### Accession
PXD022354

### Title
Epithelial cell line derived from endometriotic lesions mimics macrophage nervous mechanism of pain generation on proteome and metabolome levels

### Description
Endometriosis is a benign disease affecting one in ten women of reproductive age worldwide. Although the pain level is not correlated to the extent of the disease it still is one of the cardinal symptoms strongly affecting the patients’ quality of life. Yet, a molecular mechanism leading to the formation of severe pain remains to be defined. Recent studies have indicated a close interaction between newly generated nerve cells and macrophages, leading to neurogenic inflammation in the pelvic area. In this context, the responsiveness of an endometriotic cell culture model was characterized upon inflammatory stimulation by employing a multi-omics approach, including proteomics and metabolomics. Differential proteomic profiling of the 12-Z endometriotic cell line treated with TNFα and IL1β unexpectedly showed that the inflammatory stimulation was able to induce a protein signature associated with neuroangiogenesis, specifically including neuropilins (NRP1/2). Untargeted metabolomic profiling in the same setup further revealed that the endometriotic cells were capable of the autonomous production of 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (BH2), 7,8-dihydroneopterin and epinephrine. These metabolites are related to the development of neuropathic pain and the former two were even up-regulated upon the inflammatory stimulation. Thus, the inflammatory stimulation of endometriotic 12-Z cells led to protein and metabolite expression changes that strongly suggest a direct involvement of epithelial cells in endometriosis pain development.

### Sample Protocol
Human epithelial endometriotic cell line 12-Z was cultivated in DMEM-F12 phenolredfree (Gibco, Thermo Fisher Scientific,Austria) with 10% (v/v) heat inactivated fetal calf serum (FCS, SigmaAldrich, Austria) and 1% (v/v) penicillin and streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, Austria). Cultivation was done in humidified incubators at 37 °C and 5% CO2 (Heracell 150i C02 incubator, ThermoFisher Scientific, Austria). The 12-Z cell line was grown in T75 polystyrene cell culture flasks with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Starstedt, Austria). Cells were typically seeded in a 6-well plate with cell growth surface for adherent cells (Starstedt, Austria) at a density of 300.000 cells/well in 3 mL growth medium. Inflammatory stimulation was applied for 48 h at a concentration of 10 ng mL-1 with either TNFα or IL1β (both Sigma-Aldrich). Proteomics:  After the indicated treatment, the cells were washed twice with PBS and fractionation was performed as previously described. Isotonic lysis buffer (1 mL of 10mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X100, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)) was added to the cells, which were scraped using a cell scraper. Cell lysis was achieved using mechanical shear stress employing a syringe and a needle. After centrifugation at 2270 g for 5 min supernatant containing cytoplasmic proteins was precipitated in 4 mL of cold EtOH over night. Protein sample preparation: The ethanolic protein suspension was centrifuged at 4536g for 30 min (4 °C). The supernatant was discarded, while the protein pellet was dried and resuspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 5% SDS). Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay. An aliquot of the samples containing 20 µg protein was digested using a modified Protifi protocol. The samples were diluted to a concentration of 1 µg µL-1. The diluted sample (20 µg in 20 µL) were pipetted into a 1.5 mL Eppendorf microcentrifuge tube and 20 µL of DTT (64 mM) was added. The samples were heated for 10 min at 95 °C under constant shaking (300 rpm). The samples were cooled to room temperature, treated with iodacetamide (5 µL of 486 mM solution, and incubated in the dark for 30 min at 30 °C and 300 rpm. Afterwards, phosphoric acid (4.5 µL of 12%) was added resulting in 1,2% final concentration of phosphoric acid. S-Trap buffer (297 µL, 90% MeOH (v/v), 0.1 M TEAB) was added to the solution. The sample was loaded on the Protifi S-Trap column and washed 4 times with S-trap buffer (150 µL). Trypsin/LysC (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, USA) was added in a 1 : 40 ratio (0.5 µg for 20 µg protein). After digestion for 2 h at 37 °C peptides were eluted, dried using a SpeedVac and stored until further analysis.  Data acquisition: Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid, containing four synthetic peptides, for quality control. The samples were further diluted with 40 µL mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analysed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) using a previously published method. In short, peptides were separated on a 50 cm × 75 μm PepMap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. Gradient elution of the peptides was achieved by increasing the mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) from 8% to 40%, with a total chromatographic run time of 135 min including washing and equilibration. Mass spectrometric resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z 200) with a scan range from m/z 400–1,400. The 12 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation (Top12) at 30% normalized collision energy and analysed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z 200).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was submitted to the freely available software MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) utilising the Andromeda search engine. A minimum of two peptide identifications, at least one of them being a unique peptide, was required for valid protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 on both peptide and protein level. Uniprot database (Human, version 03/2018, reviewed entries only, 20,316 protein entries) was used to generate the fasta file used for the search. For statistical data evaluation MaxQuant companion software Perseus (version 1.6.1.0) was used. Reverse sequences and potential contaminants as well as proteins identified only by site were removed. Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were converted to Log2(x) and technical replicates averaged. Proteins were filtered for valid values, keeping only proteins that were identified in at least three measurements of one sample group. Evaluation of regulatory events between different samples groups was achieved by two-sided t-tests using a FDR < 0.05 calculated by permutation-based test.

### Publication Abstract
Endometriosis is a benign disease affecting one in ten women of reproductive age worldwide. Although the pain level is not correlated to the extent of the disease, it is still one of the cardinal symptoms strongly affecting the patients' quality of life. Yet, a molecular mechanism of this pathology, including the formation of pain, remains to be defined. Recent studies have indicated a close interaction between newly generated nerve cells and macrophages, leading to neurogenic inflammation in the pelvic area. In this context, the responsiveness of an endometriotic cell culture model was characterized upon inflammatory stimulation by employing a multi-omics approach, including proteomics, metabolomics and eicosanoid analysis. Differential proteomic profiling of the 12-Z endometriotic cell line treated with TNF&#x3b1; and IL1&#x3b2; unexpectedly showed that the inflammatory stimulation was able to induce a protein signature associated with neuroangiogenesis, specifically including neuropilins (NRP1/2). Untargeted metabolomic profiling in the same setup further revealed that the endometriotic cells were capable of the autonomous production of 7,8-dihydrobiopterin (BH2), 7,8-dihydroneopterin, normetanephrine and epinephrine. These metabolites are related to the development of neuropathic pain and the former three were found up-regulated upon inflammatory stimulation. Additionally, 12-Z cells were found to secrete the mono-oxygenated oxylipin 16-HETE, a known inhibitor of neutrophil aggregation and adhesion. Thus, inflammatory stimulation of endometriotic 12-Z cells led to specific protein and metabolite expression changes suggesting a direct involvement of these epithelial-like cells in endometriosis pain development.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Proteomics, Endometriosis, Inflammation, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090, Vienna, Austria
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Vienna, Waehringer Straße 38, 1090, Vienna, Austria


