### Accession
PXD002014

### Title
Integrated molecular phenotyping in chondrocytes identifies genes and pathways disrupted in osteoarthritis

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a degenerative joint disease with a substantial health economic burden. There is no current treatment; instead, disease management targets the main symptoms (pain and stiffness) and culminates in joint replacement surgery. OA is a disease of cartilage degeneration, but the molecular changes leading to the development of OA are still poorly understood. In this study we compare methylation, gene transcription and protein abundance at the genome-wide level in individually-matched samples of chondrocytes extracted from affected and relatively healthy articular cartilage across 12 OA patients undergoing total knee replacement. Integration analysis highlights genes that are consistently affected at multiple levels, including AQP1, CLEC3B and COL1A1, and also relevant biological pathways such as extracellular matrix organization, collagen catabolism and proteolysis. Collectively these results provide a first view of the comprehensive molecular landscape underpinning OA development and point to potential therapeutic avenues.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of chondrocytes from osteochondral tissue taken at knee replacement Osteochondral samples were transported in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM)/F-12 (1:1) (Life Technologies) supplemented with 2mM glutamine (Life Technologies), 100 U/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Life Technologies), 2.5 µg/ml amphotericin B (Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 μg/ml ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) (serum free media). Half of each sample was taken for chondrocyte extraction and the remaining tissue was fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin, decalcified in surgipath decalcifier (Leica) and embedded to paraffin wax for histological and immunohistochemical analysis. Chondrocytes were directly extracted from each paired macroscopic control and OA grade cartilage in order to remove the extracellular matrix allowing a higher yield of cells to be loaded onto the Qiagen column.  Cartilage was removed from the bone, dissected and washed twice in 1xPBS. Tissue was digested in 3 mg/ml collagenase type I (Sigma-Aldrich) in serum free media overnight at 37°C on a flatbed shaker. The resulting cell suspension was passed through a 70 µm cell strainer (Fisher Scientific) and centrifuged at 400g for 10 minutes; the cell pellet was then washed twice in serum free media, followed by centrifugation at 400g for 10 minutes. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in serum free media. Cells were counted and the viability checked using trypan blue exclusion and the Countess cell counter (Invitrogen). The optimal cell number for Qiagen column extraction from cells is between 4x106 and 1x107. Cells were pelleted at 400g for 10 minutes and homogenized in Qiagen RLT buffer containing β-Mercaptoethanol and using the QIAshredder column and DNA, RNA and protein extractions were performed as outlined for tissue extraction. RNA, DNA and protein were quantified using a Nanodrop.   Aliquots containing 30 μg of total protein were reduced, alkylated and digested overnight with MS grade trypsin (Pierce) at ratio 30:1. The resultant peptides were labeled with the TMT 6-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptide mixture was fractionated with high pH Reverse Phase (RP) chromatography using the Waters, XBridge C18 column  over a 0.85% gradient for 35 minutes. Individual peptide fractions were subjected to LC-MS analysis on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The analytical separation was performed on the Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 capillary column (Dionex) over a 0.42% gradient for 95 min. The ten most abundant multiply charged precursors per survey scan were isolated for HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy 40 and 40 sec dynamic exclusion.   For a selection of four representative control and disease samples, peptide aliquots of 500 ng without TMT labeling were analyzed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer for label free quantification and validation. Tandem mass spectra were acquired over duplicate runs of 120 min with a top speed iontrap detection method and dynamic exclusion at 10 sec and MS R=120,000.

### Data Protocol
TMT Analysis The acquired mass spectra were submitted to SequestHT search engine implemented on the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software for protein identification and quantification. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da. TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 based on Percolator q-value computed from decoy database search. All spectra were searched against a UniProt fasta file containing 20,190 Human reviewed entries. The Reporter Ion Quantifier node included a custom TMT 6plex Quantification Method with integration window tolerance 20 ppm and integration method the Most Confident Centroid.   Label free Analysis Database search was performed on Proteome Discoverer 1.4 with the SequestHT engine and normalized spectral counts were computed based on the total number of peptide-spectrum matches attributed to each protein per sample divided by the maximum value along the different samples. With a minimum requirement of at least total 14 spectra per protein we found excellent agreement in the direction of change between isobaric labelling and label free quantification for at least 32 proteins which is approximately the 90% of the common proteins between the TMT changing list and the label free identified list

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a common disease characterized by cartilage degeneration and joint remodeling. The underlying molecular changes underpinning disease progression are incompletely understood. We investigated genes and pathways that mark OA progression in isolated primary chondrocytes taken from paired intact versus degraded articular cartilage samples across 38 patients undergoing joint replacement surgery (discovery cohort: 12 knee OA, replication cohorts: 17 knee OA, 9 hip OA patients). We combined genome-wide DNA methylation, RNA sequencing, and quantitative proteomics data. We identified 49 genes differentially regulated between intact and degraded cartilage in at least two -omics levels, 16 of which have not previously been implicated in OA progression. Integrated pathway analysis implicated the involvement of extracellular matrix degradation, collagen catabolism and angiogenesis in disease progression. Using independent replication datasets, we showed that the direction of change is consistent for over 90% of differentially expressed genes and differentially methylated CpG probes. AQP1, COL1A1 and CLEC3B were significantly differentially regulated across all three -omics levels, confirming their differential expression in human disease. Through integration of genome-wide methylation, gene and protein expression data in human primary chondrocytes, we identified consistent molecular players in OA progression that replicated across independent datasets and that have translational potential.

### Keywords
Human, Chondrocytes, Label free, Tmt, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


