### Accession
PXD027268

### Title
Nuclear-capture of endosomes drives depletion of nuclear G-actin to promote SRF/MRTF gene expression and cancer cell invasiveness (part 2: Surface and Nuclear Proteomes)

### Description
Signals are relayed from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) at the cell surface to effector systems in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and coordination of this process is important for the execution of migratory phenotypes, such as cell scattering and invasion.  The endosomal system influences how RTK signalling is coded, but the ways in which it transmits these signals to the nucleus to influence gene expression are not yet clear. Here we show that an RTK, MET promotes Rab17- and clathrin-dependent endocytosis of EphA2, another RTK, followed by centripetal transport of EphA2-positive endosomes. EphA2 then mediates physical capture of endosomes on the outer surface of the nucleus; a process involving interaction between the nuclear import machinery and a nuclear localisation sequence in EphA2’s cytodomain. Nuclear capture of EphA2 promotes RhoG-dependent phosphorylation of the actin-binding protein, cofilin to oppose nuclear import of G-actin. The resulting depletion of nuclear G-actin drives transcription of Myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF)/serum-response factor (SRF)-target genes to implement cell scattering and the invasive behaviour of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: To obtain the surface proteome, H1299 cell were SILAC-labelled with heavy (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) and light (Sigma) amino acids. SILAC-labelled cells were plated into 15 cm plastic dishes and, 48 h later, were surface-biotinylated using sulpho-NHS-SS-Biotin (0.15 mg/ml) in PBS at 4°C for 1 h. Heavy-labelled cells were incubated with MesNa in Tris-buffered saline (pH 8.6) for 50 min at 4°C to remove biotin from the cell surface, whilst the light-labelled cells remained unreduced. Cells were lysed and lysates from the heavy and light SILAC-labelled cells were mixed, and biotinylated proteins were captured by incubation with streptavidin–agarose beads (Upstate, Millipore) for 1.5 h at 4°C with constant rotation. Following extensive washing, biotinylated proteins were eluted from the beads by reduction with dithiotheitol (0.1 M) in a Tris buffer (pH 7.5). To determine the proteins which translocate from the cell surface to the nucleus, cells were labelled with light or heavy SILAC amino acids and surface biotinylated. Light-labelled cells were warmed to 37°C for 30 min to allow internalisation of labelled protein in the presence of HGF (10 ng/ml), whilst the heavy labelled cells were warmed to 37 ºC in the absence of HGF. Biotin remaining at the cell surface was removed by surface reduction as above. Cells were washed in PBS and nuclei were purified as described above. The supernatants from the heavy and light SILAC labelled cells were then mixed, and biotinylated proteins isolated using streptavidin-conjugated agarose beads as described above.  Mass spectrometry: Proteins were separated on 4–12% gradient NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris gel (Life Technologies) and visualised using Instant blue (Expedeon). Each gel lane was excised into 6 slices which were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin (Trypsin gold, Promega), overnight at 35 °C. Tryptic peptides were desalted and dried in a centrifugal evaporator. Dried tryptic peptides were resuspended in and loaded with a buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and separated a 20 cm fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in house with reverse phase Reprosil Pur Basic 1.9 μm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Tryptic peptides were analysed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to an EASY-nLC II (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For the full scan a resolution of 60,000 at 250 Th was used. The top ten most intense ions in the full MS were isolated for fragmentation with a target of 50,000 ions at a resolution of 15,000 at 250 Th. MS data were acquired using the XCalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry data: Mass spectrometry files were processed with MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1, and searched with the Andromeda search engine  against the human UniProt database (09/07/2016; 92,939 entries). Common reverse and contaminant hits (as defined in MaxQuant output) were removed. Only protein groups identified with at least one uniquely assigned peptide were used for the analysis. For the SILAC experiments, the SILAC ratios between light-isotope and medium-isotope peptides were calculated using MaxQuant. Protein groups were considered reproducibly quantified if identified and quantified in both the surface proteome and the nuclear-capture proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Signals are relayed from receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) at the cell surface to effector systems in the cytoplasm and nucleus, and coordination of this process is important for the execution of migratory phenotypes, such as cell scattering and invasion. The endosomal system influences how RTK signalling is coded, but the ways in which it transmits these signals to the nucleus to influence gene expression are not yet clear. Here we show that hepatocyte growth factor, an activator of MET (an RTK), promotes Rab17- and clathrin-dependent endocytosis of EphA2, another RTK, followed by centripetal transport of EphA2-positive endosomes. EphA2 then mediates physical capture of endosomes on the outer surface of the nucleus; a process involving interaction between the nuclear import machinery and a nuclear localisation sequence in EphA2's cytodomain. Nuclear capture of EphA2 promotes RhoG-dependent phosphorylation of the actin-binding protein, cofilin to oppose nuclear import of G-actin. The resulting depletion of nuclear G-actin drives transcription of Myocardin-related transcription factor (MRTF)/serum-response factor (SRF)-target genes to implement cell scattering and the invasive behaviour of cancer cells.

### Keywords
Actin polymerisation, Nuclear g-actin, Invasiveness, Nuclear import, Rab17, Pancreatic adenocarcinoma (pdac), Cell:cell repulsion, Surface and nuclear proteome, Serum-response factor (srf), Heptocyte growth factor (hgf), Myocardin-related transcription factor (mrtf), Epha2

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


