### Accession
PXD022129

### Title
Secretome containing extracellular vesicles (EV) from cardiovascular progenitors (EV-CPC) vs the secretome containing EV from Fibroblasts (EV-FB)

### Description
Secretome containing extracellular vesicles (EV) seem to mediate the benefits of cell therapy for ischemic heart failure. Our project has the objective of comparing the secretome containing extracellular vesicles (EV) from cardiac progenitor cells (EV-CPC) vs the secretome containing EV from Fibroblasts (EV-FB) in order to stablish a protein cartography of EV-CPC and the biological pathways that they are involved. seem to mediate the benefits of cell therapy for ischemic heart failure. Our project has the objective of comparing the secretome containing extracellular vesicles (EV) from cardiac progenitor cells (EV-CPC) vs the secretome containing EV from Fibroblasts (EV-FB) in order to stablish a protein cartography of EV-CPC and the biological pathways that they are involved.

### Sample Protocol
Cryopreserved cardiovascular progenitor cells differentiated from human iPSC (iCell® Cardiac Progenitor Cells, Cellular Dynamics International, Madison, Wisconsin; CPC-301-020-001-PT) iPSC-CPC or Fibroblasts (NHDF) were thawed and plated at a density of 78,000 cells/cm2 or 5000/cells/cm2 on fibronectin-coated flasks (ref.: 11051407001, Roche Applied Sciences, Indianapolis, IN, USA) and cultured 4 days at 7% CO2 and 37°C in serum-free media according to the proliferation protocol recommended by the manufacturer: William's E medium (ref.: A12176-01, Life Technologies, Saint Aubin, France) with Cocktail B from hepatocyte maintenance supplement pack (ref.: CM4000, Life Technologies), 25μg/mL Gentamicin (ref.: 15750, Life Technologies) and bFGF, 1µg/mL (Miltenyi, ref.: 130-093-842). The particle concentration in the media prior to exposure to cells (virgin media) was 4x108 particles/mL. During culture, the media was refreshed on day 2, the flasks were washed 4 times with PBS to eliminate all serum contamination, and culture the 2 last days with only Willians E mediam and gentamicin, at day 4, the conditioned media (containing the EV secreted over the previous 48 hours) was collected for EV isolation. Conditioned media were collected, pre-cleared by centrifugation for 6 minutes at 1200 g and EV were pelleted by ultrafiltration (Amicon) of 3kD.    10µg of each sample was dried and solubilized in 20 µL 8M urea, 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate and then reduced in 5 mM dithiothreitol, pH 8 with vortexing at 37°C for 1 h. After cooling to room temperature, cysteines were alkylated by adding 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. After diluting to 1 M urea with 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, samples were digested with 1µg trypsine/LysC (Promega), with vortexing at 37°C overnight. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography (LC) was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were first trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 3.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was then performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 40°C with a linear gradient of 3% to 29% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 91 min. MS full scans were performed in the ultrahigh-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 375–1500 with a resolution of 120 000 at m/z 200. The top 20 most intense ions were subjected to Orbitrap for further fragmentation via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation and a resolution of 15 000 with the AGC target set to 100%. We selected ions with charge state from 2+ to 6+ for screening. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 30 and the dynamic exclusion of 40s.

### Data Protocol
For identification, data were searched against the Homo Sapiens Swiss-Prot database (UP000005640) and a databank of the common contaminants using Sequest-HT through proteome discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two miss cleavages sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, Methionine-loss, Methionine-loss-Acetyl and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteins were set as fixed modification. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.9 (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator (The et al, 2016) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. Peptides Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) were extracted by using MassChroQ version 2.2.1 (Valot et al., 2011) and a condition-specific alignment was performed for re-extracting missing XICs across replicates.    For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) and missed cleavages were allowed. A median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal of shared proteins to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model based on two-tailed T-tests (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR correction. Proteins with at least two distinct total peptides in at least three replicates (n=5), a 2-fold enrichment in progenitors compared to fibroblasts and an adjusted p-value<0.05 were considered significantly enriched. Unique proteins were considered with at least two distinct total peptides in all replicates.   For both progenitors and fibroblasts, we computed the expression of proteins as a molar proportion. XICs from proteotypic and shared peptides were used in this case and missed cleavages were allowed. Median and scale normalization was also applied to correct systematic biases across replicates. For each protein, iBAQ values (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011) were then obtained from the corresponding peptide intensities using the integrated R package aLFQ (Rosenberger et al., 2014). Within each replicate, iBAQ values were normalized by the total sum of iBAQ across all proteins to obtain the molar percentage of each protein. The geometric mean and geometric standard deviation of the molar percentages were computed for the set of 5 replicates, and the geometric mean was rescaled to obtain a global molar percentage. Proteins were sorted according to this final value and the most expressed proteins in progenitors (>0.1 mol%) were retained. Proteins filtered by both differential analysis and absolute quantification were further processed into CytoScape version 3.8.0 (Shannon et al., 2003) by generating the corresponding protein-protein interaction graph imported from the STRING database (Szklarczyk et al., 2019) with a confidence score > 0.8. Functional enrichment was performed using the “stringApp” add-on (Doncheva et al., 2019) on the Gene Ontology (GO) database. Redundant enriched GO terms (p-value<0.01) were removed (Jaccard similarity index > 0.5).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles (ev), Cardiovascular progenitor cells (cpc), Fibroblasts, Secretome from cardic progenitors

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Mass Spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Mass Spectrometry platform of the Institut Curie (LSMP)


