### Accession
PXD011751

### Title
Interference of RNA molecules with protein aggregation in vitro.

### Description
The analysis of RNA-protein interactomes indicates that the amount of structure in RNA molecules correlates with the capacity of binding to proteins in vitro and in vivo. To validate this observation, we used an in vitro network that mimics the composition of phase-separated RNA granules. The interference of external mRNA molecules on the protein composition of the network was analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Pre-cleared Hela cells lysate (2μg/μL) was incubated with 100 μM B-isox (Kato et al. 2012, Han et al. 2012) at 4°C for 1h to induce protein aggregation and protein-RNA granulation. The lysate was then split in 3 tubes to which 1 μg HSP70 mRNA, 1 μg BRaf mRNA or the same volume of water were added and incubated at 4°C for 1h. The pelleted aggregates were resuspended with 4% SDS, 100 mM Hepes pH7.6, 150 mM NaCl and processed according to the FASP protocol using 30k filtration units (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore) (Wisniewski et al. 2009) for data-dependent LC-MS/MS analysis with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2008). Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the human complete proteome sequences from UniProtKB, version of November 2015, containing 70075 sequences. Carbamido-methylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 4.5 ppm and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled to match identifications across samples within a time window of 2 min of the aligned retention times. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was set to 0.01. Protein matching to the reverse database or identified only with modified peptides were filtered out. Relative protein quantitation was performed using the LFQ algorithm of the Maxquant with a minimum ratio count of 1 (Cox et al. 2014). Bioinformatic data analysis was performed using Perseus (version 1.5.2.6) (Tyanova et al., 2016). The proteins with minimum three valid LFQ values in at least one group (background/Hsp70 mRNA/B-Raf mRNA) of 4 biological replicates were considered as quantified and used for downstream analysis. Proteins significantly changed in the presence of Hsp70 or BRaf mRNA compared to the background control (water) were identified by two-sample t-test at a p-value cutoff of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The combination of high-throughput sequencing and in vivo crosslinking approaches leads to the progressive uncovering of the complex interdependence between cellular transcriptome and proteome. Yet, the molecular determinants governing interactions in protein-RNA networks are not well understood. Here we investigated the relationship between the structure of an RNA and its ability to interact with proteins. Analysing in silico, in vitro and in vivo experiments, we find that the amount of double-stranded regions in an RNA correlates with the number of protein contacts. This relationship -which we call structure-driven protein interactivity- allows classification of RNA types, plays a role in gene regulation and could have implications for the formation of phase-separated ribonucleoprotein assemblies. We validate our hypothesis by showing that a highly structured RNA can rearrange the composition of a protein aggregate. We report that the tendency of proteins to phase-separate is reduced by interactions with specific RNAs.

### Keywords
B-isox, Rna interactivity, Rna granules

### Affiliations
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Giulia Calloni

### Lab Head
Dr R. Martin Vabulas
Buchmann Institute of Molecular Life Sciences and Institute of Biophysical Chemistry, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


