### Accession
PXD016622

### Title
Proteomics profiling of Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome

### Description
Here report ME/CFS-related plasma proteome analysis using untargeted ultra-performance liquid chromatography – tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS). We identified differing profiles between ME/CFS patients, as well as ME/CFS subgroups based on their IBS co-morbidity status, and controls. In addition, we identify a set of proteins that may predict ME/CFS status.

### Sample Protocol
Denaturation/reduction of the sample was performed in 8 M urea/10 mM dithiothreitol/50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0) for over 60 minutes at 52°C. The solution was stored at room temperature in 20 mM iodoacetamide at the dark for 60 minutes. The urea was diluted to a concentration of 1 M with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and then digested with trypsin (1:50 ratio) at 37°C with shaking for 16 hrs. After tryptic digestion, the peptide mixture was desalted with C18 micro spin column (C18, Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA). The column was washed with 200 μL of 100 % acetonitrile and equilibrated with 200 μL of loading buffer (0.1 % formic acid). Peptides were loaded onto the column, washed with a loading buffer and eluted with 200 μL of 70 % acetonitrile/ 0.1 % formic acid. All steps for loading, washing, and elution were carried out with benchtop centrifugation (300 x g for 2 minutes). The fraction was collected with 1.5 mL tube, dried on a speed-vac.  Samples were then run through ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry system along with internal standard peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed as combined sets of triplicates in Proteome Discoverer (ver. 2.3 Thermo Fisher Scientific) and protein quantification and annotation were performed with Spectronaut XTM software (Biognosys). We used data-Independent acquisition (DIA)-based protein quantitation approach to measure relative protein abundance comprehensively, and the effect of the variability potentially generated by the sample preparation and the LC‑MS performance was minimized using the Local Regression Normalization algorithm described by Callister et al. (2006)

### Publication Abstract
Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) is an unexplained chronic, debilitating illness characterized by fatigue, sleep disturbances, cognitive dysfunction, orthostatic intolerance and gastrointestinal problems. Using ultra performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS), we analyzed the plasma proteomes of 39 ME/CFS patients and 41 healthy controls. Logistic regression models, with both linear and quadratic terms of the protein levels as independent variables, revealed a significant association between ME/CFS and the immunoglobulin heavy variable (IGHV) region 3-23/30. Stratifying the ME/CFS group based on self-reported irritable bowel syndrome (sr-IBS) status revealed a significant quadratic effect of immunoglobulin lambda constant region 7 on its association with ME/CFS with sr-IBS whilst IGHV3-23/30 and immunoglobulin kappa variable region 3-11 were significantly associated with ME/CFS without sr-IBS. In addition, we were able to predict ME/CFS status with a high degree of accuracy (AUC = 0.774-0.838) using a panel of proteins selected by 3 different machine learning algorithms: Lasso, Random Forests, and XGBoost. These algorithms also identified proteomic profiles that predicted the status of ME/CFS patients with sr-IBS (AUC = 0.806-0.846) and ME/CFS without sr-IBS (AUC = 0.754-0.780). Our findings are consistent with a significant association of ME/CFS with immune dysregulation and highlight the potential use of the plasma proteome as a source of biomarkers for disease.

### Keywords
Me/cfs, Proteomics, Immunoglobulin

### Affiliations
Columbia University
Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University Professor of Pathology and Neurology,College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University

### Submitter
Bohyun Lee

### Lab Head
Dr W. Ian Lipkin
Center for Infection and Immunity, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia University Professor of Pathology and Neurology,College of Physicians & Surgeons, Columbia University


