### Accession
PXD043402

### Title
Cu-Catalyzed Azide-Alkyne-Thiol Reaction Forms Ubiquitous Background in Chemical Proteomics Studies

### Description
We report here a Cu-catalyzed azide-alkyne-thiol reaction forming thiotriazoles as the major by-product under widely used bioorthogonal protein labelling “click” conditions. The development of Cu(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) had tremendous impact on many biological discoveries. However, the considered chemoselectivity of CuAAC is hampered by high reactivity of cysteine free thiols yielding thiotriazole protein conjugates. The reaction by-products generate false positive protein hits in “functional” proteomic studies. The reported detail investigation of conjugates between chemical probes containing terminal alkynes, azide-tags and cell lysates reveals formation of thiotriazoles, which can be readily detected by in-gel fluorescence scanning or after peptide and protein enrichment by MS-based proteomics. The produced fluorescent bands or enriched proteins may not result from the important enzymatically driven reaction and can be falsely assigned as hits. This study provides a complete list of the most common background proteins. The knowledge of this previously overlooked reactivity now leads to improved experimental design. Here, we present modified CuAAC conditions, which avoids the undesired product formation and diminishes the background.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, lysates from immortal human cell lines (SH-SY5Y or HEK293T) or single protein were either treated in cellulo or in vitro with terminal alkyne containing probes and subsequently, clicked to (desthio-)biotin-N3, DMP-N3 or w/o any azide compound with CuAAC. Then, CuAAC reaction mixture was purified via carboxylate-coated magnetic beads (SP3) or acetone precipitation. Either the samples were directly digested with trypsin or further enriched on streptavidin-coated magnetic or agarose beads. Resulting peptide mixture was transferred with or w/o desalting on a nanoflow LC-MS/MS. MS-measurement was performed on a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 Nano-HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and FAIMS interface (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Different LC and MS settings were applied such as short/long gradients and data-dependent and data-independent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Obtained MS raw files were processed with three different search engines: DIA-NN: Data-independent acquired data was processed and used for label-free quantification. MaxQuant: Data-dependent acquired data was only processed in closed searches with pre-defined offset masses. FragPipe: Data-dependent acquired data was processed in open, closed and labile searches to analyze modified peptides. Labile searches were performed to mine for diagnostic ions and peptide/fragment-reminder masses.

### Publication Abstract
We report here a Cu-catalyzed azide-alkyne-thiol reaction forming thiotriazoles as the major byproduct under widely used bio-orthogonal protein labeling "click" conditions. The development of Cu(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) had a tremendous impact on many biological discoveries. However, the considered chemoselectivity of CuAAC is hampered by the high reactivity of cysteine free thiols, yielding thiotriazole protein conjugates. The reaction byproducts generate false-positive protein hits in functional proteomic studies. The reported detail investigation of conjugates between chemical probes containing terminal alkynes, azide tags, and cell lysates reveals the formation of thiotriazoles, which can be readily detected by in-gel fluorescence scanning or after peptide and protein enrichment by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. In protein level identification and quantification experiments, the produced fluorescent bands or enriched proteins may not result from the important enzymatically driven reaction and can be falsely assigned as hits. This study provides a complete list of the most common background proteins. The knowledge of this previously overlooked reactivity now leads to the introduction of modified CuAAC conditions, which avoids the undesired product formation, diminishes the background, and hence improves the signal-to-noise ratio.

### Keywords
Protein modifications, Cysteine reactivity, Cuaac, Mass spectrometry, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, LMU Munich, Würmtalstr. 201, 81375, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Andreas Wiest

### Lab Head
Dr Pavel Kielkowski
Department of Chemistry, LMU Munich, Würmtalstr. 201, 81375, Munich, Germany


