### Accession
PXD018991

### Title
Thermococcus eurythermalis A501, Temperature adaptation

### Description
In this study, we performed a global quantitative proteomic analysis under extreme temperatures, pH, hydrostatic pressure (HP) and salinity on an archaeal strain, Thermococcus eurythermalis A501. Here is the result of temperature adaptation: low temperature (65°C) and high temperature (95°C), and the optimal culture condition (85°C, pH 7, 2.3% NaCl, 0.1 MPa or 10 MPa) was used as the control.

### Sample Protocol
iTRAQ analysis was implemented at BGI (Shenzhen, China). Total protein (100 μg) was taken from each sample solution, and then, the protein was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at the 20: 1 ratio of protein: trypsin at 37°C for 12 h. The protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method. After trypsin digestion, peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, USA). The labelled peptide mixtures were then pooled and dried by vacuum centrifugation. SCX chromatography was performed with a LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). The iTRAQ-labelled peptide mixtures were reconstituted with 4 ml buffer A (25 mM NaH2PO4 in 25% v/v acetonitrile, pH 2.7) and loaded onto a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column containing 5-μm particles (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of buffer A for 10 min, 5-60% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% v/v acetonitrile, pH 2.7) for 27 min, and 60-100% buffer B for 1 min. The system was then maintained at 100% buffer B for 1 min before equilibrating with buffer A for 10 min prior to the next injection. Elution was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The eluted peptides were pooled into 20 fractions, desalted with a Strata XC18 column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and vacuum-dried. The supernatant was separated using a Shimadzu LC-20AD Nano-HPLC system. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer I (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and centrifuged at 20,000 ×g for 10 min; the final concentration of peptide was approximately 0.5 μg/μl. Then, 10 μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2 cm C18 trap column. The peptides were eluted onto a 10 cm analytical C18 column (inner diameter 75 μm) packed in-house. The samples were loaded at 8 μl/min for 4 min, and the 35 min gradient was run at 0.3 μl/min starting from 2 to 35% buffer II (95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 5 min linear gradient to 60%. Then, there was a 2 min linear gradient to 80%, maintenance at 80% buffer II for 4 min, and a return to 5% in 1 min.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA, USA). Data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 psi, nebulizer gas of 15 psi, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C. The MS was operated with a RP of greater than or equal to 30,000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms, and as many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. The Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multi-channel TDC detector with four-anode channel detect ion. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35±5 eV coupled with iTRAQ adjusted rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (15 s), and then, the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files by Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Protein identification was performed by using MGF files identified by the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against a database containing 2,181 predicted proteins in T. eurythermalis A501 (The GenBank/EMBL/DDBJ accession number: CP008887-CP008888) (Zhao and Xiao, 2015). For protein identification, a mass tolerance of 0.05 Da (ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and 0.1 Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavage in the trypsin digests. Gln-pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M), and iTRAQ8plex (Y) were used as the potential variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), and iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications. The charge states of peptides were set to +2 and +3. Specifically, an automatic decoy database search was performed in Mascot by choosing the decoy checkbox in which a random sequence from the database is generated and tested for raw spectra as well as the real database. To reduce the probability of false peptide identification, only peptides with significance scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval by a Mascot probability analysis greater than “identity” were counted as identified. A unique protein with at least two unique peptides was qualified whose false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01. For protein quantitation, a protein had to contain at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Mascot (Chen et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
Hyperthermophiles, living in environments above 80&#xb0;C and usually coupling with multi-extreme environmental stresses, have drawn great attention due to their application potential in biotechnology and being the primitive extant forms of life. Studies on their survival and adaptation mechanisms have extended our understanding on how lives thrive under extreme conditions. During these studies, the "cross-stress" behavior in various organisms has been observed between the extreme high temperature and other environmental stresses. Despite the broad observation, the global view of the cross-stress behavior remains unclear in hyperthermophiles, leaving a knowledge gap in our understanding of extreme adaptation. In this study, we performed a global quantitative proteomic analysis under extreme temperatures, pH, hydrostatic pressure (HP), and salinity on an archaeal strain, <i>Thermococcus eurythermalis</i> A501, which has outstanding growth capability on a wide range of temperatures (50-100&#xb0;C), pH (4-9), and HPs (0.1-70 MPa), but a narrow range of NaCl (1.0-5.0 %, w/v). The proteomic analysis (79.8% genome coverage) demonstrated that approximately 61.5% of the significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) responded to multiple stresses. The responses to most of the tested stresses were closely correlated, except the responses to high salinity and low temperature. The top three enriched universal responding processes include the biosynthesis and protection of macromolecules, biosynthesis and metabolism of amino acids, ion transport, and binding activities. In addition, this study also revealed that the specific dual-stress responding processes, such as the membrane lipids for both cold and HP stresses and the signal transduction for both hyperosmotic and heat stresses, as well as the sodium-dependent energetic processes might be the limiting factor of the growth range in salinity. The present study is the first to examine the global cross-stress responses in a piezophilic hyperthermophile at the proteomic level. Our findings provide direct evidences of the cross-stress adaptation strategy (33.5% of coding-genes) to multiple stresses and highlight the specific and unique responding processes (0.22-0.63% of coding genes for each) to extreme temperature, pH, salinity, and pressure, which are highly relevant to the fields of evolutionary biology as well as next generation industrial biotechnology (NGIB).

### Keywords
Thermooccales, Itraq, Extremophile, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Laboratory of Microbiology Oceanography, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Oceanography, Shanghai JiaoTong University

### Submitter
weishu zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Xiang Xiao
Laboratory of Microbiology Oceanography, State Key Laboratory of Microbial Metabolism, School of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, State Key Laboratory of Ocean Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, School of Oceanography, Shanghai JiaoTong University


