### Accession
PXD001355

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of trypsin-treated extracellular vesicles to evaluate non-vesicular contaminants and surface vesicular proteins.

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are lipid bilayered vesicles released into extracellular milieu by most of cells. Currently, various purification methods of EVs have been established but most of studies use ultracentrifugation-based purification of EVs. However, these methods have the problem of co-purification with non-vesicular contaminants including various different types of particles, small apoptotic vesicles, protein aggregates, and other derived from dead cells or abundant extracellular proteins. Therefore, evaluation of non-vesicular contaminants gives valuable information in EV research. Here, we purified EVs with high purity using density gradient ultracentrifugation and then purified EVs were treated by trypsin to discriminate extra-vesicular proteins from intra-vesicular proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of EVs was performed as previously described (1, 2). Conditioned medium was collected from SW480 grown for 24 h in serum-free RPMI 1640 medium at 80–90% confluency, and centrifuged at 500 × g and twice at 2,000 × g. Supernatant was concentrated using a QuixStand™ benchtop system with a 100-kDa hollow fiber cartridge (GE Healthcare, Bucks, UK). The concentrated conditioned medium was placed over 0.8 M and of 2.0 M sucrose cushion in HEPES-buffered saline (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4) and centrifuged at 100,000 × g for 2 h at 4ºC. The interface between the sucrose cushions was collected and diluted with HEPES-buffered saline and 2nd sucrose cushion ultracentrifugation was conducted with diluted sample. The interface between the sucrose cushions was harvested and then mixed with iodixanol solution (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, Missouri) to 30% iodixanol. This sample was placed at the bottom of a tube and overlaid with 20% and 5% iodixanol. After centrifugation at 200,000 × g for 2 h, 10 fractions of equal volume were collected from the top of the gradient. From iodixanol density gradients, we finally collected the 3rd fraction from top (a density of ∼1.08 g/mL), which was enriched with CD9 and CD81, well-known vesicular marker protein (1, 2). The concentration of vesicular proteins was quantified using the Bradford assay. Vesicular proteins of 30 µg in HEPES-buffered saline were lyophilized and solubilized in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1% NP-40, 0.25% Na-Deoxycholate, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, protease inhibitor, pH 7.5) and then denatured with 6 M guanidine-HCl and 50 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 5 min at 95ºC. The denatured proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetoamide for 30 min at the room temperature in the dark. After the alkylation, proteins from the supernatants were concentrated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Precipitated proteins were resuspended with 2 M urea in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and then digested with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:100) for 16 h at 37ºC. The tryptic peptides were loaded in the Amicon Ultra 10K filter (Millipore, Temecula, CA, USA) and then collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 20 min. The residual concentrate in the filter was additionally digested with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio 1:100) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 6 h at 37ºC. Additional tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 × g for 20 min at 4ºC. Next, the filter was rinsed with 500 mM NaCl and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min at 4ºC. Finally, residual peptides in the filter was rinsed again with water and centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min at 4ºC. All eluents from the filter were collected and desalted with the C18 Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The tryptic peptides were analyzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled with EASY nLC 1000 (Thermo Finnigan). Tryptic peptides were separated to a analytic column (75 μm × 12 cm) packed with C18 resin (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, DA, USA). A linear 60 min gradient was used from 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) to 60% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. The separated peptides were electrosprayed with nanoESI. The electrospray voltage was 2.6 kV using 35% normalized collision energy for MS/MS. All MS/MS spectra were acquired in data-dependent scans for fragmentation of the ten most abundant spectrums from full MS scan. The repeat count for dynamic exclusion was set to 1, the repeat duration was 30 s, the dynamic exclusion duration was set at 180 s, the exclusion mass width was 1.5 Da, and the list of dynamic exclusion was 50.  1. Hong, B. S., Cho, J. H., Kim, H., Choi, E. J., Rho, S., Kim, J., Kim, J. H., Choi, D. S., Kim, Y. K., Hwang, D., and Gho, Y. S. (2009) Colorectal cancer cell-derived microvesicles are enriched in cell cycle-related mRNAs that promote proliferation of endothelial cells. BMC Genomics 10, 556   2. Choi, D. S., Choi, D. Y., Hong, B. S., Jang, S. C., Kim, D. K., Lee, J., Kim, Y. K., Kim, K. P., and Gho, Y. S. (2012) Quantitative proteomics of extracellular vesicles derived from human primary and metastatic colorectal cancer cells. Journal of Extracellular Vesicles 1, 18704

### Data Protocol
We performed protein identification from LC-MS/MS data with four replicates using X!Tandem in the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP; version 4.6). Raw data file was converted to mzXML using the msConvert (3). The converted mzXMLs were searched against the UniProt human protein database (release 2013_01) using X!Tandem. The tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 1 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity for trypsin was used with permission of 2 missed cleavage sites. Following variable modifications were used: the oxidation of methionine (15.995 Da), carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da), deamination of N-terminal glutamine (–17.027 Da), and dehydration of N-terminal glutamic acid (–18.011 Da). Search results from X!Tandem were filtered via statistical analysis using TPP with PeptideProphet (P ≥ 0.90) and ProteinProphet (P ≥ 0.90). Relative protein abundance in the proteomes was calculated using the APEX tool (4). The 100 top-ranked proteins with high spectral counts were selected as a training data set to generate an experiment-specific data set. Based on experiment-specific data set, the protein abundance was then calculated with an APEX normalization factor of 100,000, as described in Braisted et al (4).  3. Kessner, D., Chambers, M., Burke, R., Agus, D., and Mallick, P. (2008) ProteoWizard: open source software for rapid proteomics tools development. Bioinformatics 24, 2534-2536  4. Lu, P., Vogel, C., Wang, R., Yao, X., and Marcotte, E. M. (2007) Absolute protein expression profiling estimates the relative contributions of transcriptional and translational regulation. Nat Biotechnol 25, 117-124

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nano-sized vesicles surrounded by a lipid bilayer and released into the extracellular milieu by most of cells. Although various EV isolation methods have been established, most of the current methods isolate EVs with contaminated non-vesicular proteins. By applying the label-free quantitative proteomic analyses of human colon cancer cell SW480-derived EVs, we identified trypsin-sensitive and trypsin-resistant vesicular proteins. Further systems biology and protein-protein interaction network analyses based on their cellular localization, we classified the trypsin-sensitive and trypsin-resistant vesicular proteins into two subgroups: 363 candidate real-vesicular proteins and 151 contaminated non-vesicular proteins. Moreover, the protein interaction network analyses showed that candidate real-vesicular proteins are mainly derived from plasma membrane (46.8%), cytosol (36.6%), cytoskeleton (8.0%) and extracellular region (2.5%). On the other hand, most of the contaminated non-vesicular proteins derived from nucleus, Golgi apparatus, endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria. In addition, ribosomal protein complexes and T-complex proteins were classified as the contaminated non-vesicular proteins. Taken together, our trypsin-digested proteomic approach on EVs is an important advance to identify the real-vesicular proteins that could help to understand EV biogenesis and protein cargo-sorting mechanism during EV release, to identify more reliable EV diagnostic marker proteins, and to decode pathophysiological roles of EVs.

### Keywords
Non-vesicular contaminants, Quantitative proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Trypsin treatment

### Affiliations
POSTECH
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Gyeongyun Go

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Song Gho
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang 790-784, Republic of Korea


