### Accession
PXD010238

### Title
Analysis of Erysiphe pisi proteome

### Description
Erysiphe pisi causes powdery mildew disease in garden pea. It is a biotrophic ascomycete  member necessitating a living host for its survival. An attempt to identify the global proteome of E. pisi pathogen is made using a sensitive and reliable nano LC-MS/MS approach.  The protein profiling of two isolates of E. pisi; Ep01 and Ep02 varying for virulence upon testing on a commercial cultivar, Arkel led to the detection of a total of 211 and 214 distinct proteins in Ep01 and Ep03 isolates respectively. In addition, a total of 203 and 207proteins from Ep01 and Ep03 isolates respectively were found to be hypothetical or proteins with not yet predicted functions based on GO (biological process). The protein accessions detected in these isolates were categorized into functional protein classes with some of the identified proteins reported to be involved in pathogenesis or virulence. The proteins belonging to the functional classes like stress related, signal transduction and secondary metabolite formation might be involved in virulence and pathogenesis. The proteome proposed in this study would serve as a reference proteome to facilitate the understanding of the functional aspects of an obligate biotrophic fungal pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was carried out according to the protocol described in the case of B. graminis by Noir et al. (2009).  The fungal mycelium was ground finely in liquid nitrogen using an autoclaved mortar and pestle and suspended in 1 ml of extraction buffer [50 mM Tris-Base pH 8.0; 10 mM EDTA; 1% (CHAPS); 10 mM (DTT); protease inhibitor cocktail]. The lysate was transferred to 1.5 ml eppendorf tubes and briefly sonicated with short pulses of 30 sec. at 70% amplitude for 3 min. with the lysate being stored in ice throughout. The same was centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 10 min. and the supernatant transferred to a fresh tube. The protein concentration in the lysate was estimated using 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare) and the quality was checked on SDS-PAGE. The lysates were lyophilized and stored until further processing. The lysates were reconstituted in 20% Acetonitrile made with 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was determined using Bicinchoninic Acid Protein Assay Kit (Sigma). The proteins were precipitated from the lysates using precipitation buffer (50% Acetone, 50% Ethanol and 0.1% Acetic acid) and washed three times with ice-cold acetone. The in-solution digestion protocol followed was as per Shevchenko et al. (2006) and Wiese et al. (2007). The pH of the protein sample was adjusted to 8.5 by adding 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. The sample was vortexed to mix and then spun for 30 sec. Trypsin (13ng/µl) was added in 1:30 ratio and mixed well. The samples were incubated at 55 ºC for 2hours or 37 ºC overnight in a thermostat. The tubes were allowed to cool down to room temperature and pinned for 30 sec. To this, 5% formic acid was added until the pH reached nearly 3. Additional alkylation and reduction were carried out with 10 mM DTT and 56 mM Iodoacetamide for reduction and alkylation respectively. Digested peptides were vacuum dried and reconstituted in 15 µL of 2% ACN (LC/MS grade –Fluka) with 0.1% formic acid (LC/MS grade–Fluka) and 1 µL of the same was injected onto the column. The supernatant was collected in Agilent autosampler vials and injected. The complex tryptic peptide mix was separated on 1200, 1D nano-LC (Agilent) consisting of a capillary pump (operated at 20µL/min) for loading onto a trap column and a nano pump (operated at 300nL/min) for the separation on a 3.5 µm C18 analytical column. The digested peptides were subjected on an 180-minute RPLC gradient. The pressure of the nano pump was at 140-150 bars at the beginning of the standard gradient and that of the capillary pump was 85-95bars. The Nanomate Triversa, was used as an automated nano-ESI source to generate ions for later mass spectrometric analysis. The spray current was above 50nA at the beginning of the standard gradient. With help of the spray sensing mode, the LC-MS/MS acquisitions of a sequence can be monitored. This was followed by the acquisition of data by determining m/z of intact precursors on LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery(Thermo).20 fmoles of Standard BSA digest was analyzed in parallel to check the performance of the instrument.

### Data Protocol
The generated data was searched for protein identity using MASCOT 2.4 as the search engineon Proteome discoverer 1.4. The data was searched against UniprotSwiss-Prot database (non-redundant database with reviewed proteins), UniprotTrEMBL (database with unreviewed proteins) and Erysiphe database downloaded from NCBI. A Minimum of two High confident peptides was used as a prerequisite to identify the proteins. The target false discovery rate, FDR (Strict) was 0.01 while Target FDR (Relaxed) was 0.05. The functional categorization was carried out manually based on the Gene Ontology (biological process) and KEGG entries.

### Publication Abstract
E. pisi is an ascomycete member causing powdery mildew disease of garden pea. It is a biotrophic pathogen, requiring a living host for its survival. Our understanding of molecular mechanisms underlying its pathogenesis is limited. The identification of proteins expressed in the pathogen is required to gain an insight into the functional mechanisms of an obligate biotrophic fungal pathogen. In this study, the proteome of the anamorphic stage of E. pisi pathogen has been elucidated through the nano LC-MS/MS approach. A total of 328 distinct proteins were detected from Erysiphe isolates infecting the susceptible pea cultivar, Arkel. The proteome is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010238. The functional classification of protein accessions based on Gene Ontology revealed proteins related to signal transduction, secondary metabolite formation and stress which might be involved in virulence and pathogenesis. The functional validation carried through differential expression of genes encoding G-protein beta subunit, a Cyclophilin (Peptidyl prolyl cis-transisomerase) and ABC transporter in a time course study confirmed their putative role in pathogenesis between resistant and susceptible genotypes, JI2480 and Arkel. The garden pea-powdery mildew pathosystem is largely unexplored, therefore, the identified proteome provides a first-hand information and will form a basis to analyze mechanisms involving pathogen survival, pathogenesis and virulence.

### Keywords
Erysiphe pisi, Garden pea, Nano lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Powdery mildew

### Affiliations
Department of Plant Sciences School of Life Sciences University of Hyderabad Hyderabad-500046, India.
University of Hyderabad

### Submitter
Ragiba Makandar

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Ragiba Makandar
Department of Plant Sciences School of Life Sciences University of Hyderabad Hyderabad-500046, India.


