### Accession
PXD012622

### Title
Interspecies comparison of the bacterial response to allicin reveals species-specific defense strategies

### Description
Allicin, a volatile diallylthiosulfinate from garlic (Allium sativum), exhibits broad-spectrum activity against microbial pathogens. It disrupts thiol and redox homeostasis, proteostasis, and cell membrane integrity leading to inactivation of even multidrug resistant strains. Since medicine demands cost-efficient antimicrobials with so far unexploited mechanisms, allicin with its multifaceted mode of action is a promising lead structure for future therapeutics. However, while progress is being made in fully unraveling its mode of action, little is known on bacterial adaptation strategies to cope with allicin-like stress. Some isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli, withstand exposure to higher allicin concentrations than other bacteria due to as yet unknown cellular mechanisms. To elucidate resistance and sensitivity-conferring cellular processes we compared the acute proteomic responses of the resistant species P. aeruginosa and sensitive species Bacillus subtilis to the published proteomic response of E. coli to allicin treatment. The cellular defense strategies shared functional features: proteins involved in protein (re)folding and repair, ROS and RSS detoxification, and cell envelope modification were upregulated. In both Gram-negative species, protein synthesis of up to 64% of the proteins synthesized in untreated cells was down-regulated while the sensitive, Gram-positive B. subtilis responded by upregulation of multiple regulons. A comparison of the B. subtilis proteomic response to a library of proteomic responses to antibiotic treatment, revealed 30 proteins specifically upregulated by allicin. Other upregulated proteins indicating oxidative stress were shared with nitrofurantoin and diamide. Microscopy-based assays further indicate that in B. subtilis cell wall integrity was impaired.

### Sample Protocol
Allicin-response-associated proteins that were at least twofold upregulated in each of three biological replicates (we termed them allicin marker proteins) were cut from non-radioactive gels and prepared for mass spectrometrical analysis by tryptic in-gel digest. For protein identification, tryptic digests were analyzed by a nanoACQUITY-UPLC-coupled Synapt G2-S-HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA) equipped with the NanoLockSpray-Source (Waters) and a time-of-flight detector. Samples were desalted using a nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column (pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 5 μm; length, 20 mm; Waters) with a flow of 10 µl/min in 0.5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Samples were separated using a nanoACQUITY-UPLC Peptide BEH C18 column (pore size, 130 Å; particle size, 1.7 μm; length, 150 mm; Waters) with a flow of 0.35 µl/min at 40°C. Gradient elution was performed as follows: initial, 0.5% buffer B; 22 min, 50% buffer B; 23 min, 99% buffer B; 26 min, 99% buffer B; 27 min, 0.5% buffer B; 30 min, 0.5% buffer B. Spectra were recorded in positive resolution mode with the following settings: capillary voltage, 1.7 kV; cone voltage, 40 V; source temperature, 100°C; cone gas flow, 50 l/h; desolvation gas flow, 500 l/h; desolvation temperature, 150°C. Continuous MSE spectra were recorded in a mass range of 50-1200 m/z with a scan time of 1 s. Collision energy was ramped from 14 to 45 eV. Serving as mass reference, leucine-encephalin was injected with a capillary voltage of 3 kV every 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were processed with ProteinLynx Global Server (Waters, version 2.5.2). Processing parameters were adjusted as follows: chromatographic peak width, automatic; MS TOF resolution, automatic; lock mass for charge 1, 556.2771 Da/e; Lock Mass Window, 0.25 Da; low energy threshold, 100 counts; elevated energy threshold, 30 counts; intensity threshold, 750 counts. For protein identification, databanks containing 5562 proteins of P. aeruginosa PA01 (NCBI reference sequence: NC_002516.2, added manually: trypsin, keratin) and 4180 proteins of B. subtilis (NCBI reference sequence: NC_000964.3, added manually: trypsin, keratin) were searched. The following settings were used: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; min fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; min fragment ion matches per protein, 4; maximum protein mass, 300000; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M; false positive rate, 4.

### Publication Abstract
Allicin, a broad-spectrum antimicrobial agent from garlic, disrupts thiol and redox homeostasis, proteostasis, and cell membrane integrity. Since medicine demands antimicrobials with so far unexploited mechanisms, allicin is a promising lead structure. While progress is being made in unraveling its mode of action, little is known on bacterial adaptation strategies. Some isolates of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli withstand exposure to high allicin concentrations due to as yet unknown mechanisms. To elucidate resistance and sensitivity-conferring cellular processes, the acute proteomic responses of a resistant P. aeruginosa strain and the sensitive species Bacillus subtilis are compared to the published proteomic response of E. coli to allicin treatment. The cellular defense strategies share functional features: proteins involved in translation and maintenance of protein quality, redox homeostasis, and cell envelope modification are upregulated. In both Gram-negative species, protein synthesis of the majority of proteins is downregulated while the Gram-positive B. subtilis responded by upregulation of multiple regulons. A comparison of the B. subtilis proteomic response to a library of responses to antibiotic treatment reveals 30 proteins specifically upregulated by allicin. Upregulated oxidative stress proteins are shared with nitrofurantoin and diamide. Microscopy-based assays further indicate that in B. subtilis cell wall integrity is impaired.

### Keywords
Allicin, Bacillus subtilis, Proteomic response, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Mode of action

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Senges

### Lab Head
Dr Julia E. Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany


