### Accession
PXD017770

### Title
AtNAA50 N-terminal acetylation profiling using A. thaliana naa50 KO mutants

### Description
N-terminal acetylation is one of the most abundant protein modifications in eukaryotes and is catalysed in humans by seven N-terminal acetyltransferases. AtNAA50 interreact with the NatA complex (NAA10 and NAA15) to form the NatE complex. In this study, we investigated the Arabidopsis thaliana N-terminal acetylome in leaf cells with KO naa50 gene to identify in vivo specific substrates using the SILProNAQ approach.

### Sample Protocol
Soluble leaf proteins from soil-grown wild-type and the NAA50 depleted mutants were extracted for protein N-terminal characterisation and quantification of N-terminal acetylation. The extracted proteins were processed and enriched by an SCX approach for quantification of N-terminal peptides using mass spectrometry as described in Bienvenut et al. (Methods Mol Biol; 2017, 1574:17-34). 1 mg of material was subjected to chemical acetylation of the free N-terminus amino groups with N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide. After a desalting step, the samples were subjected to protein digestion with trypsin. Then, N-terminal peptides were enriched using strong cation exchange-LC (SCX-LC) and collected every 2 min on 40 min separation gradients. Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography with retention time between 2 to 10 min (fractions 2-5) and 10 to 22 min (Fraction 6-11) were resuspended in 25 µl and 30 µl respectively (nLC Buffer A: 0.1% FA, 5% ACN). Each fraction was analysed individually (1 hour cycle acquisition method) and 10 µl were loaded onto a pre-column (NS-MP-10, Nanoseparation, Nieuwkoop, Netherland) at a maximum pressure of 200 bars of nLC buffer A followed by a separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column (NTCC-360/100-5-153, Nikkyo Technos Co., Tokyo, Japan) over a 42 min gradient (nLC buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in AcN; 5-35% B in 42 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The previous fractions 2-5, 6-8 and 9-11 were combined together and 10 µl of this mixture was analysed twice on a 2 hours cycle acquisition (5-35% nLC buffer B in 90 min). The first acquisition includes all precursor ion charges whereas the second acquisition reject singly charged precursors. The nano-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS with 20 seconds exclusion time for the selected precursor.

### Data Protocol
SILProNAQ processing was applied to determine proteins N-terminus and N-terminus acetylation quantitation using Mascot Distiller (Ver. 2.5.1, Matrix Science) and the EnCOUNTer script (Ver. 1b7). Extraction parameters were optimized for the OrbiTrap acquisition files with a minimum S/N of 1, precursor charges considered 1-5, Corr. Thr. > 0.7 and no grouping assignments. Protein identification were performed using the Mascot identification tool against the Araport11 database. Trypsin/P rule was used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.7 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys were considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, protein NTA and d3-NTA were considered as variable modifications. All data were filtered at 1% protein false discovery rate and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data processing.

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetylation (NTA) is a prevalent protein modification in eukaryotes. In plants, the biological function of NTA remains enigmatic. The dominant <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase (Nat) in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) is NatA, which cotranslationally catalyzes acetylation of &#x223c;40% of the proteome. The core NatA complex consists of the catalytic subunit NAA10 and the ribosome-anchoring subunit NAA15. In human (<i>Homo sapiens</i>), fruit fly (<i>Drosophila melanogaster</i>), and yeast (<i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>), this core NatA complex interacts with NAA50 to form the NatE complex. While in metazoa, NAA50 has <i>N</i>-acetyltransferase activity, yeast NAA50 is catalytically inactive and positions NatA at the ribosome tunnel exit. Here, we report the identification and characterization of Arabidopsis NAA50 (AT5G11340). Consistent with its putative function as a cotranslationally acting Nat, AtNAA50-EYFP localized to the cytosol and the endoplasmic reticulum but also to the nuclei. We demonstrate that purified AtNAA50 displays N<sup>&#x3b1;</sup>-terminal acetyltransferase and lysine-&#x3b5;-autoacetyltransferase activity in vitro. Global <i>N</i>-acetylome profiling of <i>Escherichia coli</i> cells expressing AtNAA50 revealed conservation of NatE substrate specificity between plants and humans. Unlike the embryo-lethal phenotype caused by the absence of AtNAA10 and AtNAA15, loss of NAA50 expression resulted in severe growth retardation and infertility in two Arabidopsis transfer DNA insertion lines (<i>naa50-1</i> and <i>naa50-2</i>). The phenotype of <i>naa50-2</i> was rescued by the expression of HsNAA50 or AtNAA50. In contrast, the inactive ScNAA50 failed to complement <i>naa50-2</i> Remarkably, loss of NAA50 expression did not affect NTA of known NatA substrates and caused the accumulation of proteins involved in stress responses. Overall, our results emphasize a relevant role of AtNAA50 in plant defense and development, which is independent of the essential NatA activity.

### Keywords
Silpronaq, Quantitative proteomics, N-terminal acetylation, N-acetylome, Encounter, Acetyltransferase, Gap test

### Affiliations
CNRS
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy Bienvenut
Génétique Quantitative et Évolution - Le Moulon INRA - Univ. Paris Sud - CNRS - AgroParisTech Ferme du Moulon 91190 Gif-sur-Yvette, France


