### Accession
PXD010093

### Title
2018CHPP -  Digging for Missing Proteins Using Low-Molecular-Weight Protein Enrichment and a "Mirror Protease" Strategy

### Description
ABSTRACT Since 2012, Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) launched the journey of missing proteins (MPs) investigation for completing human proteome project (HPP). We found the majority of MPs were distributed in low molecular weight (LMW) ranges, especially in 0-40 kDa. The identification of LMW proteins is challenging owing to their low length, low abundancy, and hydrophobicity. Even worse, many sequences from Trypsin digestion are unlikely to yield detectable peptides or composed less number of observable peptides in MS detection. Therefore, we focused on small MPs by combining LMW protein enrichment and mirror-protease strategy on human testis samples. The in-depth testis LMW protein profiling documented 4,063 proteins from which 2,565 proteins were belong to LMW proteins and 1,130 proteins had mirror peptides. This provided mass spectral evidence for small MPs further verification, and two MPs were verified in seven identified MPs. For Q8N688, confident peptides were verified from Trypsin and LysargiNase digestions, and continuous b/y-ion peptide was obtained by mirror-spectrum matching. Two verified peptides of Q86WR6 were from gel-separation and gel-elution dataset, respectively. And the other 5 MPs cannot be distinguished sufficiently as PE1, but need more verification information.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of LMW Proteins  The same human testis sample (IRB approval number BGI-IRB15076) were prepared as previously described27. The proteins were processed in triplicate, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 45 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark at room temperature for 30 min. (1) The two samples (120 µg) were resolved by a 12% Tricine-SDS-PAGE (6.5 cm) and stained by Coomassie blue G250. Subsequently, the gel lane below the 40 kDa region was excised into 5 fractions according to MW distribution. Each individual sample was separately digested with proteases Trypsin (12.5 ng/μL), LysargiNase (12.5 ng/μL) at 37 °C for 16 h. (2) The other one sample (240 µg) were resolved by a 12% Tricine-SDS-PAGE (4 cm) and didn’t stained. The gel lane below the 15 kDa region was excised into 2 fractions according to prestained protein ladder (Thermo Scientific™, Waltham, MA, USA). These two fractions were digested with Trypsin (12.5 ng/μL) at 37 °C for 16 h. The elution was collected in gel-dehydrating procedure. For the elution sample, the 3 kDa MWCO filter aided sample preparation (FASP) method was performed as described previously28. Briefly, the eluted sample was added to the filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000 ×g for 20 min. Subsequently, the sample was washed three times with 300 μL of substitution buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Subsequently, the samples were washed three times with 300 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3. Trypsin was loaded onto the filter at a protease to protein substrate ratio of 1:50 and the mixture was incubated for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were then desalted using a C18 column as described previously29 and vacuum dried before LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS Analysis and Database Searching The peptide mixtures were analyzed with tandem MS/MS (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher Scientific) after LC separation (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific). Briefly, The samples were loaded onto the self-packed capillary column (150 μm i.d. × 12 cm, 1.9 μm C18 reverse-phase fused-silica, Trap) and eluted with a 78 min nonlinear gradient: 6-10% B for 16 min, 10-24% B for 35 min, 24-34% B for 20 min, 34-95% B for 1 min, 95% B for 6min (Buffer A, 0.1% FA in dd H2O; Buffer B, 100% ACN; flow rate, ~600 nL/min). MS full scans were performed in the ultra-high-field Orbitrap analyzer in ranges m/z 300-1,400 with a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, the maximum injection time (MIT) was 80 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3×106. For MS/MS scan, the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge state 2 to 6 were subjected to fragmentation via higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) in the Q Exactive HF (2×104 AGC target, 19 ms maximum ion time). The dynamic exclusion setting was 12s.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched with the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (v2.1.1.21, Matrix Science Mascot 2.3.1) against the neXtProt database (2018-01). Full cleavage by Trypsin and LysargiNase were separately set including two missed cleavages. The protein identification must met the following criteria: (1) the peptide length≥7 AA; (2) the FDR at the PSM, peptide and protein levels ≤1%. Detailed information about the calculation of FDRs was shown in Table S-1.

### Publication Abstract
In 2012, the Chromosome-centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) launched an investigation for missing proteins (MPs) to complete the Human Proteome Project (HPP). The majority of the MPs were distributed in low-molecular-weight (LMW) ranges, especially from 0 to 40 kDa. LMW protein identification is challenging, owing to their short length, low abundance, and hydrophobicity. Furthermore, many sequences from trypsin digestion are unlikely to yield detectable peptides or a reasonable quality of MS<sub>2</sub> spectrum. Therefore, we focused on small MPs by combining LMW protein enrichment and a pair of complementary proteases strategy with trypsin and LysargiNase for human testis samples. In-depth testis LMW protein profiling resulted in the identification of 4063 proteins, of which 2565 were LMW proteins and 1130 had pairs of peptides generated from both trypsin and LysargiNase. This provided additional mass spectral evidence of further verification of small MPs. Finally, two MPs were verified from the seven MP candidates. One of them, Q8N688 , was verified with two series of continuous and complementary b/y-product ions from the pairs of spectra for tryptic and LysargiNase digested peptides after the "mirror spectrum" matching. This make the confident identification of the representative peptides for the target MPs. On the contrary, the two verified peptides for Q86WR6 were identified with the same strategy from the gel-separation and gel-elution samples, respectively. Although the other five MP candidates showed high-quality spectra, they could not be sufficiently distinguished as PE1s and require further verification. All MS data sets have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010093.

### Keywords
Testis, Mirror-protease, Missing proteins, Chromosome-centric human proteome project, Low molecular weight

### Affiliations
Ping Xu, Ph.D. Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel: 0086-10-61777113, Fax: 0086-10-61777060
National Center for Protein Sciences·Beijing

### Submitter
cuitong he

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Ping Xu, Ph.D. Secretary General of CNHUPO Professor, Director Department of Genomics and Proteomics, State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Center for Protein Sciences (Beijing) Beijing Institute of Lifeomics， 38 Life Science Park Road, Beijing 102206, P.R. China. Tel: 0086-10-61777113, Fax: 0086-10-61777060


