### Accession
PXD001338

### Title
Comprehensive temporal protein dynamics during the diauxic shift in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, part 5

### Description
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisea) has served as a key model system in biology and as a benchmark for “omics” technology. Although near-complete proteomes of log phase yeast have been measured, protein abundance in yeast is dynamic, particularly during the transition from log to stationary phase. Defining the dynamics of proteomic changes during this transition, termed the diauxic shift, is important to understand the basic biology of proliferative versus quiescent cells. Here, we perform temporal quantitative proteomics to fully capture protein induction and repression during the diauxic shift. Accurate and sensitive quantitation at a high temporal resolution and depth of proteome coverage was achieved using TMT10 reagents and LC-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer deploying synchronous precursor selection (SPS). We devised a simple template matching strategy to reveal temporal patterns of protein induction and repression. Within these groups are functionally distinct groups of proteins such as those of glyoxylate metabolism, as well as many proteins of unknown function not previously associated with the diauxic shift (e.g. YNR034W-A and FMP16). We also perform a dual time-course to determine Hap2-dependent proteins during the diauxic shift. These data serve as an important basic model for fermentative versus respiratory growth of yeast and other eukaryotes and are a benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Please see the publication materials and methods for sample processing.

### Data Protocol
Please see the publication materials and methods for data processing.

### Publication Abstract
Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) has served as a key model system in biology and as a benchmark for "omics" technology. Although near-complete proteomes of log phase yeast have been measured, protein abundance in yeast is dynamic, particularly during the transition from log to stationary phase. Defining the dynamics of proteomic changes during this transition, termed the diauxic shift, is important to understand the basic biology of proliferative versus quiescent cells. Here, we perform temporal quantitative proteomics to fully capture protein induction and repression during the diauxic shift. Accurate and sensitive quantitation at a high temporal resolution and depth of proteome coverage was achieved using TMT10 reagents and LC-MS3 analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer deploying synchronous precursor selection. Triplicate experiments were analyzed using the time-course R package and a simple template matching strategy was used to reveal groups of proteins with similar temporal patterns of protein induction and repression. Within these groups are functionally distinct types of proteins such as those of glyoxylate metabolism and many proteins of unknown function not previously associated with the diauxic shift (e.g. YNR034W-A and FMP16). We also perform a dual time-course experiment to determine Hap2-dependent proteins during the diauxic shift. These data serve as an important basic model for fermentative versus respiratory growth of yeast and other eukaryotes and are a benchmark for temporal quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
Yeast, Temporal, Tmt

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Patrick Murphy

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Harvard Medical School


