### Accession
PXD038326

### Title
SUMO Activated Target Traps (SATTs) enable the identification of a comprehensive E3-specific SUMO proteome

### Description
Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like conjugation cascades consist of dedicated E1, E2 and E3 enzymes with E3s providing substrate specificity. Mass spectrometry-based approaches have enabled the identification of more than 60,000 acceptor sites for ubiquitin and 40,000 acceptor sites for SUMO2/3. However, E3-to-target wiring is poorly understood. The limited number of SUMO E3s provides the unique opportunity to systematically study E3-substrate wiring. We developed SUMO Activated Target Traps (SATTs) and, in the presence of proteasome inhibitor MG132,systematically identified substrates for eight different SUMO E3s, PIAS1, PIAS2, PIAS3, PIAS4, NSMCE2, ZNF451, LAZSUL(ZNF451-3) and ZMIZ2. SATTs enabled us to identify 427 SUMO1 and 961 SUMO2/3 targets in an E3-specific manner. We found pronounced E3 substrate preference, even at the substrate isoform level. Quantitative proteomics enabled us to measure substrate specificity of E3s, quantified using the SATT index. Furthermore, we developed the Polar SATTs web-based tool (https://amsterdamstudygroup.shinyapps.io/polarVolcaNoseR_revised/) to browse the dataset in an interactive manner, increasing the accessibility of this resource for the community. Overall, we uncover E3-to-target wiring of 1388 SUMO substrates, highlighting unique and overlapping sets of substrates for eight different SUMO E3 ligases.

### Sample Protocol
Following the TULIP2 methodology 15, five 15 cm diameter plates of U2OS control cells or expressing either 10xHis-SUMO1, 10xHis-SUMO2Q87R or a particular SATT, were grown up to 60% to 80% confluence. Expression of SATTs constructs was induced with 1µg/mL doxycycline once 60-80% confluence was reached. 24h after doxycycline induction, cells were treated with proteasome inhibitor MG132 (Sigma Aldrich) at 10 µM for 5h. After proteasome inhibition, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scraped. Cells were spun down and collected in 2mL ice-cold PBS, 100 µL of sample was taken as input and lysed in 200 µL SNTBS buffer (2% SDS, 1% NP-40, 50mM TRIS pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl). After additional centrifugation, cells were lysed in 10mL Guanidinium buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10mM TRIS, pH 7.8) and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. After thawing, lysates were homogenized at room temperature by sonication at 80% amplitude during 5s using a tip sonicator (Q125 Sonicator, QSonica, Newtown, USA). Sonication was performed twice. Subsequently, protein concentration was determined by BiCinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay Reagent (Thermo Scientific). Total protein in lysates was equalized accordingly. After equalization, lysates were supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 8.0. 100 µL of dry nickel-nitrilotriacetic acid-agarose (Ni-NTA) beads (QIAGEN), were equilibrated with Guanidinium buffer supplemented with 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol and 50 mM Imidazole pH 8.0. Equilibrated Ni-NTA beads were added to the cell lysates and incubated overnight at 4°C under rotation. After lysate-bead incubation, Ni-NTA beads were spun down and transferred with Wash Buffer 1 (6 M Guanidine-HCl, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM Imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0.2 % Triton X-100, pH 7.8) to an Eppendorf LoBind tube (Eppendorf). After mixing and spinning down again, the beads were moved to a new LoBind tube with Wash buffer 2 (8 M Urea, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM Tris, 10 mM imidazole, 5mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8). This procedure was repeated with Wash buffer 3 (8 M urea, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 10 mM imidazole, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.3). Ultimately, beads were washed twice with Wash buffer 4 (8 M urea, 0.1M Sodium Phosphate, 10 mM TRIS, 5 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 6.3). When washing with wash buffer 3 and 4, beads were allowed to equilibrate with the buffer for 15 min under rotation. Trypsin digestion of SATT-purified conjugates. After the final wash with Wash buffer 4, Ni-NTA beads were resuspended in 7 M urea, 0.1 M NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4, 0.01 M Tris/HCl, pH 7 and digested with 500 ng recombinant Lys-C (Promega) at RT while shaking at 1,400 rpm. After 5h with Lys-C, urea buffer was diluted to <2M by adding 50 mM ABC. A second digestion was performed o/n at 37°C while shaking at 1,400 rpm using 500 ng of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). Trypsin digested peptides were separated from Ni-NTA beads by filtering through a 0.45 µm filter Ultrafree-MC-HV spin column (Merck-Millipore). All the experiments were analyzed by on‐line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Ultimate3000nano gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany). Samples were injected onto a cartridge precolumn (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap, 5 μm, 100 A) with a flow of 10 μl/min for 3 minutes (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm, 120 A) (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The gradient was run from 2% to 38% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼10 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The temperature of the nano-HPLC column was set to 50°C (Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a HCD collision energy at 28 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 350-1600, at an standard AGC target with maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z=445.12 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n=1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s, and with a precursor range of 10 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 the scan range mode was set to automated, and the MS2 scan resolution was 30,000 at an normalized AGC target of 100% with a maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw data was analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.14) as previously described 47. We performed two searches, first one analyzing the U2OS samples, HIS-SMUO1 and SUMO1 SATTs, and the other one analyzinf U2OS, HIS-SUMO2 and SUMO2 SATTs. We performed the search against an in silico digested UniProt reference proteome for Homo sapiens including canonical and isoform sequences (5th July 2021). Database searches were performed according to standard settings with the following modifications: Digestion with Trypsin/P was used, allowing 4 missed cleavages. Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Phospho (S,T) and, in the SUMO2 SATTs analysis, also QQTGG (K) (for SUMOylation sites) were allowed as variable modifications with a maximum number of 3. Carbamidomethyl (C) was disabled for SATTs analysis as a fixed modification. Label-Free Quantification was enabled, not allowing Fast LFQ. All peptides were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin and ubiquitin-like conjugation cascades consist of dedicated E1, E2, and E3 enzymes with E3s providing substrate specificity. Mass spectrometry-based approaches have enabled the identification of more than 6500 SUMO2/3 target proteins. The limited number of SUMO E3s provides the unique opportunity to systematically study E3 substrate wiring. We developed SUMO-activated target traps (SATTs) and systematically identified substrates for eight different SUMO E3s, PIAS1, PIAS2, PIAS3, PIAS4, NSMCE2, ZNF451, LAZSUL (ZNF451-3), and ZMIZ2. SATTs enabled us to identify 427 SUMO1 and 961 SUMO2/3 targets in an E3-specific manner. We found pronounced E3 substrate preference. Quantitative proteomics enabled us to measure substrate specificity of E3s, quantified using the SATT index. Furthermore, we developed the Polar SATTs web-based tool to browse the dataset in an interactive manner. Overall, we uncover E3-to-target wiring of 1388 SUMO substrates, highlighting unique and overlapping sets of substrates for eight different SUMO E3 ligases.

### Keywords
Sumo1, Sumo2, E3 enzymes

### Affiliations
CABIMER University of Sevilla
Andalusian Center for Regenerative Medicine and Cell Biology, CABIMER, University of Seville

### Submitter
Román González-Prieto

### Lab Head
Dr Roman González-Prieto
CABIMER University of Sevilla


