### Accession
PXD039824

### Title
New insight into the composition of extracellular traps released by macrophages exposed to different types of inducers

### Description
Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) release plays a key role in many chronic disease settings, including atherosclerosis. They are critical to innate immune defence, but also contribute to disease by promoting thrombosis and inflammation. Macrophages also release extracellular traps or “METs”, but their composition and role in pathological processes are less well defined. In this study, we examined MET release from human THP-1 macrophages exposed to inflammatory and pathogenic stimuli, including tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), hypochlorous acid (HOCl) and nigericin. In each case, there was release of DNA from the macrophages, as visualised by fluorescence microscopy with the cell impermeable DNA binding dye SYTOX green, consistent with MET formation. Proteomic analysis on METs released from macrophages exposed to TNFalpha and nigericin reveals that they are composed of linker and core histones, together with a range of cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins. These include proteins involved in DNA binding, stress responses, cytoskeletal organisation, metabolism, inflammation, anti-microbial activity and calcium binding. Quinone oxidoreductase in particular, was highly abundant in all METs but has not been reported previously in NETs. Moreover, there was an absence of proteases in METs in contrast to NETs. Some of the MET histones, contained post-translational modifications, including acetylation and methylation of Lys but not citrullination of Arg. These data provide new insight into the potential implications of MET formation in vivo and their contributions to immune defence and pathology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared for proteomic analysis using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). Samples (20 µg protein) were loaded onto Vivacon 500 10 kDa filters  and centrifuged (15 min at 14,000 g) before incubation with DTT (50 mM) in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5) containing urea (8 M) for 30 min. Samples were centrifuged as above and subsequently incubated with iodoacetamide (50 mM) in 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5) containing urea (8 M) for a further 30 min. Samples were centrifuged and the proteins were washed with 0.1 M Tris buffer (pH 8.5) containing urea (1.6 M) before addition of trypsin (0.2 µg) and overnight digestion (for 16 h). The resulting peptides were collected into new tubes and were desalted by a StageTip procedure using filters punched out from AttractSPE Disks C18 inserted into the bottom of a 200 μL pipette tip. The filters were activated by sequentially adding 50 µL aliquots of methanol, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, and 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) with centrifugation at 1200 g for 1 min between the addition of each solution. The samples were acidified with 10% v/v TFA before adding them to the filter discs, followed by centrifugation at 1200 g for 3 min, and washing twice with 50 μL 0.1% v/v TFA. Peptides were eluted by a solution containing acetonitrile (80% v/v) and formic acid (0.1% v/v) and centrifugation at 1200 g into new tubes. Samples were then dried using a vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% v/v formic acid (20 µL) prior to MS analysis. Samples (4 replicates for each condition) were analyzed on a Bruker TIMS TOF PRO mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) in the positive ion mode with a Captivespray ion source on-line connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSnano chromatography systems (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were separated on an Aurora column (C18 1.6 uM, 25 cm, 75 µm ID; AUR2-25075C18A-CSI; IonOpticks) at 60 °C with a solvent gradient of 0.1 % formic acid (Solvent A) and 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (Solvent B) over 140 min, at a flow rate of 600 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA PASEF mode with 1.1 s cycle time and TIMS ramp time of 100 ms. MS scan range was set to 100–1700 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database searches against the human UniProt reference proteome (UP000000558) were performed using Fragpipe version 18.0 (including MSFragger version 3.5 and Philosopher version 4.4.0), with the following settings: strict trypsin digestion with 2 missed cleavages, precursor and fragment mass error +/- 20 ppm, false discovery rate (FDR) 1 % (protein and peptide level), cysteine carbamidomethyl (fixed modification), methionine oxidation (variable modification). In addition, different combinations of variable modifications were used including acetylation (Lys, +42.0106 dDa), methylation (Lys, +14.0156 Da), and citrullination (Arg, +0.9840 Da). MS1 quantification was based on the LFQ algorithm in Ionquant using match between runs and normalization between replicates. Keratins and other common contaminants were removed and only proteins identified in 4 out of 4 replicates were considered in post-processing and statistical analysis using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0). For post-translational modifications, peptides detected in at least 3 out of 4 replicates were considered.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophil extracellular trap (NET) release plays a key role in many chronic disease settings, including atherosclerosis. They are critical to innate immune defence, but also contribute to disease by promoting thrombosis and inflammation. Macrophages are known to release extracellular traps or "METs", but their composition and role in pathological processes are less well defined. In this study, we examined MET release from human THP-1 macrophages exposed to model inflammatory and pathogenic stimuli, including tumour necrosis factor &#x3b1; (TNF&#x3b1;), hypochlorous acid (HOCl) and nigericin. In each case, there was release of DNA from the macrophages, as visualized by fluorescence microscopy with the cell impermeable DNA binding dye SYTOX green, consistent with MET formation. Proteomic analysis on METs released from macrophages exposed to TNF&#x3b1; and nigericin reveals that they are composed of linker and core histones, together with a range of cytosolic and mitochondrial proteins. These include proteins involved in DNA binding, stress responses, cytoskeletal organisation, metabolism, inflammation, anti-microbial activity, and calcium binding. Quinone oxidoreductase in particular, was highly abundant in all METs but has not been reported previously in NETs. Moreover, there was an absence of proteases in METs in contrast to NETs. Some of the MET histones, contained post-translational modifications, including acetylation and methylation of Lys but not citrullination of Arg. These data provide new insight into the potential implications of MET formation in vivo and their contributions to immune defence and pathology.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Histones, Macrophages, Extracellular traps

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Department of Biomedical Sciences

### Submitter
Per Hägglund

### Lab Head
Dr Per Hägglund
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Department of Biomedical Sciences


