### Accession
PXD042435

### Title
Chromatin proteome of S-phase in IgG- and DONSON-depleted egg extract

### Description
The aim of the project was to analyse the role of DONSON during DNA replication reaction in Xenopus laevis egg extract. To test what is the impact of DONSON on replication we decided to remove DONSON from egg extract by immunodepletion and analyse its impact on DNA replication reaction. In the parallel experiments we have shown that without DONSON egg extract cannot synthesise nascent DNA. Here we wanted to examine the change of replicating chromatin proteome in absence of DONSON. Interphase Xenopus laevis egg extract was immunodepleted with control nonspecific IgG antibodies beads or DONSON-antibodies. The efficiency of immunodepletion was shown to be over 95%. DNA replication was set up in both IgG- and DONSON-depleted egg extracts and chromatin isolated in the middle of S-phase, when replication forks where abundant in chromatin fraction in IgG-depleted extract.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated chromatin samples were run on a 5-20% gradient gel (Invitrogen) for 1 cm and cut into 10 bands. Samples were submitted pre-plated for ten fraction analysis. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: ·         Washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. ·         Reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT. ·         Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. ·         Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analysed directly without further processing. Mass Spectrometry The gel digests were analysed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters M-class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 µm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 30min gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and 15,000 FWHM resolution, respectively. APD was turned on. The instrument was run with a 3 s cycle for MS and MS/MS. Proteome Discoverer v1.4 was used for peak generation.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.8.0.1) with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin Fully Specific Database: Uniprot Xenopus (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants) released on 04/15/2014. 79,274 (including reverse and CON) entries in the database were searched.  Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), GlyGly (K), Phospho (STY) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.1.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered with 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 34.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation {Kall, 2008 #979}. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm {Nesvizhskii, 2003 #980}. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Faithful cell division is the basis for the propagation of life and DNA replication must be precisely regulated. DNA replication stress is a prominent endogenous source of genome instability that not only leads to ageing, but also neuropathology and cancer development in humans. Specifically, the issues of how vertebrate cells select and activate origins of replication are of importance as, for example, insufficient origin firing leads to genomic instability and mutations in replication initiation factors lead to the rare human disease Meier-Gorlin syndrome. The mechanism of origin activation has been well characterised and reconstituted in yeast, however, an equal understanding of this process in higher eukaryotes is lacking. The firing of replication origins is driven by S-phase kinases (CDKs and DDK) and results in the activation of the replicative helicase and generation of two bi-directional replication forks. Our data, generated from cell-free Xenopus laevis egg extracts, show that DONSON is required for assembly of the active replicative helicase (CMG complex) at origins during replication initiation. DONSON has previously been shown to be essential during DNA replication, both in human cells and in Drosophila, but the mechanism of DONSON's action was unknown. Here we show that DONSON's presence is essential for replication initiation as it is required for Cdc45 and GINS association with Mcm2-7 complexes and helicase activation. To fulfil this role, DONSON interacts with the initiation factor, TopBP1, in a CDK-dependent manner. Following its initiation role, DONSON also forms a part of the replisome during the elongation stage of DNA replication. Mutations in DONSON have recently been shown to lead to the Meier-Gorlin syndrome; this novel replication initiation role of DONSON therefore provides the explanation for the phenotypes caused by DONSON mutations in patients.

### Keywords
Xenopus, Chromatin, Donson, Replication initiation

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
Dr Aga Gambus, Reader in Genome Replication,  Wellcome and Lister Fellow, Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.67, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT

### Submitter
Aga Gambus

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Aga Gambus
Dr Aga Gambus, Reader in Genome Replication,  Wellcome and Lister Fellow, Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.67, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT


