### Accession
PXD010438

### Title
Analysis of the fission yeast meiotic proteome reveals a global switch from anabolic to catabolic processes and extensive post-transcriptional regulation.

### Description
Progression through meiosis in Schizosaccharomyces pombe is regulated by stage-specific gene expression and translation, changes in RNA stability, expression of anti-sense transcripts and also requires stage-specific, targetted proteolysis of regulatory proteins. We have used SILAC labelling to examine the relative levels of proteins in S. pombe as diploid cells undergo meiosis. We found that the relative level of 880 proteins changes at least two-fold at some stage of meiosis. Most of these proteins either increase or decrease in level during the meiotic divisions, while some show transient peaks of expression. The most notable changes are in the proteostasis network, which shows a significant increase in components involved in protein turnover concomitant to a decrease in proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis. There was also an increase in ESCRT III protein levels; biological analysis reveals a role for some ESCRT III components in chromosome segregation and spore formation. Correlation with previous studies of gene expression and ribosome occupancy through meiosis reveals that changes in steady state protein levels are mainly regulated post-transcriptionally.

### Sample Protocol
Standard techniques were used for fission yeast growth and analysis. Diploid cells were synchronized in meiosis using the temperature sensitive pat1-114 allele. Briefly, diploid pat1-114/pat1-114 leu1-32/leu1-32 adeM210/adeM216 cells h+/h+ were grown at 25°C in minimal medium (EMM) before being starved for 16 hrs at 25°C in minimal medium without NH4Cl (EMM-N). Meiosis was then induced by shifting the culture to 32°C and adding NH4Cl to 0.01% (w/v). Aliquots were removed each hour during 10 hours for protein extractions and DAPI staining. Protein extraction was performed as described in {Bicho, 2010}. Meiotic progression was followed by DAPI staining as described in {Krapp, 2014} and the percentage of cells with one, two or four nuclei was determined. Spore formation and germination efficiency were determined as follow: cells of opposite mating types containing the indicated deletion (obtained from the Bioneer S. pombe viable null mutant strain collection and checked by linkage analysis) were mated on EMM-N during 4 days. Asci were then either fixed with 70% (v/v; fixed at 4°C) Ethanol for microscopy analysis, or spores prepared by digestion with lysing enzymes (Sigma). Spores were then resuspended in water and individually placed on a Y5 plate using a micromanipulator (Singer MSM). Colonies were allowed to grow at 29°C and the percentage of colony-forming spores was determined. Incorporation of heavy amino acids was done according to {Carpy, 2015}. Briefly, diploid pat1-114/pat1-114 car2::Nat/car2::Nat nic1::K/nic1::K mat2-P102 leu1-32/leu1-32 ura4-D18/ura4-D18 arg3-D4/arg3-D4 lys1-131/lys1-131 adeM210/adeM216 cells were grown for 17 generations in exponential growth in EMMG supplemented with 100mg/l leucine, 100mg/l uracil, 500mg/l proline, 0.65g/l NH4Cl, 75mg/l heavy isotopic versions of lysine and 12.5mg/l heavy isotopic versions of arginine (l-lysine:2HCl (U-13C6, 99%; U-15N2, 99%, Cambridge Isotopes, cat no. CNLM-291-H-0.1), and l-arginine:HCl (U-13C6, 99%; U-15N4, 99%, Cambridge Isotopes, cat no. CNLM-539-H-0.1) ). Cells were then washed and resuspended in EMM-N supplemented with 20mg/l leucine, 20mg/l uracil, 20mg/l proline, 20mg/l heavy isotopic versions of lysine and 3mg/l heavy isotopic versions of arginine for starvation during 16 hrs at 25°C. Meiosis was induced by shifting the culture to 32°C and addition of amino acids to 100mg/l leucine, 100mg/l uracil, 500mg/l proline, 0.65g/l NH4Cl, 75mg/l heavy isotopic versions of lysine and 12.5mg/l heavy isotopic versions of arginine. Aliquots were removed at time 0hrs, 3hrs, 5hrs and 8hrs for protein extraction and cell cycle analysis as above. Time points 0 and 3 hrs contained mostly mononucleated cells (98.4% and 99.6%, respectively) at 5hrs, the number of binucleated cells increased (30.1%) while no tetranucleated cells were yet present (0.5%). At 8hrs most asci contained four nuclei (84.3%). For the heavy super-SILAC mix, protein extracts of all four time points were mixed in a 1:1:1:1 ratio according to protein concentration. The super-SILAC “heavy” reference sample was then mixed with each “light” sample at a 1:1 ratio according to protein concentration.  Samples were trypsin digested using the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was replaced by Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) as reducing agent and Iodoacetamide (IAA) by Chloracetamide (CAA) as alkylating agent. Proteolytic digestion was performed with the combination of Endoproteinase Lys-C and Trypsin. The resulting peptides were purified using Detergent Removal Spin Columns (PierceTM) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Samples were then desalted on C18 Stage Tips, which were then washed twice with 80% acetonitrile and conditioned three times with 0.1% TriFluoroacetic Acid (TFA). Acidified samples were loaded and then washed twice with 0.1% TFA. Elution was performed with 80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% TFA followed by 80% acetonitrile containing 10% TriFluoroEthanol (TFE) and 0.1% TFA. Samples were fractionated into six pools by Strong Cation eXchange (SCX) as previously described. All fractions were dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Each SCX fraction was resuspended and separated by Reverse-Phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive Mass-Spectrometer. Samples were first trapped on a capillary Dionex precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100) and then separated on a Dionex (Acclaim Pepmap RSLC 75µmID x 50cm, C18 2µm 100Ä) at 250nl/min applying a non-linear 240min gradient. Acquisitions were performed using Data-Dependent acquisition mode. First MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 70’000 (at 200m/z) and the 10 most intense parent ions were elected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 27%. Fragmented ions were then excluded for the following 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
SILAC data were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 against a Schizosaccharomyces pombe database containing 5146 sequences (Pombase realease 2015-09-29). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of seven amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% FDR cut-off was fixed at peptide and protein identification levels. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), Gln to pyro-Glu, Glu to pyro-Glu and Phospho (STY) were considered as variable modifications. SILAC quantifications were performed by MaxQuant using the standard settings and with the re-quantification mode enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Meiotic progression in S.&#xa0;pombe is regulated by stage-specific gene expression and translation, changes in RNA stability, expression of anti-sense transcripts, and targeted proteolysis of regulatory proteins. We have used SILAC labeling to examine the relative levels of proteins in diploid S.&#xa0;pombe cells during meiosis. Among the 3,268 proteins quantified at all time points, the levels of 880 proteins changed at least 2-fold; the majority of proteins showed stepwise increases or decreases during the meiotic divisions, while some changed transiently. Overall, we observed reductions in proteins involved in anabolism and increases in proteins involved in catabolism. We also observed increases in the levels of proteins of the ESCRT-III complex and revealed a role for ESCRT-III components in chromosome segregation and spore formation. Correlation with studies of meiotic gene expression and ribosome occupancy reveals that many of the changes in steady-state protein levels are post-transcriptional.

### Keywords
Time course, S. pombe, Silac, Meiosis, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
PCF
EPFL SV ISREC UPSIM SV2.1830 Station 19 CH - 1015 Lausanne Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Viesturs Simanis
EPFL SV ISREC UPSIM SV2.1830 Station 19 CH - 1015 Lausanne Switzerland


