### Accession
PXD017085

### Title
Application of TurboID-mediated proximity labeling and phosphoproteomics for mapping a GSK3 kinase signaling network in Arabidopsis

### Description
Transient protein-protein interactions (PPIs), such as those between posttranslational modifying enzymes and their substrates, play key roles in cellular regulation, but are difficult to identify. Here we demonstrate the application of enzyme-catalyzed proximity labeling (PL), using the engineered promiscuous biotin ligase TurboID, as a sensitive method for characterizing PPIs in signaling networks. We show that TurboID fused with the GSK3-like kinase BIN2 or a PP2A phosphatase biotinylate their known substrate, the BZR1 transcription factor, with high specifically and efficiency. We optimized the protocol of biotin labeling and affinity purification in transgenic Arabidopsis expressing a BIN2-TurboID fusion protein. Subsequent quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) analysis identified about three hundred proteins biotinylated by BIN2-TurboID more efficiently than the YFP-TurboID control. These include a significant subset of previously proven BIN2 interactors and a large number of new BIN2 interactors that uncover a broad BIN2 signaling network. Our study illustrates that PL-MS using TurboID is a powerful tool for mapping signaling networks in plants, and reveals broad roles of this GSK3-like kinase in cellular signaling and regulation.

### Sample Protocol
We generated a BIN2-YFP-TurboID transgenic plant and a YFP-YFP-TurboID transgenic plant as a control, labeling with metabolic stable isotope 14N and 15N, respectively.  After incubation with 50 µM biotin for 3 h, biotinylated proteins were extracted from two plants, mixed with same protein amount, enriched with streptavidin beads, digested into tryptic peptides. Digested phosphopeptides were enriched by IMAC, and biotinylated peptides were eluted from the Streptavidin beads. The nonmodified, phosphopeptides, and biotinylated peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. For in vivo phosphoproteomics analysis, plants were treated with or without bikinin, a GSK3 kinase inhibitor, to suppress BIN2 activity in plants. Phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe-IMAC StageTip and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were converted to peaklist files using an in-house script PAVA, and the files were searched using Protein Prospector against a TAIR10 database (35,386 entries) from TAIR (https://www.arabidopsis.org/) concatenated with sequence randomized versions of each protein using with a 1% FDR cutoff at the peptide levels. The first peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS match tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of (1) oxidation on methionine residues, (2) acetylation at the N-terminus of proteins, (3) phosphorylation on serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues, and (4) biotinylation (+ 226.078 Da) on N-terminus of proteins or uncleaved lysine residues. All data were analyzed using the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.1) and Microsoft Excel. The number of unique phosphorylated and biotinylated peptides identified from each sample was calculated using Microsoft Excel after removal of the redundant biotinylated sequences in the search compare file. The intensities of biotinylated peptides were log2 transformed, and the difference between BIN2-TbID and YFP-TbID samples were calculated by subtracting the log2 values of two samples. Median intensity ratio between light and heavy peaks (Med L/H I) was used for protein level quantitation. Average of Med L/H I value of identified peptides from 14N and 15N searches was calculated. Proteins with the value ≥2 (1st quantile of BIN2-TbID/YFP-TbID ratio) in both reciprocal experiments are considered as candidate BIN2-proximity labeled proteins. Scatter plot of Log2 fold change values of identified proteins was generated by SigmaPlot. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation analysis was performed using PANTHER classification system.

### Publication Abstract
Elucidating enzyme-substrate relationships in posttranslational modification (PTM) networks is crucial for understanding signal transduction pathways but is technically difficult because enzyme-substrate interactions tend to be transient. Here, we demonstrate that TurboID-based proximity labeling (TbPL) effectively and specifically captures the substrates of kinases and phosphatases. TbPL-mass spectrometry (TbPL-MS) identified over 400 proximal proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana BRASSINOSTEROID-INSENSITIVE2 (BIN2), a member of the GLYCOGEN SYNTHASE KINASE 3 (GSK3) family that integrates signaling pathways controlling diverse developmental and acclimation processes. A large portion of the BIN2-proximal proteins showed BIN2-dependent phosphorylation in vivo or in vitro, suggesting that these are BIN2 substrates. Protein-protein interaction network analysis showed that the BIN2-proximal proteins include interactors of BIN2 substrates, revealing a high level of interactions among the BIN2-proximal proteins. Our proteomic analysis establishes the BIN2 signaling network and uncovers BIN2 functions in regulating key cellular processes such as transcription, RNA processing, translation initiation, vesicle trafficking, and cytoskeleton organization. We further discovered significant overlap between the GSK3 phosphorylome and the O-GlcNAcylome, suggesting an evolutionarily ancient relationship between GSK3 and the nutrient-sensing O-glycosylation pathway. Our work presents a powerful method for mapping PTM networks, a large dataset of GSK3 kinase substrates, and important insights into the signaling network that controls key cellular functions underlying plant growth and acclimation.

### Keywords
Plant, Biotinylation, Protein-protein interaction, Phosphoproteomics, Gsk3 kinase, Mass spectrometry, Turboid, Protein interactome, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Carnegie Institution for Science

### Submitter
Chuan-Chih Hsu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi-Yong Wang
Carnegie Institution for Science


