### Accession
PXD036594

### Title
prm-PASEF and g-dia-PASEF analysis of plasma samples from colorectal cancer and control patients

### Description
Quantitative analysis of 10 CRC vs 10 control human plasma samples with the prm-PASEF and g-dia-PASEF acquisition methodes

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of 20 µL of human plasma were depleted on a 1260 Infinity Bio-inert LC system (Agilent) coupled to a depletion column (human 14 multiple affinity removal column; 4.6 x 50 mm; Agilent) according to the manufacturer’s procedure. After depletion, the buffer was exchanged for 100 mM NH4HCO3, and the volume was concentrated to 100 µL using a spin concentrator with a 5 kDa cutoff (Pall). Proteins were denatured with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37°C, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. All reagents were prepared in a freshly made 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer. The denatured samples were diluted to 0.5% SDC and proteolysis was performed by adding 6,5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. Potential N-glycan chains were trimmed by adding 5 U of PNGase F for 1 h at 37°C followed by an additional step of trypsin digestion with 1 µg of trypsin for 3 h at 37°C. The SDC was removed by precipitation with 1% formic acid and centrifugation. Digested samples were cleaned on Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were reconstituted with 200 µL of 0.1% formic acid/4% acetonitrile. Sample concentrations were normalized based on the absorbance at 205 nm measured with a nanodrop (Thermo Scientific). Samples were spiked with the PQ500 kit (Biognosys), consisting of a mixture of 804 stable isotopes labeled peptides of known concentration. For reproducibility experiments, a sample was injected in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were processed with Skyline daily11, and extracted fragment ion chromatograms (XICs) were extracted with a TOF resolution tolerance set to 60,000. For the g-dia-PASEF method, ion mobility data were filtered with tolerance windows of 0.05 1/K0 centered on the experimental mobility values. Only fragment ions of the y-series were allowed, avoiding b-series crosstalk between the endogeneous and the isotope-labeled standard peptides. For g-dia-PASEF data, retention time prediction was performed using iRT peptides and Biognosys spectral library values. The predicted retention time windows were set to 20 min. g-dia-PASEF transitions were manually curated to remove interfering transitions and correct wrong peak picking or peak integration boundaries

### Publication Abstract
Blood analysis is one of the foundations of clinical diagnostics. In recent years, the analysis of proteins in blood samples by mass spectrometry has taken a jump forward in terms of sensitivity and the number of identified proteins. The recent development of parallel reaction monitoring with parallel accumulation and serial fragmentation (prm-PASEF) combines ion mobility as an additional separation dimension. This increases the proteome coverage while allowing the use of shorter chromatographic gradients. To demonstrate the method's full potential, we used an isotope-labeled synthetic peptide mix of 782 peptides, derived from 579 plasma proteins, spiked into blood plasma samples with a prm-PASEF measurement allowing the quantification of 565 plasma proteins by targeted proteomics. As a less time-consuming alternative to the prm-PASEF method, we describe guided data independent acquisition (dia)-PASEF (g-dia-PASEF) and compare its application to prm-PASEF for measuring blood plasma. To demonstrate both methods' performance in clinical samples, 20 patient plasma samples from a colorectal cancer (CRC) cohort were analyzed. The analysis identified 14 differentially regulated proteins between the CRC patient and control individual plasma samples. This shows the technique's potential for the rapid and unbiased screening of blood proteins, abolishing the need for the preselection of potential biomarker proteins.

### Keywords
Pasef prm dia plasma colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
luxembourg institute of health
lih

### Submitter
antoine lesur

### Lab Head
Dr Gunnar Dittmar
lih


