### Accession
PXD014516

### Title
LFQ Burkholderia Cenocepacia pglL mutant comparsion

### Description
Characterisation of the effect of multiple pglL muants and complement within Burkholderia cenocepacia k56-2 to confirm glycosylation phenotype. Six strain comparsion (WT vs delta pglL 1 vs delta pglL 2 vs delta pglL 1 complement native pglL vs delta pglL 1 complement S7-pglL-his vs delta pglL 2 complement native pglL

### Sample Protocol
freshly prepared whole cell pellets were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM DTT for one hour and then alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Lys-C was added at a ratio of 1:200 and samples allowed to digest for 4 hours. Each sample was then diluted with 100mM ABC and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30 using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Burkholderia cenocepacia, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


