### Accession
PXD014480

### Title
Label-free shotgun proteomics analysis in zebrafish liver following dietary exposure to the pesticide dieldrin

### Description
The objective of this study was to determine the effect of dieldrin on the hepatic proteome in the zebrafish liver following dietary exposure. Female zebrafish were fed a control dose or one of three doses of DLD-contaminated food pellets over 21 days.

### Sample Protocol
Total liver proteins were isolated with 100 mM Tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (Tris)-HCl, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF) and 0.1% Triton X-100. Proteins were washed in 80% cold acetone to remove impurities. Protein assays were performed using Bradford solution (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with the SoftMax Pro Software v5.3 (Molecular Devices, Downingtown, PA, USA). Peptides were prepared from liver protein extracts by re-suspension in 100 mM TEAB to a concentration of 20 mg/ml and were reduced and acetylated using 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and 200 mM 2-iodoacetamide. Denatured proteins were then digested in 10% v/v formic acid for 30 min at 115°C. The resulting peptide mixtures in each tube were evaporated to near dryness and then re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile. The peptides were then analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (RP-HPLC–MS/MS). Peptides were separated on an Agilent 1260 Infinity nano-HPLC-Chip cube system, using a ProtID chip 150 II (300 Å C18 150 mm) at a thermostat controlled column temperature of 40°C. The autosampler chilling temperature was kept at 8°C. The capillary and nano-pump gradient timetables were: 0–45 min 0–60% solvent B, 45–50 min 90% solvent B, 50-60 min 0% solvent B. The inner valve was switched to the capillary pump at 45 min. The Agilent 6520 Accurate-Mass Quadrupole Time-of-Flight (Q-TOF) was used to detect the peptide peaks following separation by the nano-HPLC-Chip cube system. Samples were ionized using by z-spray with: positive polarity, gas flow 5 L/min at 325°C, capillary voltage 1950, fragmentor voltage 180, skimmer voltage 65, and octopole RF 750. Scan was performed in Auto MS/MS mode with MS range 300-3200 Da and scan rate 1 cycle/s. MS/MS range was 50-3200 Da and scan rate 1 cycle/s. Collision energy was ramped with slope 3.7 and offset 2.5. The maximum precursors per cycle were 10. The absolute threshold to trigger MS/MS scan was an absolute intensity of 1000 counts or a relative threshold of greater than 0.05% total intensity counts. Active exclusion was enabled after 2 spectra were collected for 6 seconds. Reference ions 322.048121, 1221.990637, and 2421.91399 m/z were used for in-run mass axis calibration.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by search against a UniProt and an NCBI Teleostei subset protein databases (both downloaded Feb 13, 2014). Spectral files for each fish were grouped into folders by treatment and then each folder was searched separately using Spectrum Mill Software (Version A.03.03 SR4). Peptides were validated manually and accepted when at least one peptide had a peptide score (quality of the raw match between the observed spectrum and the theoretical spectrum) greater than 5 and a %SPI (percent of the spectral intensity that are accounted for by theoretical fragments) of greater than 60% (these criteria were recommended by the software for validating results obtained with an Agilent Q-TOF mass spectrometer).

### Publication Abstract
Dieldrin is an environmental contaminant that adversely affects aquatic organisms. The data presented in this study are proteomic data collected in liver of zebrafish that were exposed to the pesticide in a dietary exposure. For label free proteomics, data were collected with a quadrupole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer and for iTRAQ proteomics, data were acquired using a hybrid quadrupole Orbitrap (Q Exactive) MS system. Using formic acid digestion and label free proteomics, 2,061 proteins were identified, and among those, 103 were differentially abundant (p&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05 in at least one dose). In addition, iTRAQ proteomics identified 722 proteins in the liver of zebrafish following dieldrin treatment. The label-free approach identified 21 proteins that followed a dose dependent response. Of the differentially abundant proteins identified by iTRAQ, there were 26 unique expression patterns for proteins based on the three doses of dieldrin. Proteins were queried for disease networks to learn more about adverse effects in the liver following dieldrin exposure. Differentially abundant proteins were related to metabolic disease, steatohepatitis and lipid metabolism disorders, drug-induced liver injury, neoplasms, tissue degeneration and liver metastasis. The proteomics data described here is associated with a research article, "Label-free and iTRAQ proteomics analysis in the liver of zebrafish (<i>Danio rerio</i>) following a dietary exposure to the organochlorine pesticide dieldrin" (Simmons et&#xa0;al. 2019). This investigation reveals new biomarkers of toxicity and will be of interest to those studying aquatic toxicology and pesticides.

### Keywords
Liver, Lc-ms/ms, Zebrafish

### Affiliations
Ontario Tech University
Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, ON, Canada

### Submitter
Denina Simmons

### Lab Head
Dr Denina Bobbie Dawn Simmons
Ontario Tech University, Oshawa, ON, Canada


