### Accession
PXD036020

### Title
Circulating peptidome is strongly altered in COVID-19 patients

### Description
Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) is the pathogen responsible for the coronavirus disease-19 (COVID-19), an infectious disease characterized by a broad spectrum of symptoms, from mild to severe. Even though the COVID-19 impact on the proteome, metabolome, and lipidome has been largely investigated in different bio-fluids, to date the circulating peptidome remains unexplored. Thus, the present study aimed to apply an untargeted peptidomic approach to provide insight into alterations of circulating peptides in the development and severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection.  The circulating peptidome from COVID-19 severe and mildly symptomatic patients and negative controls was characterized using LC-MS/MS analysis for identification and quantification purposes. Database search and statistical analysis allowed a complete characterization of the plasma peptidome and the detection of the most significant modulated peptides that were impacted by the infection. Our results highlighted not only that peptide abundance inversely correlates with disease severity but also the involvement of biomolecules belonging to inflammatory, immune-response, and coagulation proteins/processes. Moreover, our data suggested a possible involvement of changes in protein degradation patterns. In the present research, for the first time, the untargeted peptidomic approach enabled the identification of circulating peptides potentially playing a crucial role in the progression of COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides from plasma samples were extracted using a QAE Sephadex A-25 strong anion exchange resin (Sigma-Aldrich St. Louis, MO, USA). Briefly, 160 µL of sorbent was washed twice through the addition of 400 µL of buffer (0.02 M Tris, pH = 8.26) and the subsequent centrifugation at 800 x g for 10s. The supernatant was then carefully removed. 200 µL of plasma was diluted with 400 µL of buffer prior to extraction and then added to the washed sorbent. After 30 min incubation with vortexing (room temperature, 1000 rpm), samples were centrifuged at 500 x g for 10s and the supernatant was removed. The sorbent was again washed three times with 700 µL of buffer (500 x g, 10s) and 800 µL of 0.5 % formic acid (elution buffer) was added. Subsequently, samples were incubated with vortexing for 15 min.  To desorb peptides from the surface of highly abundant proteins, the eluates obtained from the fractionation on anion exchange sorbent were incubated at 60 °C for 15 min (Shender et al., 2018). After heating, samples were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid-phase extraction (SPE) 96-well plate (25 mg/well, Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, United States). Samples were vacuum-evaporated and reconstituted with 11 µL of mobile phase (0.1% formic acid in water) for the analysis. Peptides were analyzed with a UHPLC Vanquish system (Thermo Scientific, Rodano, Italy) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Rodano, Italy). Peptides were separated by a reverse-phase column (Accucore™ RP-MS 100 x 2.1 mm, particle size 2.6 µm). The column was maintained at a constant temperature of 40 °C at a flow rate of 0.200 mL/min. Mobile phases A and B were water and acetonitrile respectively, both acidified with 0.1% formic acid. The Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in positive ion mode. The injection volume was 6 μL.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (AB SCIEX, Concord, Canada) and Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA). For Mascot 2 missed cleavages were used and the following modifications for the assay were specified: carbamidomethyl cysteine as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. An assay tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for MS/MS tolerance. The peptide charges to be detected were set to 2 +, 3 +, and 4 +, and the assay was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins (version 2018.07.07, containing 42,131 sequence entries) was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was fixed at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Whilst the impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) on the host proteome, metabolome, and lipidome has been largely investigated in different bio-fluids, to date, the circulating peptidome remains unexplored. Thus, the present study aimed to apply an untargeted peptidomic approach to provide insight into alterations of circulating peptides in the development and severity of SARS-CoV-2 infection. The circulating peptidome from COVID-19 severe and mildly symptomatic patients and negative controls was characterized using LC-MS/MS analysis for identification and quantification purposes. Database search and statistical analysis allowed a complete characterization of the plasma peptidome and the detection of the most significant modulated peptides that were impacted by the infection. Our results highlighted not only that peptide abundance inversely correlates with disease severity, but also the involvement of biomolecules belonging to inflammatory, immune-response, and coagulation proteins/processes. Moreover, our data suggested a possible involvement of changes in protein degradation patterns. In the present research, for the first time, the untargeted peptidomic approach enabled the identification of circulating peptides potentially playing a crucial role in the progression of COVID-19.

### Keywords
Covid-19; peptidomics; protein degradation; biomarkers; respiratory disease

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale - UPO

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale - UPO


