### Accession
PXD039280

### Title
Proteomics of Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis nodules

### Description
The proteomics aspect of this project was simply to catalog the protein content in microlith nodule isolated from a Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis patient or from a mouse model of the disease

### Sample Protocol
Extracted mouse or human microliths were incubated in buffer containing 50 mM tetraethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 5 mM Tris, and 75 mM EGTA with sonication and end over end shaking in the cold room. The supernatant was then buffer exchanged with 50 mM TEAB for 3 cycles using 3 kDa filters (Amicon). The final volume of the sample was brought to 100 µl with 50 mM TEAB. The samples were reduced with 20 µl of 50 mM tris-(2 carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with 10 µl of 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS), digested with trypsin and dried in a lyophylizer.  Samples were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a Sciex 5600 quadrupole-TOF system as described in Dwivedi, P., et al., Leukemia 33, 75-87 (2019).

### Data Protocol
The data generated by nano-LC-MS/MS (.wiff files) were further analyzed for protein identification using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0, revision 4769). Protein Pilot utilized the Paragon algorithm and was searched against a UniProt database of Mus musculus or homo sapiens protein sequences. Each file was processed using MMTS for Cys alkylation and with methionine oxidation of the a variable modifications.  The search results were generated as .group files that were converted to mzIdentML files posted here. A minimum of 95% confidence in identity (calculated by probability algorithm of Protein Pilot software).

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis is an autosomal recessive lung disease caused by a deficiency in the pulmonary epithelial Npt2b sodium-phosphate co-transporter that results in accumulation of phosphate and formation of hydroxyapatite microliths in the alveolar space. The single cell transcriptomic analysis of a pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis lung explant showing a robust osteoclast gene signature in alveolar monocytes and the finding that calcium phosphate microliths contain a rich protein and lipid matrix that includes bone resorbing osteoclast enzymes and other proteins suggested a role for osteoclast-like cells in the host response to microliths. While investigating the mechanisms of microlith clearance, we found that Npt2b modulates pulmonary phosphate homeostasis through effects on alternative phosphate transporter activity and alveolar osteoprotegerin, and that microliths induce osteoclast formation and activation in a receptor activator of nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B ligand and dietary phosphate dependent manner. This work reveals that Npt2b and pulmonary osteoclast-like cells play key roles in pulmonary homeostasis and suggest potential new therapeutic targets for the treatment of lung disease.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pulmonary alveolar microlithiasis (pam), Lung, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Cincinnati
Proteomics Laboroatory University of Cincinnati College of Medicine

### Submitter
ken greis

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth D. Greis
Proteomics Laboroatory University of Cincinnati College of Medicine


