### Accession
PXD040897

### Title
Quantitative, TMT-based proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of SARS-COV-2 infected cells.

### Description
Host kinases play essential roles in the host cell cycle, innate immune signaling, the stress response to viral infection, and inflammation. Previous work has demonstrated coronaviruses specifically target kinase cascades to subvert host cell responses to infection and rely upon host kinase activity to phosphorylate viral proteins to enhance replication. Given the number of kinase inhibitors that are already FDA approved to treat cancers, fibrosis, and other human disease, they represent an attractive class of compounds to repurpose for host targeted therapies against emerging coronavirus infections. To further understand the host kinome response to betacoronavirus infection we employed multiplex inhibitory bead mass spectrometry (MIB-MS) following MERS-CoV and SARS-CoV-2 infection of human lung epithelial cell lines. To determine signaling pathways altered over the SARS-CoV-2 time-course, global quantitative phosphoproteomic and proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infected A549-hACE2 was performed on paired cell lysates (n=3) from the MIB-MS analysis. This PRIDE Submission contains the proteome and phosphoproteome data. The MIB-MS data were uploaded as a separate PRIDE Submission. Over 7,200 proteins and 14,300 phosphosites were quantified over the 24 hr infection time course. Further analysis of the phosphoproteome indicated activation of MAPK, PI3K, and mTOR signaling.

### Sample Protocol
A549-hACE2 cells were inoculated with icSARS-CoV-2 and incubated in viral growth media for 4, 12, or 24 hours. Infected samples were collected in triplicate at each timepoint alongside one mock sample collected at each timepoint. Cells were centrifuged, lysed, and placed at -80ºC immediately after lysis. Samples were later thawed and 500 µg of protein from each sample was precipitated via methanol-chloroform precipitation. Protein pellets were washed twice with methanol prior to reconstitution in 8M urea in 50mM Tris-HCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Protein samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 30 min, alkylated with iodoacetamide in the dark at room temperature for 45 min, then digested with LysC for two hours at 37ºC, followed by an overnight trypsin digestion at 37ºC (1:50 protease:protein ratio). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 desalting columns (Pierce), then peptide quantitation was conducted using BCA peptide fluorometric assay (Pierce).  Each sample (200 µg) was aliquoted, and a pooled sample was created by combining 70 µg of each sample. This pooled sample was subsequently divided into 4 different pooled aliquots. Samples were subsequently labeled with 400 µg TMTpro 16plex reagents (Thermo) for 1 hr at 25C. Prior to quenching, labeling efficiency (>98%) was verified by nLC-MS/MS analysis. Upon verification, samples were quenched, mixed 1:1, cleaned via C18 desalting sing columns (Pierce), and dried down via vacuum centrifugation then stored at –80ºC until further processing. The TMT labeled sample was subjected to off-line HPLC fractionation (Agilent 1260 System) using high pH reversed phase chromatography to generate 24 fractions, of which 5% of each fraction were aliquoted and dried down via vacuum centrifugation for proteome analysis41. The remaining 95% of each fraction were pooled down to 4 fractions, which were enriched for phosphopeptides using High-select FeNTA (Thermo).  Eluates were dried down via vacuum centrifugation for phosphoproteome analysis. Each proteome and phosphoproteome fraction (28 in total) were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200 coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–42% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% can. For the proteome fractions, the Lumos was operated in SPS-MS3 mode with a 3s cycle time. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) was set to 120,000 with a AGC target set to standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans consisted of CID normalized collision energy (NCE) 32; AGC target set to standard; maximum injection time of 50 ms; isolation window of 0.7 Da. Following MS2 acquisition, MS3 spectra were collected in SPS mode (10 scans per outcome); HCD set to 55; resolution set to 50,000; scan range set to 100-500; AGC target set to 200% with a 100 ms maximum inject time. For the phosphoproteome fractions, the Lumos was operated in MS2 mode with a 3s cycle time. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) was set to 60,000 with an AGC target set to standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. For MS2 scans, HCD was set to 35; AGC target set to 200%; maximum injection time of 120 ms; isolation window of 0.7 Da; resolution set to 50,000.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5. ‘TMTpro 16plex’ was used as the quantitation method. Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot human database (downloaded Feb 2020 containing 20,350 sequences), appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest HT within Proteome Discoverer. Data were searched with up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites and fixed modifications were set to TMTpro peptide N-terminus and Lys and carbamidomethyl Cys. Dynamic modifications were set to N-terminal protein acetyl and oxidation Met.  For phosphoproteome data, additional dynamic modification was set to phosphorylation Ser, Thr, Tyr. TMT quantitation was set to MS2, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%. The ptmRS node was used to localize phosphorylation sites within peptides. Reporter abundance based on intensity and co-isolation threshold was set to 50. For proteome data, quantitation was set to MS3, precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%. Reporter abundance based on intensity, SPS mass matches threshold set to 50, and razor and unique peptides were used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome; phosphoproteome; coronavirus; sars-cov-2; labelled quantitation; tmt labelling; tmtpro 16plex; lc-ms/ms.

### Affiliations
1. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 2. Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 3. Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA
UNC Proteomics Core, Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Angie Mordant

### Lab Head
Dr Ralph Baric
1. Department of Microbiology and Immunology, School of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 2. Department of Epidemiology, Gillings School of Public Health, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA. 3. Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC, USA


