### Accession
PXD018248

### Title
Towards a universal sample preparation method for denaturing top-down proteomics of complex proteomes

### Description
A universal and standardized sample preparation method becomes vital for denaturing top-down proteomics (dTDP) to advance the scale and accuracy of proteoform delineation in complex biological systems. It needs to have high protein recovery, minimum bias, good reproducibility, and compatibility with downstream mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Here we employed a lysis buffer containing sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) for extracting proteoforms from cells, and for the first time, compared membrane ultrafiltration (MU), chloroform-methanol precipitation (CMP), and single-spot solid-phase sample preparation using magnetic beads (SP3) for proteoform cleanup for dTDP. The MU method outperformed CMP and SP3 methods, resulting in high and reproducible protein recovery from both E. coli cell (59±3%) and human HepG2 cell (86±5%) samples without a significant bias. Single-shot capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS analyses of the prepared E. coli and HepG2 cell samples using the MU method identified 821 and 516 proteoforms, respectively. Nearly 30% and 50% of the identified E. coli and HepG2 proteins are membrane proteins. CZE-MS/MS identified 94 histone proteoforms from the HepG2 sample with various post-translational modifications, including acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. Our results suggest that combining the SDS-based protein extraction and the MU-based protein cleanup could be a universal sample preparation method for dTDP.

### Sample Protocol
Escherichia coli (E. coli, strain K-12 substrain MG1655) was cultured in the LB (Luria-Bertani) medium at 37 °C until OD600 reached 0.7. The E. coli cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4 000 rpm for 10 min. The cell pellet was washed with PBS (phosphate buffered saline) buffer for three times to remove the leftover culture medium. After that, 400 µL of a lysis buffer containing 1% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM NH4HCO3, protease inhibitors, and phosphatase inhibitors (pH 8.0) was added into the Eppendorf tube containing the E. coli cells. The cells were pipetted up and down a couple of times and lysed by ultrasonication (Branson Sonifier 250, VWR Scientific, Batavia, IL) on ice for 10 min. After cell lysis, the cell lysates were then centrifuged at 14 000 g for 5 min. After that, the protein concentration of the supernatant were measured with the BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) assay. The supernatant was then aliquoted into 100 µg/tube and stored at -80 °C before use.  The cultured HepG2 cells were kindly provided by Prof. David Lubman at the Department of Surgery Research of University of Michigan. After cell culture, the HepG2 cells were harvested through centrifugation at 100 g for 5 min and were washed with the PBS buffer for three times. The cell lysis protocol was the same as the E. coli cells described above. After the BCA assay for protein concentration measurement, the extracted proteins were aliquoted into 100 µg/tube and stored at -80 °C before use.  100 µL of an 8 M urea solution in 100 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8) was first added into 100-µg of E. coli cell lysate and the mixture was loaded onto a membrane filtration unit (30 kDa MWCO membrane). The filtration unit was centrifuged at 14 000 g to make sure that all the solution went through the membrane. The membrane was then washed with 100 µL of 8 M urea in 100 mM NH4HCO3 twice followed by membrane washing with 100-µL 100 mM NH4HCO3 for three times. After the washing, 50 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3 was loaded onto the membrane, followed by pipetting up and down a few times. The filtration unit was then vortexed for 5 min and flipped over followed by a quick spin-down to recover the proteins from the membrane. The protein concentration in the collected solution was measured through the BCA assay. The same procedure was utilized for the HepG2 cell lysate.

### Data Protocol
The TopPIC (Top-down mass spectrometry based proteoform identification and characterization) software was applied for proteoform IDs via database search for all E. coli and HepG2 data.19 Briefly, the RAW files were converted into mzML files using the msconvert tool.36 The mzML files was then processed by the TopFD (Top-down mass spectrometry feature detection) tool for spectral deconvolution. The resulted msalign files was then processed by TopPIC (v1.3.1) for database searching. UniProt databases of E. coli (UP000000625) and Human (UP000005640) were used for search. For the database search, the maximum number of mass shift was 1. All other parameters were kept as default. The target-decoy approach was employed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of proteoform spectrum match (PrSM) and proteoform IDs.37,38 The database search results were filtered with a 1% PrSM-level FDR and a 5% proteoform-level FDR.

### Publication Abstract
A universal and standardized sample preparation method becomes vital for denaturing top-down proteomics (dTDP) to advance the scale and accuracy of proteoform delineation in complex biological systems. It needs to have high protein recovery, minimum bias, good reproducibility, and compatibility with downstream mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Here, we employed a lysis buffer containing sodium dodecyl sulfate for extracting proteoforms from cells and, for the first time, compared membrane ultrafiltration (MU), chloroform-methanol precipitation (CMP), and single-spot solid-phase sample preparation using magnetic beads (SP3) for proteoform cleanup for dTDP. The MU method outperformed CMP and SP3 methods, resulting in high and reproducible protein recovery from both <i>Escherichia coli</i> cell (59 &#xb1; 3%) and human HepG2 cell (86 &#xb1; 5%) samples without a significant bias. Single-shot capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS analyses of the prepared <i>E. coli</i> and HepG2 cell samples using the MU method identified 821 and 516 proteoforms, respectively. Nearly 30 and 50% of the identified <i>E. coli</i> and HepG2 proteins are membrane proteins. CZE-MS/MS identified 94 histone proteoforms from the HepG2 sample with various post-translational modifications, including acetylation, methylation, and phosphorylation. Our results suggest that combining the SDS-based protein extraction and the MU-based protein cleanup could be a universal sample preparation method for dTDP. The MS raw data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the data set identifier PXD018248.

### Keywords
Membrane ultrafiltration, Sds, Sample preparation, Chloroform-methanol precipitation, Sp3, Histone, Ptms, Denaturing top-down proteomics, Cze-ms/ms, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University


