### Accession
PXD018147

### Title
Long noncoding RNA SAM promotes myoblast proliferation through stabilizing Sugt1 and facilitating kinetochore assembly

### Description
Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are family of gene regulators but the functional study of lncRNAs in skeletal muscle satellite cells (SCs) remains at the infancy stage. Here we identify SAM (Sugt1 associated muscle) lncRNA (also known as Snhg15, (small nucleolar RNA host gene 15) that is enriched in the proliferating myoblast cells and down-regulated as the cells progressed to differentiation. Gain- or loss- of function of SAM in muscle SCs alters myogenic proliferation and differentiation. Global deletion of SAM based on the KO-first strategy has no overt effect on mice but impairs adult muscle regeneration following acute damage; the loss also exacerbates the chronic injury induced dystrophic phenotype in the mdx mouse model. Consistently, inducible deletion of SAM in adult SCs leads to deficiency in acute injury-induced muscle regeneration. Further examination of SCs revealed that SAM loss results in cell autonomous defect in proliferative expansion of myoblasts. Mechanistically, we find SAM interacts and stabilizes Sugt1 (suppressor of G2 allele of SKP1) protein, a co-chaperon protein key to kinetochore assembly during cell division. Loss of SAM or Sugt1 both cause disruptive kinetochore assembly and microtubule attachment in mitotic cells due to mis-localization of key components Dsn1 and Hec1 proteins. Altogether, our findings identify SAM as a regulator of SC proliferation through facilitating Sugt1 mediated kinetochore assembly during cell division.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were retrieved by boiling at 100°C with loading buffer and further analyzed by running 10% SDS-PAGE gel according to the standard protocol. Proteins were detected by Coomassie Blue Staining using standard procedure. The band uniquely present in the SAM pull-done lane was cut out and the gel was destained with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and dried in a vacuum concentrator. Add 100 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and subsequent incubation with 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at RT for 20 min in the dark. Then the IAM solution was removed and the gel pieces were dehydrated twice by the addition of ACN and vacuum dried prior to digestion with 2.5-10ng/μl sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) containing buffer. After 20h digestion at 37 °C, the resulting tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 100μl extraction buffer (60%ACN, 0.1%TFA) and sonicated for 15 min. Then it was vacuum dried and added 0.1% formic acid (FA). The resulting peptides suspension was collected by filtration. Capillary-HPLC separation was carried out on an EASY-nLC System (Thermo Scientific). Sample was loaded to a Thermo scientific EASY column (75μm*100mm 3μm-C18, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated with a 54 min gradient, from 4 to 50% solvent (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The column flow rate was maintained at 300 nl min-1. Each fraction was injected into a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) for LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The MS scan was performed with the following parameters: positive ion detection; scan range (m/z) = 300-1800; resolution = 70,000 at 200m/z automatic gain control (AGC) target = 1e6; maximum injection time = 50 ms; dynamic exclusion = 60 s. polypeptide and polypeptide fragments was collected according to the following parameters: after each full scan, 10 fragment maps (MS2 scan) were collected, MS2 Activation Type was HCD, Isolation window was 2m /z, second-level mass spectral resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z, Collision Energy was 30eV, and Underfill was 0.1%. The MS/MS spectra were searched with MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, version 2.2). The following option was used: peptide mass tolerance = 20 ppm, Fragment mass tolerance = 0.1 Da, enzyme = Trypsin, Max missed cleavages = 2, fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modification: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term). The identified proteins were retrieved from the uniprot_mouse database (ref. no:73952; download time: 20130313). Ion score ≥20

### Publication Abstract
The functional study of lncRNAs in skeletal muscle satellite cells (SCs) remains at the infancy stage. Here we identify SAM (Sugt1 asssociated muscle) lncRNA that is enriched in the proliferating myoblasts. Global deletion of SAM has no overt effect on mice but impairs adult muscle regeneration following acute damage; it also exacerbates the chronic injury-induced dystrophic phenotype in mdx mice. Consistently, inducible deletion of SAM in SCs leads to deficiency in muscle regeneration. Further examination reveals that SAM loss results in a&#xa0;cell-autonomous defect in the&#xa0;proliferative expansion of myoblasts. Mechanistically, we find SAM interacts and stabilizes Sugt1, a co-chaperon protein key to kinetochore assembly during cell division. Loss of SAM or Sugt1 both disrupts kinetochore assembly in mitotic cells due to the&#xa0;mislocalization of two components:&#xa0;Dsn1 and Hec1. Altogether, our findings identify SAM as a regulator of SC proliferation through facilitating Sugt1 mediated kinetochore assembly during cell division.

### Keywords
Lc-ms

### Affiliations
Dept. of Orthopaedics and Traumatology The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Yuying LI

### Lab Head
Dr Huating Wang
Dept. of Orthopaedics and Traumatology The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China


