### Accession
PXD041332

### Title
Inhibitory and Excitatory Synaptic Neuroadaptations in the diazepam tolerant brain 

### Description
Benzodiazepine (BZ) drugs treat seizures, anxiety, insomnia, and alcohol withdrawal by potentiating γ2 subunit containing GABA type A receptors (GABAARs). BZ clinical use is hampered by tolerance and withdrawal symptoms, which include heightened seizure susceptibility, panic, and sleep disturbances. Here, we undergo a comprehensive investigation of inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic plasticity in mice tolerant to benzodiazepine sedation. Using quantitative proteomics approaches, we reveal cortex neuroadaptations of key pro-excitatory mediators and synaptic plasticity pathways, highlighted by Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMKII), MAPK, and PKC signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Cortical homogenates were prepared from 10 vehicle and 10 DZP-treated mice. Total protein concentration in the homogenate preparations were assessed by micro BCA (Pierce). TMT MS studies were performed as follows: 10 µg protein was digested with trypsin on Strap’s (Protifi) per manufacture instructions and labeled with TMT10 (ThermoFisher). A pooled control was created from aliquots of all samples, labeled with TMT channels 11 and 12, and used to normalize peptide and protein quantitative values across TMT-plexes. Labeled peptides were combined and fractionated with the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce). All fractions were dried in a speed Vac and reconstituted in 20 µl 2% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid. ~1 µg was loaded onto a heated PepMap RSLC C18 2 µm, 100 angstrom, 75 µm × 50 cm column (ThermoScientific) and eluted over 180 min gradient. Sample eluate was electrosprayed (2000 V) into a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer for analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolving power of 120,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in the Ion Trap with CID (35%) in centroid mode. Real-time search (RTS) (max search time = 35 s; max missed cleavages = 1; Xcorr = 1.5; dCn = 0.1; ppm = 5) was used to select ions for SPS for MS3. MS3 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with HCD (60%) with an isolation window = 0.7 m/z and a resolving power of 60,000, and a max injection time of 118 ms. Peptide identification, quantification, and channel normalization were performed in Proteome Discover 2.5 (ThermoFisher). Protein levels were normalized to an average of the two pooled control samples within each TMT-plex. Case-control statistics were performed in Qlucore, controlling for TMT-plex.

### Publication Abstract
Benzodiazepine (BZ) drugs treat seizures, anxiety, insomnia, and alcohol withdrawal by potentiating &#x3b3;2 subunit containing GABA type A receptors (GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs). BZ clinical use is hampered by tolerance and withdrawal symptoms including heightened seizure susceptibility, panic, and sleep disturbances. Here, we investigated inhibitory GABAergic and excitatory glutamatergic plasticity in mice tolerant to benzodiazepine sedation. Repeated diazepam (DZP) treatment diminished sedative effects and decreased DZP potentiation of GABA<sub>A</sub>R synaptic currents without impacting overall synaptic inhibition. While DZP did not alter &#x3b3;2-GABA<sub>A</sub>R subunit composition, there was a redistribution of extrasynaptic GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs to synapses, resulting in higher levels of synaptic BZ-insensitive &#x3b1;4-containing GABA<sub>A</sub>Rs and a concomitant reduction in tonic inhibition. Conversely, excitatory glutamatergic synaptic transmission was increased, and NMDAR subunits were upregulated at synaptic and total protein levels. Quantitative proteomics further revealed cortex neuroadaptations of key pro-excitatory mediators and synaptic plasticity pathways highlighted by Ca<sup>2+</sup>/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase II (CAMKII), MAPK, and PKC signaling. Thus, reduced inhibitory GABAergic tone and elevated glutamatergic neurotransmission contribute to disrupted excitation/inhibition balance and reduced BZ therapeutic power with benzodiazepine tolerance.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Tmt ms

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology W1351 Thomas Starzl Biomedical Science Tower, 200 Lothrop St,Pittsburgh, PA  15261
University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine

### Submitter
Tija Jacob

### Lab Head
Dr Tija Jacob
Department of Pharmacology & Chemical Biology W1351 Thomas Starzl Biomedical Science Tower, 200 Lothrop St,Pittsburgh, PA  15261


