### Accession
PXD022562

### Title
Interaction of Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis) cell wall proteins with mustard leaf beetle (Phaedon cochleariae) polygalacturonase family members

### Description
Plants possess various defense strategies to counter attacks from microorganisms or herbivores. For example, plants reduce the cell-wall-macerating activity of pathogen- or insect-derived polygalacturonases (PGs) by expressing PG-inhibiting proteins (PGIPs). PGs and PGIPs belong to multi-gene families believed to have been shaped by an evolutionary arms race. The mustard leaf beetle Phaedon cochleariae expresses both active PGs and catalytically inactive PG pseudoenzymes. Previous studies demonstrated that (i) PGIPs target beetle PGs and (ii) the role of PG pseudoenzymes remains elusive, despite having been linked to the pectin degradation pathway. For further insight into the interaction between plant PGIPs and beetle PG family members, we combined affinity purification with proteomics and gene expression analyses, and identified novel inhibitors of beetle PGs from Chinese cabbage (Brassica rapa ssp. pekinensis). A beetle PG pseudoenzyme was not targeted by PGIPs, but instead interacted with PGIP-like proteins. Phylogenetic analysis revealed that PGIP-like proteins clustered apart from classical PGIPs but together with proteins, which have been involved in developmental processes. Our results indicate that PGIP-like proteins represent not only interesting novel PG inhibitor candidates in addition to classical PGIPs, but also fascinating new players in the arms race between herbivorous beetles and plant defenses.

### Sample Protocol
We purified cell wall proteins from B. rapa ssp. pekinensis (above ground parts of the plant) in a modified protocol adapted from Feiz et al 2006 (doi: 10.1186/1746-4811-2-10) by first isolating cell walls and subsequently releasing the proteins with salt-containing buffers (5 mM sodium acetate containing 0.2 M CaCl2 or 1 M NaCl, respectively) (samples: BRA_Cell_Wall_Protein_Extraction_CaCl2 (150610) and BRA_Cell_Wall_Protein_Extraction_NaCl (150615)). The two PG family members from P. cochleariae PCO_GH28-1 and -3 were heterologously expressed in the yeast Pichia pastoris, purified and immobilized on a column using the AminoLink Plus Immobilization Kit (Thermo Fisher). PCO_GH28-1 showed additional bands after purification, which we analyzed and identified as PCO_GH28-1 fragments (sample: Purification_PCO_GH28-1_Fragments (151021)). Cell wall proteins were passed over the column and interacting proteins were eluted and separated on an SDS-PAGE gel. Protein bands of interest were cut out from Coomassie-stained gels (samples: Pull-Down_Elution_PCO_GH28-1 (151019), Pull-Down_Elution_PCO_GH28-3 (151020) and Pull-Down_Elution_Negative_Control (170718)), washed several times with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and destained with 50% acetonitrile (ACN)/25 mM NH4HCO3. The proteins were then reduced with 10 mM DTT at 50C for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark for 45 min. Next, destained, washed, dehydrated gel pieces were rehydrated for 1 h in 12 ng/μl solution of porcine trypsin (Promega GmbH) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 4C and incubated overnight at 37C. The tryptic peptides were extracted from gel pieces with 75% ACN/5% formic acid (FA), and dried down in a SpeedVac (Shevchenko et al. 2007, doi: 10.1038/nprot.2006.468). For nanoUPLC-MS/MS analysis samples were reconstructed in 10 μL aqueous 1% FA. Each sample was injected onto a nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system online coupled to a Q-ToF HDMS mass spectrometer (both Waters). Peptides were initially transferred with 0.1% aqueous FA for desalting onto a Symmetry C18 trap-column (20 x 0.18 mm, 5 μm particle size) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min (0.1% aqueous FA), and subsequently eluted onto a nanoAcquity C18 analytical column (200 mm75 μm ID, BEH 130 material, 1.7 μm particle size) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min with the following gradient: 1  30% B over 13 min, 30  50% B over 5 min, 50  95% B over 5 min, isocratic at 95% B for 4 min, and a return to 1% B over 1 min (phases A and B composed of 0.1%FA and 100% ACN in 0.1% FA, respectively). The analytical column was re-equilibrated for 9 min prior to the next injection. The eluted peptides were transferred to the nanoelectrospray source of a Synapt HDMS tandem mass spectrometer (Waters) that was operated in V-mode with a resolution power of at least 10 000 FWHM. All analyses were performed in positive ESI mode. A 650 fmol/μl human Glu-fibrinopeptide B in 0.1% FA/ACN (1:1 v/v) was infused at a flow rate of 0.5 μl/min through the reference Nano-LockSpray source every 30 s to compensate for mass shifts in MS and MS/MS fragmentation mode. LC-MS data were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The acquisition cycle consisted of a survey scan covering the range of m/z 400  1500 Da followed by MS/MS fragmentation of the four most intense precursor ions collected at 1 s intervals in the range of 50  2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was applied to minimize multiple fragmentations for the same precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
DDA raw files were collected using MassLynx v4.1 software and processed using ProteinLynx Global Server Browser (PLGS) v2.5 software (Waters) and pkl-files were generated. Using Mascot software version 2.6.0 (Matrix Science Inc.), pkl-files of MS/MS spectra were searched against the NCBInr database (updated May 24, 2020). The following searching parameters parameters were applied: fixed precursor ion mass tolerance of 15 ppm for survey peptide, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, 1 missed cleavage, fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines and possible oxidation of methionine. Hits were considered confident if at least one peptide was matched in the Mascot analysis with an ion score that indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell wall proteins, Beetle, Chinese cabbage, Polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Polygalacturonase, Pull-down, Cell wall-degrading enzymes

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institut for Chemical Ecology, Department of Entomology, Project Group Molecular Biology of the Insect Digestive System, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Chemical Ecology

### Submitter
Wiebke Haeger

### Lab Head
Dr Yannick Pauchet
Max Planck Institut for Chemical Ecology, Department of Entomology, Project Group Molecular Biology of the Insect Digestive System, Germany


