### Accession
PXD018426

### Title
Chemical inhibition of mtDNA transcription for treatment of cancer

### Description
Mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is important for cancer cell growth and the persistence of therapy-resistant cancer stem cells. Here, we have developed novel first-in-class inhibitors of mitochondrial transcription (IMTs) targeting mtDNA gene expression. We show that IMTs specifically target mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT) and we defined the IMT binding site using exome sequencing of cells rendered resistant to IMTs by chemical mutagenesis and cryo-EM. IMTs act as allosteric inhibitors of POLRMT, impairing binding of the DNA-RNA hybrid and translocation of the nascent RNA. IMT treatment impairs OXPHOS in a dose-dependent way and decreases cell viability in various tumour cells.  Surprisingly, several weeks of per oral IMT treatment is well tolerated in mice and does not cause OXPHOS dysfunction or toxicity in normal tissues, despite inducing a strong anti-tumour response in human cancer xenografts.  We thus show that the IMTs represent a novel promising class of drugs for tumour treatment acting by inhibition of mtDNA gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was performed as described with slight modifications: tryptic peptides were eluted from STAGE tips with 40% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA). Four micrograms of desalted peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT10plex cat. No 90110, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1:20 ratio of peptides to TMT reagent. All ten samples per timepoint were labelled in one TMT batch. TMT labelling was carried out according to manufacturer’s instruction with the following changes: 0.8 mg of TMT reagent was re-suspended with 70 µL of anhydrous ACN, dried peptides were reconstituted in 9 µL 0.1M TEAB to which 7 µL TMT reagent in ACN was added to a final ACN concentration of 43.75%, after 60 min of incubation the reaction was quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine. Labelled peptides were pooled, dried, resuspended in 200 µL 0.1% FA, split into two, and desalted using home-made C18 STAGE tips. One of the two halves was fractionated on a 1 mm x 150 mm ACQUITY column, packed with 130 Å, 1.7 µm C18 particles (Waters cat. no SKU: 186006935), using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated at a flow of 30 µL/min with a 96 min segmented gradient from 1% to 50% buffer B for 85 min and from 50% to 95% buffer B for 3min, followed by 8 min of 95% buffer B; buffer A was 5% ACN, 10mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), buffer B was 80% ACN, 10mM ABC. Fractions were collected every three minutes, and fractions were pooled in two passed (1 + 17, 2 + 18 … etc.) and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (Eppendorf). Dried fractions were resuspended in 0.1% FA and separated on a 50 cm, 75 µm Acclaim PepMap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat. No 164942) and analysed on a Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a FAIMS device (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was operated in two compensation voltages, -50 V and -70 V.  Alternatively, peptides were separated on a 25 cm, 75 µm PicoFrit column (New Objective) packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur media (Dr.Maisch) and analysed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Synchronous precursor selection based MS3 was used for TMT reporter ion signal measurements. Peptide separations were performed on an EASY-nLC1200 using a 90 min linear gradient from 6% to 31% buffer; buffer A was 0.1% FA, buffer B was 0.1% FA, 80% ACN. The analytical column was operated at 50°C. Raw files were split based on the FAIMS compensation voltage using FreeStyle (version 1.6, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data was analysed using MaxQuant59 (version 1.6.10.43). Raw proteomics data was searched against the human proteome database from Uniprot, downloaded in September 2018. The isotope purity correction factors, provided by the manufacturer, were included in the analysis. Differential expression analysis was performed using limma in R. Two samples in timepoint 0h IMT1 treatment were excluded from the analysis due to a low TMT reporter distribution. An extra variable that accounts for an experimental batch effect was used in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Altered expression of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) occurs in ageing and a range of human pathologies (for example, inborn errors of metabolism, neurodegeneration and cancer). Here we describe first-in-class specific inhibitors of mitochondrial transcription (IMTs) that target the human mitochondrial RNA polymerase (POLRMT), which is essential for biogenesis of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system<sup>1-6</sup>. The IMTs efficiently impair mtDNA transcription in a reconstituted recombinant system and cause a dose-dependent inhibition of mtDNA expression and OXPHOS in cell lines. To verify the cellular target, we performed exome sequencing of mutagenized cells and identified a cluster of amino acid substitutions in POLRMT that cause resistance to IMTs. We obtained a cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) structure of POLRMT bound to an IMT, which further defined the allosteric binding site near the active centre cleft of POLRMT. The growth of cancer cells and the persistence of therapy-resistant cancer stem cells has previously been reported to depend on OXPHOS<sup>7-17</sup>, and we therefore investigated whether IMTs have anti-tumour effects. Four weeks of oral treatment with an IMT is well-tolerated in mice and does not cause OXPHOS dysfunction or toxicity in normal tissues, despite inducing a strong anti-tumour response in xenografts of human cancer cells. In summary, IMTs provide a potent and specific chemical biology tool to study the role of mtDNA expression in physiology and disease.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Xenograft, Tmt, Inhibitor, Fusion, Lumos, Polrmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, D-50931, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SE-17177, Sweden  Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
Max Planck Institute for Biology of Aging

### Submitter
Ilian  Atanassov

### Lab Head
Dr Nils-Göran Larsson
Department of Mitochondrial Biology, Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing, Cologne, D-50931, Germany Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, SE-17177, Sweden  Max Planck Institute for Biology of Ageing - Karolinska Institutet Laboratory, Karolinska Institutet, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden


