### Accession
PXD008067

### Title
A dual inhibitor of Staphylococcus aureus virulence and biofilm attenuates expression of major toxins and adhesins

### Description
Staphylococcus aureus is a major bacterial pathogen that invades and damages host tissue by the expression of devastating toxins. We here performed a phenotypic screen of 35 molecules that were structurally inspired by previous hydroxyamide-based S. aureus virulence inhibitors compiled from commercial sources or designed and synthesized de novo. One of the most potent compounds, AV73, did not only reduce hemolytic alpha-hemolysin expression in S. aureus but also impeded in vitro biofilm formation. The effect of AV73 on bacterial proteomes and extracellular protein levels were analyzed by quantitative proteomics and revealed a significant down-regulation of major virulence and biofilm promoting proteins. To elucidate the mode of action of AV73, target identification was performed using affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP).

### Sample Protocol
Global proteomics analysis / Gel-free AfBPP The pellet/beads was/were resuspended in 200 µL denaturation buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 20 mM pH 7.5 HEPES buffer). Dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 M, 0.2 µL) / TECEP (500 mM, 2 µL) was added, the tubes were mixed by vortexing shortly and incubated in a thermomixer (450 rpm, 45 min, RT) / (600 rpm, 60 min, 37 °C). Then 2-Iodoacetamide (IAA, 550 mM, 2 µL) was added, the tubes were mixed by vortexing shortly and incubated in a thermomixer (450 rpm / 600 rpm, 30 min, RT, in the dark). Remaining IAA was quenched by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT, 1 M, 0.28 µL). The tubes were shortly mixed by vortexing and incubated in a thermomixer (450 rpm / 600 rpm, 30 min, RT). LysC (0.5 µg/µL) was thawed on ice and 1 µL was added to each microcentrifuge tube, the tubes were shortly mixed by vortexing and incubated in a thermomixer (450 rpm / 600 rpm, 4 h, RT, in the dark). TEAB solution (600 µL, 50 mM in water) and then trypsin (1.5 µL, 0.5 µg/µL in 50 mM acetic acid) were added to each tube with a short vortexing step after each addition. The microcentrifuge tubes were incubated in a thermomixer (450 rpm / 600 rpm, 13-15 h, 37°C). The digest was stopped by adding 6 µL /10 µL formic acid (FA) and vortexing. 50 mg SepPak C18 columns (Waters) were equilibrated with 1 mL acetonitrile, 1 mL elution buffer (80% ACN, 0.5% FA) and 3 mL aqueous 0.5% FA / 0.1%TFA solution. Subsequently the samples were loaded by gravity flow, washed with 5 mL aqueous 0.5% FA solution / 3 mL aqueous 0.1% TFA solution and labelled with 5 mL of the respective dimethyl labelling solution / washed with 0.5 mL aqueous 0.5% FA solution. The following solutions were used: light (L): 30 mM NaBH3CN, 0.2% CH2O, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 35 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.5; medium (M): 30 mM NaBH3CN, 0.2% CD2O, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 35 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.5; heavy (H): 30 mM NaBHD3CN, 0.2% 13CD2O, 10 mM NaH2PO4, 35 mM Na2HPO4, pH 7.5. Peptides were eluted into new 2.0 mL Protein LoBind Eppendorf tubes was performed by the addition of 250 µL/500 µL elution buffer by gravity flow followed by 250 µL elution buffer by vacuum flow until all liquid was eluted from the column. The eluates were lyophilized. Before MS measurement the samples were dissolved in 30 µL / 20 µL 1% FA by pipetting up and down, vortexing and sonication for 15 min. Differentially labelled samples were mixed. 0.45 µm centrifugal filter units (VWR) were equilibrated with two times 500 µL water, 500 µL 0.05 N NaOH and two times 500 µL 1% FA (centrifugation: 16200 xG, 1 min, RT). / 0.22 µm centrifugal filters units (VWR) were equilibrated with 300 µL 1% FA (16200 xG, 1 min, RT). Reconstituted samples were filtered through the equilibrated filters (centrifugation: 16200 xG, 2 min, RT). Samples were analyzed via HPLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, California, USA) equipped with Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm trap and Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC, 75 µM ID x 15 cm / EASY-SPRAY RSLC C18 50 cm × 75 µm separation columns coupled to Thermo Fischer LTQ Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Samples were loaded on the trap and washed for 10 min / 7 min with 0.1% FA / TFA (at 5 µL/min ), then transferred to the analytical column and separated using a, 112 min / 115 min gradient from 4% to 35% / 32% MeCN followed by 4 min / 10 min at 80% / 90% MeCN in 0.1% FA / TFA and 5% / 0% DMSO (at 200 nL/min 300 nL/min flow rate). LTQ Orbitrap Fusion was operated in a 3 second top speed data dependent mode. Full scan acquisition was performed in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120000 and an ion target of 4e5 / 2e5 in a scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z / 300 – 1500 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection as well as dynamic exclusion for 60 sec was enabled. Precursors with charge states of 2 – 7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole using a window of 1.6 m/z. Precursors were collected to a target of 1e2 / 1e4 for a maximum injection time of 250 ms / 50 ms with “inject ions for all available parallelizable time” enabled. Fragments were generated using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of fluoranthene cations (EASY-ETD/IC source).

### Data Protocol
Global Proteomics Analysis: Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.8 software with Andromeda as search engine using following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation of N-termini as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 8.5.2014). Quantification was performed using dimethyl labelling with the following settings: light: DimethLys0, DimethNter0; medium: DimethLys4, DimethNter4 and heavy: DimethLys8, DimethNter8 with a maximum of 4 labelled amino acids. Variable modifications were included for quantification. The I = L, requantify and match between runs (default settings) options were used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.6.0.0. Dimethyllabelling ratios were log2(x) transformed and z-score normalized. The average values of technical replicates were calculated and -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two sided one sample t-test over four biological replicates. Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site are not shown in the volcano plot, cut off lines were set at –log10(p-value) of 2 and a t-test difference of 2. p-values were corrected with the method of Benjamini and Hochberg.[3] Functional protein enrichment analyses were performed using the Database for Annotation, Visualisation and Integrated Discovery (DAVID).[4], [4b]Uniprot accessions of at least 4-fold significantly depleted proteins in whole proteome studies were selected and compared to an internal reference protein set of Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylococcus aureus subsp. aureus NCTC 8325. p-values were corrected with the method of Benjamini and Hochberg.[3]  Gel-free AfBPP: Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.1 software with Andromeda as search engine using following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as well as acetylation of N-termini as dynamic modifications, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 26.06.2017). Quantification was performed using label-free quantification (LFQ). The match between runs (default settings) option was used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.6.0.0. LFQ ratios were log2(x) transformed. -log10(p-values) were obtained by a two sample t-test over four biological replicates. Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site are not shown in the volcano plot. Values were filtered for three in at least one group. Cut off lines were set at –log10 (p-value) of 2 and at t-test difference of 3, for soluble fraction, and 2 for insoluble fraction. Due to the low compound access in the competition experiment, the cut off for the t-test difference of the soluble fraction was set at 2. p- values were corrected by permutation based FDR > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a major bacterial pathogen that invades and damages host tissue by the expression of devastating toxins. We here performed a phenotypic screen of 35 molecules that were structurally inspired by previous hydroxyamide-based S. aureus virulence inhibitors compiled from commercial sources or designed and synthesized de novo. One of the most potent compounds, AV73, not only reduced hemolytic alpha-hemolysin production in S. aureus but also impeded in vitro biofilm formation. The effect of AV73 on bacterial proteomes and extracellular protein levels was analyzed by quantitative proteomics and revealed a significant down-regulation of major virulence and biofilm promoting proteins. To elucidate the mode of action of AV73, target identification was performed using affinity-based protein profiling (AfBPP), where among others YidC was identified as a target.

### Keywords
Phenotype, Virulence, Target identification, Proteomics, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Technische Universität München
Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Hofbauer

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Germany


