### Accession
PXD022080

### Title
The MbovP280 of mycoplasma bovis immunoprecipitates with the wole cell lysates of bovine macrophage (BoMac),and then LC-MS/MS was used to identify the MbovP280-binding ligands

### Description
An IP–MS method was used to screen for MbovP280-binding proteins. Briefly, BoMac cells were cultured, harvested, and lysed in RIPA buffer supplemented with cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). The whole-cell lysates (400 μg) were incubated with 10 μg of either rMbovP280 or rMbovP280∆210–269 for 1 h at 4 C. Mouse antiserum (5 μg) directed against MbovP280 was added to the lysates for 12 h at 4 C, and then 50 μl of Protein A/G Agarose Beads (Beyotime) was added for an additional 1 h. The immunoprecipitates were extensively washed with NP-40 buffer and eluted with SDS loading buffer by boiling them for 5 min. The cellular proteins that coprecipitated with rMbovP280 or rMbovP280∆210–269 were resolved with SDS-PAGE and stained with silver staining.

### Sample Protocol
The MbovP280 was expressed by E.coli and the BoMac cell lysates was prepared by RIPA buffer.

### Data Protocol
The Mascot2.2 software was used to identify the proteins in the database(uniprot_Bovine_32231_20180205.fasta). The main search parameters includ Fixed modifications(Carbamidomethyl), Variable modification (Oxidation), Missed Cleavage (2), Peptide Mass Tolerance (20ppm), Fragment Mass Tolerance (0.1Da), and Filter score (>=20).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycoplasma bovis</i> causes important diseases and great losses on feedlots and dairy farms. However, there are only a few measures to control <i>M. bovis</i>-related diseases. As in other mycoplasma species, this is predominantly because the virulence related factors of this pathogen are largely unknown. Therefore, in this study, we aimed to identify novel virulence-related factors among the secreted proteins of <i>M. bovis</i>. Using bioinformatic tools to analyze its secreted proteins, we preliminarily predicted 39 secreted lipoproteins, and then selected 11 of them for confirmation based on SignalP scores &gt;0.6 or SceP scores &gt;0.8 and conserved domains. These 11 genes were cloned after gene modification based on the codon bias of <i>Escherichia coli</i> and expressed. Mouse antiserum to each recombinant protein was developed. A western blotting assay with these antisera confirmed that MbovP280 and MbovP475 are strongly expressed and secreted proteins, but only MbovP280 significantly reduced the viability of bovine macrophages (BoMac). In further experiments, MbovP280 induced the apoptosis of BoMac treated with both live <i>M. bovis</i> and MbovP280 protein. The conserved coiled-coil domain of MbovP280 at amino acids 210-269 is essential for its induction of apoptosis. Further, immunoprecipitation, mass spectrometry, and coimmunoprecipitation assays identified the anti-apoptosis regulator &#x3b1;B-crystallin (CRYAB) as an MbovP280-binding ligand. An &#x3b1;&#x3b2;-crystallin knockout cell line BoMac-cryab<sup>-</sup>, Mbov0280-knockout <i>M. bovis</i> strain T9.297, and its complemented <i>M. bovis</i> strain CT9.297 were constructed and the apoptosis of BoMac-cryab<sup>-</sup> induced by these strains was compared. The results confirmed that CRYAB is critical for MbovP280 function as an apoptosis inducer in BoMac. In conclusion, in this study, we identified MbovP280 as a novel secreted protein of <i>M. bovis</i> that induces the apoptosis of BoMac via its coiled-coil domain and cellular ligand CRYAB. These findings extend our understanding of the virulence mechanism of mycoplasmal species.

### Keywords
Bomac, Bovine, Ip, Lc-ms/ms, Mycoplasma bovis, Mbovp280

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University, China
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
Gang Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Aizhen Guo
Huazhong Agricultural University, China


