### Accession
PXD014773

### Title
Charaterising the surfaceome of primary equine chondrocytes

### Description
The aim of this study was to characterize the surfaceome of primary equine chondrocytes isolated from healthy joints following exposure to the pro-inflammatory cytokines interleukin-1-beta (IL-1β) and tumour necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α). We employed combined methodology that we recently developed for investigating the surfaceome in stem cells. Membrane proteins were isolated using an aminooxy-biotinylation technique and analysed by mass spectrometry using high throughput shotgun proteomics. Amongst the 431 unique cell surface proteins identified, a high percentage of low-abundance proteins, such as ion channels, receptors and transporter molecules were detected. A high number of proteins exhibited different levels of expression following chondrocyte stimulation with pro-inflammatory cytokines. LPR-1, thrombospondin, VDAC1-2 and annexin A1 were chosen for further analysis and validation by western blotting as proteins of special interest. Our results provide, for the first time, a repository for proteomic data on differentially expressed low-abundance membrane proteins on the surface of chondrocytes in response to pro-inflammatory stimuli.

### Sample Protocol
Chondrocytes were isolated from macroscopically healthy equine articular cartilage.  Chondrocytes were isolated by one hour incubation at 37°C with pronase (from Streptomyces griseus; Roche, Basel, Switzerland), followed by overnight incubation at 37°C with 0.3% type II collagenase (from Clostridium histolyticum; Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), both dissolved in serum-free DMEM solution containing 1% P/S and 0.05% gentamycin. Following dissociation of cartilage shavings by trituration, the solution was filtered through a 70-μm nylon mesh filter to yield a single-cell suspension, and centrifuged at 2,000×g for 5 min at room temperature. After washing in serum-free DMEM twice, cells were resuspended in 4.5 g/L glucose DMEM containing 10% foetal calf serum (FCS; Invitrogen) and 1% P/S solution, seeded into tissue culture flasks (Nunc; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and cultured in a 5% CO2 incubator at 37°C. Cells were subcultured when they reached approximately 80% confluence. Approximately 80% confluent cultures (grown in T175 flasks) of second passage primary equine articular chondrocytes cultured for 72 hours with or without IL-1β and TNF-α (both at 10 ng/mL) were washed twice with PBS and then incubated in serum-free media with or without IL1-β and TNF-α (both at 10 ng/mL) for 1 hour at 37°C. Unless indicated otherwise, all reagents below were obtained from Thermo Fisher Scientific. After washing cells twice with ice-cold PBS, 4 mL oxidation/biotinylation mix was added containing 1 mM sodium meta-periodate, 100 mM aminooxy-biotin and 10 mM aniline in ice-cold PBS. Cells were incubated by rocking in the dark at 4°C for 1 hour to oxidize and biotinylate surface sialic acid residues. The oxidation mixture was quenched by the addition of glycerol to a final concentration of 1 mM and incubated for 10 min. Cells were washed with PBS and then with PBS containing 1 mM CaCl2 and 0.5 mM MgCl2. Cells were scraped off the flask and collected by centrifuging at 300×g at room temperature for 7 min. The resulting cell pellet was resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100, 150 mM NaCl, 1× protease inhibitor, 5 mM iodoacetamide, 0.1 mg/mL PMSF and 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6), and incubated at 4°C for 30 min. Adequate lysis was achieved by vortexing/pipetting the cell pellet in lysis buffer every 5 min. Cell debris and nuclei were removed by centrifugation at 4°C once at 2,800×g for 10 min and once at 16,000×g for 10 min.  To isolate labelled glycoproteins, 300 μL of NeutrAvidin agarose beads were added to Snap Cap spin columns followed by three washes with PBS and incubation with the cell lysate for 2 hours at 4°C. Non-specifically bound proteins were eliminated by multiple washing steps each time followed by centrifugation at 1,000×g for 30 sec. Washing steps included consecutively 10× lysis buffer, 10× PBS/0.5% SDS followed by 20 min incubation at room temperature with PBS/0.5% SDS/100 mM DTT, 10× UC buffer (consisting of 6 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl; pH 8.5) followed by alkylation for 20 min at room temperature with UC buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide, 10× UC buffer, 10× 5 M NaCl, 100 mM Na2CO3, 10× PBS and 10× HPLC grade water. Biotinylated glycoproteins were digested on-beads overnight at 37°C using 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 5 μg Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Tryptic peptides were collected via centrifugation at 1,000×g for 1 min at 4°C. Beads were rinsed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and tryptic fractions pooled. Samples were cleaned using C18 spin columns according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Samples were dried gently in a vacuum evaporator and subsequently stored at –80°C until analysis. The surface protein enrichment protocol was performed twice on cells obtained from two different horses (2 biological replicates). Samples were injected into a 15 cm C18 Pepmap column using a Bruker Easy-nanoLC UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano chromatography platform with a flow rate of 300 nL/min to separate peptides. 3 μL of each sample was injected into the HPLC column. After peptide binding and washing on the column, the complex peptide mixture was separated and eluted by a gradient of solution A (100% water + 0.1% formic acid) and solution B (100% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) over 115 min to a Bruker amaZon ETD ion trap instrument. The top 5 most intense ions from each MS scan were selected for fragmentation. The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was performed on two biological replicate samples.

### Data Protocol
Processed data from the analysed samples were compiled into MGF files, which were converted to the mzML format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard 3.0.18212), and then filtered, de novo sequenced and assigned with protein ID using PEAKS Studio 8.5 software 13 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, Canada), by searching against the mammalian SwissProt database (March 2018; 20,314 entries), fixed modification carbamidomethylation of cysteine and variable modifications methionine oxidation and deamidation (NQ). This result was then processed with PEAKS PTM which looks at all 313 naturally occurring modification in Unimod. The parent mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm using monoisotopic mass, and a fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. Data were validated using the FDR method built in PEAKS 8.5 and protein identifications were accepted with a confidence score (‒10lgP)>20 for peptides and (‒10lgP)>15 for proteins, at least 1 peptide per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Chondrocyte, Horse, Equine

### Affiliations
Nottingham Trent University
John van Geest Centre, Nottingham Trent University

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David Boocock
John van Geest Centre, Nottingham Trent University


