### Accession
PXD007876

### Title
AP-SWATH analysis reveals a direct involvement of VCP/p97 in integrated stress response signalling through CReP/PPP1R15B degradation

### Description
The ubiquitin-directed AAA-ATPase VCP/p97 facilitates degradation of misfolded proteins in diverse cellular stress response pathways. Resolving the complexity of dynamic interactions with hosts of accessory proteins and substrates has therefore been a major challenge. Here, we used affinity-purification SWATH mass spectrometry (AP-SWATH) to identify proteins that specifically interact with a p97 substrate-trapping mutant, p97-E578Q. AP-SWATH identified differential interactions over a large detection range from abundant cofactors to pathway-specific partners and individual ligases such as RNF185 and MUL1 that were trapped in p97-E578Q complexes. In addition, we identified substrate candidates including the PP1 regulator CReP/PPP1R15B that dephosphorylates eIF2α and thus counteracts attenuation of translation by stress-kinases. We demonstrate here that p97 with its Ufd1-Npl4 adapter ensures rapid turnover and balanced levels of CReP in unperturbed cells. Moreover, we show that p97 is essential for the quantitative stress-induced degradation of CReP and, consequently, robust eIF2α phosphorylation to enforce the stress response. Thus, p97 not only facilitates bulk degradation of misfolded proteins upon stress, but also has an unanticipated function in directly modulating the integrated stress response at the level of signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Single step affinity purification via the streptavidin binding peptide tag, TCA precipitation, trypsin digestion, and solid phase extraction of peptides were performed as previously described (Collins et al, 2013). Samples from affinity purifications of 3 replicates of p97-wild type and 3 replicates of p97-E578Q, in addition to 2 replicates of GFP control purifications were analysed both in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode for spectral library building and SWATH-MS mode for quantitative analysis. MS data in DDA and SWATH-MS modes were acquired using a Sciex 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer interfaced to an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra using acquisition parameters as previously described (Collins et al, 2013) with the exception that for SWATH analysis 64 variable width precursor isolation windows were used (Collins et al, 2017). Spectral library building from DDA data was performed as described (Schubert et al, 2015a) except 3 search engines were used (Tandem, Tandem with k-score plugin, and Comet) (Craig et al, 2004; Eng et al, 2013; MacLean et al, 2006), semi-tryptic digestion was allowed, the top 5 most intense transitions per precursor including neutrals losses were selected, the protein false discovery was set to 5%, and decoys for OpenSWATH analysis were generated using the ‘shuffle’ method. To improve coverage of the spectral library we added DDA data from affinity purifications of 24 p97 cofactors (NSFL1C, UFD1, NPLOC4, YOD1, PLAA, UBXN7, ASPSCR1, FAF1, UBXN1, UBXN2B, SPRTN, NGLY1, UBXN10, VCPIP1, ZFAND2B, UBXN11, OTUD7B, RNF31, ATXN3, UBXN2A, UBXN6, FAF2 and SVIP).

### Data Protocol
The SWATH-MS data was analysed using OpenSWATH essentially as described (Collins et al, 2013; Rost et al, 2014). FDR was controlled in the experiment-wide context at 1% at the peptide query level and in the global context at 1% at the peptide query and protein levels (Rosenberger et al, 2017). Peak groups were further aligned using the TRIC algorithm with the LocalMST and lowess options with a target FDR of 1%. Protein abundances were computed using the ‘best flyer peptide’ approach by summing the top 5 most intense fragments from the top 3 most intense peptides using aLFQ (Rosenberger et al, 2014; Schubert et al, 2015b). After log2 tranformation and median normalization we pre-filtered the data by firstly removing any protein that was not identified in at least 2 out of 3 replicates in either p97-WT or p97-EQ. We removed contaminant proteins by then computing the median log2 fold change and t-tests (equal variance assumed) between either p97-WT or p97-EQ and GFP controls where log2 fold change > 2 and p-value < 0.05 was considered a significant interaction. We further insisted proteins whose median log2 abundance in either p97-WT or p97-EQ must be display at least a 2-fold increase over the maximum abundance from a set of 9 GFP controls purifications from a previous study (Collins et al, 2013). Median log2 fold change and t-tests were also computed between p97-EQ and p97-WT where log2 fold change > 2 or < 2 and p-value < 0.05 was considered a significant change in the interaction of a protein with p97 between the wild type and mutant conditions.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-directed AAA-ATPase VCP/p97 facilitates degradation of damaged or misfolded proteins in diverse cellular stress response pathways. Resolving the complexity of its interactions with partner and substrate proteins and understanding its links to stress signaling is therefore a major challenge. Here, we used affinity-purification SWATH mass spectrometry (AP-SWATH) to identify proteins that specifically interact with the substrate-trapping mutant, p97-E578Q. AP-SWATH identified differential interactions over a large detection range from abundant p97 cofactors to pathway-specific partners and individual ligases such as RNF185 and MUL1 that were trapped in p97-E578Q complexes. In addition, we identified various substrate proteins and candidates including the PP1 regulator CReP/PPP1R15B that dephosphorylates eIF2&#x3b1; and thus counteracts attenuation of translation by stress-kinases. We provide evidence that p97 with its Ufd1-Npl4 adapter ensures rapid constitutive turnover and balanced levels of CReP in unperturbed cells. Moreover, we show that p97-mediated degradation, together with a reduction in CReP synthesis, is essential for timely stress-induced reduction of CReP levels and, consequently, for robust eIF2&#x3b1; phosphorylation to enforce the stress response. Thus, our results demonstrate that p97 not only facilitates bulk degradation of misfolded proteins upon stress, but also directly modulates the integrated stress response at the level of signaling.

### Keywords
Integrated stress response, Ap-swath, P97

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Ben Collins

### Lab Head
Dr Ben Collins
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland


