### Accession
PXD021786

### Title
Multiomic study diet study focused on dietary interventions

### Description
Multiomic study determining the role of dietary interventions on inflammatory markers

### Sample Protocol
See https://msystems.asm.org/content/5/3/e00200-20 for a detailed description. Briefly, high throughput method leveraging S-trap 96-well plates, TMT-labeling, and robotics was used to isolate, label, and clean peptides, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data was normalized to each channels total intensity and then scaled to baseline levels. Raw data provided here was generated using Proteome Discoverer, searching Human, microbe (HMP-generated database), and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Diet modulates the gut microbiome, which in turn can impact the immune system. Here, we determined how two microbiota-targeted dietary interventions, plant-based fiber and fermented foods, influence the human microbiome and immune system in healthy adults. Using a 17-week randomized, prospective study (n&#xa0;= 18/arm) combined with -omics measurements of microbiome and host, including extensive immune profiling, we found diet-specific effects. The high-fiber diet increased microbiome-encoded glycan-degrading carbohydrate active enzymes (CAZymes) despite stable microbial community diversity. Although cytokine response score (primary outcome) was unchanged, three distinct immunological trajectories in high-fiber consumers corresponded to baseline microbiota diversity. Alternatively, the high-fermented-food diet steadily increased microbiota diversity and decreased inflammatory markers. The data highlight how coupling dietary interventions to deep and longitudinal immune and microbiome profiling can provide individualized and population-wide insight. Fermented foods may be valuable in countering the decreased microbiome diversity and increased inflammation pervasive in industrialized society.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Diet, Multiomics

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Chan Zuckerburg Biohub Mass Spec Platform Leader

### Submitter
Carlos Gonzalez

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E. Elias
Chan Zuckerburg Biohub Mass Spec Platform Leader


