### Accession
PXD019668

### Title
Optimized sample preparation, data processing of data-independent acquisition methods for the robust quantification of trace-level host cell protein impurities in drug products

### Description
In this study, we developed powerful and reproducible MS-based analytical workflows coupling optimized and efficient sample preparations, library-free DIA acquisition method and stringent validation criteria. The performances of several preparation protocols and DIA versus classical DDA were evaluated using a series of four commercially available Drug Products. Depending on the selected protocols, the user has access to different information: on the one hand, a deep profiling of tens of identified HCPs, and on the other hand an accurate and reproducible (CV<12%) quantification of major HCPs. Overall, a final global HCP amount of a few tens of ppm in these mAb samples was measured, while reaching a sensitivity down to the sub-ppm level. Thus, this straightforward and robust approach can be intended as a routine quality control for whichever Drug Products’ analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA) analyses were performed on a NanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
DDA data was analysed with Proteome Discoverer (v.2.4; Thermo Fisher Scientific; Bremen, Germany) using SEQUEST HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a FASTA file containing all Critecutulus griseus entries extracted from UniProtKB/TrEMBL (56,566 entries, 2019/09/30) as well as the retention time standards, the four standard proteins, the mAb heavy and light chains and common contaminants. Trysin/P was used as digestion enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification (except for the two native digestion-based protocols). Data was extracted using peptide mass tolerance of 5 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance at 0.05 Da. A false discovery rate of 1% was set at PSM and peptide levels. XIC-MS1 quantification was performed using unique peptides and the chromatographic alignment was fixed to 10 min and 10 ppm between replicates.  DIA data was analysed using directDIA implemented in Spectronaut (v.13.0; Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) using the following settings and the same FASTA file as described above. Trysin/P was used as digestion enzyme and one missed cleavage was allowed. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification (except for the two native digestion-based protocols). Data was extracted using dynamic mass tolerances. Identification was performed using 1% precursor q-value cutoff. Quantification was performed using interference correction and at least three fragment ions used per peptide. Quantity is based on MS2 XIC peak areas. Non-identified precursors in rows with at least one q-value below 0.01 were selected for iRT profiling, by enabling carrying over the average template peak position.

### Publication Abstract
Host cell proteins (HCPs) are a major class of bioprocess-related impurities generated by the host organism and are generally present at low levels in purified biopharmaceutical products. The monitoring of these impurities is identified as an important critical quality attribute of monoclonal antibody (mAb) formulations not only due to the potential risk for the product stability and efficacy but also concerns linked to the immunogenicity of some of them. While overall HCP levels are usually monitored by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), mass spectrometry (MS)-based approaches have been emerging as powerful and promising alternatives providing qualitative and quantitative information. However, a major challenge for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS-based methods is to deal with the wide dynamic range of drug products and the extreme sensitivity required to detect trace-level HCPs. In this study, we developed powerful and reproducible MS-based analytical workflows coupling optimized and efficient sample preparations, the library-free data-independent acquisition (DIA) method, and stringent validation criteria. The performances of several preparation protocols and DIA versus classical data-dependent acquisition (DDA) were evaluated using a series of four commercially available drug products. Depending on the selected protocols, the user has access to different information: on the one hand, a deep profiling of tens of identified HCPs and on the other hand, accurate and reproducible (coefficients of variation (CVs) &lt; 12%) quantification of major HCPs. Overall, a final global HCP amount of a few tens of ng/mg mAb in these mAb samples was measured, while reaching a sensitivity down to the sub-ng/mg mAb level. Thus, this straightforward and robust approach can be intended as a routine quality control for any drug product analysis.

### Keywords
Host cell proteins (hcp), Data-independent analysis (dia), Sample preparation, Quantification, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France
University of Strasbourg

### Submitter
Nicolas Pythoud

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), Université de Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, 25 Rue Becquerel, F-67087 Strasbourg, France


