### Accession
PXD032829

### Title
Fatty Acid Binding Protein 5 is a Novel Target in Multiple Myeloma

### Description
To identify protein changes in human myeloma cancer cells resulting from FABP inhibition, we treated GFP+/Luc+MM.1S cells with the single inhibitors (50 µM BMS309405 or 50 µM SBFI-26) or the combination (50 µM of each) for 48 hour, isolated total cell proteins, and performed a mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested by scraping and centrifugation, then solubilized in ice-cold RIPA buffer. DNA was sheared with a probe tip sonicator and cell debris pelleted. The supernatant was taken and protein content measured. 100 µg protein from each sample was precipitated with ethanol, reduced with TCEP, and cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide. After overnight trypsin digestion, each sample was freed from salts and buffers using C18 centrifugal tips. Each was evaporated to dryness and approximately 1 microgram of each sample subject to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using Protein Pilot software (Sciex, Version 5.0.2) running the Paragon algorithm. A target false-discovery rate of 0.05 and a thorough ID search effort was selected for any analysis. A minimum of 95% confidence was used as a threshold for peptide identification as calculated by Protein Pilot. Relative quantification was performed using the SWATH processing microApp in PeakView software. Peak groups were extracted with a 99% peptide confidence threshold and 1% peptide FDR limit. SWATH chromatograms were extracted in 10-minute windows with fragment ion mass tolerance set to 50 ppm. Resulting protein quantitative peak areas were further analyzed using MarkerView software (Version 1.3.1, Sciex LLC, Framingham, MA) to compare relative quantities of all detected proteins between samples. Statistical analyses including t-tests and principal component analyses, were completed for both data sets using Sciex MarkerView software. Significantly different proteins were determined via t-test (p < .05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fatty acid binding protein, Rnaseq, Fabp5, Fabp, Myeloma

### Affiliations
Maine Medical Center Research Institute
Faculty Scientist Maine Medical Center Research Institute Scarborough, Maine United States

### Submitter
Carlos Gartner

### Lab Head
Dr Calvin Vary
Faculty Scientist Maine Medical Center Research Institute Scarborough, Maine United States


