### Accession
PXD028512

### Title
Competitive Binding and Molecular Crowding Regulate the Cytoplasmic Interactome of Non-Viral Polymeric Gene Delivery Vectors

### Description
In contrast to the processes controlling the complexation, targeting and uptake of polycationic gene delivery vectors, the molecular mechanisms regulating their cytoplasmic dissociation remains poorly understood. Upon cytosolic entry, vectors become exposed to a complex, concentrated mixture of molecules and biomacromolecules. In this report, we characterise the cytoplasmic interactome associated with a polycationic vector based on poly(dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) and poly(2-methacrylolyloxyethyltrimethylammonium chloride) (PMETAC) brushes. To quantify the contribution of different classes of low molar mass molecules and biomacromolecules to RNA release, we develop a kinetic model based on competitive binding. Our results identify the importance of competition from highly charged biomacromolecules, such as cytosolic RNA, as a primary regulator of RNA release. Importantly, our data indicate the presence of ribosome associated proteins, proteins associated with translation and transcription factors that may underly a broader impact of polycationic vectors on translation. In addition, we bring evidence that molecular crowding modulates competitive binding and demonstrate how the modulation of such interactions, for example via quaternisation or the design of charge-shifting moieties, impacts on the long-term transfection efficiency of polycationic vectors. Understanding the mechanism regulating cytosolic dissociation will enable the improved design of cationic vectors for long term gene release and therapeutic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates and sample preparation for proteomic  Protein contents were quantified in urea buffer (8 M in 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0) using a BCA assay. 50 g of protein for each sample were diluted to a final volume of 300 µL with 8M urea buffer. Protein solutions were sequentially incubated with 10 µL of DTT (1M) and 4 µL of iodoacetamide (IAM, 15 mM) for one hour and 30 min respectively (RT, whilst shaking). Urea in samples was diluted to 2 M by adding 900 L of HEPES buffer (20 mM pH 8.0) prior to adding 90 µL immobilised trypsin beads (Life Tech, cat. 10066173). Samples were kept overnight at 37ºC with shaking. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation and peptide solutions were desalted using C18+carbon top tips (Glygen Corp, TT2MC18.96). Tips were activated with 200 µL of acetonitrile (ACN), and equilibrated with 200 µL of wash solution (1% ACN, 0.1%TFA). Samples were loaded in the tips and washed with 200 µL of washing solution. Peptides were eluted with 200 µL of elution solution 1 (70% ACN, 0.1%TFA) and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Polymer brush-cell lysate/cytosolic fraction adsorbates HCA2 cells were cultured in T75 flasks. Medium was aspirated after cells reached confluency. 2 mL of ice-cold PBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (20 µL NaF and 100 µL Na3VO4 per 10 mL of PBS, pH 7.4) were introduced in T75 flask (on ice). PBS was aspirated and the process was repeated twice. 0.5 mL of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES, pH 8.0; Na3VO4¬, 100 mM; NaF, 500 mM; β-glycerol phosphate, 1 M; Na2H2P2O7, 250 mM) was added to the cells followed by gentle scrapping using a cell scrapper. The cell suspension was lysed by probe sonication at 50% intensity for 15 s, twice, with a 10 s rest period in between. The vial containing the cell suspension was immersed in ice throughout the sonication process. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 5oC and the supernatant was transferred to a 1.5 mL Eppendorf Protein Lo-bind tube.  For interaction of SiO2-brush nanoparticles, we incubated SiO2-PDMAEMA or SiO2-PMETAC nanoparticles at a concentration of 5 mg/mL in undiluted cytosolic fractions, for 30 min. Pellets were recovered by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 10 min. The pellets were washed with ice cold PBS, pH 7.4 by centrifugation at 4oC. Frozen dried pelleted beads were thawed in ice and suspended in 280 µL freshly prepared 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. 500 ng of sequence grade trypsin (Thermo Sci, Cat no 13454189) was added into each sample and incubated overnight at 37°C with shaking at 1,400 rpm. The digested peptides were desalted using C18+ carbon top tips and eluted with 70% ACN with 0.1% formic acid and dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. Mass spectrometry Dried peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and analysed by nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano instrument, coupled on-line to a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo FS). Gradient elution was from 3% to 35% buffer B in 120 min at a flow rate 250 nL/min with buffer A being used to balance the mobile phase (buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in water and B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN) . The mass spectrometer was controlled by Xcalibur (version 4.0), operated in the positive mode. The spray voltage was 1.95 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 255 ºC. Q-Exactive plus was operated in data dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 15 MS/MS scans. Full scans were acquired in the mass analyser at 375-1500m/z with the resolution of 70 000, and MS/MS scans were obtained with a resolution of 17 500.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification  For peptide identification, MS raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using Mascot Distiller (version 2.7.1) and searched against the SwissProt database (release September 2019) restricted to human entries using the Mascot search daemon (version 2.6.0) with a FDR of ~1% and restricted to the human entries. Allowed mass windows were 10 ppm and 25 mmu for parent and fragment mass to charge values, respectively. Variable modifications included in searches were oxidation of methionine, pyro-glu (N-term) and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine. Peptides with an expectation value <0.05 were considered for further analysis. The mascot result (DAT) files were extracted into excel files. For peptide quantification Pescal Software was used to construct extracted ion chromatograms for all the identified peptides across all conditions. For protein quantification, an in house developed script was used to sum the intensities of all peptides comprised in the same protein. Only proteins with at least 2 different peptides and a score > 40 were considered for further analysis. Cluster analysis was performed via ClustVis47. Functional cluster analysis was performed via DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.848.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to the processes controlling the complexation, targeting and uptake of polycationic gene delivery vectors, the molecular mechanisms regulating their cytoplasmic dissociation remains poorly understood. Upon cytosolic entry, vectors become exposed to a complex, concentrated mixture of molecules and biomacromolecules. In this report, we characterise the cytoplasmic interactome associated with polycationic vectors based on poly(dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PDMAEMA) and poly(2-methacrylolyloxyethyltrimethylammonium chloride) (PMETAC) brushes. To quantify the contribution of different classes of low molar mass molecules and biomacromolecules to RNA release, we develop a kinetics model based on competitive binding. Our results identify the importance of competition from highly charged biomacromolecules, such as cytosolic RNA, as a primary regulator of RNA release. Importantly, our data indicate the presence of ribosome associated proteins, proteins associated with translation and transcription factors that may underly a broader impact of polycationic vectors on translation. In addition, we bring evidence that molecular crowding modulates competitive binding and demonstrate how the modulation of such interactions, for example via quaternisation or the design of charge-shifting moieties, impacts on the long-term transfection efficiency of polycationic vectors. Understanding the mechanism regulating cytosolic dissociation will enable the improved design of cationic vectors for long term gene release and therapeutic efficacy.

### Keywords
Gene delivery, Polycationic vector, Proteomics, Cytosolic interactome, Polymer brush, Lc-ms/ms, Rna delivery

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute - a Cancer Research UK Centre of Excellence Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas, PhD
Pedro R. Cutillas Professor of Cell Signalling & Proteomics Centre for Genomics and Computational Biology   Barts Cancer Institute - a Cancer Research UK Centre of Excellence Queen Mary, University of London John Vane Science Centre, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ


