### Accession
PXD010538

### Title
Protein expression in MOCK and neuronal nitric oxide synthase 1 (NOS1) transduced SH-SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells on stimulation with rapamycin or serum free starvation

### Description
Neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS/NOS1) is upregulated in the aging brain and contributes to age-and stress-associated neuronal dysfunctions. To mimic this situation for the study of underlying mechanisms we generated a cell model in which human SH-SH5Y neuroblastoma cells constitutively express NOS1 at a level comparable with the rodent brain, whereas the control cells have only low levels. SH-SY5Y cells are the most widely used cell model for neurodegenerative and aging research. They were stably transduced with a lentiviral vector for NOS1 and FACS sorted. Control cells were transduced with the backbone vector, referred to as MOCK or "WT-LV205".  Neuronal aging of SH-SY5Y can be imposed with a number of pharmacological, genetic or stress stimuli including retinoic acid and repeated cycles of starvation. Hence, to further challenge the cells we imposed proteostasis stress by treatment with 1 µM rapamycin for 24h or culture in serum-free medium for 24h. Control cells were cultured in full medium, which was RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with heat-inactivated 10% fetal bovine serum, 100 U/ml penicillin/streptomycin, and 2 mM glutamine. All cells were kept at 37°C in 5% CO2 atmosphere in a humidified tissue culture incubator.  Rapamycin elicits mTOR dependent autophagy, whereas starvation is a stimulus for chaperone-mediated autophagy, but also affects proteolysis by the proteasome and lysosome and eventually, ER stress. During stimulation, all cells were supplemented with NOS cofactors including 10 µM NAD, 40 µM NADPH, and 100 µM tetrahydrobiopterin.  The proteome data set shows nNOS/NOS1-dependent alterations of protein expression in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells in full medium, on stimulation with rapamycin or exposure to serum-free starvation.

### Sample Protocol
Cell harvest and protein extraction  After 24h starvation or rapamycin treatment, cells were washed twice with PBS, scraped off and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell pellets were homogenized in 1% Triton, 100 mM Tris pH 7.4 using a motor-driven Potter–Elvehjemn with 15 strokes, and then incubated on ice for 15 min. Following centrifugation at 16000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and precipitated with 20% TCA. The pellet was resolved in extraction buffer (10% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES pH 7.8). Precipitated proteins were washed twice with ice-cold acetone and finally resolved in extraction buffer. Sonification for 5 s facilitated resolubilization of proteins. 100 µg of protein from each fraction was diluted in 4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 M DTT, mixed with 200 µl 8M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and loaded onto spin filters with a 30 kDa cut off (Microcon). The filter aided universal sample preparation protocol (FASP) [1] was used as described. Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin/LysC (sequencing grade, Promega). Following the protocol of Kulak and Mann [2], acidified peptides (final concentration 0.1% v/v TCA) were fractionated on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) composed of C18-tips and strong cation exchange (SCX) tips. Peptides from the pellet fraction were eluted in 3 steps. Peptides from the supernatant fraction were eluted in 6 steps. All fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.  Label free mass spectrometry  For proteome analysis, the LC/MS was performed on a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase pre-column (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on in-house packed picotip emitter tips (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm long from New Objectives) with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The gradient was from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 80% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min with a flow rate 400 nl/min.  MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition Top10 method selecting the most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. Lock mass option [3] was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy between multiple runs. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000 and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*106 total ion counts. The maximal ion injection time was 160 ms. Higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 105 ions. The maximal ion injection time was 150 ms. Ions were excluded if they occurred within a time-window of 20 s following a fragmentation event. Full scan data were acquired in profile mode and fragments in centroid mode by Xcalibur software

### Data Protocol
Xcalibur raw files were analyzed using the proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.3.30) [4] The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of N-terminus (+42.01) and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were set as variable modifications, and  carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. The human proteome set from Uniprot (Download April 2015, 68511 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins. The False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Label free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide. Identifications from the reverse decoy database, identified by site only and known contaminants were excluded.

### Publication Abstract
Upregulations of neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS/NOS1) in the mouse brain upon aging suggest a role in age-associated changes of protein homeostasis. We generated a cell model, in which constitutive expression of nNOS in SH-SY5Y cells at a level comparable to mouse brain replicates the aging phenotype i.e. slowing of cell proliferation, cell enlargement and expression of senescence markers. nNOS+ and MOCK cells were exposed to proteostasis stress by treatment with rapamycin or serum-free starvation. The proteomes were analyzed per SILAC or label-free using hybrid liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS). Full scan MS-data were acquired using Xcalibur, and raw mass spectra were analyzed using the proteomics software MaxQuant. The human reference proteome from uniprot was used as template to identify peptides and proteins and quantify protein expression. The DiB data file contains essential MaxQuant output tables and includes peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, protein and gene names, sequence coverage and quantification values of each sample. Differences in protein expression in MOCK versus nNOS+ SH-SY5Y cells and interpretation of results are presented in Valek et al. (2018). Raw mass spectra and MaxQuant output files have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Vizcaino et al., 2014) via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PRIDE: PXD010538.

### Keywords
Starvation, Sh-sy5y human neuroblastoma, Rapamycin, Neuronal nos

### Affiliations
University Frankfurt, Germany
Mass spectrometry facility, Functional Proteomics, SFB 815 Core Unit, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Irmgard Tegeder

### Lab Head
Dr Ilka Wittig
Mass spectrometry facility, Functional Proteomics, SFB 815 Core Unit, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


