### Accession
PXD025870

### Title
Characterisation of a nucleo-adhesome

### Description
In addition to central functions in cell adhesion signalling, integrin-associated proteins have wider roles at sites distal to adhesion receptors. In experimentally defined adhesomes, we noticed that there is clear enrichment of proteins that localise to the nucleus, and conversely, we now report that nuclear proteomes contain a class of adhesome components that localise to the nucleus. We here defined a nucleo-adhesome, providing experimental evidence for a remarkable scale of nuclear localisation of adhesion proteins, establishing a framework for interrogating nuclear adhesion protein functions.

### Sample Protocol
For subcellular fractionation, we modified an isotonic buffer-mediated cellular dissection method (Shaiken & Opekun, 2014, Sci. Rep. 4, 4923). Proteins (200 µg) from murine squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) subcellular fractions were precipitated and washed with acetone. Samples were clarified by centrifugation, and each pellet was collected and air-dried. Protein pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.9, and sonicated. Proteins (40 µg) were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 37°C and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. To samples, 200 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.9, 10 mM DTT was added to dilute urea concentration from 8 M to 6 M, and samples were incubated with MS-grade Lys-C (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) for 3–4 h at 37°C. Samples were further diluted from 6 M to 2 M urea concentration, and samples were incubated with sequencing-grade trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein ratio) for 16 h at 37°C . Peptides were acidifed with trifluoroacetic acid (~1% (v/v) final concentration), desalted on homemade C18 StageTips and resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Purified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were injected onto a C18-packed emitter in buffer A (2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid) and eluted with a linear 120-min gradient of 2%–45% (v/v) buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid). Eluting peptides were ionised in positive ion mode before data-dependent analysis. The target value for full scan MS spectra was 5 × 10^5 charges in the 350–1,400 m/z range, with a resolution of 120,000. Ions were fragmented with normalised collision energy of 35, using a 2-s cycle time. A dynamic exclusion window of 30 s was enabled to avoid repeated sequencing of identical peptides. The target value for MS/MS spectra was 5 × 10^4 ions, with a resolution of 1 × 10^4 ions. All spectra were acquired with 1 microscan and without lockmass.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantitative analysis of MS data was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.10). Peptide lists were searched against the mouse UniProtKB database (version 2018_07, which consists of 17,038 UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot entries and 69,415 UniProtKB/TrEMBL entries) and a common contaminants database using the Andromeda search engine. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal glutamine cyclisation, N-terminal carbamylation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications (up to five modifications per peptide). Peptide identifications in one or more LC runs that were not identified in other LC runs were matched and transferred between runs (1.0-min time window). MS/MS were not required for quantitative comparisons, and large label-free quantification ratios were stabilised. Peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, determined by applying a target-decoy search strategy using MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, except when followed by proline, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and at least one peptide ratio was required for label-free quantification. Proteins matching to the reversed or common contaminants databases were omitted. Whole cell lysate samples (“WCL”) and “-20” samples were not analysed further in this study. Of six biological replicate analyses, biological replicate 3 was deemed an outlier and was omitted from further analysis. Label-free quantification intensities for proteins quantified in four or more biological replicates in at least one experimental group were weighted according to protein yields of corresponding fractions (cytoplasmic, perinuclear/organellar, nuclear) to account for different protein amounts in different subcellular fractions. Intensities were binary-logarithm transformed. Values missing from all biological replicates of an experimental group were imputed from a uniform distribution using the R package imp4p (version 1.0); remaining missing values were imputed by k-nearest neighbour averaging using the R package impute (version 1.64.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Nucleus, Adhesome, Adhesion

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Adam Byron

### Lab Head
Dr Margaret Frame
University of Edinburgh


