### Accession
PXD009700

### Title
Integrative multi-omics analysis of intestinal organoid differentiation

### Description
Intestinal organoids accurately recapitulate epithelial homeostasis in vivo, thereby representing a powerful in vitro system to investigate lineage specification and cellular differentiation. Here, we applied a multi-omics framework on stem cell enriched and -depleted mouse intestinal organoids to obtain a holistic view of the molecular mechanisms that drive differential gene expression during adult intestinal stem cell differentiation. Our data revealed a global rewiring of the transcriptome and proteome between intestinal stem cells and enterocytes, with the majority of dynamic protein expression being transcription-driven. Integrating absolute mRNA and protein copy numbers revealed post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Probing the epigenetic landscape identified a large number of cell-type specific regulatory elements, which revealed Hnf4g as a major driver of enterocyte differentiation. In summary, by applying an integrative systems biology approach we uncovered multiple layers of gene expression regulation, which contribute to lineage specification and plasticity of the mouse small intestinal epithelium.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates were digested with a Trypsin/LysC combination using Filter Aided Sample-Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al, 2009b). For absolute quantification 2 µg of a standard range of proteins (UPS2, Sigma) was added to each lysate (Schwanhausser et al, 2011). For deep-coverage proteomics we subjected the digested peptides to a strong anion exchange (SAX) (Wisniewski et al, 2009a) fractionation, and collected a flow through, pH 11, pH 8, pH 5 and pH 2 fraction. Peptides were desalted and stored on StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007) prior to mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were applied to on-line Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo) separation using different 214 min gradients of acetonitrile (7-30%, 5-23%, 8-27%, 9-30%, 11-32% and 14-32% for unfractionated, flow through, pH 11, 8, 5 and 2, respectively) followed by washes at 60% followed by 95% acetonitrile for 240 min of total data collection. Mass spectra were collected on a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) in data-dependent top-speed mode with dynamic exclusion set at 60 s.  Lipidomics LC-MS/MS (data dependent) analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific Acella UHPLC system and an Acquity BEH C-18 column (1 × 100 mm, 1.7 μm). The column outlet was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap XL equipped with an electrospray ion source operated in either negative or positive mode. The system was operated at a flow rate of 80 μL min−1 and 60 °C. The mobile phases consisted of 40% acetonitrile in ultrapure water (v/v) also containing 10 mM ammonium acetate (solvent A), and 10% acetonitrile and 90% isopropanol (v/v) also containing 10 mM ammonium acetate (solvent B). A 10 min linear gradient of 40–100% B was started 1 min after the injection of the sample and was at 100% B for the next 5 min. Thereafter the system was returned to its starting situation. Total runtime was 21 min. All acquired MS-data was searched against available databases.  Metabolomics LC-MS/MS (data dependent) analysis was conducted with a Thermo Scientific Acella UHPLC system and an Acquity BEH C-8 column (1 × 150 mm, 1.7 μm). The column outlet was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap XL equipped with an electrospray ion source operated in either negative or positive mode. The system was operated at a flow rate of 150 μL min−1 and 40 °C. The mobile phases consisted of 6.5 mM ammonium carbonate pH 8 (solvent A), and 6.5 mM ammonium carbonate in 95% methanol (v/v, solvent B) in negative mode. For positive mode analysis the solvents were 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water and 0.1% formic acid in methanol, respectively. A 5-min linear gradient of 0–70% B was started 1 min after the injection of the sample. The gradient was increased to 98% B in 0.5 min and was at 98% B for the next 10 min. Thereafter the system was returned to its starting situation. Total runtime was 22 min. All acquired MS-data was searched against available databases.

### Data Protocol
For proteomics experiments, raw mass spectra were analyzed in MaxQuant 1.5.1.0 (Cox and Mann 2008) with match-between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. A mouse RefSeq protein sequence database downloaded at 28-06-2016 from UCSC was used to identify proteins. Identified proteins were filtered for reverse hits and potential contaminants. Proteins detected in the BME gel were blacklisted for downstream analyses. We only considered proteins that were identified in at least all of the triplicates of the same sample, for downstream analyses. Missing values were semi-randomly imputed based on the assumption that they were not detected because they were under the detection limit of the mass spectrometer (in Perseus, MaxQuant software package). For absolute quantification we applied a linear regression between supplied amounts and the iBAQ intensities of the spike-in proteins in the unfractionated sample, followed by a second linear regression between the absolute abundances and iBAQ intensities in the fractionated sample.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal organoids accurately recapitulate epithelial homeostasis <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i>, thereby representing a powerful <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> system to investigate lineage specification and cellular differentiation. Here, we applied a multi-omics framework on stem cell-enriched and stem cell-depleted mouse intestinal organoids to obtain a holistic view of the molecular mechanisms that drive differential gene expression during adult intestinal stem cell differentiation. Our data revealed a global rewiring of the transcriptome and proteome between intestinal stem cells and enterocytes, with the majority of dynamic protein expression being transcription-driven. Integrating absolute mRNA and protein copy numbers revealed post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression. Probing the epigenetic landscape identified a large number of cell-type-specific regulatory elements, which revealed Hnf4g as a major driver of enterocyte differentiation. In summary, by applying an integrative systems biology approach, we uncovered multiple layers of gene expression regulation, which contribute to lineage specification and plasticity of the mouse small intestinal epithelium.

### Keywords
Enterocytes, Organoids, Systems biology, Adult intestinal stem cells, Hnf4g

### Affiliations
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen - the Netherlands

### Submitter
Rik Lindeboom

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University, Nijmegen - the Netherlands


