### Accession
PXD005457

### Title
Proteomes and Ubiquitylomes Analysis Reveals the Involvement of Ubiquitination in Protein Degradation

### Description
Petal senescence is a complex programmed process. It has been previously demonstrated that treatment with ethylene, a plant hormone involved in senescence, can extensively alter transcriptome and proteome profiles in plants. However, little is known regarding the impact of ethylene on post-translational modification (PTM) or the association between PTM and the proteome. Protein degradation is one of the hallmarks of senescence, and ubiquitination, a major PTM in eukaryotes, plays important roles in protein degradation. In this study, we first obtained reference petunia transcriptome data via RNA sequencing. Next, we quantitatively investigated the petunia proteome, ubiquitylome, and the association between them in petunia corollas following ethylene treatment. In total, 51,799 unigenes, 3,606 proteins, and 2,270 ubiquitination sites were quantified 16 hours after ethylene treatment. Treatment with ethylene resulted in 14,448 down-regulated and 6,303 up-regulated unigenes (absolute log2-fold change >1 and FDR<0.001), 284 down-regulated and 233 up-regulated proteins, and 320 up-regulated and 127 down-regulated ubiquitination sites using a 1.5-fold threshold (P<0.05), indicating that global ubiquitination levels increase during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Several putative ubiquitin ligases were up-regulated at the protein and transcription levels. Our results showed that the global proteome and ubiquitylome were negatively correlated and that ubiquitination could be involved in the degradation of proteins during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunias. Ethylene regulates hormone signaling transduction pathways at both the protein and ubiquitination levels in petunia corollas. In addition, our results revealed that ethylene increases the ubiquitination levels of proteins involved in ER-associated degradation (ERAD).

### Sample Protocol
Petunia (Petunia hybrida‘Mitchell’) plants were grown under greenhouse conditions (22-25°C) and a natural photoperiod (Liu et al., 2011). Flowers were emasculated 1 d before they were fully open to prevent self-pollination. Eight to ten petunia flowers were harvested at the anthesis stage (corollas 90° reflexed) and were then placed immediately in tap water. Buds were collected at about the 3rd week after the first flower opened. Stems, leaves and roots were collected from plants at the vegetative stage when the plants were 10 cm in height. All tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80°C until used for RNA extraction. Fresh weights were measured immediately before freezing (Liu et al, 2011).All experiments were conducted at least three times with independently collected and extracted tissues unless otherwise noted.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant with an integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched  against a database (40,341 sequences) made from RNA sequencing of petunias in this study.For proteomic peptides, Trypsin/P was used as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and to 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMT-6plex (N-term) and TMT-6plex (K) were specified as fixed modifications, and oxidation  on Met was specified as a variable modification.  FDR  was adjusted to < 1%, and peptide ion score was set to > 20.For Kub peptides, Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme, allowing up to 3 missed cleavages. First, the search range was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions, and the main search range  was  set  to  5  ppm  and  0.02 Da  for  fragment  ions.  Carbamidomethyl  on  Cys  was specified as a fixed modification, and GlyGly on lysine and oxidation on Met were specified 7 as variable  modifications.  The  label-free  quantification  method was LFQ, and FDR was adjusted to < 1%, while the minimum score for modified peptides was set to > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Petal senescence is a complex programmed process. It has been demonstrated previously that treatment with ethylene, a plant hormone involved in senescence, can extensively alter transcriptome and proteome profiles in plants. However, little is known regarding the impact of ethylene on posttranslational modification (PTM) or the association between PTM and the proteome. Protein degradation is one of the hallmarks of senescence, and ubiquitination, a major PTM in eukaryotes, plays important roles in protein degradation. In this study, we first obtained reference petunia (Petunia hybrida) transcriptome data via RNA sequencing. Next, we quantitatively investigated the petunia proteome and ubiquitylome and the association between them in petunia corollas following ethylene treatment. In total, 51,799 unigenes, 3,606 proteins, and 2,270 ubiquitination sites were quantified 16 h after ethylene treatment. Treatment with ethylene resulted in 14,448 down-regulated and 6,303 up-regulated unigenes (absolute log<sub>2</sub> fold change &gt; 1 and false discovery rate &lt; 0.001), 284 down-regulated and 233 up-regulated proteins, and 320 up-regulated and 127 down-regulated ubiquitination sites using a 1.5-fold threshold (P &lt; 0.05), indicating that global ubiquitination levels increase during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Several putative ubiquitin ligases were up-regulated at the protein and transcription levels. Our results showed that the global proteome and ubiquitylome were negatively correlated and that ubiquitination could be involved in the degradation of proteins during ethylene-mediated corolla senescence in petunia. Ethylene regulates hormone signaling transduction pathways at both the protein and ubiquitination levels in petunia corollas. In addition, our results revealed that ethylene increases the ubiquitination levels of proteins involved in endoplasmic reticulum-associated degradation.

### Keywords
Ethylene; ubiquitination; senescence; petunia; protein degradation

### Affiliations
company
2 College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China

### Submitter
Jones Macke

### Lab Head
Dr Yixun Yu
2 College of Horticulture, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou 510642, China


