### Accession
PXD038779

### Title
Spastin is an essential regulator of male meiosis, acrosome formation, manchette structure and nuclear integrity

### Description
The development and function of male gametes is critically dependent on a dynamic microtubule network, yet how this is regulated remains poorly understood. We have recently shown that microtubule severing, via the action of the meiotic AAA ATPase protein clade, plays a critical role in this process. Here, we sought to elucidate the roles of spastin, an as yet unexplored member of this clade in spermatogenesis. Using a SpastKO/KO mouse model, we reveal that spastin loss resulted in a complete loss of functional germ cells. Spastin plays a critical role in the assembly and function of the male meiotic spindle, and in its absence, apoptosis is significantly increased. Consistent with meiotic failure, round spermatid nuclei were enlarged, indicating aneuploidy, but were still able to enter spermiogenesis. During spermiogenesis, we observed extreme abnormalities in manchette structure, acrosome biogenesis, and commonly, a loss of nuclear integrity. This work defines a novel and essential role for spastin in regulating microtubule dynamics during spermatogenesis and is of potential relevance to patients carrying Spastin variants and to the medically assisted reproductive technology industry.

### Sample Protocol
For IP assays, wild-type mouse testes (n=3 per IP assay) were lysed in 1% NP-40 (PBS) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Calbiochem, 539134). Co-immunoprecipitation of SPAST and its binding partners was performed using the Pierce Co-immunoprecipitation Kit (Thermo Scientific, 26149) as per the manufacturer’s instructions, in combination with the SPAST antibody (Abcam ab31850, 5 ug per IP column). To minimise non-specific binding, testis protein lysates were pre-cleared by incubation with 400μl of Pierce control agarose resin slurry for a 4 hour at 4°C with gently rocking. For each pre-cleared testis lysate, 4mg was then loaded into two IP columns, one which contained the target antibody covalently coupled to the amine reactive Pierce AminoLink Plus Coupling Resin and one which contained the target antibody and a non-amine reactive Pierce Control Agarose Resin (negative control), and incubated overnight at 4°C. Lysate flow through was removed, columns were washed and bound protein eluted and collected as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted proteins were neutralised with 1.5M Tris-HCL (pH 8.8), reduced with TCEP, then digested by incubation with trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptide samples were freeze dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% formic acid (FA) (diluted in MilliQ water) before concentrated FA was added to adjust the pH to <3. Samples were purified using reverse-phase chromatography C18 stage tips, which aim to desalt and fractionate in-solution peptides at an acidic pH. The tips were initially activated with 50 CAN/ 0.1%FA and equilibrated with 0.1% FA, before samples were loaded into them and washed with 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN/0.1% FA, freeze dried, resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% FA.   The purified peptide samples were analysed via nano liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) at the University of Melbourne Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, using an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a nano ESI interface coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and Acclaim PepMap trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, C18, 100 Å). The enrichment column was injected with the tryptic peptides (3 µL) at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.05% v/v aqueous trifluoroacetic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1 % v/v aqueous formic acid and 5 % v/v dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (solvent A) and  0.1 % v/v formic acid and 5 % DMSO in acetonitrile (solvent B). The gradient was at 300 nL min-1 from (i) 0–6 min, 3 % B; (ii) 6–35 min, 3–23 % B; (iii) 35-45 min, 23-40 % B; (iv) 45-50 min, 40-80 % B; (v) 50-55 min, 80–80 % B; (vi) 55-55.1 min, 80-3 % B; (vii) 55.1-65 min, 3-3 % B. The column oven was maintained at 50 °C throughout the analysis. The Eclipse Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, wherein full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode over the range of m/z 375-1500, with spray voltage at 1.9kV, source temperature at 275 °C, MS1 at 120,000 resolution and normalized AGC target of 100 % and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The top 3 second method was used and selecting peptide ions with charge states of ≥ 2-7 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 5E4 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.6 m/z, and precursors were fragmented using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 30 %, a resolution of 15,000, a normalized AGC target of 100% and automated IT time.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were analysed with the MaxQuant software suite for the identification and quantification of peptides/proteins from the Mouse SwissProt database. Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Statistical analysis was conducted with the Perseus software considering protein and PSM false discovery rates (FDR) both set at < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
The development and function of male gametes is dependent on a dynamic microtubule network, yet how this is regulated remains poorly understood. We have recently shown that microtubule severing, via the action of the meiotic AAA ATPase protein clade, plays a crucial role in this process. Here, we sought to elucidate the roles of spastin, an as-yet-unexplored member of this clade in spermatogenesis. Using a SpastKO/KO mouse model, we reveal that spastin loss resulted in a complete loss of functional germ cells. Spastin plays a crucial role in the assembly and function of the male meiotic spindle. Consistent with meiotic failure, round spermatid nuclei were enlarged, indicating aneuploidy, but were still able to enter spermiogenesis. During spermiogenesis, we observed extreme abnormalities in manchette structure, acrosome biogenesis and, commonly, a catastrophic loss of nuclear integrity. This work defines an essential role for spastin in regulating microtubule dynamics during spermatogenesis, and is of potential relevance to individuals carrying spastin variants and to the medically assisted reproductive technology industry.

### Keywords
Spast, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Testes

### Affiliations
School of BioSciences and Bio21 Institute, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Jessica Dunleavy

### Lab Head
Dr Jessica Dunleavy
School of BioSciences and Bio21 Institute, Faculty of Science, The University of Melbourne, VIC, 3010, Australia


