### Accession
PXD009474

### Title
Translocase of the Outer Membrane (TOM complex) of hydrogenosomes in Trichomonas vaginalis

### Description
Mitochondria originated from α-proteobacterial endosymbionts, and the endosymbiont-to-organelle transition is tightly linked to the establishment of protein import pathways. The initial import of most proteins is mediated by the translocase of the outer membrane (TOM). Although TOM is common to all forms of mitochondria, recent studies have shown diversity of TOM subunits between main eukaryotic lineages. However, experimental knowledge is currently limited to a few model organisms. Here, we analysed the TvTOM complex in hydrogenosomes, an anaerobic form of mitochondria found in the excavate Trichomonas vaginalis. Using the pore-forming TvTom40-2 as bait, we immunoprecipitated the high molecular weight TvTOM complex both under crosslinking and native conditions and performed label-free quantitative mass spectrometry (LFQ-MS) to identify the components of the TvTOM complex.   Identification of the components of the hydrogenosomal TOM complex  To identify interaction partners for TvTom40-2 in the TOM complex, we performed co-immunoprecipitations (coIPs) of HA-tagged TvTom40-2 under protein crosslinking and under native conditions, and the eluted proteins were analyzed using label-free quantitative (LFQ) mass spectrometry. CoIPs using anti-HA antibody (Ab) were performed with hydrogenosomes isolated from both the strain expressing HA-tagged TvTom40-2 and the wild type strain, as a negative control. The analysis revealed 50 and 36 proteins that were enriched with HA-tagged TvTom40-2 under crosslinking and native conditions respectively. As TOM proteins are embedded in the hydrogenosomal outer membrane, we searched for proteins with TMDs in the datasets using TMHMM and found 19 and 13 proteins for crosslinking and native coIPs respectively. The intersection between the two datasets and the hydrogenosomal membrane proteome (Rada et al 2011) contained five TvTom40 isoforms, two TA proteins named Homp36 and Homp19 (Homp, Hydrogenosomal outer membrane protein), Sam50 and its paralogue Sam50p, and Hmp35. In addition, the intersection between the coIP dataset under crosslinking conditions and the membrane proteome contained two more TA proteins, Homp38 and Homp46. Based on these results, we selected Homp36 which was previously shown to reside in the hydrogenosomal outer membrane (Rada et al 2011) for the reciprocal coIPs.  Proteins enriched in the HA-tagged Homp36 coIPs under crosslinking conditions included multiple isoforms of TvTom40, Sam50, Hmp35, Homp38, Homp46 and Homp19, and multiple isoforms of TvTom40, Sam50 and Hmp35 were enriched under native conditions. Altogether, the coIP and MS data indicated four TA candidate proteins, Homp19, Homp36, Homp38 and Homp46, and two β-barrel proteins, Sam50 and Hmp35. InterProScan predicted that Homp36, Homp38 and Homp46 carry an N-terminal Hsp20-like chaperone domain, three TPR-like domains and a C-terminal transmembrane helix. This domain architecture resembles the recently reported ATOM69 in T. brucei (Mani et al 2015). Indeed, HHpred searches using Homp36 and Homp38 as queries against the T. brucei proteome revealed ATOM69 as the first hit, with E values of 4.9e-17 and 2.3e-11 respectively. HHpred searches with Homp46 recognized various proteins with TPR domains, whereas no significant homology was observed for Homp19.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry  To remove SDS from the crosslinking coIPs and to remove HA peptides from the native coIPs, samples were resuspended in 8 M urea and processed using a FASP (Filter Aided Sample Preparation) protocol, according to Wisniewski et al. (Wisniewski et al ). Briefly, samples were loaded on centrifugal filters with a 3 kDa cut off (Microcon Ultracel-30, Merck Millipore) and centrifuged at 16000 x g at room temperature for 20 min. All the following centrifugation steps were performed under the same conditions. Loaded proteins were then washed twice with 200 µl of 100 mM TEAB (Triethylammonium bicarbonate) buffer. After the final wash, the lysate was diluted with 50 µl of TEAB, and TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM to reduce disulfide bonds. Reduction was performed at 60°C for 30 min in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf). Reduction filters were left to cool down and were spun shortly before alkylation. Alkylation was performed using S-Methyl methanethiosulfonate (Sigma Aldrich) at a 10 mM final concentration for 10 min at room temperature and then centrifuged for 10 min. Then, the samples were digested with 1 µg of trypsin at 37°C overnight. The obtained peptides were eluted with 80 µl of 100 mM TEAB. The supernatant was collected following centrifugation, acidified with 1% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) and desalted on a Michrom C18 column. Nano Reversed phase columns (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) were used for LC/MS analysis. Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase buffer B was composed of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å wide pore, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 Cartridges) for 4 min at 15 μl/min. Loading buffer was composed of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Peptides were eluted with a Mobile phase B gradient, from 2% to 40%, over 60 min. Eluting peptide cations were converted to gas-phase ions by electrospray ionization and analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT- qIT, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1600 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z), with a 5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.5 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS 2 ion count target was set to 104, and the max injection time was 35 msec. Only those precursors with a charge state between 2 and 6 were sampled for MS 2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 sec, with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode, with 2 sec cycles (Herbert et al 2014).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.3.8) (Cox et al 2014). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and we specified a minimum length of seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the T. vaginalis database (Downloaded from TrichDB, Trichomonas Genome Resource, www.trichdb.org, containing 59,862 entries). Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, allowing cleavage at proline bonds, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Dithiomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. The “match between runs” feature of MaxQuant was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS/MS runs, based on their masses and retention times (Maximum deviation 0.7 min), and this was also used in quantification experiments. Quantifications were performed with the label-free algorithms, and the data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.5.2.4 software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tom complex, Trichomonas vaginalis, Protein import/translocation, Mitochondria, Hydrogenosomes

### Affiliations
BIOCEV, Charles University
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic

### Submitter
Abhijith Makki

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Tachezy
Department of Parasitology, Faculty of Science, Charles University, BIOCEV, Průmyslová 595, 25242 Vestec, Czech Republic


