### Accession
PXD017069

### Title
Optimisation of Synovial Fluid Collection and Processing for NMR Metabolomics and LC-MS/MS Proteomics

### Description
Synovial fluid (SF) is of great interest for the investigation of orthopaedic pathologies as it is in close proximity to various tissues which are primarily altered during these disease processes and can be collected using minimally invasive protocols. Therefore, SF has substantial potential for improved understanding of underlying disease pathogenesis and biomarker discovery. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolomics is a rapidly expanding field, providing comprehensive metabolite profiling of complex biological samples with high levels of technical reproducibility. However, currently there are no agreed standard protocols which are published for SF collection and processing for use with NMR metabolomic analysis. The development of liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) has provided a fast and sensitive methodology to identify and quantify proteins within complex biological samples. However, the large protein concentration dynamic range present within SF can mask the detection of lower abundance proteins. Combinational ligand libraries (ProteoMinerTM columns) have been developed to reduce this dynamic range, achieving peptide-based depletion, whilst allowing preservation of the whole proteome. However, the reproducibility of ProteoMinerTM columns when used in conjunction with SF or on-bead protein digestion protocol reproducibility have yet to be investigated. During this study, protocols have been optimised for the collection, processing and storage of SF for NMR metabolite analysis. We have also optimised protocols for analysis of the SF proteome using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The proteomics aspect of this study centred on the optimisation of SF protein digestion and subsequent workflow using LC-MS/MS analysis. SF was treated by adding 1 µg/ml hyaluronidase, heating at 37°C for 1 hr, centrifuging at 1,000g for 5 min, removing the supernatant and passing through a 0.22 µm cellulose acetate filter at 5,000g for 15 min (or a variation of this protocol as stated). For ProteoMiner™ Small Capacity bead column studies (Bio-Rad), columns were loaded with 1-10 mg of protein as stated and processed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. During this study, previously developed standard trypsin digestion protocols were used for native SF protein digestion and on-bead ProteoMinerTM protein digestion, or a variation of this protocol as stated, including the addition of a Lys-C endopeptidase (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemical, Osaka, Japan) (10 µg/ml final digest concentration) pre-trypsin digestion step, incubated at 37˚C for 4 or 16 hrs. 160 µl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka Chemicals Ltd., Gillingham, UK) containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest (Waters, Elstree, Hertfordshire, UK) was added to ProteoMinerTM columns. For native SF and ProteoMinerTM column flow-through, the appropriate volume containing 100 µg of protein was diluted to a final volume of 160 µl 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Fluka) containing 0.05% (w/v) RapiGest. Samples were heated for 10 min at 80°C, 3 mM final concentration DL-Dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) added, heated at 60°C for 10 min and 9 mM final concentration iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) added and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Protein digestion was carried out through the addition of 2 µg of proteomics grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich), rotation at 37°C for 16 hrs with repeated trypsin supplementation for 2 hrs, again rotating at 37°C. Columns were centrifuged at 1,000g for 1 min, 0.5% (v/v) final concentration trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) added, rotated at 37°C for 30 min, centrifuged at 13,000g and 4°C for 15 min and the supernatant removed.   Tryptic digests were diluted 5-fold in 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 3% (v/v) acetonitrile and analysed individually, in a random order, via LC-MS/MS using a 60, 90 or 120 min liquid chromatography (LC) gradient as stated. A Q ExactiveTM HF quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) was used for data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses. Digests were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 20 mm x 75 µm) using a loading buffer of 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile in water for 3 min at a flow rate of 5 µl min-1. The trapping column was then set in-line with an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® C18, 15 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm) with peptide elution carried out using a linear gradient of 96.2% A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid):3.8% B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water:acetonitrile (80:20) (v/v)) to 50% A:50% B over 30, 60 or 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1, followed by washing at 1 % A:99% B for 5 min and re-equilibration of the column to starting conditions. The Q ExactiveTM was operated in data dependent positive (ESI+) mode with survey scans between m/z 300-2000 acquired at a mass resolution of 70,000 (full width at half maximum) at m/z 200 after accumulation of ions to 1x106 target value based on predictive automatic gain control values from the previous full scan. The 10 most intense precursor ions with charge states of between 2+ and 5+ were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used to fragment peptides using normalised collision energy of 30% with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion of m/z values to prevent repeated fragmentation of the same peptide was used with an exclusion time of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS® Search Parameters  For peptide/protein database searches using PEAKS® Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada) the Equus caballus database was used with search parameters including: precursor mass error tolerance, 10.0 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance, 0.01 Da; precursor mass search type, monoisotopic; enzyme, trypsin; maximum missed cleavages, 1; non-specific cleavage, none; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation; variable modifications, oxidation or hydroxylation and oxidation (methionine). A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was set and a minimum of 2 unique peptides required for protein identification. No normalisation was undertaken. PEAKS® searches were used for all peptide and protein identifications except for protein digestion optimisation and semi-tryptic peptide analysis.  Mascot Search Parameters  For peptide/protein database searches using an in-house Mascot server Version 2.6.2 the Equus caballus database was used with search parameters including: peptide mass tolerance, 10.0 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 Da; enzyme, trypsin; missed cleavages allowed, one; fixed modifications, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and variable modifications; oxidation (methionine), oxidation (proline) and oxidation (lysine). Mascot database searches were used for protein digestion optimisation and semi-tryptic peptide analysis.  Semi-Tryptic Peptide Identification and Quantification  Raw spectral files underwent spectral alignment, peak picking and peptide quantification in Progenesis™ QI 2.0 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). No normalisation was undertaken. Peptide identifications were carried out for the top ten spectra of each feature with Mascot, using the same Equus caballus search parameters as for tryptic peptides, except a ‘semi-tryptic’ search was conducted opposed to ‘tryptic’. Peptides, with a 1% FDR correction, were exported from Progenesis™ and technical replicates of semi-tryptic peptide abundances compared using the online neopeptide tool.

### Publication Abstract
Synovial fluid (SF) is of great interest for the investigation of orthopedic pathologies, as it is in close proximity to various tissues that are primarily altered during these disease processes and can be collected using minimally invasive protocols. Multi-"omic" approaches are commonplace, although little consideration is often given for multiple analysis techniques at sample collection. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) metabolomics and liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomics are two complementary techniques particularly suited to the study of SF. However, currently there are no agreed upon standard protocols that are published for SF collection and processing for use with NMR metabolomic analysis. Furthermore, the large protein concentration dynamic range present within SF can mask the detection of lower abundance proteins in proteomics. While combinational ligand libraries (ProteoMiner columns) have been developed to reduce this dynamic range, their reproducibility when used in conjunction with SF, or on-bead protein digestion protocols, has yet to be investigated. Here we employ optimized protocols for the collection, processing, and storage of SF for NMR metabolite analysis and LC-MS/MS proteome analysis, including a Lys-C endopeptidase digestion step prior to tryptic digestion, which increased the number of protein identifications and improved reproducibility for on-bead ProteoMiner digestion.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Synovial fluid, Proteomics, Lys-c endopeptidase, Nuclear magnetic resonance, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool

### Submitter
James Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Mandy Peffers
University of Liverpool


