### Accession
PXD028492

### Title
Cul5 regulates CD4+ T cell fate choice and allergic inflammation

### Description
Antigen encounter directs CD4+ T cells to differentiate into T-helper or -regulatory cells. This process focuses the immune response on the invading pathogen and limits tissue damage. Mechanisms that govern -helper versus -regulatory fate remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cul5 determines fate selection in CD4+ T cells by regulating IL-4 receptor signaling. Mice lacking Cul5 in T cells developed enhanced Th2 and Th9 inflammation and pathophysiological features of atopic asthma upon allergen exposure. Following T cell activation, Cul5 formed a complex with CIS and pJak1. Loss of Cul5 function resulted in reduced ubiquitylation and increased stability of pJak1, elevated STAT6 activity, and a reduced threshold for IL-4 receptor signaling. In keeping with this, Cul5-deficient T cells deviated from Treg to Th9 differentiation in low IL-4 conditions. These data support that Cul5 promotes a tolerogenic T cell fate choice and reduces susceptibility to allergic asthma.

### Sample Protocol
D10 cells were stimulated with plate bound 5g/ml anti-CD3 and soluble 2g/ml anti-CD28 in presence of 10ng/ml IL-4 along with NAEi (1M) for 4hrs. Cells were harvested and washed with chilled PBS and subjected to lysis followed by mass-spectrometry. Samples were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and and EasySpray source. Peptides were separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on Easy-Spray RSLC C18 2um 75 μm id × 50cm column at 50C.  Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90-min gradient from 1 to 5 % B in 15 min, 5-45%B in 90 min.  The mass spectrometer was set to repetitively scan m/z from 300 to 1800 (R = 120,000), followed by data-dependent MS/MS scans (R=45000) on the twenty most abundant ions, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27, dynamic exclusion of 15 second with a repeat count of 1. FTMS full scan AGC target value was 5e5, while MSn AGC was 1e5, respectively. MS and MSn injection time was 120 ms; microscans were set at one. Unassigned, 1, 7, 8, and >8 charge states were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data were processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0 using a mouse proteome database including canonical and reviewed isoforms downloaded from Uniprot on 01/04/2018.

### Publication Abstract
Antigen encounter directs CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells to differentiate into T helper or regulatory cells. This process focuses the immune response on the invading pathogen and limits tissue damage. Mechanisms that govern T helper cell versus T regulatory cell fate remain poorly understood. Here, we show that the E3 ubiquitin ligase Cul5 determines fate selection in CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells by regulating IL-4 receptor signaling. Mice lacking Cul5 in T cells develop Th2 and Th9 inflammation and show pathophysiological features of atopic asthma. Following T cell activation, Cul5 forms a complex with CIS and pJak1. Cul5 deletion reduces ubiquitination and subsequent degradation of pJak1, leading to an increase in pJak1 and pSTAT6 levels and reducing the threshold of IL-4 receptor signaling. As a consequence, Cul5 deficient CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells deviate from Treg to Th9 differentiation in low IL-4 conditions. These data support the notion that Cul5 promotes a tolerogenic T cell fate choice and reduces susceptibility to allergic asthma.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Allergy, Cd4, T-cell, Crl5, Cul5, Cis, Asthma

### Affiliations
Cell Pathology Division 816F/ARC Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia The University of Pennsylvania 3615 Civic Center Blvd. 816F/ARC Philadelphia, PA 19104 Office: 267-426-2839 Fax: 267-426-5165
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Paula M. Oliver, PhD
Cell Pathology Division 816F/ARC Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia The University of Pennsylvania 3615 Civic Center Blvd. 816F/ARC Philadelphia, PA 19104 Office: 267-426-2839 Fax: 267-426-5165


