### Accession
PXD042496

### Title
Amoxicillin treatment of pneumococcal pneumonia impacts bone marrow neutrophil maturation and function.

### Description
Pneumonia caused by Streptococcus pneumoniae is a leading cause of death worldwide, and bacterial resistance to antimicrobial drugs has become a major issue. A growing body of evidence indicates that the successful treatment of bacterial infections results from synergy between antibiotic-mediated direct antibacterial activity and the host’s immune defenses. However, the mechanisms underlying the protective immune responses induced by amoxicillin (a β-lactam antibiotic used as the first-line treatment of S. pneumoniae infections) have not been characterized. A better understanding of amoxicillin’s effects on host-pathogen interactions might facilitate the development of other treatment options. Given the crucial role of neutrophils in the control of S. pneumoniae infections, we decided to investigate amoxicillin’s impact on neutrophil development in a mouse model of pneumococcal superinfection. Although a single therapeutic dose of amoxicillin prevented local and systemic inflammatory responses, it did not impair the emergency granulopoiesis triggered in the bone marrow by S. pneumoniae. Importantly, treatment of pneumonia with amoxicillin was associated with a greater mature neutrophil count in the bone marrow; these neutrophils had specific transcriptomic and proteomic profiles. Furthermore, amoxicillin-conditioned, mature neutrophils in the bone marrow had a less activated phenotype and might be rapidly mobilized in peripheral tissues in response to systemic inflammation. Thus, by revealing a novel effect of amoxicillin on the development and functions of bone marrow neutrophils during Streptococcus pneumoniae pneumonia, our findings provide new insights into the impact of amoxicillin treatment on host immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE to perform one gel slice trypsin digestion for each sample. Peptides were extracted with 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, evaporated to reduce volume at 8µl and injected on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were automatically fractionated onto a commercial C18 reversed-phase column (75 μm × 250 mm, 2-μm particle, PepMap100 RSLC column, Thermo Fisher Scientific (Waltham, USA), temperature 35 °C). Trapping was performed for 4 min at 5 μL/min with solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid). Elution was performed using two solvents, A (0.1% formic acid in water) and B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Gradient separation was 3 min at 3% B, 110 min from 3% to 20% B, 10 min from 20% to 80% B, and maintained for 15 min. The column was equilibrated for 6 min with 3% buffer B prior to the next sample analysis. The eluted peptides from the C18 column were analyzed by Q-Exactive instruments (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275 °C. Full mass spectrometry (MS) scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the m/z 400–1200 range with a resolution of 70 000 (m/z 200). The target value was 3.00E+06. The fifteen most intense peaks with charge states between 2 and 5 were fragmented in the high-energy collisional dissociation cell (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27%, and the tandem mass spectrum was acquired using an Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 1.00E+05. The ion selection threshold was 5.0E+04 counts, and the maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 250 ms for full MS scans and 100 ms for tandem mass spectra. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data collected during nano LC–MS/MS analyses were processed and converted into an *.mgf peak list format with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS data were analyzed using the search engine Mascot (version 2.4.0, Matrix Science, London, UK) installed on a local server. Searches were performed with a tolerance on mass measurement of 0.02 Da for precursor and 10 ppm for fragment ions against a composite target-decoy database built with a Mus musculus Uniprot database (taxonomy 10090, April 2022, 88037 entries) fused with the sequences of recombinant trypsin and a list of classical contaminants (118 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and cysteine propionamidation were searched as variable modifications. Up to one missed trypsin cleavage was allowed. The identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) for validation. Peptide spectrum matches taller than 9 residues and ion scores >10 were retained. The false discovery rate was then optimized to be below 1% at the protein level using the Mascot Modified Mudpit score. Spectral counting analyses were performed with Proline 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neutrophils; bone marrow; granulopoiesis; amoxicillin; streptococcus pneumoniae

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France
Institut Pasteur de Lille

### Submitter
SALIOU Jean-Michel

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-michel Saliou
Univ. Lille, CNRS, Inserm, CHU Lille, Institut Pasteur de Lille, US41 – UAR 2014 – PLBS, F-59000 Lille, France


