### Accession
PXD025874

### Title
Proteomic analysis of healthy and hyperglycemic murine fetal kidneys

### Description
Alteration of kidney morphogenesis in diabetic pregnancies is poorly described, especially changes in the extracellular matrix (ECM) and glomerular basement membrane (GBM during glomerulogenesis. Addressing the ECM proteome, or matrisome, in the mouse fetal kidney in a healthy and diabetic environment will improve understanding about the association between ECM changes in the kidney as potential reprogramming mechanisms of kidney differentiation in diabetic pregnancies. Therefore, to better understand ECM composition and remodelling in kidney developmental and appreciate the alterations associated to the maternal diabetes, this project aimed to define the matrisome in the mouse fetal kidney on embryonic day 19. For this, we used an ECM enrichment approach combined with high resolution label-free tandem mass spectrometry to define the matrisome in the fetal mouse kidney (healthy and hyperglycemic) to test the hypothesis that maternal diabetes influences ECM composition, assembly and, therefore, biology.

### Sample Protocol
Swiss female mice (2 months old) were used to induce type 1 diabetes as previously described (Favaro ett al. 2013), using alloxan (40 mg/kg). Diabetic and normoglycemic females were mated with normoglycemic males, and fetuses were obtained at the embryonic day 19 (E19). Kidney samples (n=6 control, 6 hyperglycemic) collected from E19 mouse fetuses were processed by a serial chemical fractionation to enrich for ECM proteins. First samples were homogenised in Tris-buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged to collect soluble cellular proteins (Fraction 1). The remaining pellet was incubated in 20 mM Na4OH in PBS-Triton to disrupt cell-matrix interactions, then centrifuged again to yield fraction 2. The remaining pellet was the treated with 0.4ug benzonaze in PBS supplemented with CaCl2 and MgCl2 to remove DNA/RNA traces. Finally, the remaining pellet enriched for insoluble matrix proteins was resuspended in 5-times reducing sample buffer (100 mM Tris pH 6.8, 25% glycerol, 10% SDS, 10% -mercaptoethanol, 0.1% bromophenol blue) to yield fraction ECM. Fractions 1 and 2 were combined (1:1) into a cellular fraction. All samples underwent in gel trypsin digestion as previously described (Humphries et al., 2009). Briefly, gel top proteins distained were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with 1.25 ng/l sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega #V5111) prepared in 25 mM NaHCO3 buffer. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and submitted to desalting using R3 reverse-phase beads (Applied Biosystems #1133903). Peptide samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an UltiMate® 3000 Rapid Separation LC (RSLC, Dionex Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA) coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using a gradient from 93% A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 7% B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) to 18% B over 57 min followed by a second gradient to 27% B over 14 min both at 300 nl/min, using a CSH C18 analytical column (Waters). Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent acquisition. Raw spectra data were acquired and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Humphries, J.D., A. Byron, M.D. Bass, S.E. Craig, J.W. Pinney, D. Knight, and M.J. Humphries. 2009. Proteomic analysis of integrin-associated complexes identifies RCC2 as a dual regulator of Rac1 and Arf6. Sci Signal. 2:ra51.

### Data Protocol
MS data was searched against SwissProt and TrEMBL databases (v. 2018_01) using SEQUEST HT and Mascot search tools. For the search were considered: tryptic peptides with up to 1 missed cleavage, mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, and protein validation was performed using Target/Decoy strategy. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification based on precursor ion intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Extracellular matrix, Diabetes, Mass spectrometry, Kidney, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.

### Submitter
Louise Hopkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.


