### Accession
PXD033935

### Title
Natural and cryptic peptides dominate the immunopeptidome of atypical teratoid rhabdoid tumors.

### Description
Atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumors (AT/RT) are highly aggressive CNS-tumors of infancy and early childhood. Hallmark is the surprisingly simple genomics with a truncating mutation in the SMARCB1 gene as the oncogenic driver. Nevertheless, AT/RTs are infiltrated by immune cells and even clonally expanded T-cells. However, it is unclear, what T-cells might recognize on AT/RT cells. Here, we report a comprehensive analysis of naturally presented HLA-class-I and class-II ligands on n=23 AT/RTs. MS-based analysis of the HLA-ligandome revealed 55 class-I and 139 class-II peptides from tumor-associated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and clas II molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification. In brief, snap-frozen AT/RT tissue samples were minced in lysis buffer containing 10 mM CHAPS/PBS (AppliChem, St. Louis, MO, USA/Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and one protease inhibitor tablet (Complete; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). We employed the pan-HLA class I-specific antibody W6/32 and the HLA-DR-specific antibody L243, both produced in house (University of Tübingen, Department of Immunology) from HB-95, and HB-55 hybridoma cell lines (ATCC, Manassas, VA) respectively. Furthermore, the pan-HLA class II-antibody Tü39 was employed, and produced in house from a hybridoma clone previously described. Antibodies were covalently linked to to CNBr-activated Sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). HLA molecules were  purified by cyclically passing the cleared protein lysate from AT/RT tissue over two columns. The first column contained 1 mg of W6/32 antibody coupled to sepharose, whereas the second column contained equal amounts of Tü39 (0.5 mg) and L243 (0.5 mg) antibody coupled to sepharose HLA-DR1 is known to be expressed at higher levels than the other class II allotypes, therefore the specific L243 mAb at the given stoichiometry was used. Tü39 is utilized complementarily to pull-down the remaining class II complexes. HLA–peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid, Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). Eluted HLA ligands were purified by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Amicon; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) with 3 kDa and 10 kDa pore size for HLA class I and HLA class II ligands, respectively. HLA ligands were desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore). Extracted peptides were eluted in 35 μl 32.5% acetonitrile (Merck)/0.2% TFA, and vacuum-centrifuged to 2 – 5 µl and resuspended in 25 μl of 1% acetonitrile/0.05% TFA. Samples were stored at − 80 °C until analysis by LC–MS/MS. Peptide samples were separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography (nano-UHPLC, UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) and analyzed in online-coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Samples were analyzed in three or five technical replicates. Sample shares of 20% were trapped on a 75 μm × 2 cm trapping column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher) at 4 μl/min for 5.75 min. Peptide separation was performed at 50 °C and a flow rate of 175 nl/min on a 50 μm × 25 cm separation column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC; Thermo Fisher) applying a gradient ranging from 2.4 to 32.0% of acetonitrile over the course of 90 min. Samples were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap XL using a top five CID (collision-induced dissociation) method with survey scans at 60k resolution and fragment ion detection in the ion trap (ITMS2) operated at normal scan speed. Fragmentation of HLA class I ligands was limited to precursors with a mass range of 400–650 m/z and charge states 2+ and 3+. For HLA class II ligands, a mass range of 300–1500 m/z with charge states ≥ 2 were selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The software Proteome Discoverer (v.1.3; Thermo Fisher) was used to perform database search using the Mascot search engine (Mascot 2.2.04; Matrix Science, London, UK) . The human proteome as comprised in the Swiss-Prot database (http://www.unipr ot.org, status September 2013, 20,225 reviewed sequences contained) was used as reference database. The search combined data of technical replicates and was not restricted by enzymatic specificity. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Oxidation of methionine residues was allowed as a dynamic modification. False discovery rate (FDR) estmation was performed using the Percolator node and was set to a peptide spectrum match level FDR ≤ 5%. For HLA class I ligands, peptide lengths were limited to 8–12 amino acids (AA), for HLA class II, peptides were limited to 8–25 AA of length. Protein grouping was disabled, allowing all proteins that contain a given peptide to be annotated as peptide source proteins As a final step of quality control, binding prediction was performed employing NetMHC-3.0 with a cut-off score of % Rank<0.5 for strong binders and <2 for weak binders.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Primary at/rt tumors, Hla-i and hla-ii

### Affiliations
Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Würzburg, Germany
University of Tübingen, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology, Department of Immunology

### Submitter
Ana Marcu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. med. Matthias EyrichChildren’s Hospital, University Medical Center Würzburg, Germany
Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Würzburg, Germany


