### Accession
PXD032202

### Title
Global and comparative proteome signatures in the lens capsule, trabecular meshwork, and iris of patients with pseudoexfoliation glaucoma

### Description
Pseudoexfoliation (PXF) is characterized by the accumulation of exfoliative material in the eye and high rates of blindness, if left untreated. Pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (PXG) is generally diagnosed too late due to its asymptomatic nature, necessitating the development of new effective screening tools for the early diagnosis of the disease. Thus, the increasing prevalence of this disease due to an aging population has necessitated the identification of suitable biomarkers for the early detection of the disease or detection of the onset of glaucoma in eyes with PXF. We applied a proteomics strategy based on a high-throughput screening method for the determination of proteins involving PXF and PXG pathogenesis. Lens capsule (LC) samples were obtained from surgical trabeculectomy of 146 adults with PXF, PXG, and controls to characterize the proteome profile. Peptides from LC were analyzed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The protein of interest and cytokines/chemokines profiles were verified using immunohistochemistry and bio-plex kit assay, respectively. We have also analyzed the proteomic profile of trabecular meshwork (TM) and iris samples with PXG compared to control. There were 1433 proteins identified in human LC, of which 27 proteins were overexpressed and 8 proteins were under-expressed in PXG compared with PXF. Overexpressed proteins such as fibromodulin, decorin, lysyl oxidase homolog 1, Collagen alpha-1(I) chain, and Collagen alpha-3(VI) chain were the major components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins involved in cell-matrix interactions or ECM proteoglycans, assembly and crosslinking of collagen fibrils. The ECM composition and homeostasis are altered in glaucoma; thus, quantitative proteomics is a method to discover molecular markers in the eye. Monitoring of these events can help evaluate disease progression in future studies.

### Sample Protocol
Excised tissues were dissolved in 150ul of chilled 6M Gn-HCL in 0.1M Tris (pH 8.5) plus 1x protease inhibitors (Roche). Tissues were dissolved using tissue homogeniser and then these samples were sonicated at 60 amplitude, 10sec on and off for 5 minutes. Hogenized samples were boiled at 90 degrees C for 5 minutes and then centrifuged at 15,000rpm for 20 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was stored and marked properly. Now 25µg of the sample was first reduced with 5mM TCEP Tris (2- carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and further alkylated with 50mM iodoacetamide. The samples were diluted to 0.6 M final Gn-HCL concentration with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin (1:50, trypsin:lysate ratio) for 16 hours at 37°C. Digests were cleaned up using C18 silica cartridge (The Nest Group,Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and dried using speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in Buffer-A (5 % acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid). Mass Spectrometric analysis of peptide mixtures All the experiments were performed using EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with nanoelectrospray ion source. 1µg of the peptide mixture was loaded on a precolumn and resolved using 15 cm Easy-spray with 2 µm C18-resin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded with Buffer A   and eluted with a 0-40% gradient of Buffer-B (95% acetonitrile/0.1%formic acid) at a flow rate of 300nl/min for 90 min. MS data acquisition The QExactive was operated using the Top10 HCD data-dependent acquisition mode with a full scan resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17500 at m/z 400. Lock mass option was enabled for polydimethylcyclosiloxane (PCM) ions (m/z = 445.120025) for internal recalibration during the run. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification: The data generated was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and was searched against Uniprot-Human database at an FDR of 1%. For Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e. enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were considered as variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR and determined using percolator node. Relative protein quantification of the proteins were performed using Minora feature detector node of Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with default settings and considering only high PSM (peptide spectrum matches) confidence. Based on Uniprot accession number Pfam, KEGG pathways and GO annotations were assigned for the list of identified proteins. Perseus and R scripts were utilized for statistical and graphical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudoexfoliation (PXF) is characterized by the accumulation of the exfoliative material in the eye and high rates of blindness if left untreated. Pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (PXG) is generally diagnosed too late due to its asymptomatic nature, necessitating the development of new effective screening tools for the early diagnosis of the disease. Thus, the increasing prevalence of this disease due to an aging population has demanded the identification of suitable biomarkers for the early detection of the disease or detection of the onset of glaucoma in the eyes with PXF. We applied a proteomics strategy based on a high-throughput screening method for the determination of proteins involving PXF and PXG pathogenesis. The lens capsule (LC), iris, and trabecular meshwork (TM) samples with PXF and PXG were taken by surgical trabeculectomy, and control samples were taken from the donor corneal buttons obtained from the institutional eye bank to characterize the proteome profile. Peptides from the LC were analyzed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The protein of interest and cytokine/chemokine profiles were verified using immunohistochemistry and the bio-plex kit assay, respectively. There were a total of 1433 proteins identified in the human LC, of which 27 proteins were overexpressed and eight proteins were underexpressed in PXG compared with PXF. Overexpressed proteins such as fibromodulin, decorin, lysyl oxidase homolog 1, collagen alpha-1(I) chain, collagen alpha-3(VI) chain, and biglycan were the major components of the extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins involved in cell-matrix interactions or ECM proteoglycans and the assembly and cross-linking of collagen fibrils. The ECM composition and homeostasis are altered in glaucoma. Thus, quantitative proteomics is a method to discover molecular markers in the eye. Monitoring these events can help evaluate disease progression in future studies.

### Keywords
Iris, Lens capsule, Trabecular meshwork, Pseudoexfoliation glaucoma (pxg), Pseudoexfoliation (pxf), Mass spectroscopy, Extracellular matrix, Lysyl oxidase

### Affiliations
L V Prasad Eye Institute, Mithu Tulsi Chanrai Campus Patia, Bhubaneswar
L.V. Prasad Eye Institute

### Submitter
Prity Sahay

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aparna Rao
L V Prasad Eye Institute, Mithu Tulsi Chanrai Campus Patia, Bhubaneswar


