### Accession
PXD033407

### Title
Selective modulation of cell surface proteins during vaccinia infection: a resource for identifying viral immune evasion strategies

### Description
The interaction between immune cells and virus-infected targets involves multiple plasma membrane (PM) proteins. A systematic study of PM protein modulation by vaccinia virus (VACV), the paradigm of host regulation, has the potential to reveal not only novel viral immune evasion mechanisms, but also novel factors critical in host immunity. Here, >1000 PM proteins were quantified throughout VACV infection, revealing selective downregulation of known T and NK cell ligands including HLA-C, downregulation of cytokine receptors including IFNAR2, IL-6ST and IL-10RB, and rapid inhibition of expression of certain protocadherins and ephrins, candidate activating immune ligands. Downregulation of most PM proteins occurred via a proteasome-independent mechanism. Upregulated proteins included a decoy receptor for TRAIL. Twenty VACV-encoded PM proteins were identified, of which five were not recognised previously as such. Collectively, this dataset constitutes a valuable resource for future studies on antiviral immunity, host-pathogen interaction, poxvirus biology, vector-based vaccine design and oncolytic therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane protein labelling was performed as described (Weekes et al Cell 2014). Briefly, cell surface sialic acid residues were oxidised and biotinylated using 1 mM sodium periodate (Thermo Scientific), 100 mM aminooxy-biotin (Biotium Inc., Fremont, U.S.A.) in dry DMSO and 10 mM aniline (Sigma-Aldrich, Merck, Dorset, U.K.) in PBS pH 6.7 (Sigma-Aldrich). After 30 min at 4 oC, the reaction was stopped by addition of glycerol (Sigma-Aldrich) at a final concentration of 1 mM. Cells were harvested into 1.6 % Triton X-100 (Fisher Scientific), 150 mM NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with protease inhibitor tablets (Roche, Merck). Biotinylated glycoproteins were enriched with high-affinity streptavidin agarose beads (Pierce) and washed extensively. Captured protein were denatured with SDS and urea, reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma) and digested on-bead with trypsin (Promega) in 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1piperazineethanesulfonic acid) pH 8.5 for 3 h. The digested peptides were eluted, and each sample labelled with 56 µg of a unique TMT reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a final acetonitrile concentration of 30 % (v/v) for 1 h at room temperature. Samples were labelled as follows: TMT 126 (WT VACV 90 min), TMT 127N (WT VACV 6 h), TMT 127C (WT VACV 12 h), TMT 128N (WT VACV 18 h), TMT 128C (Mock 18 h), TMT 130N (WT VACV + MG132 18 h), TMT 130C (Mock + MG132 18 h), TMT11-131C (Mock 90 min). The reaction was quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). TMT labelled samples were combined at equal ratio, vacuum-centrifuged and subjected to C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak, Waters). An unfractionated single-shot sample was analysed to ensure similar peptide loading across each TMT channel. The remaining TMT-labelled tryptic peptide samples were subjected to HpRP fractionation, as described (Nightingale et al Cell, Host&Microbe 2018) except that the samples were prepared as a single-set of 6 fractions. The fractions were dried and resuspended in 10 µl MS solvent (4 % MeCN/5 % formic acid) prior to LC-MS3. Data from the single-shot experiment was analysed with data from the corresponding fractions to increase the overall number of peptides quantified. Mass spectrometry data was acquired using an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). An Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UHPLC equipped with a 300 µm ID x 5 mm Acclaim PepMap µ-Precolumn (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a 75 µm ID x 50 cm 2.1 µm particle Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column was used. Loading solvent was 0.1% FA, analytical solvent A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% MeCN + 0.1% FA. All separations were carried out at 40°C. Samples were loaded at 5 µL/min for 5 min in loading solvent before beginning the analytical gradient. The following gradient was used: 3-7% B over 3 min, 7-37% B over 173 min, followed by a 4-min wash at 95% B and equilibration at 3% B for 15 min. Each analysis used a MultiNotch MS3-based TMT method. The following settings were used: MS1: 380-1500 Th, 120,000 Resolution, 2 × 105 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 50 ms maximum injection time. MS2: Quadrupole isolation at an isolation width of m/z 0.7, CID fragmentation (normalised collision energy (NCE) 35) with ion trap scanning in turbo mode from m/z 120, 1.5 x 104 AGC target, 120 ms maximum injection time. MS3: In Synchronous Precursor Selection mode the top 10 MS2 ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 65) and scanned in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolution with an AGC target of 1 × 105 and a maximum accumulation time of 150 ms. Ions were not accumulated for all parallelisable time. The entire MS/MS/MS cycle had a target time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was set to +/- 10 ppm for 70 s. MS2 fragmentation was trigged on precursors 5 × 103 counts and above.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed as described in (Soday et al Cell Reports 2019) using MassPike, a sequest-based software pipeline, through a collaborative arrangement with Professor Steven Gygi’s laboratory (Harvard Medical School). A combined database was constructed from (i) the human UniProt database (26th January 2017), (ii) the VACV strain WR UniProt database (23rd February 2017), (iii) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance, product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, a target-decoy strategy was employed. Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis. This distinguishes correct from incorrect peptide IDs in a manner analogous to the widely used Percolator algorithm, though employing a distinct machine learning algorithm. The following parameters were considered: XCorr, DCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using ‘‘MassPike,’’. A minimum one unique or shared peptide per protein was used for quantitation. Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127n, 127c, 128n, 128c, 129n, 129c, 130n, 130c, 131n, 131c) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. The primary determinant of quantitation quality is the number of TMT reporter ions detected in each MS3 spectrum, which is directly proportional to the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio observed for each ion (106). Conservatively, every individual peptide used for quantitation was required to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of 1375 per spectrum) so that each on its own could be expected to provide a representative picture of relative protein abundance. Additionally, an isolation specificity filter was employed to minimize peptide co-isolation. Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined S:N ratio of less than 275 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Peptides meeting the stated criteria for reliable quantitation were then summed by parent protein, in effect weighting the contributions of individual peptides to the total protein signal based on their individual TMT reporter ion yields.   Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in MS Excel. For protein quantitation, reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, then each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalised assuming equal protein loading across all channels. Fractional TMT signals (i.e., reporting the fraction of maximal signal observed for each protein in each TMT channel, rather than the absolute normalised signal intensity) was used for further analysis and to display in figures. This effectively corrected for differences in the numbers of peptides detected per protein. For all proteins quantified in the PMP screens, normalized S:N ratio values are presented in Table S1 (‘Data original’ worksheet). Peptide sequences initially assigned to HLA-A, -B or -C were manually compared to reference sequences of classical HLA-I expressed by HFFF-TERTs (HLA-A11:01, -A24:02, -B35:02, -B40:02, -C02:02, and -C04:01). Only the peptides matching uniquely to the reference sequence of a single subtype (-A, -B, -C) were included. The summed S:N values of these peptides was used for the relative abundance of HLA-A, HLA-B or HLA-C and are available in Table S1 (see manuscript).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vaccinia virus; plasma membrane; immune evasion; host-pathogen interaction

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY, UK


