### Accession
PXD020239

### Title
Ribosome collisions trigger cis-acting feedback inhibition of translation initiation

### Description
Translation of aberrant mRNAs can cause ribosomes to stall, leading to collisions with trailing ribosomes. Collided ribosomes are specifically recognized by ZNF598 to initiate protein and mRNA quality control pathways. Here we found using quantitative proteomics of collided ribosomes that EDF1 is a ZNF598-independent sensor of ribosome collisions. EDF1 recruits and stabilizes GIGYF2 at collisions to inhibit translation initiation in cis via 4EHP. The GIGYF2 axis acts independently of the ZNF598 axis, but each pathway’s output is more pronounced without the other. We propose that the widely conserved and highly abundant EDF1 monitors the transcriptome for excessive ribosome density, then triggers a GIGYF2-mediated response to locally and temporarily reduce ribosome loading. Only when collisions persist is translation abandoned to initiate ZNF598-dependent quality control. This tiered response to ribosome collisions would allow cells to dynamically tune translation rates while ensuring fidelity of the resulting protein products.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were grown on 10 cm plates. One 10 cm plate was used for each experimental condition, which was performed in duplicate. 90% confluent cells were treated for 15 min with a low dose of emetine (1.8 uM), a high dose of emetine (360 uM) or with DMSO (control). Prior to harvesting, cells were washed with ice cold PBS twice. Lysis was in 200 ul for 20 min on ice using 1xRNC buffer [50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 100 mM K(OAc), 5 mM Mg(OAc)2] supplemented with 0.01% purified digitonin, 40 U/ml RNAsin, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail, and 1 mM DTT. Cells were ruptured by passing through a 26G needle using a 1 ml syringe (20 passes). Lysates were sedimented by centrifugation for 15 min at 15,000 g at 4°C using a tabletop centrifuge. The resulting supernatant was loaded onto a 10- 50% sucrose gradient (2 ml gradient volume) in 1xRNC buffer. Centrifugation was for 1h at 55,000 rpm in the TLS 55 rotor (Beckman) at 4°C using the slowest acceleration and deceleration settings. After the spin, 11 fractions were manually collected from the top of the gradient. Fractions 8-11 were pooled together (previously verified to represent polysomalfractions), diluted with an equal volume of 1xRNC buffer (800 μl) and centrifuged for 1h at 100,000 rpm in the TLA100.3 rotor at 4°C. The polysome pellet was washed once with 200 μl of 1xRNC and resuspended in 20-50 μl of 1xRNC buffer. The concentrations of samples were normalized using absorbance at 260 nm and subjected to quantitative mass spectrometry using Tandem Mass Tagging (TMT) approach (Thompson et al., 2003). In brief, quantitative mass spectrometry was performed by in-solution digestion of samples, followed by tandem mass tag labelling (Thermo Fisher Scientific cat. #90110). Protein samples in solution were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 56 °C for 30 min and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at 22 °C. The alkylation reaction was quenched by the addition of DTT and the samples were digested with trypsin (Promega, 0.5 μg) overnight at 37 °C. The peptide mixtures were then desalted using home-made C18 (3M Empore) stage tip filled with 0.5 mg of poros R3 (Applied Biosystems) resin. Bound peptides were eluted sequentially with 30%, 50% and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1%TFA and lyophilized. Dried peptide mixtures from each condition were resuspended in 20 μL of 7% acetonitrile, 200 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate. For TMT labelling, 0.8 mg of TMT reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were reconstituted in 41 μL anhydrous acetonitrile. 10 μL of TMT was added to each peptide mixture and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature. The labelling reactions were terminated by incubation with 2.5 μL 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min, and labelled samples were subsequently pooled. The acetonitrile was evaporated using a Speed Vac, desalted and then fractionated with home-made C18 (3M Empore) stage tip using 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile gradients. Eluted fractions were partially dried down using a Speed Vac and subjected to LC-MSMS. Liquid chromatography was performed on a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 100 μm × 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 μm × 25 cm reverse phase C18 nano column (Aclaim PepMap, Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min with an acetonitrile gradient. The HPLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quardrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanospray ion source.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MSMS raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). MSMS spectra were searched against human, UniProt Fasta database using Mascot (version 2.4, Matrix Science) search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Translation of aberrant mRNAs can cause ribosomes to stall, leading to collisions with trailing ribosomes. Collided ribosomes are specifically recognised by ZNF598 to initiate protein and mRNA quality control pathways. Here we found using quantitative proteomics of collided ribosomes that EDF1 is a ZNF598-independent sensor of ribosome collisions. EDF1 stabilises GIGYF2 at collisions to inhibit translation initiation in cis via 4EHP. The GIGYF2 axis acts independently of the ZNF598 axis, but each pathway's output is more pronounced without the other. We propose that the widely conserved and highly abundant EDF1 monitors the transcriptome for excessive ribosome density, then triggers a GIGYF2-mediated response to locally and temporarily reduce ribosome loading. Only when collisions persist is translation abandoned to initiate ZNF598-dependent quality control. This tiered response to ribosome collisions would allow cells to dynamically tune translation rates while ensuring fidelity of the resulting protein products.

### Keywords
Human, Quality control, Ribosome stalling

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology Division

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr Ramanujan S. Hegde
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cell Biology Division


