### Accession
PXD032368

### Title
THRONCAT: Efficient metabolic labelling of newly synthesized proteins using a bioorthogonal threonine analogue

### Description
Profiling the nascent cellular proteome and capturing early proteomic changes in response to external stimuli provides valuable insight into cellular physiology. Existing metabolic protein labelling approaches based on bioorthogonal methionine- or puromycin analogueues allow for the selective visualization and enrichment of the newly synthesized proteins, however, their applications are limited as they require methionine-free conditions or are toxic to cells. Here, we introduce a novel threonine-derived non-canonical amino acid tagging method, THRONCAT, based on bioorthogonal threonine analogueue β-ethynyl serine (βES) that enables efficient and non-toxic labelling of the nascent proteome in complete growth media within minutes. We used THRONCAT for the visualization and enrichment of nascent proteins in bacteria, mammalian cells, and drosophila melanogaster and rapidly profiled proteomic changes of Ramos B-cells in response to receptor activation in a time-stamp approach, demonstrating the potential and ease-of-use of the method.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa or Ramos cells were metabolically pulse-labeled with homopropargylglycine (HPG) or β-ethynyl serine (BES). Whole cell lysates were prepared and used as input for the enrichment of nascent proteins using click-chemistry. Captured proteins were reduced and alkylated and subjected to overnight on-bead overnight digestion using trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated on C18 Stage-tips until further processing. Peptide samples were eluted from StageTips with elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in H2O), reduced to 10% of the original volume by vacuum concentration and diluted in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were separated using an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (ThermoScientific) with a 44 minute acetonitrile gradient (7-30%), followed by washes at 60% and 95% acetonitrile for a total of 60 minutes data collection. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (ThermoScientific) in data-dependent top-20 mode with dynamic exclusion set at 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was done in MaxQuant v1.6.0.128 with match-between-runs, iBAQ and label-free quantification enabled. Methionine-to-HPG (-22.0702 Da; HeLa experiment) and threonine-to-βES (+9.984 Da; HeLa and Ramos experiment) were added to the default variable modifications. For proteomic analysis of Ramos NSPs, Arg6 and Lys8 were set as labels to exclusively use Lys8-containing peptides for protein identification and quantification. For dimethyl experiments, dimethyl-0 and dimethyl-4 labels were selected. For the BES-Thr competition experiment, Thr5 and BES were selected as variable modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against a human UniProt database downloaded in June 2017.

### Publication Abstract
Profiling the nascent cellular proteome and capturing early proteomic changes in response to external stimuli provides valuable insights into cellular physiology. Existing metabolic protein labeling approaches based on bioorthogonal methionine- or puromycin analogs allow for the selective visualization and enrichment of newly synthesized proteins. However, their applications are limited as they often require methionine-free conditions, auxotrophic cells and/or are toxic to cells. Here, we introduce THRONCAT, a threonine-derived non-canonical amino acid tagging method based on the bioorthogonal threonine analog &#x3b2;-ethynylserine (&#x3b2;ES) that enables efficient labeling of the nascent proteome in complete growth media within minutes. We use THRONCAT for the visualization and enrichment of nascent proteins in bacteria, mammalian cells and Drosophila melanogaster. We profile immediate proteome dynamics of B-cells in response to B-cell receptor activation simply by adding &#x3b2;ES to the culture medium, demonstrating the ease-of-use of the method and its potential to address diverse biological questions. In addition, using a Drosophila model of Charcot-Marie-Tooth peripheral neuropathy, we show that THRONCAT enables visualization and quantification of relative protein synthesis rates in specific cell types in vivo.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Boncat, Throncat

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands
RIMLS 

### Submitter
Jelmer Dijkstra

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


