### Accession
PXD031516

### Title
Mouse kidney and cell lines LC-MS/MS

### Description
Zinc (Zn) is an essential micronutrient and cofactor for up to 10% of proteins in living organisms. During Zn limitation, specialized enzymes called metallochaperones are predicted to allocate Zn  to specific metalloproteins. This function has been putatively assigned to G3E GTPase COG0523 proteins, yet no Zn metallochaperone has been experimentally identified in any organism. Here, we functionally characterize a family of COG0523 proteins that is conserved across vertebrates. We identify Zn metalloprotease METAP1 as a COG0523 client, leading to the redesignation of this group of COG0523 proteins as Zn regulated GTPase metalloprotein activator (ZNG1) family. Using biochemical, genetic, structural, and pharmacological approaches across evolutionarily divergent models, including zebrafish and mice, we demonstrate a critical role for ZNG1 proteins in regulating cellular Zn homeostasis. Collectively, these data reveal the existence of a family of Zn metallochaperones and place ZNG1 at the center of a new paradigm for intracellular Zn trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Kidneys were isolated from 11-13-week old C57BL/6 or C57BL/6 Zng1-/- mice that were fed a low Zn diet for 5 weeks. Animals were humanely euthanized, kidneys isolated, and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. For protein isolation, frozen organs were gently thawed on ice and transferred through a 70 µM sterile cell strainers (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 22-363-548) into 5 mL of ice-cold PBS supplemented with Halt protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78430). Filters were flushed an additional two times with PBS with protease inhibitor. Cells were pelleted (4 C, 400x g, 10 min) and pellets resuspended in 500 µL of RIPA buffer with Halt protease inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 78430). Following rigorous vortexing, incubation on ice (10 min), and a second round of vortexing, cellular debris were pelleted by centrifugation (4 C, 10,000x g, 10 min) and supernatant transferred into fresh tubes for further analysis. Protein concentrations were determined using the 660 Protein Assay (Pierce, 22660). Equal amounts of protein (200 µg) were processed for LC-MS/MS using s-traps (Protifi) (HaileMariam et al., 2018; Zougman et al., 2014). Briefly, proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA), acidified using phosphoric acid, and combined with s-trap loading buffer (90% MeOH, 100mM TEAB). Proteins were loaded onto s-traps, washed, and finally digested with Trypsin/Lys-C (1:100, w:w; enzyme:protein) overnight at 37 C. Peptides were eluted and dried with a vacuum concentrator. Peptides were resuspended in H2O/1% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated using a 75 µm x 50 cm C18 reversed-phase-HPLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 164570) on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 120 min gradient (2-32% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS survey scans were acquired at 70,000 resolution. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS analysis.  Murine tissue samples: Murine brain tissue was homogenized in NP40 buffer (50mM trizma base, 150mM sodium chloride, 1mM EDTA, and 1% nonidet 40) using cycles of sonication. Protein concentration was quantified using a Bicinchoninic Acid assay (Sigma Aldrich). For each sample, 10 μg of protein was suspended in 8M urea containing 50mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final volume of 90μL. Proteins were reduced using a final concentration of 20mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Scientific) at 37°C for 45 minutes, followed by alkylation using 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Thermo Scientific) at room temperature for 15 minutes. Samples were diluted to reduce the concentration of urea to <1M using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and proteins were digested using 1μg of LysN at 50°C for 2 hours. Oasis mixed-mode cation exchange (MCX) solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) were used to remove lipids and other contaminants from the digested peptides. Peptide samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator.   Mass Spectrometry Quantification of Zng1 Peptides: Dried digested samples were reconstituted in HPLC-grade water containing 0.1% formic acid by vortexing and centrifuged briefly to remove any particulates. A total of 250ng of each sample was desalted and concentrated using C18 EvoTips (EvoSep). Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry was performed using an EvoSepOne (EvoSep) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source. Chromatography was performed using a 15cm long column containing ReproSil-Pur C18 1.9 µm beads by Dr Maisch C18 and a fused silica emitter tip (20 µm inner diameter) (EvoSep). Peptides were eluted from the column using an EvoSep 20 samples/day Whisper method. Mass spectrometry was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source. MS1 was performed using Orbitrap detection at a resolution of 60,000 with a standard AGC target. Data independent acquisition was performed using quadropole isolation with nonoverlapping windows of 16 m/z from precursor masses 400-1008 with HCD fragmentation (33% collision energy) and Orbitrap detection with a resolution of 30,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (v 1.6.14.0, www.maxquant.org) and searched against the current UniProt Mus musculus protein sequences database. Search parameters included constant modification of cysteine by carbamidomethylation and the variable modifications, methionine oxidation and protein N-term acetylation. Proteins were identified using the filtering criteria of 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate. Protein intensity values were normalized using the MaxQuant LFQ function. Label free quantitation analysis was performed using Perseus (v 1.6.14.0), software developed for the analysis of -omics data. LFQ Intensity values were Log2-transformed, and then filtered to include proteins containing at least 60% valid values (reported LFQ intensities) in at least one experimental group. Finally, the missing values in the filtered dataset were replaced using the imputation function in Perseus with default parameters (Tyanova et al., 2016). Statistical analyses were carried out using the filtered and imputed protein groups file. Statistically significant changes in protein abundance are determined using Welch’s t-test p-values and z-scores. Normalized peak areas of Zng1 peptides were extracted using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Zinc (Zn) is an essential micronutrient and cofactor for up to 10% of proteins in living organisms. During Zn limitation, specialized enzymes called metallochaperones are predicted to allocate Zn to specific metalloproteins. This function has been putatively assigned to G3E GTPase COG0523 proteins, yet no Zn metallochaperone has been experimentally identified in any organism. Here, we functionally characterize a family of COG0523 proteins that is conserved across vertebrates. We identify Zn metalloprotease methionine aminopeptidase 1 (METAP1) as a COG0523 client, leading to the redesignation of this group of COG0523 proteins as the Zn-regulated GTPase metalloprotein activator (ZNG1) family. Using biochemical, structural, genetic, and pharmacological approaches across evolutionarily divergent models, including zebrafish and mice, we demonstrate a critical role for ZNG1 proteins in regulating cellular Zn homeostasis. Collectively, these data reveal the existence of a family of Zn metallochaperones and assign ZNG1 an important role for intracellular Zn trafficking.

### Keywords
Mouse, Targeteed, Shotgun, Zinc

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology;Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology, and Inflammation. Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Angela Kruse

### Lab Head
Dr Eric P. Skaar
Department of Pathology, Microbiology, and Immunology;Vanderbilt Institute for Infection, Immunology, and Inflammation. Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN USA


