### Accession
PXD015924

### Title
CD4+ Th immunogenicity of Ascaris spp.

### Description
Application of a reconstituted in vitro system to define the CD4+ Th immunogenicity of complex antigenic mixtures.

### Sample Protocol
we used 16O/18O-labeled samples. Male and Female ES products (ESM and ESF, 50 μg) were resolved in SDS-PAGE (4-20%). Each lane was cut into ten pieces of equal size in a parallel fashion. In gel tryptic digestion and 16O/18O labelling was performed as previously described (Morrison 2015). Briefly, gel bands were incubated with 50 ng trypsin in 15 μl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer in the presence of heavy (H218O) and light (H216O) water overnight at 37 °C. Residual trypsin activity was inactivated by adding 10 μl of 0.5% TFA in acetonitrile. Matching heavy and light samples from either Male and Female ES were mixed before drying the samples in a Speed-Vac. Samples were reconstituted in 10 μl 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 5% (v/v) acetonitrile before measurements.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using Mascot Distiller (version 2.4.3.3) software. Data were searched against the Uniprot Ascaris spp. protein database (March 2017). The mass tolerance of precursor and sequence ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.35 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Ascaris spp</i>. is a major health problem of humans and animals alike, and understanding the immunogenicity of its antigens is required for developing urgently needed vaccines. The parasite-secreted products represent the most relevant, yet complex (&gt;250 proteins) antigens of <i>Ascaris spp</i>. as defining the pathogen-host interplay. We applied an in vitro antigen processing system coupled to quantitative proteomics to identify potential CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>h</sub> cell epitopes in <i>Ascaris</i>-secreted products. This approach considerably restricts the theoretical list of epitopes using conventional CD4<sup>+</sup> T<sub>h</sub> cell epitope prediction tools. We demonstrate the specificity and utility of our approach on two sets of candidate lists, allowing us identifying hits excluded by either one or both computational methods. More importantly, one of the candidates identified experimentally, clearly demonstrates the presence of pathogen-reactive T cells in healthy human individuals against these antigens. Thus, our work pipeline identifies the first human T cell epitope against <i>Ascaris spp</i>. and represents an easily adaptable platform for characterization of complex antigens, in particular for those pathogens that are not easily amenable for in vivo experimental validation.

### Keywords
Cd4+ t cell epitope/ immunodominance/ immunogenicity/ mhcii antigen presentation/ ascaris spp./ pathogen

### Affiliations
FU Berlin
Protein Biochemistry Group. Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy. Institut für Biochemie (lab head)

### Submitter
Miguel Alvaro

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Freund
Protein Biochemistry Group. Department of Biology, Chemistry, Pharmacy. Institut für Biochemie (lab head)


