### Accession
PXD024707

### Title
Is there a serum proteome signature to predict mortality in severe COVID-19 patients?

### Description
Here we recorded serum proteome profiles of 33 COVID-19 patients admitted to the ICU. We received, for most patients, blood samples just after admission and at two more later timepoints. We focused on serum proteins different in abundance between the group of survivors and non-survivors and observed that a rather small panel of about a dozen proteins were significantly different in abundance between these two groups. The four structurally and functionally related type-3 cystatins AHSG, FETUB, HRG and KNG1 were all more abundant in the survivors. The family of inter-α-trypsin inhibitors, ITIH1, ITIH2, ITIH3 and ITIH4, were all found to be differentially abundant in between survivors and non-survivors, whereby ITIH1 and ITIH2 were more abundant in the survivor group and ITIH3 and ITIH4 more abundant in the non-survivors. ITIH1/ITIH2 and ITIH3/ITIH4 also did show opposite trends in protein abundance during disease progression. This panel of eight proteins, complemented with a few more, may represent a panel for mortality risk assessment and eventually even for treatment, by administration of exogenous proteins possibly aiding survival. Such administration is not unprecedented, as administration of exogenous inter-α-trypsin inhibitors is already used in the treatment of patients with severe sepsis and Kawasaki disease. The mortality risk panel defined here is in excellent agreement with findings in two recent COVID-19 serum proteomics studies on independent cohorts, supporting our findings. This panel may not be unique for COVID-19, as some of the proteins here annotated as mortality risk factors have previously been annotated as mortality markers in aging and in other diseases caused by different pathogens, including bacteria.

### Sample Protocol
Individual Serum Sample Collection and Chemicals   The present analysis included 33 patients from the “Pro-thrombotic status in patients with SARS-Cov-2 infection” (ATTAC-Co) study[11, 12]. The ATTAC-Co study is an investigator-initiated, prospective, single-centre study recruiting consecutive patients admitted to hospital (University Hospital of Ferrara, Italy) because of respiratory failure due to COVID-19 between April and May 2020. Inclusion criteria were: i) age >18 years; ii) confirmed SARS-CoV-2 infection; iii) hospitalization for respiratory failure; iv) need for invasive or non-invasive mechanical ventilation or only oxygen support. Exclusion criteria were: prior administration of P2Y12 inhibitor (clopidogrel, ticlopidine, prasugrel, ticagrelor) or anticoagulant drugs (warfarin or novel oral anticoagulants), known disorder of coagulation or platelet function and/or chronic inflammatory disease. SARS-CoV-2 infection was confirmed by RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction) assay (Liaison MDX, Diasorin, Saluggia, Italy) from nasopharyngeal swab specimen. Respiratory failure was defined as a PaO2/FiO2 (P/F) ratio ≤200 mmHg. Clinical management was in accordance with current guidelines and specific recommendations for COVID-19 pandemic by Health Authorities and Scientific Societies. Three different blood samplings (at inclusion (t1), after 7±2 days (t2) and 14±2 days (t3)) were withdrawn. Study blood samplings were performed from an antecubital vein using a 21-gauge needle or from central venous line. All patients underwent blood sampling in the early morning, at least 12 hours after last administration of anticoagulant drugs. The first 2 to 4 mL of blood was discarded, and the remaining blood was collected in tubes for serum/plasma collection. The serum and plasma samples were stored at -80 °C. The planned blood sample withdrawals were not performed in case of patient’s death or hospital discharge.   The protocol was approved by the corresponding Ethics Committee (Comitato Etico di Area Vasta Emilia Centro, Bologna, Italy). All patients gave their written informed consent. In case of unconsciousness, the informed consent was signed by the next of kin or legal authorized representative. The study is registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov with the identifier NCT04343053. As quoted above, the subgroup of interest for the present analysis is selected starting from the 16 cases who died. From the remaining 38 survivors, we identified the 17 cases who best matched in terms of age, clinical history and clinical presentation. This selection was done with the aim to maximize the possibility to identify differences between deceased and survivors and minimizing potential confounding factors.   Serum sample preparation   A detergent-based buffer (1% SDC, 10mM TCEP, 10mM Tris, 40mM chloroacetamide) with Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was added to serum at a 25:1 ratio to enhance protein denaturation and boiled for 5min at 95C. 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added and digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37C using trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and LysC (Wako, Richmond, VA, USA) at 1:50 and 1:75 enzyme:substrate ratios, respectively. The digestion was quenched with 10% formic acid and the resulting peptides were cleaned-up in an automated fashion using the AssayMap Bravo platform (Agilent Technologies) with corresponding AssayMap C18 reverse-phase column. The eluate was dried and resolubilized in 1% FA to achieve a concentration of 1ug/uL.   Serum proteome profiling   All spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) operated in data-independent mode (DIA) coupled to an Ultimate3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 50 cm reversed phase column packed in-house (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7um, 50cmx75um). Proteome samples were eluted over a linear gradient of a dual-buffer setup with buffer A (0.1%FA) and buffer B (80%ACN, 0.1%FA) ranging from 9-40% B over 95 min, 40-55% B for 4 min, 55-95% B in 1 min, and maintained at 95% B for the final 5 min with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. DIA runs consisted of a MS1 scan at 60 000 resolution at m/z 200 followed by 30 sequential quadrupole isolation windows of 20 m/z for HCD MS/MS with detection of fragment ions in the OT at 30 000 resolution at m/z 200. The m/z range covered was 400–1000 and the Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set to 1e6 for MS and 2e5 for MS/MS. The injection time was set to 100ms for MS and ‘auto’ for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were extracted from the DIA data using DIA-NN (version 1.7.12) without a spectral library and with ”Deep learning” option enabled. The enzyme for digestion was set to trypsin and one missed cleavage was tolerated. Cysteine Carbamidomethylation and Methionine oxidation were allowed. The precursor FDR (false discovery rate) threshold was set to 1%. Protein grouping was done by protein names and cross-run normalization was RT-dependent. All other settings were kept at the default values. The gene-centric report from DIA-NN was used for downstream analysis, and quantification was based on unique peptides. When injection replicates were available, the median of these values was used. All downstream analyses were carried out in R[13]. For all proteins the concentration was estimated based on a set of reference proteins using a log-log model. Significant proteins were determined using results from a two-sided Student’s t-test, with a p-value cutoff of 5e-2. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering was performed using Ward’s algorithm with euclidean clustering distance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Biomarker, Longitudinal, Covid-19, Mortality, Sars-cov2, Serum, Dia, Blood

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands and Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Franziska Voellmy

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Utrecht, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands and Netherlands Proteomics Center, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH, Utrecht, The Netherlands


