### Accession
PXD047232

### Title
The NSP3 protein of SARS-CoV-2 binds fragile X mental retardation proteins to disrupt UBAP2L binding

### Description
Viruses interact with numerous host factors to facilitate viral replication and to dampen antiviral defense mechanisms. We currently have a limited mechanistic understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 binds host factors and the functional role of these interactions. Here, we uncover a novel interaction between the viral NSP3 protein and the fragile X mental retardation proteins (FMRPs: FMR1 and FXR1-2). SARS-CoV-2 NSP3 mutant viruses preventing FMRP binding have slightly attenuated replication in vitro and reduced levels of viral antigen in lungs during early stages of infection.  We show that a unique peptide motif in NSP3 binds directly to the two central KH domains of FMRPs and that this interaction is disrupted by the I304N mutation found in a patient with fragile X syndrome. NSP3 binding to FMRPs disrupts their interaction with the stress granule component UBAP2L through direct competition with a peptide motif in UBAP2L to prevent FMRP incorporation into stress granules. Collectively, our results provide novel insight into how SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host cell proteins and provides molecular insight to the possible underlying molecular defects in fragile X syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitations Cells  (HeLa or HEK293) were seeded at 25% confluency in 15 cm3 dishes with 2 g DNA and 2L Jet Optimus reagent overnight in 15mL media. Media was changed on the following day and cells were collected after 48 or 24 hours post transfection. Cell pellets from each 15 cm3 dish were lyzed in 350 L lysis buffer (100mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7,4, 0,1% NP40, 0,2% Triton-100, 1mM DTT) supplemented with protease (complete mini EDTA free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor tablets (Roche). Lysate was sonicated at 4C for 10 cycles of 30s ON, 30s OFF using a Bioruptor sonicator. Following sonication lysates were cleared for 45 min at 20000g. Supernatants were collected and concentrations were measured. Lysates were incubated with 10 L pre-equilibrated GFP-trap beads for 1h at 4C on a rotor-wheel. Beads were washed 3 times with 800 L wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7,4, 0,05% NP40, 5% Glycerol, 1mM DTT). If immunoprecipitations were prepared for Mass-spectrometry analysis, one additional wash with basic wash buffer (100mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 7,4, 5% Glycerol) was made.   Affinity purification and mass spectrometry (AP‐MS) Partial on‐bead digestion was used for peptide elution from GFP‐Trap Agarose (Chromotek). Briefly, 100 μl of elution buffer (2 M urea; 2 mM DTT; 20 μg/ml trypsin; and 50 mM Tris, pH 7.5) was added and incubated at 37°C for 30 min. Samples were alkylated with 25 mM CAA and digested overnight at room temperature before addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to stop digestion. Peptides were desalted and purified with styrene–divinylbenzene reversed‐phase sulfonate (SDB‐RPS) StageTips. Briefly, two layers of SDB‐RPS were prepared with 100 μl wash buffer (0.2% TFA in H2O). Peptides were loaded on top and centrifuged for 5 min at 500 g, and washed with 150 μl wash buffer. Finally, peptides were eluted with 50 μl elution buffer (80% ACN and 1% ammonia) and vacuum‐dried. Dried peptides were dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA in water and stored at −20°C.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS analysis  Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analysis was performed with an EASY-nLC-1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a trapped ion mobility spectrometry quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany) with a nano-electrospray ion source (Captive spray, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Peptides were loaded on a 50 cm in-house packed HPLC-column (75µm inner diameter packed with 1.9µm ReproSilPur C18-AQ silica beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5-30% buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 80% ACN in LC-MS grade H2O) in 43 min followed by an increase to 60% buffer B for 7 min, then to 95% buffer B for 5min and back to 5% buffer B in the final 5min at 300nl/min. Buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade H2O. The total gradient length was 60 min. We used an in-house made column oven to keep the column temperature constant at 60 °C.   Mass spectrometric analysis was performed essentially as described in Brunner et al. (Brunner et al, 2022) in data-dependent (ddaPASEF) mode. For ddaPASEF, 1 MS1 survey TIMS-MS and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans were acquired per acquisition cycle. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer was set to 100 ms each and we analyzed the ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 0.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated with a 2 Th window for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z >700 in a total m/z range of 100-1.700 by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered linearly as a function of increasing mobility starting from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 VS cm-2 to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded with a polygon filter (otof control, Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked at an intensity threshold of 1.000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and resequenced until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20.000 a.u taking into account a dynamic exclusion of 40 s elution. Data analysis of proteomic raw files Mass spectrometric raw files acquired in ddaPASEF mode  were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) (Cox & Mann, 2008; Prianichnikov et al, 2020). The Uniprot database (2019 release, UP000005640_9606) was searched with a peptide spectral match (PSM) and protein level FDR of 1%. A minimum of seven amino acids was required including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two allowed missed cleavages. First and main search mass tolerance was set to 70 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. Peptide identifications by MS/MS were transferred by matching four-dimensional isotope patterns between the runs (MBR) with a 0.7-min retention-time match window and a 0.05 1/K0 ion mobility window. Label-free quantification was performed with the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al, 2014) and a minimum ratio count of two.  Bioinformatic analysis Proteomics data analysis was performed with Perseus (Tyanova et al, 2016) and within the R environment (https://www.r-project.org/). MaxQuant output tables were filtered for ‘Reverse’, ‘Only identified by site modification’, and ‘Potential contaminants’ before data analysis. Missing values were imputed after stringent data filtering and based on a normal distribution (width = 0.3; downshift = 1.8) prior to statistical testing. For pairwise proteomic comparisons (two-sided unpaired t-test), we applied a permutation-based FDR of 5% to correct for multiple hypothesis testing including an s0 value (Tusher et al, 2001) of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses interact with numerous host factors to facilitate viral replication and to dampen antiviral defense mechanisms. We currently have a limited mechanistic understanding of how SARS-CoV-2 binds host factors and the functional role of these interactions. Here, we uncover a novel interaction between the viral NSP3 protein and the fragile X mental retardation proteins (FMRPs: FMR1, FXR1-2). SARS-CoV-2 NSP3 mutant viruses preventing FMRP binding have attenuated replication in vitro and reduced levels of viral antigen in lungs during the early stages of infection. We show that a unique peptide motif in NSP3 binds directly to the two central KH domains of FMRPs and that this interaction is disrupted by the I304N mutation found in a patient with fragile X syndrome. NSP3 binding to FMRPs disrupts their interaction with the stress granule component UBAP2L through direct competition with a peptide motif in UBAP2L to prevent FMRP incorporation into stress granules. Collectively, our results provide novel insight into how SARS-CoV-2 hijacks host cell proteins and provides molecular insight into the possible underlying molecular defects in fragile X syndrome.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ubap2l, Fragile x syndrome, Stress granules, Nsp3

### Affiliations
Max Delbrueck Center for Molecular Medicine
NNF Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Fabian Coscia

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Jakob Nilsson
NNF Center for Protein Research


