### Accession
PXD027068

### Title
Interactome analysis of C. elegans synapses by TurboID-based proximity labeling

### Description
Proximity labeling provides a powerful in vivo tool to characterize the proteome of subcellular structures and the interactome of specific proteins. Using the highly active biotin ligase TurboID, we optimize a proximity labeling protocol for C. elegans. We use this protocol to characterise the proteomes of the worm’s gut, muscle, skin, and nervous system. We express TurboID exclusively in the pair of AFD neurons and show we can identify known and previously unknown proteins expressed selectively in AFD. We knock TurboID into the endogenous elks-1 gene, which encodes a presynaptic active zone protein. We identify many known ELKS-1 interacting proteins as well as previously uncharacterised synaptic proteins. Versatile vectors, and the inherent advantage of C. elegans for biochemistry, make proximity labeling a valuable addition to the nematode’s armory.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gel slices (1-2 mm) containing the purified proteins were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis using the Janus liquid handling system (PerkinElmer, UK). Briefly, the excised protein gel pieces were placed in a well of a 96-well microtitre plate, destained with 50% v/v acetonitrile and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. After alkylation, proteins were digested with 6 ng/μL Trypsin (Promega, UK) overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were extracted in 2% v/v formic acid, 2% v/v acetonitrile. The digest was analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm x 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 250 mm nanoViper column (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). Peptides were eluted using a 60-minute gradient of acetonitrile (2% to 80%). The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionisation source with a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Orbitrap, ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA). Data collection was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with an r = 70,000 (@ m/z 200) full MS scan from m/z 380–1600 with a target AGC value of 1e6 ions followed by 15 MS/MS scans at r = 17,500 (@ m/z 200) at a target AGC value of 1e5 ions. MS/MS scans were collected using a threshold energy of 27 for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and a 30 s dynamic exclusion was employed to increase depth of coverage.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were then searched in MaxQuant (1.6.10.43) against a fasta database containing the C. elegans reference proteome from UniProt KB (including SwissProt and TrEMBL entries). Most parameters were kept at their default value. Carbamidomethyl (C) (+57.0214637236) was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications included were “Oxidation (M)” (+15.9949146221), “Acetyl (Protein N-term)” (+42.0105646863), “Deamidation (NQ)” (+0.9840155848), “Gln->pyro-Glu” (-17.0265491015), “Phospho (STY)” (+79.9663304084), as well as two custom modifications (“K-Biot” and “N-termBiot”, +226.077598394 on, respectively, lysines or protein N-terminus) to account for TurboID-induced biotinylated peptides. Match Between Runs (MBR, not used in the final results) and Second Peptide Search were activated. All FDRs were set to 1%. Identified data was then re-processed in R using the evidence.txt results table, but a decision was made to exclude indirect, MBR-based identifications to focus on higher confidence hits.

### Publication Abstract
Proximity labeling provides a powerful in&#xa0;vivo tool to characterize the proteome of subcellular structures and the interactome of specific proteins. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is one of the most intensely studied organisms in biology, offering many advantages for biochemistry. Using the highly active biotin ligase TurboID, we optimize here a proximity labeling protocol for C.&#xa0;elegans. An advantage of TurboID is that biotin's high affinity for streptavidin means biotin-labeled proteins can be affinity-purified under harsh denaturing conditions. By combining extensive sonication with aggressive denaturation using SDS and urea, we achieved near-complete solubilization of worm proteins. We then used this protocol to characterize the proteomes of the worm gut, muscle, skin, and nervous system. Neurons are among the smallest C.&#xa0;elegans cells. To probe the method's sensitivity, we expressed TurboID exclusively in the two AFD neurons and showed that the protocol could identify known and previously unknown proteins expressed selectively in AFD. The active zones of synapses are composed of a protein matrix that is difficult to solubilize and purify. To test if our protocol could solubilize active zone proteins, we knocked TurboID into the endogenous elks-1 gene, which encodes a presynaptic active zone protein. We identified many known ELKS-1-interacting active zone proteins, as well as previously uncharacterized synaptic proteins. Versatile vectors and the inherent advantages of using C.&#xa0;elegans, including fast growth and the ability to rapidly make and functionally test knock-ins, make proximity labeling a valuable addition to the armory of this model organism.

### Keywords
Interactome caenorhabditis elegans turboid proximity proteomics biotin labeling

### Affiliations
IST Austria
IST Austria, Austria

### Submitter
Armel Nicolas

### Lab Head
Dr Mario de Bono
IST Austria, Austria


