### Accession
PXD006089

### Title
AhR interactome in early embryonic development

### Description
The transcriptional program of early embryonic development is tightly regulated by a set of well-defined transcription factors that suppress premature expression of differentiation genes and sustain the pluripotent identity. It is generally accepted that this program can be perturbed by environmental factors such as chemical pollutants, however the precise molecular mechanisms remain unknown. The Aryl Hydrocarbon Receptor (AHR) is a widely expressed nuclear receptor that senses environmental stimuli and modulates target gene expression. Here, we show that ectopic activation of AHR during early differentiation disrupts the differentiation program via the chromatin remodeling complex NuRD. The activated AHR/NuRD complex altered the expression of differentiation-specific genes that control the first two developmental decisions without affecting the pluripotency program. These findings identify a novel mechanism that allows environmental stimuli to disrupt embryonic development through AHR signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Affinity Purification was carried out as described in (PMID: 20362542) with some modifications. Briefly, cell pellet was incubated in FTAP lysis buffer (50mM Tris pH 8.0, 150mM NaCl, 0.1% NP-40, 1mM EDTA, 25mM NaF, 0.5mM Na3VO4, 1mM DTT) for 10min on ice and lysed with 20 strokes using the tight pestle of the Dounce homogeniser. Lysate was cleared by centrifugation and cell pellet was again lysed in FTAP lysis buffer similarly as above but with 450mM NaCl and 0.2% NP-40. The high-salt extract was diluted to a final concentration of 150mM NaCl and 0.1% NP-40 and merged with the first lysate. First purification was carried out for 3h at 4oC with α-Flag M2, which was crosslinked with 20mM dimethyl pimelimidate dihydrochloride to protein G dynabeads and complexes were eluted either by AcTEV protease digestion or 3xFlag peptide. Eluted complexes were subjected to a second round of purification using Calmodulin Affinity Resin for 1h at 4oC and eluted again from the resin by Ca+2 chelation in 20mM EGTA. Eluates were concentrated with Vivaspin 500, 5000 MWCO, PES filters, reduced by incubation at 70oC for 10’ in 10mM Tris(2- carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and then alkylated in 10mM Iodoacetamide for 30’ at room temperature. Proteins were separated in Novex NuPAGE Bis-Tris 4-15% gels; gel was fixed in 40% Methanol/2% acetic acid for 30’ and stained with Colloidal Coomassie. Upon destaining, each lane was cut into 12 slices and digested with Trypsin (Roche, Sequencing grade) overnight at room temperature, peptides were eluted with 50% formic acid 50% acetonitrile and dried in Speed Vac before proceeding to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the mouse Uniprot database (v. February 2013). The search parameters were: trypsin digestion, 2 missed cleavages, 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS, 0.5 Da mass tolerance for MS/MS, with variable modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), N-acetylation (protein), oxidation (M), and pyro-glu (N-term Q). Database search results were refined through processing with Mascot Percolator (significance threshold < 0.05, FDR < 1%). Protein identification required at least one high-confidence peptide (FDR < 1%). High confidence peptides were apportioned to proteins using Mascot Protein Family summary. External contaminants (keratins, albumin, casein, trypsin, TEV protease, lactoglobulin, filaggrin, hornerin, immunoglobulin, calmodulin) were removed from the list.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional program of early embryonic development is tightly regulated by a set of well-defined transcription factors that suppress premature expression of differentiation genes and sustain the pluripotent identity. It is generally accepted that this program can be perturbed by environmental factors such as chemical pollutants; however, the precise molecular mechanisms remain unknown. The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) is a widely expressed nuclear receptor that senses environmental stimuli and modulates target gene expression. Here, we have investigated the AHR interactome in embryonic stem cells by mass spectrometry and show that ectopic activation of AHR during early differentiation disrupts the differentiation program via the chromatin remodeling complex NuRD (nucleosome remodeling and deacetylation). The activated AHR/NuRD complex altered the expression of differentiation-specific genes that control the first two developmental decisions without affecting the pluripotency program. These findings identify a mechanism that allows environmental stimuli to disrupt embryonic development through AHR signaling.

### Keywords
Embryonic development, Interactome, Ahr, Environmental pollutants, Nurd

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


