### Accession
PXD036612

### Title
Degradomic identification of membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP/MMP14) as an ADAMTS9 and ADAMTS20 substrate

### Description
ADAMTS9 and ADAMTS20 are homologous secreted proteases implicated in ECM proteolysis and ciliogenesis, but few relevant substrates of these proteases are currently known. Quantitative N-terminomics comparison of RPE-1 cells lacking ADAMTS9 with parental RPE-1 cells identified transmembrane protease MT1-MMP (MMP14) as a novel ADAMTS9 substrate. The resulting enhanced cell-surface MT1-MMP activity in the gene-edited cells contributes to their adhesion defect, but not lack of cilia. A key physiological function of ADAMTS9/20 may be to dampen cell-surface MT1-MMP activity.

### Sample Protocol
RPE-1 cell lysate or serum free medium was collected and labeled with either iTRAQ or Dimethyl formaldehyde respectively at the protein level for N-terminomics TAILS analysis. Lysates were generated using 0.05% SDS, 10 mM DTT in 100 mM HEPES, 10 mM EDTA, pH 8 with protease inhibitors. Medium was concentrated 10-fold using a 3kDA MWCO filter. Labeled samples were mixed, digested with trypsin and underwent N-terminomic enrichment using an ALD-HPG polymer that binds to free amine groups. Samples were desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 column and analyzed using a data-dependent HCD fragmentation method, 3-sec window with 120 sec dynamic exclusion, on a Fusion Lumos, in-line with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC on a Dionex 15 cm X 75 µm id Acclaim Pepmap C18, 2 µm, 100 A reversed-phase capillary chromatography column. Five µl of the samples were injected and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min. The nanospray ion source is operated at 1.9 kV.

### Data Protocol
Individual LC-MS/MS raw files were searched against the reviewed human (Uniprot.org) protein database using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo) and search parameters specified in the manuscript. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was applied to identify high confidence proteins. The human database included all reviewed proteins with experimental evidence and was used to validate the purity of the mixture. Quantitation was only based on the label ratios determined using proteome discoverer precursor ion quantitation software.

### Publication Abstract
The secreted metalloproteases ADAMTS9 and ADAMTS20 are implicated in extracellular matrix proteolysis and primary cilium biogenesis. Here, we show that clonal gene-edited RPE-1&#xa0;cells in which ADAMTS9 was inactivated, and which constitutively lack ADAMTS20 expression, have morphologic characteristics distinct from parental RPE-1&#xa0;cells. To investigate underlying proteolytic mechanisms, a quantitative terminomics method, terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates was used to compare the parental and gene-edited RPE-1&#xa0;cells and their medium to identify ADAMTS9 substrates. Among differentially abundant neo-amino (N) terminal peptides arising from secreted and transmembrane proteins, a peptide with lower abundance in the medium of gene-edited cells suggested cleavage at the Tyr<sup>314</sup>-Gly<sup>315</sup> bond in the ectodomain of the transmembrane metalloprotease membrane type 1-matrix metalloproteinase (MT1-MMP), whose mRNA was also reduced in gene-edited cells. This cleavage, occurring in the MT1-MMP hinge, that is, between the catalytic and hemopexin domains, was orthogonally validated both by lack of an MT1-MMP catalytic domain fragment in the medium of gene-edited cells and restoration of its release from the cell surface by reexpression of ADAMTS9 and ADAMTS20 and was dependent on hinge O-glycosylation. A C-terminally semitryptic MT1-MMP peptide with greater abundance in WT RPE-1 medium identified a second ADAMTS9 cleavage site in the MT1-MMP hemopexin domain. Consistent with greater retention of MT1-MMP on the surface of gene-edited cells, pro-MMP2 activation, which requires cell surface MT1-MMP, was increased. MT1-MMP knockdown in gene-edited ADAMTS9/20-deficient cells restored focal adhesions but not ciliogenesis. The findings expand the web of interacting proteases at the cell surface, suggest a role for ADAMTS9 and ADAMTS20 in regulating cell surface activity of MT1-MMP, and indicate that MT1-MMP shedding does not underlie their observed requirement in ciliogenesis.

### Keywords
Mmp14, Adamts20, Mt1-mmp, Ciliogenesis, Adamts9, Extracellular matrix, Rpe-1 cells

### Affiliations
Cleveland Clinic
Department of Biomedical engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic

### Submitter
Daniel Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Suneel Apte
Department of Biomedical engineering, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic


