### Accession
PXD022976

### Title
The structures of R124H and R555W TGFBIp suggest a direct role of the mutated residues in the aggregation of TGFBIp in granular corneal dystrophy

### Description
Protein aggregation in the outermost layers of the cornea, leading to cloudy vision and in severe cases blindness, is linked to mutations in the extracellular matrix protein, transforming growth factor-β-induced protein (TGFBIp). Among the most frequent disease-causing mutations are R124H and R555W, both associated with granular corneal dystrophy (GCD) characterized by early-onset amorphous aggregation. The molecular mechanisms of protein aggregation in GCD are largely unknown. In this study, we determined the crystal structures of R124H and R555W. Whereas no structural changes of mutated monomeric TGFBIp can explain its aggregation propensity, the two mutations facilitate a new dimer interface in the crystal packing, not appearing in the wild-type structure. The interface in both R124H and R555W structures are centered on residue 124 in one TGFBIp molecule and 555 in a second TGFBIp molecule. This unique interface of R124H and R555W is not compatible with arginines at positions 124 and 555 as seen in wild-type TGFBIp. Hence, this intermolecular interaction may underlie the similar aggregation behavior exhibited by the two TGFBIp mutants in vivo. Using cross-linking mass spectrometry, we identified and characterized a dimer of TGFBIp wild-type and mutants in solution. The soluble dimers also involve interactions between the N- and C-terminal domains of two TGFBIp molecules but is not identical to the crystal packing dimer interface involving R124H and R555W. Targeting of the crystal packing dimer interface might offer new opportunities for therapeutic intervention to treat patients with GCD.

### Sample Protocol
Cross-linking of TGFBIp was performed in PBS, 6.7 % v/v DMSO using 3.1 µM TGFBIp and 155 µM DSSO in triplicates. Cross-linking was carried out for 30 min at room temperature and quenched by 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8. After cross-linking, samples were reduced with 7 mM DTT for 15 min and alkylated with 21 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature. Samples were run on 5-15 % SDS-PAGE gels and the relevant bands excised. The bands were shrunk in acetonitrile, rehydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8, and digested 18 hours with 1:30 (w/w) MS-grade porcine pancreatic trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 37 °C. Additional digestion using 1:30 (w/w) endoproteinase GluC (New18 England Biolabs) was carried out for 4 hours at 37 °C. Prior to MS analysis, peptides were desalted using Empore SPE Disks of C18 octadecyl packed in 10 μl pipet tips.  LC-MS3 peptide analysis was performed using on-line separation of peptides on a column pulled and packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 nM resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a MS2_MS3 method (35). Peptides were fragmented by 20% energy collision-induced dissociation at the MS2 level and if the unique mass difference of DSSO fragment doublets, Δ=31.9715 Da, was observed, these fragments were isolated for MS3 using 35% energy collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Cross-linked peptides were identified in the resulting raw files with Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4. (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the add-on XLinkX node using established workflows for analysis of MS-cleavable cross-links (35). Databases containing wild-type or mutant TGFBIp sequences were searched. A maximum FDR of 1 % and three missed cleavages for trypsin and GluC were allowed. Cross-links identified in at least two of the three replicates were depicted in the TGFBIp sequence using xiNET (36).

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregation in the outermost layers of the cornea, which can lead to cloudy vision and in severe cases blindness, is linked to mutations in the extracellular matrix protein transforming growth factor-&#x3b2;-induced protein (TGFBIp). Among the most frequent pathogenic mutations are R124H and R555W, both associated with granular corneal dystrophy (GCD) characterized by the early-onset formation of amorphous aggregates. The molecular mechanisms of protein aggregation in GCD are largely unknown. In this study, we determined the crystal structures of R124H, R555W, and the lattice corneal dystrophy-associated A546T. Although there were no changes in the monomeric TGFBIp structure of any mutant that would explain their propensity to aggregate, R124H and R555W demonstrated a new dimer interface in the crystal packing, which is not present in wildtype TGFBIp or A546T. This interface, as seen in both the R124H and R555W structures, involves residue 124 of the first TGFBIp molecule and 555 in the second. The interface is not permitted by the Arg124 and Arg555 residues of wildtype TGFBIp and may play a central role in the aggregation exhibited by R124H and R555W in&#xa0;vivo. Using cross-linking mass spectrometry and in-line size exclusion chromatography-small-angle X-ray scattering, we characterized a dimer formed by wildtype and mutant TGFBIps in solution. Dimerization in solution also involves interactions between the N- and C-terminal domains of two TGFBIp molecules but was not identical to the crystal packing dimerization. TGFBIp-targeted interventions that disrupt the R124H/R555W crystal packing dimer interface might offer new therapeutic opportunities to treat patients with GCD.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix protein, Protein cross‐linking, Protein aggregation, Tgfbip, Granular corneal dystrophy, X‐ray crystallography, Tgfbi, Lattice corneal dystrophy

### Affiliations
Aarhus University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Nadia Sukusu Nielsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Aarhus University, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics


