### Accession
PXD027979

### Title
Proteomic analysis of eut induced L. monocytogenes cells compared to eut non-induced L. monocytogenes cells to explore virulence potential and stress responses.

### Description
This study was conducted for the comparative proteomic analysis of eut induced L. monocytogenes cells compared to eut non-induced L. monocytogenes cells to explore virulence potential and stress responses.

### Sample Protocol
L. monocytogenes cultures were anaerobically grown at 30°C in Eut-induced (LB+15mM ethanolamine + 20nM B12) and in non-induced control conditions (LB+15mM ethanolamine). Samples were collected at 24 h of incubation and then washed twice with 100 mM Tris (pH 8). About 10 mg wet weight cells in 100 μl 100 mM Tris was sonicated for 30 s twice to lyse the cells. Samples were prepared using a filter assisted sample preparation protocol (FASP) (Wisniewski 2009, Zeng, 2021). Each prepared peptide sample was analyzed by injecting (18 μl) into a nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo nLC1000 connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap XL) as described previously (Zeng et al., 2021).  Wisniewski, J. R., A. Zougman, N. Nagaraj and M. Mann (2009). "Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis." Nature Methods 6(5): 359-362. Zeng, Zhe, et al. "Bacterial microcompartments coupled with extracellular electron transfer drive the anaerobic utilization of ethanolamine in listeria monocytogenes." Msystems 6.2 (2021): e01349-20.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
We report a 58-year-old patient with acute myeloid leukaemia who developed an oedematous erythema resembling Sweet's syndrome, accompanied by atypical erythema nodosum and bullous pyoderma gangrenosum. Examination of skin biopsies showed dense infiltration with mature neutrophils, although there was peripheral blood leucocytopenia. The oedematous erythema worsened after he was treated with granulocyte-colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF), which was given for his leucocytopenia. We suggest that when a neutrophilic dermatosis complicates leukaemia, alternatives to G-CSF should be considered for the treatment of leucocytopenia. Corticosteroids were very effective in controlling the skin lesions in our patient.

### Keywords
Anaerobic growth, Ethanolamine, Caco-2 cell, Listeria monocytogenes, In-vitro virulence

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


