### Accession
PXD001349

### Title
Redox proteomics of Arabidopsis cells under salicylate and flg22 treatments

### Description
The redox-sensitive proteins were identified in Arabidopsis cells under the treatment of salicylate or flg22 (a peptide from bacterial flagellin) using OxiTRAQ method. Proteins were extracted from cell samples in the presence of NEM to block free thiols. Reversibly oxidized thiols were reduced by DTT and then tagged with biotin-HPDP. After trypsin digestion and affinity purification of the biotinylated peptides, the different samples were labeled with different iTRAQ reagent and then pooled together. Peptides were identified and quantified by tandem MS. In parallel, total protein abundance was determined by regular iTRAQ assay.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from control and treated cells in the extraction buffer supplemented with 10 mM N-ethylmaleimide. After acetone precipitation, proteins were quantified and used for OxiTRAQ assay as previously described. Briefly, approximately 3 mg proteins of each sample were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 0.4 mM of thiol-reactive N-[6-(Biotinamido) hexyl]-3'-(2'-pyridyldithio) propionamide (biotin-HPDP). After trypsin digestion, digestion was terminated by 1% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted and dried. The resulting peptides were incubated with NeutrAvidin agarose resin at RT for 1 hour. The resin was washed 5 times followed by eluted with 10 mM DTT. The eluted sample was alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. The isolated peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The labeled mixtures were fractionated by strong cation exchange. Each sample was analyzed three times by an Easy-nLC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos as described before.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.2, Thermo Scientific) to extract mascot generic files (mgf) from HCD and CID spectra separately. The files were then searched using Mascot (version 2.3) against a concatenated target-decoy Arabidopsis protein database TAIR10 (http://www.arabidopsis.org) with common contaminants (71,248 entries). The enzyme limits were set at full tryptic cleavage at both ends, and a maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. The mass tolerances were set 10 ppm for the peptide precursors and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Variable modifications for the search include carbamidomethylation (57.02) and N-ethylmaleimidate (125.05) at cysteine, iTRAQ (4-plex, 144.10) at tyrosine, and oxidation (+15.99) at methionine. The fixed modification was iTRAQ (4-plex) reagent labeling at N-terminal and lysine. The search results were exported in csv files.

### Publication Abstract
Accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is one of the early defense responses against pathogen infection in plants. The mechanism about the initial and direct regulation of the defense signaling pathway by ROS remains elusive. Perturbation of cellular redox homeostasis by ROS is believed to alter functions of redox-sensitive proteins through their oxidative modifications. Here we report an OxiTRAQ-based proteomic study in identifying proteins whose cysteines underwent oxidative modifications in Arabidopsis cells during the early response to salicylate or flg22, two defense pathway elicitors that are known to disturb cellular redox homeostasis. Among the salicylate- and/or flg22-responsive redox-sensitive proteins are those involved in transcriptional regulation, chromatin remodeling, RNA processing, post-translational modifications, and nucleocytoplasmic shuttling. The identification of the salicylate-/flg22-responsive redox-sensitive proteins provides a foundation from which further study can be conducted toward understanding biological significance of their oxidative modifications during the plant defense response.

### Keywords
Oxitraq, Salicylate, Redox protemics, Flg22

### Affiliations
Hong Kong Baptist University
Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong

### Submitter
Pei Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Yiji Xia
Department of Biology, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong


