### Accession
PXD015720

### Title
Identification of pre-miR155 binding proteins from macrophases treated with LPS or LPS + IL10

### Description
Identification of pre-miR155 binding proteins using bioinylated pre-miR155 oligos and streptavidin magnetic beads from macrophages that are treated with LPS or LPS and IL10.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were pulled down and ran on gels for in gel digestion, and analyzed on Bruker Impact II Qtof for LCMSMS.

### Data Protocol
Resulting data were searched using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 against mouse database as label-free quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-10 (IL10) is essential for attenuating inflammatory responses, which includes reducing the expression of pro-inflammatory microRNA-155 (miR155) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS) activated macrophages. miR155 enhances the expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as TNF&#x3b1; and suppresses expression of anti-inflammatory molecules such as SHIP1 and SOCS1. We previously found that IL10 interfered with the maturation of pre-miR155 to miR155. To understand the mechanism by which IL10 interferes with pre-miR155 maturation we isolated proteins that associate with pre-miR155 in response to IL10 in macrophages. We identified CELF2, a member of the CUGBP, ELAV-Like Family (CELF) family of RNA binding proteins, as protein whose association with pre-miR155 increased in IL10 treated cells. CRISPR-Cas9 mediated knockdown of CELF2 impaired IL10's ability to inhibit both miR155 expression and TNF&#x3b1; expression.

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Proteomics, Pull-down

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Departments of Surgery and Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada

### Submitter
Jenny Moon

### Lab Head
Dr Alice Mui
Departments of Surgery and Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada


