### Accession
PXD025469

### Title
Quantification of Peptide 2 (RLLWENGNL) concentration in the mouse plasma

### Description
Diabetes mellitus (DM) causes the change in the components of the plasma, which may induce tissue and organ injuries, including the heart and kidney. In the diabetic model db/db mice, intravenous injection of purified dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPPIII) attenuated the heart and kidney damages provoked by DM without alteration in blood glucose level. This led us to hypothesize that there might be peptide(s) that are involved in the progression of the DM-mediated damages and are cleaved by DPPIII. To explore the peptides, the whole peptidomics analysis (shotgun peptidomics) was conducted using tandem mass spectrometry, in which peptides derived from the plasma of PBS-infused C57BL/6 mice, PBS-infused db/db mice, and DPPIII-treated db/db mice were compared. The raw mass spectrometry data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD025440. Together with the mass spectrometry analysis and other experiments, we identified a peptide named Peptide 2 (AA sequence: RLLWENGNL) as a substrate of DPPIII. Peptide 2 is a part of C3f (53% identical), and C3f can act as an anaphylatoxin like C3a. To quantify the amount in plasma derived from the plasma of PBS-infused C57BL/6 mice, PBS-infused db/db mice, and DPPIII-treated db/db mice, selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay was performed. All of the chromatograms and quantified data obtained by SRM from the three mouse groups were shown in the Analyst formated and PDF files.

### Sample Protocol
As an internal peptide standard, stable isotope-labeled Peptide 2 was artificially synthesized by Scrum Inc. (Tokyo, Japan) for the mass measurement accuracy. The synthesized Peptide 2 was labeled with [13C6, 15N] leucine at the C-terminal residue. For preparation of plasma samples to apply to liquid chromatography, 10 μL of 1% formic acid in water/acetonitorile (1:1), 10 μL of the isotope-labeled Peptide 2 and 20 μL of 8 mol/L ammonium formic acid were added to 50 μL of the mouse plasma sample, which was then vigorously mixed. Subsequently, 150 μL of methanol/acetonitrile (1:1) was supplied into the sample. High molecular weight proteins were removed by centrifugation at 14,000 × g at 4°C for 5 min. The supernatant from the plasma was then dried by nitrogen gas spraying, and dissolved in 1% formic acid in acetonitrile/water (1:9). Three μL of the sample was applied to liquid chromatography. SRM experiments were conducted at Kyushu Pro Search LLC (Fukuoka, Japan) using QTRAP6500 (Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA) coupled to ACQUITY UPLC H-Class-liquid chromatograph (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Each prepared sample was loaded to the ACQUITY UPLC Peptide CSH C18 column (Waters; 13 nm, 1.7 μm, 2.1 mm x 50 mm) at the flow rate of 0.4 mL/min at 50°C. The gradient elution program with mobile phase A (0.02% (v/v) acetic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.02% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile) was performed for the determination of Peptide 2; 10–30% B for 0–3 min, 30% for 3–3.5 min, 10% for 3.5–4.5 min, 10–90% for 4.5–5 min, 90% for 5–6 min, 10% for 6–7 min, 10–90% for 7–7.5 min, 90% for 7.5–8.5 min and 10% for 8.5–10 min. The autosampler was maintained at 10°C, and the effluent was introduced into a electrospray ionization source operated with positive ion mode. The MS parameters in details were as follows: curtain gas at 25 psi, collision gas at 12 psi, IonSpray voltage at 5500 V, source temperature at 450°C, ion source gas 1 at 50 psi, ion source gas 2 at 80 psi. The SRM parameters in details were as follows: declustering potential at 60 V, entrance potential at 10 V, exit potential at 20 V, collision energy at 42 V, and dwell time at 10 ms. SRM of the protonated precursor molecular ions [M + 2H]2+ and the related product was quantified. The resolutions of quadrupole Q1 mass (precursor ion) and Q3 mass (product ion) were set at unit. For the SRM scan of Peptide 2 in the plasma sample, ion pairs 558.0 to 698.4 m/z were monitored for quantitation, while ion pairs 558.0 to 383.2 m/z, 558.0 to 812.4 m/z and 558.0 to 984.5 m/z were monitored for confirmation. For the SRM scan of stable isotope-labeled Peptide 2, ion pairs 561.5 to 698.4 m/z, 561.5 to 383.2 m/z, 561.5 to 812.4 m/z and 561.5 to 984.5 m/z were monitored.

### Data Protocol
All of chromatograms and mass spectral data were acquired and processed using Analyst 1.6.2 software (Sciex). For peak smoothing, the factor was set at 21 and the calculated area was converted to PDF format. contol group: sample# 1, 2, 4, 16, and 18, db/db PBS group: 6, 7, 8, 9, and 10, db/db DPPIII group: 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes mellitus (DM) causes injury to tissues and organs, including to the heart and kidney, resulting in increased morbidity and mortality. Thus, novel potential therapeutics are continuously required to minimize DM-related organ damage. We have previously shown that dipeptidyl peptidase III (DPPIII) has beneficial roles in a hypertensive mouse model, but it is unknown whether DPPIII has any effects on DM. In this study, we found that intravenous administration of recombinant DPPIII in diabetic db/db mice for 8&#xa0;weeks suppressed the DM-induced cardiac diastolic dysfunctions and renal injury without alteration of the blood glucose level. This treatment inhibited inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis in the heart and blocked the increase in albuminuria by attenuating the disruption of the glomerular microvasculature and inhibiting the effacement of podocyte foot processes in the kidney. The beneficial role of DPPIII was, at least in part, mediated by the cleavage of a cytotoxic peptide, named Peptide 2, which was increased in db/db mice compared with normal mice. This peptide consisted of nine amino acids, was a digested fragment of complement component 3 (C3), and had an anaphylatoxin-like effect determined by the Miles assay and chemoattractant analysis. The effect was dependent on its interaction with the C3a receptor and protein kinase C-mediated RhoA activation downstream of the receptor in endothelial cells. In conclusion, DPPIII plays a protective role in the heart and kidney in a DM animal model through cleavage of a peptide that is a part of C3.

### Keywords
Plasma, Peptidase, Mouse, Diabetes mellitus, Selected reaction monitoring, Peptide, Srm

### Affiliations
Shiga University of Medical Science

### Submitter
Akio Shimizu

### Lab Head
Dr Hisakazu Ogita
Shiga University of Medical Science


