### Accession
PXD016312

### Title
Nrf2-mediated enhancer activation via phase separation ameliorates oxidative stress and cystogenesis in autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease

### Description
Mitochondrial dysfunction is emerging as a crucial contributor to the pathogenesis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), but the molecular mechanisms underlying the disturbed mitochondrial homeostasis in cystic cells remain elusive. In the present study, we identify impaired activity of NRF2 antioxidant pathway as a driver mechanism for mitochondrial dysfunction and ADPKD progression. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, we find that NRF2 antioxidant pathway is suppressed in ADPKD kidneys. In a cohort of ADPKD patients, reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels are frequently elevated, and the increased ROS levels inversely correlates with decreased NRF2 expression and positively correlates with disease severity. Genetic deletion of NRF2 increases ROS generation and promotes cyst growth in an orthologous ADPKD mouse model, while pharmacological induction of NRF2 reduces ROS levels and retards cystogenesis and disease progression. Mechanistically, NRF2 activates its antioxidant target genes mainly through remodeling enhancer landscapes. The activation domain of NRF2 forms phase-separated condensates with MED16, a Mediator complex subunit in vitro, and NRF2 is required for optimal Mediator recruitment to target genomic sites in vivo. Taken together, these findings indicate that NRF2 remodels enhancer landscapes and activates its target genes through a phase-separation mechanism, and that activation of NRF2 represents a promising strategy for restoring mitochondrial homeostasis and combatting ADPKD.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were dissolved in a 0.1 percent formic acid solvent, loaded onto a column with a length of 15 cm, an inner diameter of 75µm. The gradient was consisted of an increase from 6 percent to 23 percent solvent (0.1 percent formic acid in 98 percent acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23 percent to 35 percent in 8 min and climbing to 80 percent in 3 min then holding at 80 percent for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to the NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. And the electrospray voltage used was 2.0 kV, the m/z scan range was from 350 to 1800 for full scan, the intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a final resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for tandem mass spectrometry using the NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a final resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 tandem mass spectrometry scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control was set at the 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse database concatenated with reverse decoy database.

### Data Protocol
The protein quantitative analysis was carried out on the log2 values of the measured reporter intensities. In this study, the down regulated proteins with P values ≤ 0.05 and fold change ≥ 1.5 were considered as the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). For subcellular localization, Wolfpsort software (an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences) was employed to predict subcellular localization of the indicated DEPs. For GO analysis, the DEPs were classified into three categories: cellular compartment, biological process, and molecular function. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to test the enrichment of the DEPs in each category.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress is emerging as a crucial contributor to the pathogenesis of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD), but the molecular mechanisms underlying the disturbed redox homeostasis in cystic cells remain elusive. Here, we identified the impaired activity of the NRF2 (nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2) antioxidant pathway as a driver of oxidative damage and ADPKD progression. Using a quantitative proteomic approach, together with biochemical analyses, we found that increased degradation of NRF2 protein suppressed the NRF2 antioxidant pathway in ADPKD mouse kidneys. In a cohort of patients with ADPKD, reactive oxygen species (ROS) frequently accumulated, and their production correlated negatively with NRF2 abundance and positively with disease severity. In an orthologous ADPKD mouse model, genetic deletion of <i>Nrf2</i> further increased ROS generation and promoted cyst growth, whereas pharmacological induction of NRF2 reduced ROS production and slowed cystogenesis and disease progression. Mechanistically, pharmacological induction of NRF2 remodeled enhancer landscapes and activated NRF2-bound enhancer-associated genes in ADPKD cells. The activation domain of NRF2 formed phase-separated condensates with MEDIATOR complex subunit MED16 in vitro, and optimal Mediator recruitment to genomic loci depended on NRF2 in vivo. Together, these findings indicate that NRF2 remodels enhancer landscapes and activates its target genes through a phase separation mechanism and that activation of NRF2 represents a promising strategy for restoring redox homeostasis and combatting ADPKD.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Adpkd, Kidney

### Affiliations
2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.
Tianjin Medical University

### Submitter
Yongzhan Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Yupeng Chen
2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Tianjin for Medical Epigenetics, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Medical Epigenetics, Key Laboratory of Immune Microenvironment and Disease (Ministry of Education), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, China.


