### Accession
PXD036682

### Title
Restoring cellular magnesium balance through Cyclin M4  protects against acetaminophen-induced liver damag

### Description
Acetaminophen (APAP) is one of the most widely consumed and prescribed drugs.  APAP overdose is one of the leading causes of intrinsic drug-induced liver injury (DILI),  acute liver failure (ALF), and liver transplantation in the Western world.  Mg2+, essential for health, plays a role in virtually every process within the human cell. The cellular transporter family cyclin M, also known as CNNM, plays a key role in Mg2+ transport across the cell membranes in different organs. Here, we identified that the  expression of CNNM4 is elevated in the liver of patients with APAP-induced liver injury  (AILI), with a concomitant disturbance in serum Mg2+ levels. We demonstrated that, in  the liver, APAP interferes with the Mg2+ mitochondrial reservoir via CNNM4, which affects  ATP production and ROS generation, further boosting endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress  of the hepatocytes. Importantly, the CNNM4 mutant T495I showed no effect. Finally, a  shift in localization of CNNM4 from membrane to ER was shown under APAP toxicity. Therapeutic targeting of Cnnm4 in the liver with nanoparticles and GalNAc-formulated  siRNA provides efficient protection from AILI by restoring hepatocyte Mg2+ homeostasis  and by inducing hepatocyte restoration. Our results suggest that inhibition of Cnnm4 may  represent an alternative route for the treatment of DILI..

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were treated with cell lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS), vortexed  and spined down to remove debris. Extracted protein was digested following the SP3  protocol described by Hughes et al3 with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a  trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated 2 hours at 37oC. Resulting  peptides were dried out and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were analyzed  in a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry-quadrupole time of flight mass  spectrometer (timsTOF Pro with PASEF, Bruker Daltonics) coupled online to a EVOSEP  ONE (EVOSEP). This mass spectrometer takes advantage of a novel scan mode termed  parallel accumulation-serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing  speed without any loss in sensitivity4 . Samples (200 ng) were directly loaded in a 15 cm  analytical column (EVOSEP) and resolved at 300 nl/min with a 44 min gradient

### Data Protocol
Protein  identification and quantification was carried out using PEAKS software using default  settings. Searches were carried out against a database consisting of mice protein entries  (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20 ppm and 0.05 Da.  Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at FDR<1% were considered for further  analysis. Data was loaded onto Perseus platform and further processed (log2  transformation, imputation).

### Publication Abstract
Acetaminophen overdose is one of the leading causes of acute liver failure and liver transplantation in the Western world. Magnesium is essential in several cellular processess. The Cyclin M family is involved in magnesium transport across cell membranes. Herein, we identify that among all magnesium transporters, only Cyclin M4 expression is upregulated in the liver of patients with acetaminophen overdose, with disturbances in magnesium serum levels. In the liver, acetaminophen interferes with the mitochondrial magnesium reservoir via Cyclin M4, affecting ATP production and reactive oxygen species generation, further boosting endoplasmic reticulum stress. Importantly, Cyclin M4 mutant T495I, which impairs magnesium flux, shows no effect. Finally, an accumulation of Cyclin M4 in endoplasmic reticulum is shown under hepatoxicity. Based on our studies in mice, silencing hepatic Cyclin M4 within the window of 6 to 24&#x2009;h following acetaminophen overdose ingestion may represent a therapeutic target for acetaminophen overdose induced liver injury.

### Keywords
Drug-induced liver damage (dili), Cnnm4, Acute liver failulre (alf), Label free, Acetaminophen (apap)

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix ELortza
Proteomics Service CIC bioGUNE Bizkaia Tech. Park Build. 800 48160 Derio (Spain)


