### Accession
PXD028841

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of plasma in major mental disorders

### Description
Emerging high-throughput proteomic technologies have recently been considered as a powerful means of identifying substrates involved in mood disorders. We performed proteomic profiling using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify dysregulated proteins in plasma samples of 44, 49, and 50 patients with major depressive disorder (MDD), bipolar disorder (BD), and schizophrenia , respectively, in comparison to 51 healthy controls (HCs).

### Sample Protocol
Fasting blood samples were collected in ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes and centrifuged at 3000 rpm at 4 °C for 10 min. The plasma samples were then stored at below −70 °C and further processed according to the modified version of the method reported by Geyer et al. (2016). In each plasma sample, digestion buffer (8 M urea, 5 mM TCEP, 20 mM CAA in 0.1 M ABC) was added and the process was optimized to evaluate 2 μL of each sample. In order to denature and alkylate the proteins, the mixture was boiled for 25 min at 60 °C. After cooling the samples to room temperature, digestion was performed overnight using a trypsin/LysC mixture at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio at 37 °C. We performed the next digestion process at 37 °C for 2 h using trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w] of 1:1000). All resulting peptides were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using homemade C18-StageTips as previously described (Han et al., 2014; Woo et al., 2015). The desalted samples were fully dried with a vacuum dryer and stored at −80 °C until liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra of the proteins were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016), and the Andromeda engine was used to match MS/MS spectra against the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries) and contaminant protein sequence (Cox et al., 2011). The searching parameters used were as follows: primary search tolerance of 6 ppm, MS/MS ion tolerance of 20 ppm, N-Acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications, modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation was fixed, and enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion (Lee et al., 2018). Peptides with a minimal length of six amino acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered, and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide, protein, and modification levels (Lee et al., 2018). To maximize the quantification events across samples, matching between runs was performed using a previously reported in-house plasma spectral library (Rhee et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
The proteomics data included in this article supplement the research article titled "Predictive protein markers for the severity of depression in mood disorders: A preliminary trans-diagnostic approach study (manuscript ID: JPSYCHIATRES-D-20-00437)." Plasma protein was analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). This data article included 370 plasma protein profiles expressed in patients with bipolar II disorder (BD-II) and major depressive disorder (MDD). The tables present the comparison of protein expressions between BD-II and MDD, and the relationship between the severity of the depressive symptoms and protein expression. In addition, details of results adjusting the use of each psychotropic medication (antipsychotics, mood stabilizers, and antidepressants) for 20 proteins that showed a significant relationship with the severity of the depressive symptom were presented in the table. Results of the bioinformatics analysis of proteins, which were significantly related to the severity of depressive symptom, are presented. The blood protein profiles and the results of the analyses presented in this data article provide detailed information on the proteins associated with mood disorders, and could be used as the basis for further mass spectrometry studies in psychiatric disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Mood depression disorder, Schizophrenia, Bipolar disorder

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


