### Accession
PXD036076

### Title
Ligand-induced shifts in conformational ensembles that predict transcriptional activation

### Description
Nuclear receptors function as ligand-regulated transcription factors whose ability to regulate diverse physiological processes is closely linked with conformational changes induced upon ligand binding. Understanding how conformational populations of nuclear receptors are shifted by various ligands could illuminate strategies for the design of synthetic modulators to regulate specific transcriptional programs. Here, we investigate ligand-induced conformational changes using a reconstructed, ancestral nuclear receptor. By making substitutions at a key position, we engineer receptor variants with altered ligand specificities. We use atomistic molecular dynamics (MD) simulations with enhanced sampling to generate ensembles of wildtype and engineered receptors in combination with multiple ligands, followed by conformational analysis and prediction of ligand activity. We combine cellular and biophysical experiments to allow correlation of MD-based predictions with functional ligand profiles, as well as elucidation of mechanisms underlying altered transcription in receptor variants. We determine that conformational ensembles accurately predict ligand responses based on observed population shifts, even within engineered receptors that were constitutively active or transcriptionally unresponsive in experiments. These studies provide a platform which will allow structural characterization of physiologically-relevant conformational ensembles, as well as provide the ability to design and predict transcriptional responses in novel ligands.

### Sample Protocol
Wild type and M75L SR2 samples were stored in 20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.4. To assess allostery in response to ligand binding (estradiol and progesterone), 10 mM SR2 samples were incubated with 200 µM ligand at 37 oC for 150 minutes before HDX. Deuterium labelling was carried out using a PAL RTC autosampler (LEAP technologies). All samples were diluted to a final concentration of 90.9% D2O to initiate the deuterium exchange reaction. Deuterium buffers were prepared by dilution of 20X storage buffer in D2O. Deuterium exchange was carried out at room temperature (20 °C) maintained on a drybath for 10, 30, 60, 900, and 3600 sec followed by rapidly quenching the reaction to minimize back exchange using 1.5 M GdnHCl and 0.1% FA on ice to bring the pH down to 2.5.  Quenched samples were injected onto an immobilized pepsin treatment (BEH Pepsin Column, Enzymate, Waters, Milford, MA) using a nano-UPLC sample manager at a constant flow rate of 75 µl/min of 0.1% formic acid. Proteolyzed peptides were then trapped in a VanGuard column (ACQUITY BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column, 1.7 µm, Waters, Milford, MA) and separated using a reversed phase liquid chromatography column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column, 1.0 × 100 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters, Milford MA). NanoACQUITY binary solvent manager (Waters, Milford, MA) was used to pump an 8-40% acetonitrile gradient at pH 2.5 with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 40 µl/min and analyzed on a SYNAPT XS mass spectrometer (Waters, Milford, MA) acquired in MSE mode.

### Data Protocol
Undeuterated SR2 particles were sequenced by MSE to identify pepsin digested peptides using Protein Lynx Global Server Software (PLGS v3.0) (Waters, Milford, MA). The peptides were identified by searching against the SR2 protein sequence database with a non-specific proteolysis enzyme selected. Peptides from the undeuterated samples that were identified and matched from the primary sequence database were filtered and considered with the following specifications: precursor ion tolerance of < 10 ppm, products per amino acid of at least 0.2 and a minimum intensity of 1000.  Average deuterium exchange in each peptide was measured relative to undeuterated control peptides using DynamX v3.0 (Waters, Milford, MA) by determining the centroid mass of each isotopic envelope. Subtractions of these centroids for each peptide from the undeuterated centroid determined the average number of deuterons exchanged in each peptide [63]. Deuterium exchange for all peptides is represented using relative fractional uptake (RFU) plots. Each value reported is an average of three independent deuterium exchange experiments and not corrected for back-exchange. Difference plots were made by subtracting absolute centroid mass values between the two states under consideration. A difference of ± 0.5 Da was considered a significance threshold for deuterium exchange. Deuteros 2.0 was used to generate coverage maps and Woods plots with peptide level significance testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Pennsylvania State University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University

### Submitter
SABAB HASAN KHAN

### Lab Head
Dr C. Denise Okafor
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University


