### Accession
PXD000775

### Title
Lactate racemase proteins MALDI TOF/TOF

### Description
This project reports the characterization of the lactate racemase system in Lactobacillus plantarum. The lactate racemase (LarA) is a nickel-dependent enzyme. The apo-enzyme (apoLarA) is activated by a single nickel-containing maturation protein (LarE) that requires preactivation by two other accessory proteins (LarC which is a fusion between LarC1 and LarcC2 and LarB). Data submitted here identify the purified forms of Lar proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The protein bands were excised from a Commassie blue stained gel. The protein was in-gel digested with trypsin for 16 h at 37°C. Digested peptides were recovered and vacuum dried. Peptides were then dissolved in 0.025% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and desalted using a Millipore C18 ZipTipR Pipette Tip (Billerica, USA). 2 microl of a solution containing 10 mg/ml of alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (alpha-cyano MALDI matrix) in 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile and 0.1 % (v/v) TFA were added to 2 microl of peptides. 1 microl of peptide/matrix mixture was put down on a Applied Biosystems MALDI plate Opti-TOF™ 384 Well Insert (Foster City, USA). The spotted plate was analyzed in reflector mode on an Applied Biosystems 4800 MALDI TOF/TOF Analyzer using a 200 Hz solid state laser operating at 355 nm. MS spectra were obtained using a laser intensity of 3600 and 2000 laser shots per spot in the m/z range of 800 to 4000, while MS-MS spectra were obtained by automatic selection of the 20 most intense precursor ions per spot using a laser intensity of 4000 and 2000 laser shots per precursor. Collision induced dissociation was performed with an energy of 1 kV with air gas at a pressure of 1 x 10E-6 Torr.

### Data Protocol
Data were collected using the Applied Biosystems 4000 Series ExplorerTM Software. LC/MS-MS data were processed using the Applied Biosystems GPS ExplorerTM 3.6 Software. A local  database containing sequences of interest was used. 200 ppm precursor tolerance for MS spectra and 0.1 Da fragment tolerance for MS/MS spectra was allowed. The selected charge state of + 1, one trypsin miscleavage and variable modifications consisting of methionine oxidation and acrylamide modified cystein were used.

### Publication Abstract
Racemases catalyse the inversion of stereochemistry in biological molecules, giving the organism the ability to use both isomers. Among them, lactate racemase remains unexplored due to its intrinsic instability and lack of molecular characterization. Here we determine the genetic basis of lactate racemization in Lactobacillus plantarum. We show that, unexpectedly, the racemase is a nickel-dependent enzyme with a novel &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; fold. In addition, we decipher the process leading to an active enzyme, which involves the activation of the apo-enzyme by a single nickel-containing maturation protein that requires preactivation by two other accessory proteins. Genomic investigations reveal the wide distribution of the lactate racemase system among prokaryotes, showing the high significance of both lactate enantiomers in carbon metabolism. The even broader distribution of the nickel-based maturation system suggests a function beyond activation of the lactate racemase and possibly linked with other undiscovered nickel-dependent enzymes.

### Keywords
Lactobacillus plantarum, Nickel enzyme, Maturation proteins, Lactate racemase

### Affiliations
Institute of Life Sciences (UCL/ISV), Belgium
UCL

### Submitter
Pascal Hols

### Lab Head
Dr MORSOMME Pierre
Institute of Life Sciences (UCL/ISV), Belgium


