### Accession
PXD027266

### Title
In planta transcriptome and proteome profiles of Spongospora subterranea illuminates regulatory principles underlying host-pathogen interaction

### Description
Spongospora subterranea is an obligate biotrophic pathogen, causing a tremendous economic loss in the potato industry. Currently, there are no effective chemical or biological strategies for the control of S. subterranea. Understanding the gene regulation of pathogens in their host is dependent on multidimensional datasets. To further our understanding of S. subterranea biology during infection, we characterized the transcriptome and proteome of the pathogen inside the susceptible and resistant potato cultivars. A total of 7650 transcripts from S. subterranea were identified in the transcriptome analysis in which 1377 transcripts were differentially expressed between two cultivars. In proteome analysis, we identified 117 proteins with 14 proteins significantly changed in comparison between resistant and susceptible cultivars. The transcriptome analysis uncovered the gene regulatory modules underlying virulence. The functional annotation of transcriptome data indicated that the gene ontology terms related to the transportation and actin processes were induced in the resistant cultivar. The downregulation of enzyme activity and nucleic acid metabolism in the resistant cultivars suggesting a remarkable influence of these processes in the virulence of S. subterranea. The protein analysis results indicated that the majority of identified proteins were related to the metabolic processes. The present study provides a comprehensive molecular insight into the multiple layers of gene regulation that contribute to S. subterranea germination and growth in planta and illuminates the role of host immunity in affecting pathogen responses.

### Sample Protocol
S. subterranea inoculum was obtained by dry scraping lesions from powdery scab-infected tubers and purified using Ludox. Proteins were extracted from 50 mg of frozen roots per sample by adding 150 µL of urea/thiourea extraction buffer in 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0 and protease inhibitor cocktail. The mixture was homogenized two times for 60 s each using a Fast Prep-24 bead beater (Mp Biomedicals, Seven Hills, NSW, Australia) at 5500 ×g in room temperature. Samples were then centrifuged at 16000 ×g for 10 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Six volumes of cold acetone was added to the resulting clariﬁed extracts and tubes incubated at -20 °C overnight. The tubes were centrifuged at 10000 ×g for 8 min, the protein pellets were left to air dry for 5 min at room temperature and resuspended in denaturing buffer (7 M urea and 2 M thiourea, 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0 and protease inhibitor). Protein concentration was estimated by a Qubit fluorometer using the Qubit protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Subsequently, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 10 mM and proteins were reduced overnight at 4 °C. Samples were then alkylated in dark using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 2 hrs at room temperature and then digested with trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) according to the SP3 method.

### Data Protocol
DIA- MS/MS data were searched against a concatenated FASTA file comprising known S. subterranea protein sequences and the potato (Solanium tuberosum) to generate a spectral library. DIA-MS data was then used for quantitation of relative protein abundance by targeted re-extraction of peptide data from the spectral library using Spectronaut software (v14)

### Publication Abstract
<i>Spongospora subterranea</i> is an obligate biotrophic pathogen, causing substantial economic loss to potato industries globally. Currently, there are no fully effective management strategies for the control of potato diseases caused by <i>S. subterranea</i>. To further our understanding of <i>S. subterranea</i> biology during infection, we characterized the transcriptome and proteome of the pathogen during the invasion of roots of a susceptible and a resistant potato cultivar. A total of 7650 transcripts from <i>S. subterranea</i> were identified in the transcriptome analysis in which 1377 transcripts were differentially expressed between two cultivars. In proteome analysis, we identified 117 proteins with 42 proteins significantly changed in comparisons between resistant and susceptible cultivars. The functional annotation of transcriptome data indicated that the gene ontology terms related to the transportation and actin processes were induced in the resistant cultivar. The downregulation of enzyme activity and nucleic acid metabolism in the resistant cultivar suggests a probable influence of these processes in the virulence of <i>S. subterranea</i>. The protein analysis results indicated that the majority of differentially expressed proteins were related to the metabolic processes and transporter activity. The present study provides a comprehensive molecular insight into the multiple layers of gene regulation that contribute to <i>S. subterranea</i> infection and development <i>in planta</i> and illuminates the role of host immunity in affecting pathogen responses.

### Keywords
Spongospora subterranea; potato; in planta analysis; transcriptomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


