### Accession
PXD028911

### Title
Conserved proteomic programs between human cerebral tissue and organoids implicate RUVBL2 in neurodevelopment and disease

### Description
Cerebral organoids have emerged as faithful humanoid avatars for modeling numerous advanced neurodevelopmental and pathological processes and additionally serve as a powerful discovery platform for less well-characterized neurobiological programs. Towards this later prospect, we leveraged mass spectrometry-based proteomics to molecularly profile precursor and more committed neural compartments of both human-derived organoids and mid-gestation fetal brain tissue to define overlapping protein-level programs. Interestingly, this included numerous precursor-enriched transcriptional regulatory proteins that were notably not found to be differentially expressed in previous transcriptomic datasets. Specifically, we show that the RuvB-like 2 (RUVBL2) AAA-type ATPase is preferentially expressed in the SOX2-positive compartment of organoids and chemical inactivation leads to precursor cell displacement and apoptosis within the more mature DCX-positive niche. To explore potential clinicopathological correlates of this disruption in organoid cytoarchitecture, we interrogated various clinical datasets, and identified de novo deletions, missense mutations and a novel recurring tandem duplication involving RUVBL2 in patients diagnosed with neurodevelopmental and autism spectrum disorders. Together, our study demonstrates how cell-type specific and phenotype-level profiling of cerebral organoids can help nominate and implicate previously unappreciated genes in neurodevelopment and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Sorted samples were placed in lysis buffer (Urea 8M, 50mM NH4HCO3). Samples were placed on ice for 30 min and sonicated for 30 pulses, 30s each at a 3.5 amplitude setting (Bioruptor Pico Sonicator). Lysates were spun down at 14,000×g, supernatants were transferred to a clean centrifuge tube and protein was quantitated using the Pierce Coomassie protein assay kit (Thermo Fisher). 12 μg of protein were reduced in 6mM of Dithiothreitol in 50mM of ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) solution and alkylated in 18 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC solution, for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were Trypsin/ Lys-C (Promega) digested in 1:25 μg of protein per sample and incubated overnight at 37 °C with constant shaking. The digestion reaction was quenched with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were spun down at 13000 x g and the supernatant was transferred to a clean tube.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometry RAW files were uploaded into MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43 (www.coxdocs.org) and searched with built-in Andromeda search engine against a Human SwissProt protein database (January 2015 release, 89,649 entries) The following parameters were used for the search: trypsin/P enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set to fixed modification; with oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, N-terminal protein acetylation and ubiquitination of lysine set as variable modifications; first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm against a small “human-first-search” database for the purpose of mass recalibration and the main search was performed at 4.5 ppm; contaminants were included in the search; the database was reversed for the purpose of calculating the peptide and protein level false-discover rate (FDR) at 1%; match between runs was set to a 0.7 min window; LFQ minimum-ratio count was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cerebral organoids, Neurodevelopment, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University Health Network, University of Toronto
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Phedias Diamandis
University Health Network, University of Toronto


