### Accession
PXD030906

### Title
Evolutionary collateral sensitivity to pleuromutilins in vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium

### Description
The rise of antibiotic resistance and decline of antibiotic discovery urgently calls for novel mechanistic understanding of pharmacological and evolutionary interactions between antibiotics and multidrug resistant bacteria to revitalize existing antibiotics. The evolutionary cross-resistance to antibiotics has received intensive attention previously. Nevertheless, whether and how bacteria develop negative responses, under the selective pressure of antibiotics by inverting the evolutionary trajectory remains unclear. Here we found an instance of collateral sensitivity, in which clinical vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREfm) pathogens exhibit dramatic and specific susceptibility to pleuromutilin antibiotics, decreased minimal inhibitory concentrations (MICs) from 128 µg/mL to 0.03 µg/mL. The unique trade-off between vancomycin and pleuromutilins is mediated by the epistasis between the van gene cluster and msrC encoding an ABC-F protein protecting bacterial ribosomes. We validated the efficacy of pleuromutilins in vivo through reducing colonization and promoting microbiota restoration. Our findings provide an alternative approach to inverting the selective advantage and reversing the route of vancomycin resistance evolution, and to treat VREfm associated infections.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures VRE.CAU378 were diluted 1:100 in BHI and incubated at 37℃ 200 r.p.m. for 4 h, to obtain bacteria at exponential phase.Then thebacterial suspension were treated with lefamulin at the level of 1xMIC and 10xMIC for 15 min and1h.Then cells were lysed and the protein was reduced and alkylated by heatingat 95°C for 5 min followed by sonication for 20 min. The resulting mixture was diluted 10 times with the dilution buffer composed of 25mM Tris-HC1(pH8.5) and 10% acetonitrile (ACN) and the protein was digeste with trypsin at 37°C overnight. After digestion, the total protein was acidated with 5% TFA and loaded onto a C18-column which had been pretreated and equilibrated with methanol and 0.2% acetic acid respectively For MS analysis, total peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and analysed by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer(Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with DIA-NN software package against the sequence data of VRE.Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism 8. All data were presented as the mean±S.D.

### Publication Abstract
The acquisition of resistance to one antibiotic sometimes leads to collateral sensitivity to a second antibiotic. Here, we show that vancomycin resistance in Enterococcus faecium is associated with a remarkable increase in susceptibility to pleuromutilin antibiotics (such as lefamulin), which target the bacterial ribosome. The trade-off between vancomycin and pleuromutilins is mediated by epistasis between the van gene cluster and msrC, encoding an ABC-F protein that protects bacterial ribosomes from antibiotic targeting. In mouse models of vancomycin-resistant E. faecium colonization&#xa0;and septicemia, pleuromutilin treatment reduces colonization and improves survival more effectively than standard therapy (linezolid). Our findings suggest that pleuromutilins may be useful for the treatment of vancomycin-resistant E. faecium infections.

### Keywords
Collateral sensitivity，vancomycin-resistant enterococcus faecium，pleuromutilin

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China

### Submitter
hanzhong feng

### Lab Head
Dr Kui Zhu
College of Veterinary Medicine, China Agricultural University, Beijing 100193, China


