### Accession
PXD002289

### Title
High Fat Diet Related Changes in Mitochondrial Proteome

### Description
Western diets leads to obesity and its comorbidities, in particular the progression of hepatosteatosis and insulin resistance. In DIO C57/BL6 obese mice, we performed quantitative mitochondrial bioenergetics and proteomic analysis and fused both technologies to understand the functional adjustments of mitochondrial energy metabolism in response to overfeeding.

### Sample Protocol
Protein lysates and extracts containing 100 µg of total protein were processed in the 30k filtration units (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore) using the MED-FASP protocol. Endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin were used for sequential digestion of proteins. The enzyme to protein ratios were 1/50. Triplicates of each sample were prepared and analyzed.

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed using the software environment MaxQuant version 1.2.6.20. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was up to 6 ppm, and for the fragment masses it was up to 20 ppm. The maximum false peptide discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Protein concentrations were calculated on the basis of spectral protein intensity using the Total Protein Approach (TPA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Liver, Fasp, High fat diet

### Affiliations
Max-Planck Instutute of Biochemistry, Martinsrfied, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R. Wisniewski
Max-Planck Instutute of Biochemistry, Martinsrfied, Germany


