### Accession
PXD010572

### Title
A combined N-terminomics and shotgun proteomics approach to investigate the responses of human cells to rapamycin and zinc at the mitochondrial level

### Description
This study aims investigating the impact of rapamycin and zinc at subtoxic doses on the human mitochondrial proteome. Experiments were performed on U397 monocytic cells. A dN-TOP strategy, combining shotgun proteomics and N-terminomics, was applied to study both internal and N-terminal peptides of the mitochondrial proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC device (Waters, Milford, MA) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were converted into mgf files using the MSConvert tool from ProteomeWizard (v3.0.6090). The peak lists were searched using Mascot (version 2.5.1) against an in-house database containing all Homo sapiens entries extracted from UniProtKB-SwissProt (release of 01/2016, 20,175 entries), common contaminants (119 entries), and the corresponding 20,294 reverse entries. The database was generated using the database toolbox from MSDA (publicly available from https://msda.unistra.fr). The following parameters were applied: semiTrypsin as digestion enzyme, one permitted missed cleavage per peptide, a mass tolerance of 5 ppm on the precursor ions and 0.07 Da on the peptide fragments, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues and light (+572.18 Da) and heavy (+581.21 Da) TMPP derivatization on any N-terminal amino acid or side chain of tyrosine and lysine residues as variable modifications. Mascot result files were loaded into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) and proteins were validated on pretty rank equal to 1, and a Mascot ion score ≥ 13. N-terminal peptides were validated using the “dN-TOP Validation Tool” available on https://msda.unistra.fr, ensuring the identification of both the light and heavy labelled peptide and their perfect chromatographic co-elution.

### Publication Abstract
All but thirteen mammalian mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome, translated in the cytosol and then imported into the mitochondria. For a significant proportion of the mitochondrial proteins, import is coupled with the cleavage of a presequence called the transit peptide, and the formation of a new N-terminus. Determination of the neo N-termini has been investigated by proteomic approaches in several systems, but generally in a static way to compile as many N-termini as possible. In the present study, we have investigated how the mitochondrial proteome and N-terminome react to chemical stimuli that alter mitochondrial metabolism, namely zinc ions and rapamycin. To this end, we have used a strategy that analyzes both internal and N-terminal peptides in a single run, the dN-TOP approach. We used these two very different stressors to sort out what could be a generic response to stress and what is specific to each of these stressors. Rapamycin and zinc induced different changes in the mitochondrial proteome. However, convergent changes to key mitochondrial enzymatic activities such as pyruvate dehydrogenase, succinate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase were observed for both treatments. Other convergent changes were seen in components of the N-terminal processing system and mitochondrial proteases. Investigations into the generation of neo-N-termini in mitochondria showed that the processing system is robust, as indicated by the lack of change in neo N-termini under the conditions tested. Detailed analysis of the data revealed that zinc caused a slight reduction in the efficiency of the N-terminal trimming system and that both treatments increased the degradation of mitochondrial proteins. In conclusion, the use of this combined strategy allowed a detailed analysis of the dynamics of the mitochondrial N-terminome in response to treatments which impact the mitochondria.

### Keywords
N-terminome analysis, Mitochondria, Nanolc-ms/ms, Dn-top strategy, Differential analysis

### Affiliations
LSMBO - IPHC
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS

### Submitter
Joanna Bons

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
IPHC (LSMBO - Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse Bio-Organique), UMR 7178, Université de Strasbourg, CNRS


