### Accession
PXD039340

### Title
Confirmation of the subunit composition of Rhodobacter sphaeroides cytochrome bc1 complex isolated in styrene maleic acid nanodiscs.

### Description
The purple α-proteobacterium Rhodobacter sphaeroides is a long-established model organism owing to its ability to switch between aerobic, anaerobic and phototrophic metabolism. This organism is also of great interest because of its phylogenetic relationship with the bacterial progenitor of the mitochondrion in eukaryotes. A component of the electron transport chain in both bacteria and mitochondria is the cytochrome bc1 (cytbc1) complex, a quinol:cytochrome c oxidoreductase that translocates protons across energy-transducing membranes. The resulting proton motive force is then utilized to drive ATP synthesis. Cytbc1 comprises three core subunits together with, in some organisms, one or more additional subunits. In Rhodobacter sphaeroides, the one additional subunit (subunit IV) is not fully characterized in terms of both structure and function. In this project, proteomic analysis is used to confirm the presence of all four subunits in a cytbc1 preparation isolated in SMA nanodiscs for structural analysis by cryo-EM.

### Sample Protocol
Rhodobacter sphaeroides cells expressing His-tagged cytbc1 were grown in M22 liquid medium under 50 μmol m-2 s-1 illumination, harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 RCF for 30 min at 4 °C then resuspended in 30 mL 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 200 mM NaCl (Tris-NaCl). Cells were lysed using two passes through a cell disruptor at 20,000 PSI (Constant Systems) and the lysate clarified by centrifugation at 25,000 RCF for 15 min at 4 °C. Membranes were recovered by centrifugation at 150,000 RCF for 2 h at 4 °C and resuspended in 20 mL Tris-NaCl. Cytbc1 was solubilised by diluting membranes to OD(850 nm) = 50 in Tris-NaCl, 1.5 % styrene maleic acid (SMA)and stirring at room temperature for 1 h in the dark. Insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 150,000 RCF for 1 h at 4 °C and the soluble fraction diluted two-fold prior to binding to a 50 mL Ni-NTA column pre equilibrated with five volumes of Tris-NaCl by recycling for 16 h at 5 mL min-1. The column was washed with ten volumes of Tris-NaCl, 10 mM imidazole then cyt bc1 was eluted using a linear gradient of 10-250 mM imidazole over six volumes, collecting 5 mL fractions. UV/Vis/NIR spectra of pigmented fractions were acquired at 350-1000 nm and those with a Soret band at 413-415 nm and a ratio of absorbance at 415-850 nm above 1 were concentrated to 1 mL using a 100,000 MWCO Amicon centrifugal filter (Merck). Cytbc1 was further enriched by applying 0.5 mL to a 11 mL gradient of sucrose in Tris-NaCl from 10-15% (w/w) and centrifuging at 100,000 RCF for 16 h at 4 °C. The pigmented bands at ~12% sucrose were fractionated, spectra were collected at 250-1000 nm, and those with a Soret band at 414-415 nm and a ratio of absorbance at 415-850 nm above ten were pooled and concentrated to 1 mL. The concentrated cytbc1 was injected onto a HiPrep 16/60 Sephacryl S-300 HR size exclusion column (Cytiva) pre-equilibrated with two volumes of Tris-NaCl and eluted over 1.5 volumes at 0.5 mL min-1 collecting 2.5 mL fractions. Those with a Soret band at 415 nm and a ratio of absorbance at 415-280 nm of 1.15-1.25 were pooled and stored in Tris-NaCl, 20% glycerol at -80 °C. For proteomic analysis, a sample containing 50 µg protein (Bio-Rad DC) was solubilized in 100 µL 2% sodium dodecylsulfate, 40 mM Tris base, 60 mM DTT at 60°C for 5 min. Proteins were isolated from lipids and cofactors by precipitation using a 2-D clean up kit (Cytiva) followed by re-solubilization in 50 µl 0.2% (v/v) formic acid containing 2 µg pepsin. Digestion was carried out by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. The resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For analysis by LC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with an EasyNano C18 reverse phase column (75 µm x 50 cm, 40°C, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 75-min gradient from 97% (v/v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 50% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with centroid full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the Rhodobacter sphaeroides reference proteome (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/ UP000002703) downloaded on 28 April 2021 using Byonic (v2.9.38, Protein Metrics). Default parameters were selected with methionine oxidation specified as a variable modification and semi-specific cleavage at both N- and C-sides of F, W, Y and L.

### Publication Abstract
Cytochrome <i>bc</i><sub>1</sub> complexes are ubiquinol:cytochrome <i>c</i> oxidoreductases, and as such, they are centrally important components of respiratory and photosynthetic electron transfer chains in many species of bacteria and in mitochondria. The minimal complex has three catalytic components, which are cytochrome <i>b</i>, cytochrome <i>c</i><sub>1</sub>, and the Rieske iron-sulfur subunit, but the function of mitochondrial cytochrome <i>bc</i><sub>1</sub> complexes is modified by up to eight supernumerary subunits. The cytochrome <i>bc</i><sub>1</sub> complex from the purple phototrophic bacterium <i>Rhodobacter</i>&#xa0;<i>sphaeroides</i> has a single supernumerary subunit called subunit IV, which is absent from current structures of the complex. In this work we use the styrene-maleic acid copolymer to purify the <i>R. sphaeroides</i> cytochrome <i>bc</i><sub>1</sub> complex in native lipid nanodiscs, which retains the labile subunit IV, annular lipids, and natively bound quinones. The catalytic activity of the four-subunit cytochrome <i>bc</i><sub>1</sub> complex is threefold higher than that of the complex lacking subunit IV. To understand the role of subunit IV, we determined the structure of the four-subunit complex at 2.9 &#xc5; using single particle cryogenic electron microscopy. The structure shows the position of the transmembrane domain of subunit IV, which lies across the transmembrane helices of the Rieske and cytochrome <i>c</i><sub>1</sub> subunits. We observe a quinone at the Q<sub>o</sub> quinone-binding site and show that occupancy of this site is linked to conformational changes in the Rieske head domain during catalysis. Twelve lipids were structurally resolved, making contacts with the Rieske and cytochrome <i>b</i> subunits, with some spanning both of the two monomers that make up the dimeric complex.

### Keywords
Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Subunit iv, Purple bacteria, Cytochrome bc1 complex

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, United Kingdom.
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr David Swainsbury
School of Biological Sciences, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, United Kingdom.


