### Accession
PXD021536

### Title
Heat stress triggers protein secretion into the extracellular matrix of sorghum cell suspension cultures

### Description
Plants reprogram gene expression as an adaptive response to survive high temperatures. While the identity and functions of intracellular heat stress-responsive proteins have been extensively studied, the heat response of proteins secreted to the extracellular matrix is unknown. Here, we used Sorghum bicolor, a species adapted for growth in hot climates, to investigate the extracellular heat-induced responses. When exposed to 40 C for 72 h, heat-sensitive Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures died, while ICSB338 sorghum cell cultures survived by activation of a transcriptional response characterized by the induction of HSP70 and HSP90 genes. Quantitative proteomic analysis of proteins recovered from cell culture medium revealed specific heat stress-induced protein expression within the sorghum secretome. Of the 265 secreted proteins identified, 100 responded to heat, with the majority (85%) possessing a predicted signal peptide for targeting to the classical secretory pathway. The differentially expressed proteins have putative functions in detoxification (36%), metabolism (32%) and protein modifications (19%), while 13% are unclassified. Extracellular proteins play a vital role in cell-cell communications during stress adaptation. Our study reveals new insights into the adaptive response of sorghum to heat and provides a useful resource of extracellular proteins that could serve as targets for developing thermotolerant crops.

### Sample Protocol
Growth medium proteins were precipitated with 80% acetone and solubilised in in 9 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4 % (w/v) CHAPS. Aliquots with 12.5 ug protein from each sample were acetone-precipitated and processed using the iTRAQ Reagent-Multiplex Buffer Kit (Applied Biosystems Sciex, Foster City, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, with minor modifications. The protein samples were resuspended in the sample buffer, reduced, alkylated and digestion overnight at 37C using 1:10 (w/w) trypsin (Promega, Madison, USA) to protein sample ratio as described previously [38]. The digested samples were vacuum-dried, re-suspended in triethylammoium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5), and labelled with an 8-plex iTRAQ reagent kit (Applied Biosystems Sciex) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptides of the four control samples were labelled with isobaric tags 113, 114, 115 and 116, while the heat-treated samples were labelled with tags 117, 118, 119 and 121. The eight isobaric-tagged control and heat-stressed samples were pooled into one composite sample, vacuum-dried and cleaned-up using the Hydrophilic Interaction Liquid Chromatography (HILIC) SPE cartridges (PolyLC Inc). Bound peptides were eluted from the cartridges, freeze-dried and re-suspended in 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA) for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was conducted on peptides originating from 5 µg protein, using a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems Sciex) linked to an Eksigent 425 LC system via a Sciex Nanospray III source. Spectrometer data was acquired using the Analyst TF 1.7.1 instrument control and data processing software (Applied Biosystems Sciex).For protein identification and relative quantification, the raw.wiff data-files were processed against the UniProt protein sequences of Sorghum bicolor only (downloaded in May 2018) using ProteinPilot 5.0.1 version 4895 software, incorporating the Paragon Algorithm 5.0.1.0.4874, (Applied Biosystems Sciex).

### Publication Abstract
Plants reprogram gene expression as an adaptive response to survive high temperatures. While the identity and functions of intracellular heat stress-responsive proteins have been extensively studied, the heat response of proteins secreted to the extracellular matrix is unknown. Here, we used <i>Sorghum bicolor</i>, a species adapted for growth in hot climates, to investigate the extracellular heat-induced responses. When exposed to 40 C for 72 h, heat-sensitive Arabidopsis cell suspension cultures died, while ICSB338 sorghum cell cultures survived by activation of a transcriptional response characterized by the induction of <i>HSP70</i> and <i>HSP90</i> genes. Quantitative proteomic analysis of proteins recovered from cell culture medium revealed specific heat stress-induced protein accumulation within the sorghum secretome. Of the 265 secreted proteins identified, 31 responded to heat (2-fold change), with 84% possessing a predicted signal peptide for targeting to the classical secretory pathway. The differentially accumulated proteins have putative functions in metabolism, detoxification, and protein modifications. A germin (SORBI_3003G427700) was highly heat-inducible at both protein and gene level. Overall, our study reveals new insights into sorghum responses to heat and provides a useful resource of extracellular proteins that could serve as targets for developing thermotolerant crops. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD021536.

### Keywords
Sorghum, Heat stress, Itraq

### Affiliations
Durham University, UK
Durham University

### Submitter
Adrian Brown

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Chivasa
Durham University, UK


