### Accession
PXD005227

### Title
Yeast Bdf1 interactome -  Bdf1 Bromodomains are Essential for Meiosis and the Expression of Meiotic-Specific Genes

### Description
Bromodomain and Extra-terminal motif (BET) proteins play a central role in transcription regulation and chromatin signalling pathways. In yeast, Bdf1 and its homologous protein Bdf2 are partially redundant and the deletion of both genes is lethal. Most of Bdf1 functions have been investigated in vegetative cells even if this protein is essential for sporulation. In this study, we explored for the first time the functional role of the Bdf1 bromodomains during the sporulation program. Extensive purification of Bdf1 partners identified two independent complexes with Bdf2 or the Swr1 complex. However, none of them are required for meiotic gene regulation or to complete sporulation. Taken together, our results unveil a new role for Bdf1 as a meiotic-specific gene transcriptional regulator independently of its predominant protein partners.

### Sample Protocol
TAP purifications were performed as described previously (Rigaut et al. 1999; Puig et al. 2001). Calmoduline eluates from the TAP-purified complexes were analyzed by SDS-PAGE by using Novex 4-12% gradient gels (Invitrogen) and visualized by staining with SilverQuest™ Silver Staining Kit (Thermo, LC6070). Western Blot analysis of the Calmoduline eluates was performed using the corresponding antibodies. Protein preparation and mass spectrometry-based proteomic analyses were realized as described in (Milbradt et al., Mol Cell Proteomics, 2014). Briefly, eluted proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (NuPAGE 4-12%, Invitrogen) before in-gel digestion using trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and Q-Exactive Plus or LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30, Cox J & Mann M, 2008, Nat. Biotechnol.) and SGD database (November 2015 version). The iBAQ value (Schwanhäusser B et al. Nature, 2011) calculated by MaxQuant was used to quantify proteins. Only proteins identified with a minimum of 2 unique + razor peptides were taken into account. For statistical analysis of results obtained with Bdf1-TAP triplicates, we used ProStaR (WieczorekS et al., in revision): proteins identified in the reverse and contaminant databases and proteins exhibiting less than 6 iBAQ values in one condition (2 conditions and 2 analytical replicates per biological replicates) were discarded from the list. After log2 transformation, iBAQ values were normalized by condition-wise median centering before missing value imputation using the QRILC algorithm (missing not at random-devoted imputation method); statistical testing was conducted using limma. To consider a protein as a potential binding partner of Bdf1-TAP, it must exhibit a p-value < 0.001 and a log2(fold change) ≥ 7.

### Publication Abstract
Bromodomain and Extra-terminal motif (BET) proteins play a central role in transcription regulation and chromatin signalling pathways. They are present in unicellular eukaryotes and in this study, the role of the BET protein Bdf1 has been explored in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Mutation of Bdf1 bromodomains revealed defects on both the formation of spores and the meiotic progression, blocking cells at the exit from prophase, before the first meiotic division. This phenotype is associated with a massive deregulation of the transcription of meiotic genes and Bdf1 bromodomains are required for appropriate expression of the key meiotic transcription factor NDT80 and almost all the Ndt80-inducible genes, including APC complex components. Bdf1 notably accumulates on the promoter of Ndt80 and its recruitment is dependent on Bdf1 bromodomains. In addition, the ectopic expression of NDT80 during meiosis partially bypasses this dependency. Finally, purification of Bdf1 partners identified two independent complexes with Bdf2 or the SWR complex, neither of which was required to complete sporulation. Taken together, our results unveil a new role for Bdf1 -working independently from its predominant protein partners Bdf2 and the SWR1 complex-as a regulator of meiosis-specific genes.

### Keywords
Bdf1, Nanolc-ms/ms, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Tap purification

### Affiliations
EDyP
EDyP team

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Bruley  
EDyP team


