### Accession
PXD000881

### Title
Identification of Drosophila USP2 partners

### Description
We used Drosophila flies model system for the identification of new enzymes of the ubiquitin specific protease family regulating evolutionary conserved immune signals in both Drosophila and Humans. These enzymes specifically control the stability or the activated status of target proteins by hydrolysing ubiquitin. We report here results of USP2 partners pull-down.

### Sample Protocol
Pull Down assays were performed using S2 cell lysate incubated with GST or GST-USP2. Eluted proteins were stacked in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel before being in-gel digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS (Dionex U3000 coupled to ThermoFisher LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro).

### Data Protocol
Data were processed automatically using Mascot Daemon software (version 2.3.2, Matrix Science). Concomitant searches against Uniprot sequence databank (Drosophila melanogaster taxonomy) and classical contaminants database were performed using Mascot (version 2.4). ESI-TRAP was chosen as the instrument, trypsin/P as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavage allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set respectively at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethyl (C, fixes) acetyl (N-ter, variable), oxidation (M, variable) and deamidation (NQ, variable). The IRMa software (version 1.31.1) was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide identification FDR < 1% (as calculated by employing the reverse database strategy), and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. The filtered results were uploaded into a relational mass spectrometry identification database (MSIdb) and a homemade tool (hEIDI version 1.14.3) was used for the compilation, grouping and comparison of the protein groups from the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Usp2, Pull-down, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
EDyP
EDyP team, Large Scale Biology Department, iRTSV CEA - Inserm - UJF Grenoble, France

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP team, Large Scale Biology Department, iRTSV CEA - Inserm - UJF Grenoble, France


