### Accession
PXD033688

### Title
Introducing a new type of organotypic laryngeal mucosa model

### Description
Research of human vocal fold (VF) biology is hampered by several factors. The sensitive microstructure of the VF mucosa is one of them and limits the in vivo research, as biopsies carry the unbearable risk of scarring. A laryngeal organotypic model consisting of VF epithelial cells and VF fibroblasts (VFF) might overcome some of the limitations. Whereas human VFF are available in several forms, availability of VF epithelial cells is scarce. Buccal mucosa might be a good source, as it is easily accessible, and biopsies heal without scarring.  For this project we generated organotypic constructs consisting of immortalized human VF fibroblasts and primary human buccal epithelial cells. The constructs (n = 3) were compared to native laryngeal mucosa on a histological and proteomic level.  The engineered constructs reassembled into a mucosa-like structure, after a cultivation period of 35 days. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed a multi-layered stratified epithelium, a collagen type IV positive barrier-like structure resembling the basal membrane, and an underlying layer containing VFF. Proteomic analysis revealed a total number of 1961 proteins. Of these, 83.8% were detected in both native VF and constructs, with only 53 proteins having significantly different abundance. 15.3% of detected proteins were identified in native VF mucosa only, most likely due to endothelial, immune and muscle cells within the VF samples, while 0.9% were found only in the constructs.  Based on easily available cell sources, we could demonstrate that our organotypic laryngeal mucosa model shares many characteristics with native VF mucosa. It represents a stable and reproducible in vitro model and offers a wide range of possibilities ranging from the exploration of VF biology to the testing of interventions (e.g. drug testing).

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen samples of CC were lysed in 100 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl (1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS); 10 mM Tris(2-carbocylethyl)phospine hydrochloride (TCEP); 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), (all Sigma Aldrich) by sonication for 2 minutes on ice. Snap-frozen samples of VF were homogenized with steel beads (Sigma Aldrich) using the MagNA lyser instrument for 3 minutes in 600 µl of 100 mM Tris-HCl. After removal of the beads, homogenates were reduced, alkylated for 10 minutes at 95°C, and centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 7 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined using the BCA-RAC assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s instructions. For Liquid chromatography – Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, 100 µg of solubilized protein or whole matrix CC were subjected to filter aided sample preparation as described previously with minor modifications using 3kD cut off ultracentrifugation filters (Merck Millipore, Burlington, Massachusetts, USA). Buffer was exchanged 3 times with 8 M Urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl. After predigestion for 4 hours at 37°C with rLysC (1:100; Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA), samples were diluted to 2 M Urea with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with trypsin (1:50, Promega) overnight. Peptides were collected by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 45 minutes at room temperature and desalted using SDB-RPS tips. 500 ng protein-digest or 1/400 of CC of each sample were injected and analyzed by nano-HPLC (equipped with an Aurora nanocolumn (C18, 1.6 µm, 250 x 0.075 mm, Ion Optics, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Separation was carried out on the nanocolumn at a flow rate of 150 µl/min at 35°C using the following gradient (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in water, solvent B: acetonitrile (VWR International, Radnor, Pennsylvania, USA) containing 0.1% formic acid): 0-0.1 min: 2% B, 150 µl/min; 0.1-18 min: 2% 150 µl/min – 300 µl/min; 18-100 min 2%-25% B; 100-107 min; 25-35% B; 108-118 min: 35-95% B; 118-118.1 min: 95-2% B; 118.1-133 min: 2% B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker, Vienna, Austria) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with mass range: 200-2000 m/z, 2 Hz, capillary 16.000 V, dry gas flow 3 l/min with 150°C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control top 17.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were analysed by MaxQant by searching the public Swissprot human database plus rat collagens (13202466 residues, 20304 sequences) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance: ± 0.0006 Da; product mass tolerance: ± 40 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1% peptide-spectra-matches (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), 1% protein FDR. Additionally, a label free quantification (LFQ) was performed using MaxQuant requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Research of human vocal fold (VF) biology is hampered by several factors. The sensitive microstructure of the VF mucosa is one of them and limits the in vivo research, as biopsies carry a very high risk of scarring. A laryngeal organotypic model consisting of VF epithelial cells and VF fibroblasts (VFF) may overcome some of these limitations. In contrast to human VFF, which are available in several forms, availability of VF epithelial cells is scarce. Buccal mucosa might be a good alternative source for epithelial cells, as it is easily accessible, and biopsies heal without scarring. For this project, we thus generated alternative constructs consisting of immortalized human VF fibroblasts and primary human buccal epithelial cells. The constructs (n = 3) were compared to native laryngeal mucosa at the histological and proteomic level. The engineered constructs reassembled into a mucosa-like structure after a cultivation period of 35 days. Immunohistochemical staining confirmed a multi-layered stratified epithelium, a collagen type IV positive barrier-like structure resembling the basement membrane, and an underlying layer containing VFF. Proteomic analysis resulted in a total number of 1961 identified and quantified proteins. Of these, 83.8% were detected in both native VF and constructs, with only 53 proteins having significantly different abundance. 15.3% of detected proteins were identified in native VF mucosa only, most likely due to endothelial, immune and muscle cells within the VF samples, while 0.9% were found only in the constructs. Based on easily available cell sources, we demonstrate that our laryngeal mucosa model shares many characteristics with native VF mucosa. It provides an alternative and reproducible in vitro model and offers many research opportunities ranging from the study of VF biology to the testing of interventions (e.g. drug testing).

### Keywords
Vocal folds, Proteomics, Laryngeal mucosa model, In vitro, Oral buccal mucosa

### Affiliations
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria
Omics Center Graz

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Full Professor for Analytical Chemistry Vienna University of Technology Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics Getreidemarkt 9/E164 A-1060 Vienna Austria


