### Accession
PXD010359

### Title
CotL, a new morphogenetic coat protein of Clostridium difficile

### Description
The strict anaerobe Clostridium difficile is an important nosocomial enteropathogen that has become the most common cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhea. The oxygen-resistant C. difficile spores play a central role in the infectious cycle, contributing to transmission, infection and recurrence. The spore surface layers, coat and exosporium, enable resistance of the spores to extreme physical and chemical stresses. Despite the critical importance of the spore in C. difficile infection, little is known about the mechanisms that orchestrate the assembly of its external layers. In this study, we identified and characterized a new C. difficile spore protein, named CotL, which is required for the assembly of the spore surface layers. The cotL gene was expressed in the mother cell compartment under the dual control of σE and σK. The CotL protein was localized in the C. difficile spore coat and cotL mutant spores had a major morphologic defect at the level of the coat/exosporium layers, as observed by transmission electron microscopy. Accordingly, spores of the cotL mutant contained a reduced amount of several proteins of the coat and exosporium, including CotB, CotE and CdeC. Additionally, cotL inactivation resulted in a defect in localization of late spore coat proteins in sporulating cells. Finally, spores of the cotL mutant were more sensitive to lysozyme and were impaired in germination. These defects are most likely associated with the structurally altered coat. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that CotL is a morphogenetic protein essential for the assembly of the spore coat in C. difficile.

### Sample Protocol
Spore proteins pellets were resupended in Urea 8 M / NH4HCO3 100 mM and sonicated on ice. Subsequently, total proteins were reduced with TCEP and then alkylated with iodoacetamide.Proteins were digested with rLys-C and then digested with Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin . The digestion was stop with Formic acid and peptides were desalted on C18 Sep-Pak Cartridge. Peptides were resuspended with ACN 2% / FA 0.1%. DDA acquisitions were performed on a Q Exactive HF couple to a proxeon nLC-1000 chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version using the Andromeda search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against an internal Clostridium difficile database containing 3,957 proteins and the contaminant file included in MaxQuant. For the quantification, skip normalization option was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The strict anaerobe Clostridium difficile is the most common cause of antibiotic-associated diarrhoea. The oxygen-resistant C. difficile spores play a central role in the infectious cycle, contributing to transmission, infection and recurrence. The spore surface layers, the coat and exosporium, enable the spores to resist physical and chemical stress. However, little is known about the mechanisms of their assembly. In this study, we characterized a new spore protein, CotL, which is required for the assembly of the spore coat. The cotL gene was expressed in the mother cell compartment under the dual control of the RNA polymerase sigma factors, &#x3c3;<sup>E</sup> and &#x3c3;<sup>K</sup> . CotL was localized in the spore coat, and the spores of the cotL mutant had a major morphologic defect at the level of the coat/exosporium layers. Therefore, the mutant spores contained a reduced amount of several coat/exosporium proteins and a defect in their localization in sporulating cells. Finally, cotL mutant spores were more sensitive to lysozyme and were impaired in germination, a phenotype likely to be associated with the structurally altered coat. Collectively, these results strongly suggest that CotL is a morphogenetic protein essential for the assembly of the spore coat in C. difficile.

### Keywords
Q exactive hf, Clostridium difficile, Shotgun proteomics, Spore coat

### Affiliations
Laboratoire Pathogenèse des Bactéries Anaérobies, InstitutPasteur, Paris, France
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Thibaut Douché

### Lab Head
Dr Bruno Dupuy
Laboratoire Pathogenèse des Bactéries Anaérobies, InstitutPasteur, Paris, France


