### Accession
PXD016575

### Title
Autophagy mediates temporary reprogramming and dedifferentiation in plant somatic cells

### Description
Somatic cells acclimate to changes in the environment by temporary reprogramming. Much has been learned about transcription factors that induce these cell-state switches in both plants and animals, but how cells rapidly modulate their proteome remains elusive. Here, we show rapid induction of autophagy during temporary reprogramming in plants triggered by phytohormones, immune and danger signals. Quantitative proteomics following sequential reprogramming revealed that autophagy is required for timely decay of previous cellular states and for tweaking the proteome to acclimate to the new conditions. Signatures of previous cellular programs thus persist in autophagy deficient cells, affecting cellular decision-making. Concordantly, autophagy deficient cells fail to acclimatize to dynamic climate changes. Similarly, they have defects in dedifferentiating into pluripotent stem cells, and redifferentiation during organogenesis. These observations indicate that autophagy mediates cell state switches that underlie somatic cell reprogramming in plants and possibly other organisms, and thereby promotes phenotypic plasticity.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plant material (500 mg) was lysed in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris HCl, pH7.5) and supernatant was collected after centrifugation at 20000 g for 15 min. Samples (8 µg/ml concentration) were used for mass spectrometry measurements. FASP and desalting steps were performed as previously described (Käll et al, 2007). These samples are then labeled with TMT according to the manufacturer’s instructions (ThermoFisher). Labelled samples were separated into fractions using an SCX system (ThermoFisher), analyzed in LC-MS/MS (Roitinger et al, 2015). SCX was performed using an Ultimate system (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 35 µl/min and a TSKgel column (ToSOH) column (5-µm particles, 1 mm i.d. x 300 mm). The flow-through was collected as a single fraction, along with the gradient fractions, which were collected every minute. In total, 130 fractions were collected and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis raw files were processed in Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS Amanda (Dorfer et al, 2014) (version 1.4.14.8240) was used to perform a database search against the TAIR10 database supplemented with common contaminants. Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as well TMT at lysine and peptide N-termini were defined as fixed modifications. Trypsin was defined as the proteolytic enzyme allowing for up to 2 missed cleavages. Mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursors and 0.03 Da for fragment masses. Reporter ion intensities were extracted in Proteome Discoverer using the most confident centroid within an integration boundary of 10 ppm. Identified spectra were FDR filtered to 0.5% on PSM level using Percolator. Peptides shorter than 7 amino acids were removed from the results. Identified peptides were grouped to proteins applying strict maximum parsimony. Quantification of proteins is based on unique peptides only. Quantified proteins were exported and further processed in the R environment (version 3.4.3). Proteins were ranked by their similarity to an expected regulation pattern according to Pearson correlation. Furthermore, proteins regulated more than 1.5-fold were subdivided into clusters using k-means clustering.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Arabidopsis, Autophagy

### Affiliations
IMBA - Institute of Molecular Biotechnology
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Yasin Dagdas
Gregor Mendel Institute of Molecular Plant Biology GmbH Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria Phone: +43 1 79044 9850 http://www.gmi.oeaw.ac.at


