### Accession
PXD015022

### Title
A single mutation in NFU1 gene metabolically reprograms pulmonary artery smooth muscle cells

### Description
NFU1 is an iron-sulfur (Fe-S) scaffold protein, involved in Fe-S assembly and transfer to a range of mitochondrial metalloproteins. Patients with the NFU1G208C mutation develop pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) with 70% penetrance. Rats with NFU1G206C homozygous mutation demonstrated the PAH phenotype showing increased pulmonary vasculature remodeling, right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy, and RV pressure. In the present study, we discovered phenotypic metabolic changes in pulmonary arterial smooth muscle cells (PASMC) from NFU1G206C homozygous mutant rats associated with alterations in the mitochondrial proteome. Quantitative analysis of the mitochondrial proteome showed significant changes in the abundance of 208 proteins involved in various metabolic and antioxidant functions in response to the NFU1 mutation. Our data indicates that the NFU1G206C homozygous mutant rats have decreased expression of complex I and II, which are known to depend on iron-sulfur clusters, and increased expression of complexes III to V, accompanied with a significant decrease in mitochondrial function, pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) activity and amplified glycolysis and anabolism in PASMC. The NFU1 mutation produced a dysregulated antioxidant system in the mitochondria which leads to increased levels of reactive oxygen species. Due to alterations in apoptosis regulating proteins, the NFU1G206C cells were found to exhibit high proliferation rates and resistance to apoptosis as compared with the wild type (WT). Finally, the NFU1G206C mitochondrial proteome showed significant abundance changes in proteins that regulate fatty acid (FA) metabolism and exhibited increased FA oxidation compared to WT, suggesting increased FA oxidation compensates for the decreased PDH activity. In conclusion, our data indicates that the NFU1G206C mutation induces a metabolic shift in the PASMC, which results in a hyper-proliferative and apoptosis resistant phenotype and presents a novel cellular model to study PAH.

### Sample Protocol
To determine changes in the mitochondrial proteome associated with the NFU1G206C mutation, 50 µL of Membrane Solubilization Buffer (cat# 1862783, Thermo Scientific) was added to isolated mitochondria and incubated on ice for 30 minutes. 40 µL of clarified supernatant was collected and subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion. Sample volumes were made to 100 µL using Membrane Solubilization Buffer, supplemented with DTT at a final concentration of 5mM, and incubated at 56°C for 30 minutes. Samples were cooled to room temperature for 10 minutes and subsequently incubated with 15mM acrylamide for 30 minutes at room temperature while protected from light. The samples were supplemented with 6 volumes of pre-chilled 100% acetone and incubated one hour at -20°C to precipitate proteins followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. 400 µL of pre-chilled 90% acetone was added to the protein pellet and vortexed followed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C. The remaining acetone was removed and the protein pellets were air dried for 2-3 minutes. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 µL of Digestion Buffer from the Pierce MS Sample Prep kit for Cultured Cells (cat# 84840, Thermo Scientific) and 2 µg of Lys-C was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours while shaking at 300rpm. Afterwards, 50 µL of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 2 µg of trypsin was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C overnight while shaking at 300rpm. The samples were frozen at -80°C for 10 minutes to stop the digestion. The samples were dried down, resuspended in 15 µL 0.1%HFBA/4%FA (v/v), and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The samples were subjected to desalting as previously described (PMID:  28550165 & 31018989).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were then searched against the rattus SwissProt_2018_11 database (8068 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made through the use of Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Reported peptide FDR rates from Scaffold ranged from 0.1-0.2%. Label-free Quantitative Proteomics. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification as previously described (PMID: 27207528).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nfu1, Liver, Pulmonary arterial hypertension, Hyper-proliferative

### Affiliations
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Langlais
University of Arizona College of Medicine, Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology


