### Accession
PXD021562

### Title
Cooperative treatment effectiveness of VE821 and AUY922 in Ewing’s sarcoma cells

### Description
Ewing's sarcoma (ES) is the second most frequent bone cancer during childhood and adolescence originating from a translocation between the EWSR1 and the FLI1 gene, which inactivates BRCA-mediated DNA damage response. Both ATR and HSP90 inhibitors are promising new candidates in the field of ES treatment. We show that the HSP90 inhibitor AUY922 alone induced DNA damages, apoptosis and ER stress, while reducing the abundance of DNA repair proteins. The combinations of the ATR inhibitor VE821 and AUY922 (AUY-VE) led to strong apoptosis induction in ES cell lines, originating from a common set of molecular targets and independent of their p53 status, yet based on different molecular mechanisms. P53 wild-type ES cells activated pro-apoptotic gene transcription and underwent mitochondria-mediated apoptosis. P53 null ES cells, however, accumulated higher level of DNA damage, ER stress and autophagy, finally leading to apoptosis. Moreover, AUY-VE treatment compromised ES cell vitality due to impaired PI3K/AKT/mTOR signaling. Unexpectedly, the combinations of AUY922 with the ATM inhibitor, KU55933 failed to kill ES cells and showed protective effects compared to AUY-VE. In summary, we provide mechanistic insights into the effective ES cell killing by ATR and HSP90 inhibitor combinations, which also offers a targetable approach for BRCA-deficient tumors, irrespective of their p53 status and may give rise to new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets (10e6 cells replicate) were thawed on ice and resuspended in 0.5ml of PBS. 0.5ml of a 2x lysis buffer was added (final 100mM HEPES, 50mM DTT, 4% SDS).  Cell lysates were sonicated (Bioruptor Plus, Diagenode) with 10 cycles (1min ON, 30sec OFF, 20°C),then heated at 95°C (10min). Following alkylation (15mM Iodoacetamide, 30min, RT, dark), 50µg protein per sample was precipitated in ice-cold acetone (4x sample volume, overnight, -20°C).Protein pellets were obtained by centrifugation (20000xg, 30min, 4°C) and washed twice with 400µl ice-cold 80% acetone/water. Pellets were vortexed and centrifuged (10min after first wash, 2min after second, at 20000g, 4°C), before resuspension by sonication (as described before) in lysis buffer (100mM HEPEs, 3M Urea, pH 8.0) at a concentration of 1µg/µL.  Digestion with Lys-C (1:100 enzyme/protein; Wako,4h, 37°C) was followed by 1:1 dilution with water and digestion overnight with trypsin (1:100 enzyme/protein; Promega, 37°C). Peptides were acidified (10% TFA to pH 2) and desalted using an Oasis® HLB μElution Plate (Waters Corporation). Samples were spiked with iRT kit (Biognosys AG)and separated by the nanoAcquity M-Class Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5µm, 180µm x 20mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7µm, 75µm x 250mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a Q-Exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% FA and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded at constant flow of solvent A at 5μL/min onto the trap for 6min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at 0.3μL/min and introduced via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360μm OD x 20μm ID; 10μm tip (New Objective). A spray voltage of 2.2kV was used. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a non-linear fashion from 0% to 40% in 120min. Total run time was 145min. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. The RF lens was set to 40%. MS conditions were: Full scan MS spectra with mass range 350-1650m/z was acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120000 FWHM. The filling time was set at60ms with limitation of 3e6 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 40 mass window segments of differing 20 widths across the MS1 mass range. HCD fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200m/z after accumulation of 3e6 ions or after filling time of 35ms.

### Data Protocol
For sample-specific spectral library generation, data was acquired from samples from each condition in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using the same gradients as the DIA analyses. Both DIA and DDA data were included in the library generation. The data were searched against the human Uniprot database using the Pulsar search engine (Biognosys AG). The following modifications were included in the search: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M)/ Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1% on peptide and protein level. The resulting library contained 99274 precursors corresponding to 6334 protein groups. Precursor matching, protein inference, and quantification were performed in Spectronaut using median peptide and precursors (no TopN). Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut (version 13.1.190621, Biognosys AG) using the paired samples (according to the day of cell harvesting) from each condition across the replicates. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with R-studio (version 0.99.902) using in-house pipelines and scripts. Proteome data sets were further processed using ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; Quiagen) (cutoff of q<0.05).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ewing's sarcoma

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena, Germany
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Zhao-Qi Wang
Leibniz Institute on Aging Fritz Lipmann Institute (FLI) Beutenbergstr. 11 07745 Jena, Germany


