### Accession
PXD033606

### Title
Characterization of ISG65-Cd3 complex

### Description
Identification of disulfide bonds of ISG65 protein and hydrogen-deuteium exchange with mass spectrometry for characterization of protein-protein interaction area.

### Sample Protocol
300 pmol of ISG65 or C3d were mixed in a 1:1 (v/v) ratio with 1 M glycine, 200 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at pH 2.3 and injected onto a Nepenthesin-2 column. Generated peptides were trapped and desalted using a micro-trap column (Luna Omega 5 μm Polar C18 100 Å Micro Trap 20 x 0.3 mm) for 3 min at a flow rate of 400 μl min-1 using an isocratic pump delivering 0.4% (v/v) formic acid in water. Both the protease column and the trap column were placed in an icebox. After 3 min, the peptides were separated on a C18 reversed phase column (Luna Omega 1.6 μm Polar C18 100Å ,100 x 1.0 mm) with a linear gradient of 5-35% B over 26 min, where solvent A was 2% (v/v) acetonitrile / 0.4% (v/v) formic acid in water and solvent B was 95% (v/v) acetonitrile / 4.5% (v/v) water / 0.4% (v/v) formic acid. The analytical column was placed in an icebox. A 15T solariX XR FT-ICR mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) operating in positive MS/MS mode was used for the detection of peptides.  Hydrogen deuterium exchange Hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) was initiated by a 10-fold dilution of 160 μM ISG65: C3d complex into a deuterated buffer. 50 μl aliquots (100 pmol) were taken after 20 s, 120 s, 1200 s and 7200 s of incubation in deuterated buffer and quenched by the addition of 50 μl of 1 M glycine, 200 mM TCEP at pH 2.3, followed by immediate freezing using liquid nitrogen. Aliquots were quickly thawed and analysed as described for peptide mapping. Peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 10-30% B over 18 min. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive MS mode.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed by DataAnalysis 5.0 (Bruker Daltonics), ProteinScape 4.0 (Bruker Daltonics). Data was processed by DataAnalysis 4.2 software (Bruker Daltonics). The MASCOT search engine was used for the identification of peptides, using a database containing sequence of ISG65. Spectra of partially deuterated peptides were processed by Data Analysis 4.2 (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, MA) and by in-house program DeutEx.

### Publication Abstract
African Trypanosomes have developed elaborate mechanisms to escape the adaptive immune response, but little is known about complement evasion particularly at the early stage of infection. Here we show that ISG65 of the human-infective parasite Trypanosoma brucei gambiense is a receptor for human complement factor C3 and its activation fragments&#xa0;and that it takes over a role in selective inhibition of the alternative pathway C5 convertase and thus abrogation of the terminal pathway. No deposition of C4b, as part of the classical and lectin pathway convertases, was detected on trypanosomes. We present the cryo-electron microscopy (EM) structures of native C3 and C3b in complex with ISG65 which reveal a set of modes of complement interaction. Based on these findings, we propose a model for receptor-ligand interactions as they occur at the plasma membrane of blood-stage trypanosomes and may facilitate innate immune escape of the parasite.

### Keywords
Isg65-cd3 complex, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the CAS
Intitute of Biotechnology

### Submitter
Petr Pompach

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Zoll
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry of the CAS


