### Accession
PXD027003

### Title
Filariasis test strip (FTS) antibody recognition of Brugia malayi glycoproteins

### Description
Rapid and accurate prevalence mapping of lymphatic filariasis (LF) is necessary to eliminate this disfiguring and disabling neglected tropical disease. Unfortunately, rapid tests such as the filariasis test strip (FTS) for Wuchereria bancrofti, the causative agent of LF in Africa, can cross-react with antigens circulating in some persons infected by the African eye worm, Loa loa, rendering the test unreliable in eleven co-endemic nations. The intended target of the FTS is a heavily glycosylated W. bancrofti circulating filarial antigen (Wb-CFA). Previously, we determined that the FTS monoclonal antibody, AD12.1, which detects a carbohydrate epitope on Wb-CFA, also detects multiple L. loa proteins in cross-reactive sera from persons with loiasis. Since the carbohydrate epitope recognized by AD12.1 is present on glycoproteins of other parasitic nematodes, including Brugia species, it is unclear why reactive glycoproteins are not detected in infections with other filarial parasites.  To gain a better understanding of the proteins recognized by the FTS diagnostic antibody, we used proteomics and to characterize filarial glycoproteins that are bound by the AD12.1 antibody using Brugia malayi as a model. This included using shotgun proteomics to catalog the AD12-reactive glycoproteins found in adult female somatic (BmSOM) and excretory/secretory (BmES) antigens. As well as in-gel proteomics of two predominant protein bands from BmES.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite in vitro culturing and protein preparation. B. malayi worms were obtained from the Filariasis Research Reagent Resource Center (FR3, filariasiscenter.org). To prepare whole worm lysate (B. malayi somatic antigens, BmSOM), 30 adult male or female worms or 106 Microfilaria (Mf) were subjected to one freeze-thaw cycle, then incubated at 4°C overnight in RIPA buffer with ProteaseArrest protease inhibitors (G-biosciences). Lysates underwent mechanical disruption by pestle and then by shearing with a 25G needle with subsequent centrifugation (13500 g for 30 min). To collect excretory/secretory products (BmES), 60 adult male or female worms or 3 x 106 Mf were cultured for two weeks at 37°C/5% CO2 in RPMI 1640 media supplemented with L-glutamine, glucose, 100 U/mL penicillin, 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin, and 0.25 µg/mL amphotericin B. The spent media was collected on alternating days by passage through a 0.4 µm cell strainer to block collection of larvae and stored at -20°C. BmES products were concentrated to 1-1.5 mL by centrifugal filtration using an Amicon Ultra 3000 MWCO filter (Millipore). In this report, BmES is derived from adult female worms unless otherwise specified.  Immunoprecipiation DH6.5 and AD12.1 are monoclonal mouse IgM antibodies, initially generated against Dirofilaria immitis antigens, which both recognize the same carbohydrate epitope. A mouse IgM specific to lipopolysaccharide (clone 11E10, Southern Biotech) served as an isotype control. Monoclonal antibody DH6.5 and mouse IgM isotype control antibodies were conjugated to Affigel 10 beads (Bio-Rad) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Conjugated beads were stored as a 50% slurry in PBS. Conjugated beads (100 µL) were mixed with either 80 µg of BmSOM, or BmES in 1 ml total volume then rocked overnight at 4°C. For BmSOM, beads were washed four times with cold PBS. For BmES, more stringent wash conditions were required due to the lack of detergent during BmES preparation. BmES product was washed four times with cold PBS, four times with high salt detergent buffer, MIB-T (5 mM HEPES, 1 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 10 mM NaF, 2.4 mM NaVO4, 0.5% Triton-X-100 and protease inhibitor cocktail), followed by two washes in cold PBS to remove the detergent. After washing, antigen-coated beads were suspended in 1X NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) and incubated at 95°C for five minutes to release bound antigens.   Liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS). For shotgun proteomics, immunoprecipitation samples were prepared for LC-ESI-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nanoLC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific).  For in-gel proteomics, gel bands were cut into four 1 x 1 mm plugs and transferred to a 96 well plate. Gel plugs were dehydrated by the addition of acetonitrile (100 µL) to each well and incubated at room temperature for 10 min on a nutator. The supernatants were removed, the dehydration step was repeated, and the gel plugs were air dried for 30 min. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 50 µL of 10 mM DTT in 100 mM Seppro ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC buffer, Millipore), pH 8.0 for 30 min at 56°C, followed by alkylation with 50 µL of 55 mM IAM in 100 mM ABC buffer for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Plugs were dehydrated twice with acetonitrile as before. Gel plugs were rehydrated in digestion buffer containing either chymotrypsin (0.025 µg/µL in LC-MS-grade water) or trypsin (0.025 µg/µL in 100 mM ABC buffer, pH 8.0) and incubated for 1 hour at room temperature on the nutator. An additional 0.25 µg of digest enzyme was added and the sample was incubated overnight. Peptides were extracted twice from the plugs by incubating with 20 µL of 50% MeCN with 5% (vol/vol) formic acid in water at 37°C for 30 min. Peptides were analyzed according to the solution-based proteomics described above.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS spectra were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) files using Proteome Discoverer v2.1.0.81. MGF files were submitted for peptide identification based on the B. malayi genome, Bmal 4.0 downloaded from WormBase ParaSite (parasite.wormbase.org)). Peptide hits were cross-referenced against contaminant databases: ENSEMBL for Human contaminants (Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.72 ENHU, version June 2016) and the cRAP database version (2012.01.01) for common contaminating peptides (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). Qualifying peptides had a less than 1% false discovery rate and were absent from the combined human and cRAP databases. Proteins were considered true hits if more than one unique peptide was detected by mass spectrometry.

### Publication Abstract
The Global Program to Eliminate Lymphatic Filariasis (LF) relies on rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs) to determine where annual mass drug administration for LF is required and when it can be stopped. These tests detect a Wuchereria bancrofti glycoprotein in the blood of infected persons via a carbohydrate moiety recognized by the monoclonal antibodies AD12 and DH6.5. Loiasis cross-reactivity with LF RDTs has recently been recognized as a serious obstacle to LF elimination in loiasis-endemic areas. To better understand the nature of this cross-reactivity, we used the DH6.5 antibody to immunoaffinity purify Loa loa antigens from the sera of individuals with a positive RDT due to loiasis. Immunoblot analysis revealed many circulating AD12/DH6.5-reactive antigens, and proteomic analysis identified multiple L. loa proteins in LF RDT-positive loiasis sera. These included both secreted and somatic proteins, suggesting that they may be released by dying L. loa adult worms and/or microfilariae. Unlike the single high molecular weight W. bancrofti circulating filarial antigen that is reliably present in the blood of persons with bancroftian filariasis, reactive L. loa antigens appeared to be only transiently present in the blood of a subset of persons with loiasis. These key differences between the circulating antigens of W. bancrofti and L. loa can be used to differentiate positive results generated by both species and may lead to improved diagnostic tests for LF and loiasis.

### Keywords
Excretory, Filariasis, Brugia malayi, Bmes, Lc-esi ms/ms, Secretory

### Affiliations
Washington University in St Louis
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington Univerisity in St Louis

### Submitter
Marla Hertz

### Lab Head
Dr Philip J Budge
Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of Medicine, Washington Univerisity in St Louis


