### Accession
PXD021019

### Title
Proteomics analysis of white adipose tissue in high fat diet fed mice

### Description
The popularity of high fat foods in modern society has been associated with epidemic of various metabolic diseases characterized by insulin resistance, the pathology of which involves complex interactions between multiple tissues such as liver, skeletal muscle and white adipose tissue (WAT). To uncover the mechanism by which excessive fat impairs insulin sensitivity, we conducted a multi- tissue study by using TMT-based quantitative proteomics. 3-week-old ICR mice were fed with high fat diet (HFD) for 19 weeks to induce insulin resistance. Liver, skeletal muscle and epididymal fat were collected for proteomics screening. Additionally, PRM was used for validating adipose differential proteins. By comparing tissue-specific protein profiles of HFD mice, multi-tissue regulation of glucose and lipid homeostasis and corresponding underlying mechanisms was systematically investigated and characterized.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-based quantitative proteomics Sample preparation. Total proteins were extracted from cell powder obtained by liquid nitrogen grinding of each sample. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (P0011-1, Beyotime Biotechnology, Shanghai, China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For each tissue, equal protein extracts from every subject in HFD and control group were separately pooled.  Protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  After trypsin digestion, Peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit (90068, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Sample name and marking information are as follows: NC—126; LC—127; NH—128; LH—129; M-NC—128; M-LC—129; M-NH—130; M-LH—131; Liver-NC—128; Liver-MC—129; Liver-NH—130; Liver-LH—131. The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length).  LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (20-cm length, 150 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from9% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 25% to 36% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 700 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Orbitrap FusionTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1550 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 35 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 15,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Database search. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against SwissProt Mouse (16964 entries) database concatenated with reverse decoy database (42). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification. Acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met and deamidation (NQ) were specified as variable modifications.. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40. TMT-6plex quantification was performed. Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) Sample preparation. The protein extraction and trypsin digestion processes were the same as that described in TMT-based quantitative proteomics, except for centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min.  LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column. The gradient was comprised of an increase from 7% to 25% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 40 min, 25% to 35% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 350 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 400 to 1050 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 27 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-independent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 3E6 for full MS and 1E5 for MS/MS. The maxumum IT was set at 50 ms for full MS and 150 ms for MS/MS. The isolation window for MS/MS was set at 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis. The resulting MS data were processed using Skyline (v.4.1.0.18166). Peptide settings: enzyme was set as Trypsin [KR/P], Max missed cleavage set as 0. The peptide length was set as 7-25, Variable modification was set as Carbamidomethyl on Cys and oxidation on Met. Transition settings: precursor charges were set as 2, 3, ion charges were set as 1, ion types were set as b, y. The product ions were set as from ion 3 to last ion, the ion match tolerance was set as 0.02 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Insulin resistance; high fat diet; multi-tissue analysis

### Affiliations
Hebei Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases

### Submitter
Linlin Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Huijuan Ma
Hebei Key Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases


