### Accession
PXD022150

### Title
Identification of microbial-derived HLA-bound peptides in melanoma

### Description
Various bacterial species are known to colonize human tumors , proliferate within them and modulate immune function, ultimately affecting patient survival and response to treatment. However, it is not known whether intracellular bacterial antigens are presented by HLA-I and HLA-II molecules of tumor cells, and whether potential tumor-presented bacterial-derived antigens may elicit a tumor infiltrating T-cell immune response. Here, we used 16S rRNA gene sequencing and HLA-peptidomics to unbiasedly identify an intracellular bacterial peptide repertoire presented on HLA-I and HLA-II molecules in melanoma tumors. Our microbial analysis of 17 melanoma metastases, derived from 9 patients, revealed 248 and 38 unique HLA-I and HLA-II peptides, respectively, derived from 41 different classified bacterial species. Recurrent bacterial peptides were identified in different tumors. Our study reveals that intra-tumor intracellular bacteria can be presented by tumor cells and elicit immune-reactivity, thus providing insight into how bacteria influence immune system activation and response to therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Production and purification of membrane HLA molecules Tumor sample weights ranged from 0.1-0.8 grams. Cell-line pellets were collected from 2x108 cells. Tumor samples and cell pellets were homogenized through a cell strainer on ice with a lysis buffer containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340), 1 mM PMSF and 1% octyl-b-D glucopyranoside in PBS. Samples were then incubated in rotation at 4˚C for 1 hour. The lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 48,000 g for 60 minutes at 4˚C and then passed through a pre-clearing column containing Protein-A Sepharose beads.  HLA-I molecules were immunoaffinity purified from cleared lysate with the pan-HLA-I antibody (W6/32 antibody purified from HB95 hybridoma cells) covalently bound to Protein-A Sepharose beads. HLA-II molecules were then purified by transferring the flow-through to similar affinity columns containing a pan-HLA-II antibody (purified from HB-145 hybridoma cells). Affinity columns were washed first with 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris–HCl and then with 20 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.0. The HLA-peptide complexes were then eluted with 1% trifluoracetic acid followed by separation of the peptides from the proteins by binding the eluted fraction to Sep-Pak (Waters). Elution of the peptides was done with 28% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid for HLA-I and 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid for HLA-II.   Mass-spectrometry analysis of eluted HLA peptides ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was solubilized in 12 µL 97:3 water: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size, Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/minute. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 5% to 28%B in 120 minutes, 28% to 35%B in 15 minutes, 35% to 95% in 15 minutes, maintained at 95% for 10 minutes and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon).  For the discovery experiments, data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top20 method. MS1 resolution was set to 70,000 (at 400m/z), mass range of 300-1800m/z, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 100 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 17,500, quadrupole isolation 1.8m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds and maximum injection time of 150 msec. Charge exclusion was set to ‘unassigned’, 4-8, greater than 8 and an exclusion list of singly charge, background ions.

### Data Protocol
Identification of bacterial-derived HLA peptides FASTA files of the bacterial species proteome, as well as the human proteome, were downloaded from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/). Proteome datasets were available for all bacteria except to Porphyromonas bennonis, Sphingomonas kyeonggiensis and Sphingomonas roseiflava. For bacterial species with multiple entries, we downloaded all entries, to avoid missing information, and then removed redundant sequences using CD-HIT software(http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/). The longest sequences with 100% identity were kept.  MS data was analyzed using MaxQuant 68 version 1.5.0.25. Peptides were searched against the UniProt human proteome and the specific bacterial species that were identified in the sample (both datasets were used together in each analysis). In patients where the same bacteria was identified in a few metastases, we ran all metastases samples together. N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da) and methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set as “unspecific” and peptides’ FDR was set to 0.05. The “match between runs” option was disabled to avoid the matching of identifications across the samples. Mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
A variety of species of bacteria are known to colonize human tumours<sup>1-11</sup>, proliferate within them and modulate immune function, which ultimately affects the survival of patients with cancer and their responses to treatment<sup>12-14</sup>. However, it is not known whether antigens derived from intracellular bacteria are presented by the human leukocyte antigen class&#xa0;I and II (HLA-I and HLA-II, respectively) molecules of tumour cells, or whether such antigens elicit a tumour-infiltrating T cell immune response. Here we used 16S rRNA gene sequencing and HLA peptidomics to identify a peptide repertoire derived from intracellular bacteria that was presented on HLA-I and HLA-II molecules in melanoma tumours. Our analysis of 17&#xa0;melanoma metastases (derived from 9&#xa0;patients) revealed 248 and 35&#xa0;unique HLA-I and HLA-II peptides, respectively, that were derived from 41&#xa0;species of bacteria. We identified recurrent bacterial peptides in tumours from different patients, as well as in different tumours from the same patient. Our study reveals that peptides derived from intracellular bacteria can be presented by tumour cells and elicit immune reactivity, and thus provides insight into a mechanism by which bacteria influence activation of the immune system and responses to therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Hla peptidomics, Immunopeptidomics, Lc-msms, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute of science
Weizmann Institute of Science Israel

### Submitter
Shelly Kalaora

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Yardena Samuels
Weizmann Institute of Science Israel


