### Accession
PXD019407

### Title
Peptides in plasma, urine, and dialysate: towards unraveling renal peptide handling

### Description
We investigated the endogenous peptidomes of spent hemodialysate, urine, and plasma, to shed light on peptide handling in the kidney. Our study was based on the hypothesis that hemodialysis replaces glomerular filtration and aims at gaining first insight into the comparative distribution of the peptidome/proteome in these body fluids. These data are expected to support insight into the underlying biological and physiological processes that take place in the kidney, which may help to advance treatment in advanced-stage chronic kidney disease and detoxification in renal replacement therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for the CE were ionized using a modified Proxeon nano spray source fitted with a non-grounded Agilent ESI sprayer operating in positive ion mode. Ionization voltage was 3.4 kV and the capillary temperature was 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in MS/MS mode scanning from 350 to 1500 amu. The threshold was set to 5000 counts to trigger sequencing. The top five multiply charged ions were selected from each scan for MS/MS analysis using HCD at 30% collision energy. The resolution of ions in MS1 was 60.000 and 7.500 for MS2. Samples for LC were separated on a nano-flow system (Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex, Thermo Fisher, Germany). The eluant was ionized using a Proxeon nano spray ESI source operating in a positive ion mode and MS/MS and Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany). Ionization voltage was 2.6 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by MS was further searched against the UniProt human non-redundant database using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher) and the SEQUEST search engine. Variable modifications were allowed oxidation of methionine and proline. High-confidence identification was defined by cross-correlation (Xcorr) ≥ 1.9 and rank = 1. Precursor mass tolerance was 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da. As further criteria, the absence of cysteine and the absence of hydroxylated proline in non-collagen peptides were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urine, Hemodialysis fluid, Plasma, Thymosin beta-4, Clinical study

### Affiliations
Clinical Proteomics
Mosaiques Diagnostics GmbH

### Submitter
Martin Pejchinovski

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pejchinovski
Clinical Proteomics


