### Accession
PXD027738

### Title
Neprilysins regulate muscle contraction and heart function via cleavage of SERCA-inhibitory micropeptides

### Description
Muscle contraction depends on strictly controlled Ca2+ transients within myocytes. A major player maintaining these transients is the sarcoplasmic/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+ ATPase, SERCA. Activity of SERCA is regulated by binding of micropeptides and impaired expression or function of these peptides results in cardiomyopathy. To date, it is not known how homeostasis or turnover of the micropeptides is regulated. We found that the Drosophila endopeptidase Neprilysin 4 hydrolyzes SERCA-inhibitory Sarcolamban peptides in membranes of the sarcoplasmic reticulum, thereby ensuring proper regulation of SERCA. Cleavage was necessary and sufficient to maintain homeostasis and function of the micropeptides. Analyses on human Neprilysin, sarcolipin, and ventricular cardiomyocytes indicated that the regulatory mechanism is evolutionarily conserved. By identifying a neprilysin as essential regulator of SERCA activity and Ca2+ homeostasis in cardiomyocytes, these data contribute to a more comprehensive understanding of the complex mechanisms that control muscle contraction and heart function in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
For pull-down assays, 30 third instar larvae of each control genotype (mef2-Gal4 > UAS-roGFP, mef2-Gal4 > UAS-GFP.ER, or mef2-Gal4 > w1118) were collected, frozen in liquid nitrogen, and homogenized. Since overexpression of Nep4 results in a reduced body size, an equal weight of mef2-Gal4 > UAS-Nep4A::roGFP third instar larvae was collected and homogenized. Total larvae homogenates were resuspended in 300 µl lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 1 mM MgCl, 0.2% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltopyranoside [DDM]) and centrifuged (10.000 x g, 15 min). The resulting supernatants were incubated for 30 min at 4 °C with 50 µl of µMACS anti-GFP MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Auburn, CA, USA). Beads were immobilized in calibrated µ-columns (Miltenyi Biotec), which were equilibrated beforehand with 200 µl lysis buffer. After two washing steps using 200 µl lysis buffer, bound proteins were reduced by incubation in 50 µl reducing solution (10 mM dithiothreitol [DTT], 100 mM NH4HCO3) for 5 min at RT and additional 30 min at 38 °C, followed by two washing steps with 20 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5). Subsequently, bound proteins were alkylated by addition of 50 µl alkylation solution (54 mM Iodacetamid, 100 mM NH4HCO3) and incubation for 15 min in the dark. The columns were then washed twice with 100 µl digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, 5% acetonitrile), sealed, and incubated with 25 µl trypsin solution (0.01 µg trypsin / lysC in digestion buffer) overnight. Eluates were centrifuged (10.000 x g, 10 min) and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis (5 µl per sample). At least three independent biological replicates were analyzed for each genotype. Reversed-phase chromatography was performed using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm, 0.1 mm x 20 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed with loading buffer (0.1% TFA in H2O) at a flow rate of 25 µl/min. The trap column was switched in line with a separation column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 2 µm, 0.075 mm x 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequently, bound peptides were eluted by changing the mixture of buffer A (99% water, 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 20% water and 0.1% formic acid) from 100:0 to 20:80 within 60 min. The flow rate was kept constant at 0.3 µl/min. Eluted compounds were directly electrosprayed through an EASY-Spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluates were analyzed by measuring the masses of the intact molecules as well as the masses of the fragments, which were generated by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the corresponding parent ion.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS Studio software (Version 10.6, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Canada), in combination with a Drosophila-specific SwissProt database (UP000000803, www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000000803) was used to determine peptide-specific amino acid sequences (parent mass error tolerance: 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance: 0.2 Da; enzyme: trypsin; max missed cleavages: 2; selected PTMs: carbamidomethylation, oxidation, phosphorylation). Label-free quantification was performed by comparing peptide and protein amounts of different groups according to established protocols (Lin et al., 2013), with each group comprising at least three independent biological replicates. The protein list was controlled by FDR (threshold: 1%) and significance was calculated by PEAKS software (one-way ANOVA). Classification as possible interaction partner required p < 0.01, with quantification being based on at least two individual protein-specific peptides. Lin H, He L, Ma B. A combinatorial approach to the peptide feature matching problem for label-free quantification. Bioinformatics 29, 1768-1775 (2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metallopeptidase, Heart physiology, Micropeptides, Neprilysin, Drosophila melanogaster, Calcium homeostasis, Serca

### Affiliations
University of Osnabruck
Barbarastr 11
49076 Osnabruck
Heiko Meyer, Osnabruck University, Department of Zoology / Developmental Biology, Barbarastr. 11, 49076 Osnabruck, Germany

### Submitter
Heiko Meyer

### Lab Head
Dr Heiko Meyer
Heiko Meyer, Osnabruck University, Department of Zoology / Developmental Biology, Barbarastr. 11, 49076 Osnabruck, Germany


