### Accession
PXD007916

### Title
Proteome-Wide Characterization of Phosphorylation-Induced  Conformational and Stability Changes in Breast Cancer

### Description
Large-scale studies of protein phosphorylation have generally focused on determining the sites and stoichiometry of phosphorylated proteins derived from different biological specimens such as cell lines and tissue samples. While such information is important for understanding the role of phosphorylation in biological systems, it fails to expose the relationship between protein phosphorylation and protein function. Because of the close link between protein function and protein folding stability, knowledge about phosphorylation-induced protein folding stability changes can lead to a better understanding of the functional effects of protein phosphorylation. As part of this work, the Stability of Proteins from Rate of OXidation (SPROX) and Limited Proteolysis (LiP) techniques were utilized to identify phosphorylation-induced conformational and stability changes in proteins derived from a human breast cancer cell line MCF-7. This was accomplished by comparing the conformation properties of proteins in two MCF-7 cell lysates including one that was and one that was not dephosphorylated with alkaline phosphatase. The SPROX technique, which probes the global unfolding/refolding properties of proteins, identified 168 proteins with dephosphorylation-induced stability changes, and the LiPs technique, which probes the more local unfolding/refolding properties of proteins, identified 251 proteins with dephosphorylation-induced stability changes. A total of 49 proteins identified here with dephosphorylation-induced conformational changes, were previously identified in phosphoproteomic studies to be differentially phosphorlyated in different human breast cancer subtypes. A total of 98 proteins identified here overlapped with protein hits previously found to be differentially stabilized in four human breast cancer phenotypes, suggesting that the phosphorylated changes observed here may be disease related. The experimental approach and results reported here create a novel approach for identifying functionally significant PTMs in proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The noninvasive human breast cancer cell line, MCF-7 from ATCC, was cultured in a humidified 37 oC incubator with 5% CO2. Light SILAC-labeled MCF-7 cells were cultured following the ATCC guidelines. Heavy SILAC-labeled cells were cultured using heavy labeled lysine and arginine according to standard protocols 31.  The heavy labeled lysine was enriched with six 13C and two 15N. The heavy labeled arginine was enriched with six 13C.   MCF-7 cells were lysed by mechanical disruption using a disruptor genie (Scientific Industries) and 1 mM diameter zirconia/silica beads (Biospec) in 20 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 9.0) containing 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2 and protease inhibitor cocktail (1 mM AEBSF, 500 μM Bestatin, 15 μM E-64, 20 μM Leupeptin, and 10 μM Pepstatin A (Thermo Pierce). The cell lysates were centrifuged at 14000 X g for 15 min at 4 oC, and the supernatant was used to generate (+) and (-) phosphatase samples. The light and heavy labeled lysates were normalized to same total protein concentration (4-5 mg/ml) using lysis buffer.  Alkaline phosphatase from bovine (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the heavy labelled lysate at a ratio of 0.5 units/μg total protein and incubated at 37 oC for 16 h to generate the (+) phosphatase sample. The light labeled cell lysate was subjected to the same treatment except no alkaline phosphatase added. The (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were adjusted to 2 mg/ml with 20 mM Hepes (pH 7.5), 150 mM KCl and 10 mM MgCl222. The (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were each divided into two equal 100 uL aliquots (total four equal aliquots) to generate a double digestion (DD) group and single digestion (SD) group. Proteinase K from Tritirachium album (Sigma) was added to the two samples in the DD group, which included a (+) and a (-) phosphatase sample. The final Proteinase K concentration was 1:100 (w/w) enzyme to substrate ratio. The mixtures were incubated for 5 min at room temperature and quenched with guanidine hydrochloride at a final concentration of 7.4 M. The digestions were heated at 100 oC for 3 min to ensure complete denaturation. The SD group was treated in same procedure except no proteinase K added. Both the DD and the SD group samples mixtures were combined and prepared for bottom-up proteomics analysis. The SILAC-SPROX protocol employed here was similar to that which has been previously described26. Briefly, 20 μL of the (+) and (-) phosphatase lysates were diluted into 75 μL buffer solutions containing of 20 mM phosphate (pH 7.4) and urea concentrations ranging from 0 to 10 M. The final concentration of urea in each set of denaturant-containing buffers ranged from 0 to 8 M. The (+) and (-) samples were equilibrated in each urea buffer for 2 h. The methionine oxidation reaction was initiated by adding 5 μL hydrogen peroxide (Sigma-Aldrich) into each buffer to achieve a final concentration of 0.5 M. The reactions in the denaturant-containing buffers were allowed to proceed for 6 min, before they were quenched with 653 μL of a 375 mM L-methionine (Sigma-Aldrich) solution. The (+) and (-) phosphatase samples at each concentration of urea were combined. TCA (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at final concentration of 16% to precipitate the protein. After incubation on ice for 16-18 h, the samples were centrifuged at 8000 X g and 4 oC for 30 min. Supernatants were discarded and the protein pellets were rinsed with 300 μL ice-cold ethanol three times. The pellets were dried under vacuum and re-dissolved in 60 μL of 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) (Sigma-Aldrich) containing 3 μL of a 2% stock solution of sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS). The protein solutions were then submitted to a standard bottom-up proteomics analyses.The protein samples from both SILAC-LiP and SILAC-SPROX experiments were treated with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) (ThermoFisher) (5 mM) for 1 h at 60 oC. The proteins were then reacted with methylmethane thiosulfonate (MMTS) (Sigma-Aldrich) to final concentrations of 10 mM at room temperature for 15 min to block cysteine side chains. Trypsin was added to each sample. The ratio trypsin to total protein was 1:20 to 1:50. The digestions were allowed to proceed at 37 oC for 16- 18 h before quenching with adding 10 % TFA to pH 2-3.  The digested samples were then desalted using C18 resin (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.

### Data Protocol
The desalted samples were analyzed on liquid-chromatography-tandem MS (LC−MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC 1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive (quadrupole-orbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).………..  The three biological replicates of the double and single digestion samples generated in the SILAC-LiP experiments were each analyzed by LC-MS/MS in triplicate. The twelve SILAC-SPROX protein samples generated in each of the three biological replicates were subject to a single LC-MS/MS run (i.e., each biological replicate included twelve LC-MS/MS runs).     All raw LC-MS/MS data were searched by MaxQuant 1.5.2.8 against the 20265 human proteins in the 2014-04 release of the UniProt Knowledgebase and exported into excel spreadsheet. In the SILAC-LiP experiments, searches were performed with trypsin as the enzyme with semi-specificity. In the SILAC-SPROX experiments, searches were performed with trypsin as the enzyme with specific cleavage. All searches set SILAC labeling of lysine and arginine, MMTS as fixed modification. Oxidized methionine, glutamine and asparagine deamination, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were also set as variable modification. The mass tolerances for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm and 10 ppm for first and main search respectively. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Match between runs and re-quantification were used during each search. The remaining parameters were set as the default values. Peptides with false discovery rates <1% and positive heavy to light (H/L) ratios were used for subsequent data analysis. In the SILAC-LiP experiment, the data were treated similar to previously reported29. Briefly, in each biological replicate, a median H/L ratio was determined for each protein using all the peptides identified from the protein in the single digestion group. The H/L ratios of peptides from identical proteins in both single and double digestion groups were then normalized by its protein median in each biological replicate. This normalization accounted for protein abundance differences. All normalized H/L ratios were log 2 transformed and combined by single and double digestion groups for following hit determination. Only peptides identified two or more times in both single and double digestion groups were considered for hit selection which involved the use of a Student’s two tailed t-test in Mathematica 11.0.0.0 to identify significant H/L ratio differences between the single and double digestion groups. Peptides with p-value less than 0.05 were selected as hits. Excel spreadsheets containing all the peptides and proteins assayed in the t-test are available and provided in Tables S1 in the Supporting Information.  In the SILAC-SPROX experiment, the data were treated as previously described32. Briefly, a Mathematica script, developed in house, was used to process the data and to determine final hits. The script imported the output files from MaxQuant, and normalized H/L ratio of methionine containing peptide with the H/L ratio of non-methinonine peptide from the same protein. Only peptides identified in at least 7 different denaturant concentrations were assayed. The normalized H/L ratios from each assayed peptide were processed by fold change cutoff and least-square regression based hit determination criteria.

### Publication Abstract
Because of the close link between protein function and protein folding stability, knowledge about phosphorylation-induced protein folding stability changes can lead to a better understanding of the functional effects of protein phosphorylation. Here, the stability of proteins from rates of oxidation (SPROX) and limited proteolysis (LiP) techniques are used to compare the conformational properties of proteins in two MCF-7 cell lysates including one that was and one that was not dephosphorylated with alkaline phosphatase. A total of 168 and 251 protein hits were identified with dephosphorylation-induced stability changes using the SPROX and LiP techniques, respectively. Many protein hits are previously known to be differentially phosphorylated or differentially stabilized in different human breast cancer subtypes, suggesting that the phosphorylation-induced stability changes detected in this work are disease related. The SPROX hits were enriched in proteins with aminoacyl-tRNA ligase activity. These enriched protein hits included many aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs), which are known from previous studies to have their catalytic activity modulated by phosphorylation. The SPROX results revealed that the magnitudes of the destabilizing effects of dephoshporylation on the different aaRSs were directly correlated with their previously reported aminoacylation activity change upon dephosphorylation. This substantiates the close link between protein folding and function.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Protein conformation, Protein stability, Human breast cancer

### Affiliations
Duke University
professor, chemistry, Duke University

### Submitter
He Meng

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
professor, chemistry, Duke University


