### Accession
PXD019056

### Title
Wild-type and L317P mutant ARHGAP36 isoform 2 interactome

### Description
ARHGAP36 is an atypical Rho GTPase-activating protein (GAP) family member that drives both spinal cord development and tumorigenesis, acting in part through an N-terminal motif that suppresses protein kinase A and activates Gli transcription factors. ARHGAP36 also contains isoform-specific N-terminal sequences, a central GAP-like module, and a unique C-terminal domain, and the functions of these regions remain unknown. Here we have mapped the ARHGAP36 structure-activity landscape using a deep sequencing-based mutagenesis screen and truncation mutant analyses. Using this approach, we have discovered several residues in the GAP homology domain that are essential for Gli activation and a role for the C-terminal domain in counteracting an N-terminal autoinhibitory motif that is present in certain ARHGAP36 isoforms. In addition, each of these sites modulates ARHGAP36 recruitment to the plasma membrane or primary cilium. Through comparative proteomics, we also have identified proteins that preferentially interact with active ARHGAP36, and we demonstrate that one binding partner, prolyl oligopeptidase-like protein, is a novel ARHGAP36 antagonist. Our work reveals multiple modes of ARHGAP36 regulation and establishes an experimental framework that can be applied towards other signaling proteins. This accession contains raw data from an interactome analysis of wild-type and L317P mutant ARHGAP36 isoform 2, represented in Fig. 5 and Dataset S2 of the associated publication.nactive GAP-like domain mutant, we have also identified prolyl oligopeptidase-like protein (PREPL) as a direct antagonist that decreases ARHGAP36 protein expression. In combination, our systems-level analyses uncover an ensemble of mechanisms that regulate ARHGAP36 expression, localization, and activity state, providing a potential means for context-specific ARHGAP36 functions. This accession contains raw data from an interactome analysis of wild-type and L317P mutant ARHGAP36 isoform 2, represented in Fig. 5 and Dataset S2 of the associated publication.

### Sample Protocol
NIH-3T3 cells were transduced with retrovirus for either wild-type or L317P ARHGAP36 with a C-terminal LAP tag to achieve an MOI > 1.5. The media was exchanged for growth medium after 4 hours, and cells were cultured for an additional 20 hours. Cells were then washed with cold PBS, manually scraped off each dish, and centrifuged at 750 g for 7 minutes at 4 ºC. The remaining cell pellet was flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 ºC prior to LAP-tagged mediated tandem affinity purification. Three biological replicates were conducted for each wild-type and L317P ARHGAP36-LAP comparison. For tandem affinity purification, pellets of ARHGAP36-LAP-expressing cells were re-suspended in LAP resuspension buffer [300 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT, and protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific)]. Cells were lysed with the gradual addition of 10% NP-40 to a final concentration of 0.3%, followed by a 10-minute incubation at 4 ºC. The lysate was then centrifuged at 27,000 g at 4 °C for 10 minutes, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 4 °C. The high-speed supernatant was next incubated with anti-GFP-antibody-coupled beads for 1 hour at 4 °C to capture GFP-tagged proteins. The beads were washed five times with LAP200N buffer [200 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, protease inhibitors, and 0.05% NP40) and incubated with PreScission protease in LAP200N buffer at 4 °C for 16 hours. All subsequent steps were performed in a laminar flow hood. PreScission protease-eluted supernatant was added to S-protein agarose beads (EMD Millipore) and incubated rocking for 3 hours at 4 ºC. S-protein agarose beads were then washed three times with LAP200N buffer and twice with LAP100 buffer [100 mM KCl, 50 mM HEPES-KOH (pH 7.4), 1 mM EGTA and 10% glycerol). Beads were stored in 50mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol at 4 ºC prior to on-bead digestion. Proteins were eluted from S-protein agarose beads with an on-bead reduction, alkylation, and tryptic digestion as follows. Samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT in ammonium bicarbonate for an initial 5-minute incubation at 55 ºC followed by 25 minutes at room temperature. The proteins were then alkylated with a 30-minute incubation in 30 mM acrylamide at room temperature, and finally eluted from the beads with an overnight digest performed at room temperature using Trypsin/LysC (Promega) and 0.02% ProteaseMax (Promega). The digests were acidified with 1% formic acid, de-salted with C18 Monospin reversed phase columns (GL Sciences), dried on a SpeedVac, and reconstituted in 12.5 μL  of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 4 μL of each sample were used for liquid-chromatography-mass spectrometry analyses performed on an Acquity M-Class UPLC (Waters Corporation) and either an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For each biological replicate, the sample from the ARHGAP36 L317P-expressing cells was run immediately before that of the wild-type ARHGAP36-expressing cells.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of .RAW data files was conducted using Byonic (Protein Metrics), with the assumption of tryptic proteolysis and a maximum allowance of two missed cleavage sites. Precursor and MS/MS fragment mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm and 0.4 Da, respectively. A false discovery rate of 1% was used for protein identification. The resulting list of identified proteins was compared to an NCBI Genbank FASTA database containing all mouse proteomic isoforms with the exception of the tandem affinity bait construct sequence and common contaminant proteins. Post-processing of spectral counts was conducted with a custom R script (see associated publication).

### Publication Abstract
ARHGAP36 is an atypical Rho GTPase-activating protein (GAP) family member that drives both spinal cord development and tumorigenesis, acting in part through an N-terminal motif that suppresses protein kinase A and activates Gli transcription factors. ARHGAP36 also contains isoform-specific N-terminal sequences, a central GAP-like module, and a unique C-terminal domain, and the functions of these regions remain unknown. Here we have mapped the ARHGAP36 structure-activity landscape using a deep sequencing-based mutagenesis screen and truncation mutant analyses. Using this approach, we have discovered several residues in the GAP homology domain that are essential for Gli activation and a role for the C-terminal domain in counteracting an N-terminal autoinhibitory motif that is present in certain ARHGAP36 isoforms. In addition, each of these sites modulates ARHGAP36 recruitment to the plasma membrane or primary cilium. Through comparative proteomics, we also have identified proteins that preferentially interact with active ARHGAP36, and we demonstrate that one binding partner, prolyl oligopeptidase-like protein, is a novel ARHGAP36 antagonist. Our work reveals multiple modes of ARHGAP36 regulation and establishes an experimental framework that can be applied towards other signaling proteins.

### Keywords
Nih-3t3, Lc-msms, Mouse

### Affiliations
Stanford University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Patricia Nano

### Lab Head
Dr James K. Chen
Stanford University School of Medicine


