### Accession
PXD043505

### Title
Analyses of the brown stain on the Parthenon Centaur head

### Description
Marbles of Greek origin have been reported to form a brown stain layer, also known as patina or film. Early investigations discovered that this layer is formed by the two calcium oxalate minerals whewellite and weddellite. The origin of this oxalate film is, however, not clear, while one of the hypotheses is that it is a result of bacteria, fungi, or lichen growing on the surface of the marble. The present study characterizes the brown stain from one of the Parthenon marbles in Danish custody using LC-MS-based proteomics aiming to shed light on the possible biological origin of the staining layer. The marbles curated in Copenhagen are particularly interesting because the pieces have been kept indoors since before the onset of the industrial revolution, therefore they have experienced air pollution to a much lesser degree than the marbles still residing at the Acropolis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized from 1 mg of the marble sample by the addition of 90 µL buffer containing (100 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid disodium salt (Na2EDTA), 2 M guanidine-hydrochloride, 150 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), and 20 mM chloroacetamide. The solution was set to react in a vortex shaker for 60 minutes at 56 °C. Following dilution of the solution to 1 M guanidine-hydrochloride by addition of 150 mM TEAB, proteins were digested with trypsin (1 µg) overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was terminated by acidification with 1 µL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified by desalting with tip-column reverse-phase chromatography. The purified sample was dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The blank control sample consisted of the protein solubilization buffer/enzyme and was processed using the same protocol (further referenced as negative). Before injection, the sample was dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA). The analysis was executed using a Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled through a Nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher) to an Ultimate 3000 nano RPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a newly prepared fused silica column with an integrated emitter (25 cm x 75 Âµm i.d.) home packed with 2 µm Inertsil ODS-3 (GL Sciences) beads. The following solutions were used for LC separation: A - 0.1% FA in water, and B - 0.1% FA in 95% acetonitrile. Samples were initially loaded on column with 2% B at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, the loading volume was 12 µL. The sample was eluted using the following gradient: in 1 min linear increase to 4% B, in 38 min linear increase to 30% B, in 6 min linear increase to 45% B, in 6 minutes linear increase to 95% B. The column was washed for 3.5 minutes with 95% B and equilibrated for the next injection at 2% B for 12 minutes. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode; MS1 parameters: Resolution - 120000 @ m/z 200, AGC target - 3e6, Maximum injection time - 50 ms, Scan Range - m/z 350 - 1400; MS2 parameters: Resolution - 60000 @ m/z 200, AGC target - 2e5, Maximum injection time - 125 ms. Up to seven precursors (Top 7) with charges from 2 to 6 (both included) were isolated in quadrupole using a 1.2 Th window and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation at normalized collisional energy of 28. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded for 12 sec. To control for any possible contamination of the column 1 µL of 0.1% FA was injected with the same method (Blank) before and after samples.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences (only reviewed) were obtained from the Uniprot resource (accessed 13-14.05.2021) and assembled into four databases used for the analysis 1) proteins belonging to bacteria (taxon: Bacteria, taxonomic id: 2, 334967 entries); 2) proteins belonging to vertebrates (taxon: Chordata, taxonomic id: 7711, 86255 entries); 3) proteins belonging to fungi (taxon: Fungi, taxonomic id: 4751, 35153 entries); 4) proteins belonging to higher plants (taxon: Embryophyta, taxonomic id: 3193, 39058 entries). Acquired LC-MS/MS files were analyzed in three steps. First, FragPipe 19.1 with MSFragger 3.7 and Philosopher 4.8.1 has been employed for open modification searches and unspecific cleavage searches. Open modification search parameters: precursor tolerance was –150 – 500 Da, MS2 tolerance was 7 ppm, isotope error was 0, top 175 peaks per spectrum used for search, peptide length was 7 – 35 amino acids, peptide mass was 500 – 3500 Da, the enzyme was trypsin without the proline rule, carboxamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as possible variable ones, all other parameters were used as set in the open search template. Unspecific cleavage search parameters: precursor tolerance was 10 ppm, MS2 tolerance was 10 ppm, isotope error was 0 or 1, top 200 peaks per spectrum used for search, peptide length was 7 – 25 amino acids, peptide mass was 500 – 3500 Da, no enzyme, carboxamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable one, all other parameters were used as set in the default template.
Next, Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using MSAmanda 2.0.0.16129 was used to search against each database individually. The following search parameters were used: enzyme – semi-trypsin, precursor tolerance was 5 ppm, fragment tolerance was 20 ppm, carboxamidomethylated cysteines were used as fixed modification, and oxidized methionine as variable modifications. Search results were validated using Percolator.
Finally, we identified all organisms with at least one reliably identified protein in the first two steps and extracted complete proteomes of these in a new database (79859 entries from 41 taxons). Proteome Discoverer was used for the search with the following variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, proline, and serine; deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal glutamine. All other parameters were the same as for the second step. Proteins identified with a single peptide were filtered out. All peptides, including the shared ones were considered for judging protein presence in the samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Archeology, Patina, Parthenon, Marbles

### Affiliations
Professor, Department for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Professor, Department for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


