### Accession
PXD027970

### Title
multiFLEX-LF: A Computational Approach to Quantify the Modification Stoichiometries in Label-free Proteomics Datasets

### Description
In high-throughput LC-MS/MS-based proteomics, information about the presence and stoichiometry of post-translational modifications is normally not readily available. To overcome this problem we developed multiFLEX-LF, a computational tool that builds upon FLEXIQuant and FLEXIQuant-LF, which detect modified peptides and quantify their modification extent by monitoring the differences between observed and expected intensities of the unmodified peptides. To this end, multiFLEX-LF relies on robust linear regression to calculate the modification extent of a given peptide relative to a within-study reference. multiFLEX-LF can analyze entire label-free discovery proteomics datasets. Furthermore, to analyze modification dynamics and co-regulated modifications, the peptides of all proteins are hierarchically clustered based on their computed relative modification scores. To demonstrate the versatility of multiFLEX-LF we applied it on a cell-cycle time series dataset acquired using data-independent acquisition. The clustering of the peptides highlighted several groups of peptides with different modification dynamics across the four analyzed time points providing evidence of the kinases involved in the cell-cycle. Overall, multiFLEX-LF enables fast identification of potentially differentially modified peptides and quantification of their differential modification extent in large datasets. Additionally, multiFLEX-LF can drive large-scale investigation of modification dynamics of peptides in time series and case-control studies. multiFLEX-LF is available at https://gitlab.com/SteenOmicsLab/multiflex-lf.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa S3 cells were treated with thymidine for 20 hours to synchronize them in S (synthesis) phase (0h). For M (mitotic) phase, the cells were treated with nocodazole after having been cultured for 3 hours in fresh media. Cells were collected after 4, 8 and 10 hours of treatment with nocodazole. Each sample was analyzed once on a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA) in data-dependent acquisition mode coupled with an online nanoLC system (Sciex/Eksigent, Dublin, CA). Additionally, each time point was analyzed in SWATH (DIA) mode in triplicates using the same mass spectrometer and LC-system as for the DDA data.

### Data Protocol
The raw DDA data were newly searched in the human proteome database from Uniprot containing 20,397 canonical and reviewed sequences (downloaded: Oct. 20, 2020). The database was concatenated with the iRT sequence from Biognosys and common laboratory contaminants (245 entries). The data was searched with MaxQuant v1.5.2.8 with full tryptic specificity and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl on C was set as a fixed modification and oxidation on M and phosphorylation on S, T and Y were set as variable modifications. The error tolerance was set to 20ppm during the first search and 4.5 ppm during the second search. The database was reversed for false-discovery rate (FDR) calculation. The FDR was set to 1% at peptide and protein level. The minimum length of peptides was set to seven amino acids. The database search results were used to generate a spectral library in Spectronaut 14.5 with the above-described database and default parameters. The DIA data were searched against the spectral library employing Spectronaut 14.5 with default parameters.

### Publication Abstract
In liquid-chromatography-tandem-mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, information about the presence and stoichiometry of protein modifications is not readily available. To overcome this problem, we developed multiFLEX-LF, a computational tool that builds upon FLEXIQuant, which detects modified peptide precursors and quantifies their modification extent by monitoring the differences between observed and expected intensities of the unmodified precursors. multiFLEX-LF relies on robust linear regression to calculate the modification extent of a given precursor relative to a within-study reference. multiFLEX-LF can analyze entire label-free discovery proteomics data sets in a precursor-centric manner without preselecting a protein of interest. To analyze modification dynamics and coregulated modifications, we hierarchically clustered the precursors of all proteins based on their computed relative modification scores. We applied multiFLEX-LF to a data-independent-acquisition-based data set acquired using the anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C) isolated at various time points during mitosis. The clustering of the precursors allows for identifying varying modification dynamics and ordering the modification events. Overall, multiFLEX-LF enables the fast identification of potentially differentially modified peptide precursors and the quantification of their differential modification extent in large data sets using a personal computer. Additionally, multiFLEX-LF can drive the large-scale investigation of the modification dynamics of peptide precursors in time-series and case-control studies. multiFLEX-LF is available at https://gitlab.com/SteenOmicsLab/multiflex-lf.

### Keywords
Ptm stochiometry, Post-translational modifications, Lc-msms, Quantification, Cell cycle, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, USA Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, USA
Boston Children's Hospital; Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Christoph Schlaffner

### Lab Head
Dr Hanno Steen
Department of Pathology, Boston Children's Hospital, USA Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, USA


