### Accession
PXD006655

### Title
Proteomic analysis of posterior silk gland of wild silkworm during developmental stages

### Description
We performed shotgun proteomic analysis of the posterior silk glands (PSGs) of wild silkworms on the 3rd and 5th days of the fifth instar.

### Sample Protocol
PSGs at on the 3rd day and 5th day of the fifth instar were dissected in cold PBS. The fibroin in the PSG lumen was removed according to a previously described method (Li et al., J Proteome Res., 2011). PSG proteins were separated with 12.5% 1D SDS-PAGE gel followed by in-gel tryptic digestion. The extracted peptide pellets were applied to an Ettan MDLC nanoflow/capillary LC system (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap (LTQ-Orbitrap) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Triplicate experimental replicates were performed for each sample

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data recorded with Xcabilur software were subjected to Mascot Server 2.3 with Daemon software for database searches against an in-house target-decoy protein database.

### Publication Abstract
The wild silkworm Bombyx mandarina was domesticated to produce silk in China approximately 5000 years ago. Silk production is greatly improved in the domesticated silkworm B. mori, but the molecular basis of the functional evolution of silk gland remains elusive. We performed shotgun proteomics with label-free quantification analysis and identified 1012 and 822 proteins from the posterior silk glands (PSGs) of wild silkworms on the third and fifth days of the fifth instar, respectively, with 128 of these differentially expressed. Bioinformatics analysis revealed that, with the development of the PSG, the up-regulated proteins were mainly involved in the ribosome pathway, similar to what we previously reported for B. mori. Additionally, we screened 50 proteins with differential expression between wild and domesticated silkworms that might be involved in domestication at the two stages. Interestingly, the up-regulated proteins in domesticated compared to wild silkworms were enriched in the ribosome pathway, which is closely related to cell size and translation capacity. Together, these results suggest that functional evolution of the PSG during domestication was driven by reinforcing the advantageous pathways to increase the synthesis efficiency of silk proteins in each cell and thereby improve silk yield.

### Keywords
Wild silkworm, Shotgun lc-ms/ms, Ltq-orbitrap, Posterior silk gland

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Normal University
College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University,Hangzhou, China

### Submitter
Jian-ying Li

### Lab Head
Dr Bo-xiong Zhong
College of Animal Sciences, Zhejiang University,Hangzhou, China


