### Accession
PXD015168

### Title
Overcoming steric restrictions of VRC01 HIV-1 neutralizing antibodies through  immunization

### Description
Broadly HIV-1 neutralizing VRC01-class antibodies target the CD4-binding site of Env. They are derived from VH1-2*02 antibody heavy chains paired with rare light chains expressing five amino acid long CDRL3s. They have been isolated from infected subjects but have not yet been elicited by immunization. Env-derived immunogens capable of binding the germline forms of VRC01 B cell receptors on naïve B cells have been designed and evaluated in knock-in mice. However, the elicited antibodies cannot bypass glycans present on the conserved position N276 of Env, which restricts access to the CD4-binding site. Efforts to guide the appropriate maturation of these antibodies by sequential immunization have not yet been successful. Here, we report on a two-step immunization scheme that led to the maturation of VRC01-like antibodies capable of accommodating the N276 glycan and displaying autologous tier 2 neutralizing activities.  Our results are relevant to clinical trials aiming to elicit VRC01 antibodies.

### Sample Protocol
For analysis of the N-linked glycosylation profile of the cross-linked 426c WT Core-P1B5 complex, 250 pmol of sample was denatured, reduced, and alkylated by dilution to 5 μM in 50 μL of buffer containing 100 mM Tris (pH 8.5), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethylphosphine (TCEP), 40 mM iodoacetamide or 40 mM iodoacetic acid, and 2% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate. Samples were first heated to 95°C for 5 min and then incubated for an additional 25 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples were digested with trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific, Cat#: 90057), by diluting 20 μL of sample to a total volume of 100 μL of buffer containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5). Trypsin was added in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) before incubation at 37°C overnight. Subsequently, 2 μL of formic acid was added to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate from the solution. Following centrifugation at 17,000 × g for 25 min, 85 μL of the supernatant was collected and centrifuged again at 17,000 × g for 5 min to ensure removal of any residual precipitated deoxycholate. 80 μL of this supernatant was collected. For each sample, 8 μL was injected on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. A 35 cm analytical column and a 3 cm trap column filled with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 5 μM (Dr. Maisch) beads were used. Nanospray LC-MS/MS was used to separate peptides over a 90 min gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. A positive spray voltage of 2100 was used with an ion transfer tube temperature of 350°C. An electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation ion-fragmentation scheme (Frese et al., 2013) was used with calibrated charge-dependent entity-type definition parameters and supplemental higher-energy collision dissociation energy of 0.15. A resolution setting of 120,000 with an AGC target of 2 × 105 was used for MS1, and a resolution setting of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1 × 105 was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with the Protein Metrics Byonic software (Bern et al., 2012), using a small custom database of recombinant protein sequences including the proteases used to prepare the glycopeptides. Reverse decoy sequences were also included in the search. Specificity of the search was set to C-terminal cleavage at R/K (trypsin), allowing up to three missed cleavages, with EthcD fragmentation (b/y- and c/z-type ions). We used a precursor mass and product mass tolerance of 12 ppm and 24 ppm, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, carbamidomethylation of lysines was set as a variable modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and a concatenated N-linked glycan database (derived from the four software-included databases) was used to identify glycopeptides. All analyzed glycopeptide hits were manually inspected to ensure their quality and accuracy.  Semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS of P-p3b3, B-p1b5 and VRC01-immunoprecipitation experiments were performed using Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010) with peak integration and LC-MS/MS searches imported from Byonic, as previously described (Borst et al., 2018). Missed cleavages and post-translational modifications listed above for qualitative LC-MS/MS searches were included in the quantification of glycopeptides. All MS1 peak areas used for integration were manually inspected. Each fraction was performed as part of two technical replicates and was subsequently averaged. Calculations and plots for glycoform enrichment graphs were generated by subtracting the relative signal values of the input Core fraction from the unbound or bound Core fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Broadly HIV-1 neutralizing VRC01 class antibodies target the CD4-binding site of Env. They are derived from VH1-2<sup>&#x2217;</sup>02 antibody heavy chains paired with rare light chains expressing 5-amino acid-long CDRL3s. They have been isolated from infected subjects but have not yet been elicited by immunization. Env-derived immunogens capable of binding the germline forms of VRC01 B cell receptors on naive B cells have been designed and evaluated in knockin mice. However, the elicited antibodies cannot bypass glycans present on the conserved position N276 of Env, which restricts access to the CD4-binding site. Efforts to guide the appropriate maturation of these antibodies by sequential immunization have not yet been successful. Here, we report on a two-step immunization scheme that leads to the maturation of VRC01-like antibodies capable of accommodating the N276 glycan and displaying autologous tier 2 neutralizing activities. Our results are relevant to clinical trials aiming to elicit VRC01 antibodies.

### Keywords
Immunization, Bnab, Hiv, Antibody, N276, 426c core, Vrc01, Mice, Glycan

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA
University of Washington

### Submitter
Andrew Borst

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
Assistant Professor, Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA


