### Accession
PXD000700

### Title
Proteomic analysis of accessory gland in sexually mature Eriocheir sinensis

### Description
The accessory gland (AG), an important component of the male reproductive system, enhances the fertility of spermatozoa during male reproduction. Some AG proteins are known to bind to the spermatozoa membrane and affect its function and properties. In this study, we describe, for the first time, a comprehensive catalog of proteins of the AG secreted fluid during the mature phase of the Chinese mitten crab (Eriocheir sinensis). AG secreted proteins were separated by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and analyzed by reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein extracts from the E sinensis Accessory Sex Gland, Sample volumes corresponding to 100 mg of AG protein were resuspended in loading buffer (urea 7 M, thiourea, CHAPS 2%, SDS 4%, Tris 0.1 M pH 6.8, glycerol 30%, mercaptoethanol 12.5%, and bromophenol blue 0.0062%) and run using 10 cm and 12% SDS- PAGE gels for 1 h at 120 V. The gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Invitrogen, Shanghai, China) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The staining gel was sliced in 10 consecutive portions followed by in-gel trypsin digestion. After digestion, the peptides obtained from each gel slice were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS, Chromatography was performed using a surveyor LC system (Thermo Finnigan, San Jose, CA) on a C18 reverse phase column (RP, 180 µm × 150mm,BioBasicC18,5 µm,Thermo Hypersil-Keystone).

### Data Protocol
Mascot v. 2.2.03 (www.matrixscience.com) was used as search engine to analyze mass spectrometric results. The parameters for the database searches were set as follows: enzyme, trypsin (KR); fixed modifications, carboxyamidomethyl cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine; number of missed cleavage sites allowed, 2. The following tolerances were allowed for the different mass spectrometers: LTQ Orbitrap ((10 ppm for precursor ions and (0.5 amu for fragment ions), Q-Tof ((10 ppm for precursor ions and (0.1 amu for fragment ions), MALDI-TOF/TOF ((100 ppm for precursor ions and (0.8 amu for fragment ions in automatic mode acquisition; (50 ppm for precursor ions and (0.7 amu for fragment ions in manual mode acquisition). For strategies A and B, only those proteins with at least two peptides with a false discovery rate (FDR) e1% after decoy database searches21-23 were accepted as true positives

### Publication Abstract
The accessory gland (AG) is an important component of the male reproductive system of arthropods, its secretions enhance fertility, some AG proteins bind to the spermatozoa and affect its function and properties. Here we report the first comprehensive catalog of the AG secreted fluid during the mature phase of the Chinese mitten crab (Eriocheir sinensis). AG proteins were separated by one-dimensional gel electrophoresis and analyzed by reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). Altogether, the mass spectra of 1173 peptides were detected (1067 without decoy and contaminants) which allowed for the identification of 486 different proteins annotated upon the NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and our transcritptome dataset. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited at the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000700. An extensive description of the AG proteome will help provide the basis for a better understanding of a number of reproductive mechanisms, including potentially spermatophore breakdown, dynamic functional and morphological changes in sperm cells and sperm acrosin enzyme vitality. Thus, the comprehensive catalog of proteins presented here can serve as a valuable reference for future studies of sperm maturation and regulatory mechanisms involved in crustacean reproduction.

### Keywords
Accessory gland, Eriocheir sinensis, Hplc-msms

### Affiliations
School of Life Science
School of Life Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China

### Submitter
Lin He

### Lab Head
Dr Qun Wang
School of Life Science, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China


