### Accession
PXD004733

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of cAMP signaling of adenylate cyclase toxin in mouse dendritic cells

### Description
The whooping cough agent, Bordetella pertussis, subverts dendritic cell (DCs) functions through powerful immunomodulatory activities of its toxins. Here we focused on the signaling action of the adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA) that targets myeloid cells expressing the αMβ2 integrin CD11b/CD18 (known as complement receptor 3 (CR3) or Mac-1). CyaA delivers an extremely catalytically potent adenylyl cyclase enzyme domain into the cytosol of phagocytes and disrupts their innate and adaptive immune functions through unregulated production of the key signaling molecule cAMP. Here we describe the global phosphoproteomic analysis of cAMP signaling in murine bone marrow-derived DCs exposed to CyaA. Gathered data reveal toxin-triggered alternations of phosphorylation status of proteins regulating actin cytoskeleton, chromatin remodeling, mTOR activity and IL-10 gene expression. The reported findings highlight the complexity of subversive physiological manipulation that is exerted on myeloid phagocytes by the cAMP-generating adenylate cyclase toxin of Bordetellae.

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow-derived DCs were SILAC-labelled (Arg+6 and Lys+6) and 'light' cells were treated by CyaA or enzymatically inactive CyaA-AC(-) toxoid ('heavy' cells were left as control/untreated groups). The whole experiment was done in biological triplicate with one label swap experiment (raw files with 'LS' suffix). Treated cells were washed in ice-cold PBS and lysed in lysis buffer (containing NH4HCO3, 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and phosphatase inhibitors) by placing the cell suspensions into boiling water bath for 5 min. Corresponding 'light' and 'heavy' isotope-labelled lysates were mixed in a 1:1 ratio based on the protein content. Proteins were reduced by dithiotreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide , and digested by trypsin (Promega) overnight. Digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA to precipitate SDC, which was removed by ethyl acetate extraction. Peptides were then desalted and fractionated by HILIC chromatography on HPLC. Eighteen fractions through the gradient elution window were collected into microcentrifuge tubes and acidified by TFA solution (final concentration 2%) containing glutamic acid as excluder. TiO2 particles (GL Sciences) were added directly into each acidified fraction, followed by 20 min of vortexing at RT. Suspensions were then centrifuged and pellets of TiO2 particles were sequentially washed in buffers with decreasing amount of TFA. TiO2-bonded phosphopeptides were eluted by vortexing particles for 10 min at RT in ammonia solution (pH ≈ 11) followed by acidification. Each HILIC fraction was subjected to two identical cycles of the enrichment and TiO2-eluates from the same fraction were pooled and desalted. Phosphopeptides from each fraction were analyzed by reversed-phase nano LC-MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano connected to Q-Exactive) employing DDA approach (Top10). MS spectra of 350-1750 m/z range were acquired at resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200). Only multiply charged precursors ions with minimal threshold intensity of 5×10^4 counts and not fragmented during previous 30 s were admitted for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Tandem mass spectra were acquired with following settings; resolution at 17,500, AGC target value at 1×10^5, maximum ion injection time at 100 ms, and normalized collision energy set to 27. Data acquisition was under control of Xcalibur software v3.0.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant ver. 1.5.1.0 coupled with Andromeda search engine was used for phosphosite identification and quantification. Measured data were searched against FASTA database consisting of reference proteome for Mus musculus downloaded from Uniprot (UP000000589; May 7, 2015) and sequences of wild type and toxoid versions of CyaA. False discovery rate (FDR) estimation of peptide identification was based on target-decoy approach using reverted search database (with swap of lysine and arginine with neighboring amino acid) as a decoy. Parameters of MaxQuant search were: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm (with individual mass error filtering enabled); maximum of 2 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide z = 7; minimal length of peptide 7 amino acids, maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and phosphorylation (STY), oxidation (M), and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to 5. Trypsin with no cleavage restriction was set as a protease. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 20 ppm, taking the 12 most intensive peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). Minimal Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and minimal delta score for modified peptides was 6. FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was 0.01 with separate FDR filtering for each modification set to 0.01. For peptide quantitation, Arg+6 [13C6] and Lys+6 [13C6] were set as labels in heavy channel (or in light channel for label-swap experiments to obtain inverted H/L ratios) with re-quantify function enabled. Ratios for individual phosphosites were derived from normalized ratios of the least modified phosphopeptides in a given replicate.

### Publication Abstract
The adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA) of the whooping cough agent Bordetella pertussis subverts immune functions of host myeloid cells expressing the &#x3b1;<sub>M</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin (CD11b/CD18, CR3 or Mac-1). CyaA delivers into cytosol of cells an extremely catalytically active adenylyl cyclase enzyme, which disrupts the innate and adaptive immune functions of phagocytes through unregulated production of the key signaling molecule cAMP. We have used phosphoproteomics to analyze cAMP signaling of CyaA in murine bone marrow-derived dendritic cells. CyaA action resulted in alterations of phosphorylation state of a number of proteins that regulate actin cytoskeleton homeostasis, including Mena, Talin-1 and VASP. CyaA action repressed mTOR signaling through activation of mTORC1 inhibitors TSC2 and PRAS40 and altered phosphorylation of multiple chromatin remodelers, including the class II histone deacetylase HDAC5. CyaA toxin action further elicited inhibitory phosphorylation of SIK family kinases involved in modulation of immune response and provoked dephosphorylation of the transcriptional coactivator CRTC3, indicating that CyaA-promoted nuclear translocation of CRTC3 may account for CyaA-induced IL-10 production. These findings document the complexity of subversive physiological manipulation of myeloid phagocytes by the CyaA toxin, serving in immune evasion of the pertussis agent.

### Keywords
Bone marrow-derived dendritic cells, Phosphoproteome, Bordetella pertussis, Adenylate cyclase toxin

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i., Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Šebo
Institute of Microbiology of the Czech Academy of Sciences, v.v.i., Videnska 1083, 142 20 Prague, Czech Republic


