### Accession
PXD003915

### Title
Analysis of HER2 genomic binding in breast cancer cells identifies a global role in direct gene regulation

### Description
HER2 is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, which plays a key role in breast cancer due to a common genomic amplification. It is used as a marker to stratify patients in the clinic and is targeted by a number of drugs including Trastuzumab and Lapatinib. HER2 has previously been shown to translocate to the nucleus. In this study, we have explored the properties of nuclear HER2 by analysing the binding of this protein to the chromatin in three breast cancer cell lines. We find genome-wide re-programming of HER2 binding after treatment with the growth factor EGF. Over 4,000 HER2 binding sites are found in all three breast cancer cell lines, and these occur near genes involved in protein kinase activity and signal transduction. HER2 was shown to co-localise at a subset of regions demarcated by H3K4me1, a hallmark of functional enhancer elements and HER2/H3K4me1 co-bound regions were enriched near EGF regulated genes providing evidence for their functional role as regulatory elements. A chromatin bound role for HER2 was verified by independent methods, including Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA), which confirmed a close association between HER2 and H3K4me1. Interestingly, HER2 bound to the ErbB2 gene itself indicating a potential self-regulatory mechanism for HER2. Mass spectrometry analysis of the chromatin bound HER2 complex identified EGFR and STAT3 as interacting partners. These findings reveal a global role for HER2 as a chromatin-associated factor that binds to enhancer elements to elicit direct gene expression events in breast cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Bead-bound proteins were digested by the addition of 10 ml trypsin solution 15 ng /ul (Worthington Biochemicals) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. The beads were then incubated at 370C overnight. A second step digestion was performed the following day for 4 h. Sample tubes were placed on a magnetic rack and the supernatant solution was collected and acidified by the addition of 2 ml 5% formic acid. The samples were then cleaned using Ultra-Micro C18 Spin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) prior to the mass spectrometry (MS) analysis according to manufacturer’s instructions.   Mass spectrometry (MS) was performed using an LTQ Velos-Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate RSLCnano-LC system (Dionex). Optimal separation conditions resulting in maximal peptide coverage were achieved using an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) (Dionex) with an internal diameter of 75 μm and capillary length of 25 cm. A flow rate of 350 nl/min was used with a solvent gradient of 5% B to 50% B in 120 min. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, whereas the composition of solvent B was 80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode using an Nth order double-play method to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ Velos-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (from 400 to 1,600 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with resolution (R) 60,000 at 400 m/z. The method allowed sequential isolation of the 10 most intense ions for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, depending on signal intensity, using CID at collision energy 30. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 20 s. General MS conditions were electrospray voltage, 2.0kV with no sheath or auxiliary gas flow, an ion selection threshold of 1,000 counts for MS/MS, an activation Q value of 0.25, activation time of 10 ms and an S-Lens RF level of 65% were also applied.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Processed files were searched against the SwissProt human database using the Sequest HT. The Nodes for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.5 Da, Dynamic Modifications were Oxidation of M (+15.995 Da) and Deamidation of N, Q (+0.984 Da). Protein quantification was based on the relative precursor intensity of the light and heavy R(10), K(8) SILAC labelled versions of their matching peptides.The level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. FDR<1% was applied in all the runs.

### Publication Abstract
HER2 is a transmembrane receptor tyrosine kinase, which plays a key role in breast cancer due to a common genomic amplification. It is used as a marker to stratify patients in the clinic and is targeted by a number of drugs including Trastuzumab and Lapatinib. HER2 has previously been shown to translocate to the nucleus. In this study, we have explored the properties of nuclear HER2 by analysing the binding of this protein to the chromatin in two breast cancer cell lines. We find genome-wide re-programming of HER2 binding after treatment with the growth factor EGF and have identified a de novo motif at HER2 binding sites. Over 2,000 HER2 binding sites are found in both breast cancer cell lines after EGF treatment, and according to pathway analysis, these binding sites were enriched near genes involved in protein kinase activity and signal transduction. HER2 was shown to co-localise at a small subset of regions demarcated by H3K4me1, a hallmark of functional enhancer elements and HER2/H3K4me1 co-bound regions were enriched near EGF regulated genes providing evidence for their functional role as regulatory elements. A chromatin bound role for HER2 was verified by independent methods, including Proximity Ligation Assay (PLA), which confirmed a close association between HER2 and H3K4me1. Mass spectrometry analysis of the chromatin bound HER2 complex identified EGFR and STAT3 as interacting partners in the nucleus. These findings reveal a global role for HER2 as a chromatin-associated factor that binds to enhancer elements to elicit direct gene expression events in breast cancer cells.

### Keywords
Rime, Breast cancer, Her2

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Aisling Redmond

### Lab Head
Dr Jason S Carroll
University of Cambridge, Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Li Ka Shing Centre, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK


