### Accession
PXD019733

### Title
A Universal 384-Well Proteomic Sample Preparation Platform for  High-Throughput Screening and Biomarker Discovery

### Description
Major advances have been made to develop an automated universal 384-well plate sample preparation platform with high reproducibility and adaptability for extraction of proteins from cells within a culture plate. An in-solution digest strategy is employed to generate peptides from the extracted proteins for LC-MS analysis in the 384-well plate. Method evaluation utilized HeLa cells cultured in the 384-well plate ranging from 500 – 10,000 cells. Digestion efficiency was excellent in comparison to the commercial digest peptides standard with minimal sample loss while improving sample preparation throughput by 20 – 40 fold. Analysis of six human cell types, which included two primary cell samples identified and quantified approximately 4,000 proteins for each sample in a single LC-MS/MS injection with as little as 100 – 10,000 cells depending on cell type demonstrating universality of the platform. Implementation of the comprehensive 384-well format protocol for processing cells to clean digested peptides enables large-scale biomarker validation and compound screening through proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
High Throughput Sample Handling The automated sample preparation workflow was executed on an Agilent Bravo Liquid Handling Platform with a 384ST liquid handling head that uses disposable 70 µL tips (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The Bravo platform was equipped with both a Peltier thermal station and an orbital shaker (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). The Agilent Bravo teach points were set using a piece of standard printer paper and one 384ST 70µL tip equipped in the A1 position of the Agilent Bravo 384ST liquid handling head. The teach points were set when the printer paper was 0.1 mm above a complete “pinning” of the paper from the tip, which means the printer paper could not be removed without significantly moving the tip. The paper should be able to move and barely brush against the bottom surface of the tip. The deck layout is included in Fig. 1b and included the following labeled plates and their respective deck positions: 1: wash station, 2: vacuum station, 3: tips 1, 4: analyte, 5: empty, 6: cells, 7: acetonitrile/waste/formic acid, 8: lysis cocktail, 9: iodoacetamide/trypsin. Since the protocol lasts over the span of two days with an overnight digestion, the protocol was divided into two automation protocols in the VWorks Automation Control software (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA): digestion and formic acid quenching. The lysis cocktail stock solution was transferred to a Nunc™ 384-Well Polypropylene Storage Microplate for Bravo system, then to the target Corning® CellBIND® 384-well flat clear bottom black, polystyrene, sterile, microplate by Agilent Bravo automated liquid transfer where the cell samples were plated. The iodoacetamide, trypsin, and formic acid stock solutions were prepared and  transferred to a Nunc™ 384-Well Polypropylene Storage Microplate by a multi-channel pipette, then to their respective target plates by Agilent Bravo automated liquid transfer. All Agilent Bravo liquid handling parameters can be found in Fig. 1d.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry Data Search and Analysis Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest algorithm were used for peptide identification and quantitation. The MS raw data were searched against a Swiss-Prot Human database (version January 2019, reviewed database) consisting of 20,350 entries using the following parameters: precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.6 daltons. Peptides were searched using fully tryptic cleavage constraints and up to two internal cleavages sites were allowed for tryptic digestion. Fixed modifications consisted of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications considered were oxidation of methionine residues and N-terminal protein acetylation. Peptide identification false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to a maximum of 0.01 using identifications from a concatenated database from the non-decoy and the decoy databases. Label-free quantification analysis used the “Precursor Ions Quantifier” node from Proteome Discoverer and normalized by total peptide amount. The output from Proteome Discoverer was used to generate radar plots, violin plots, and heat maps using R (version 3.4.2) and the following packages: “ggplot2” and “grid.”

### Publication Abstract
Major advances have been made to improve the sensitivity of mass analyzers, spectral quality, and speed of data processing enabling more comprehensive proteome discovery and quantitation. While focus has recently begun shifting toward robust proteomics sample preparation efforts, a high-throughput proteomics sample preparation is still lacking. We report the development of a highly automated universal 384-well plate sample preparation platform with high reproducibility and adaptability for extraction of proteins from cells within a culture plate. Digestion efficiency was excellent in comparison to a commercial digest peptide standard with minimal sample loss while improving sample preparation throughput by 20- to 40-fold (the entire process from plated cells to clean peptides is complete in &#x223c;300 min). Analysis of six human cell types, including two primary cell samples, identified and quantified &#x223c;4,000 proteins for each sample in a single high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry injection with only 100-10K cells, thus demonstrating universality of the platform. The selected protein was further quantified using a developed HPLC-multiple reaction monitoring method for HeLa digests with two heavy labeled internal standard peptides spiked in. Excellent linearity was achieved across different cell numbers indicating a potential for target protein quantitation in clinical research.

### Keywords
Proteomics, High-throughput screening, Biomarkers, Mrm, Hplc-ms

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health (NIH)
National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)

### Submitter
Dingyin Tao

### Lab Head
Dr Dingyin Tao
National Institutes of Health (NIH) National Center for Advancing Translational Sciences (NCATS)


