### Accession
PXD000663

### Title
A high-confidence glycosome proteome for procyclic form Trypanosoma brucei by epitope-tag organelle enrichment and SILAC

### Description
Epitope tagging and magnetic bead enrichment were combined with SILAC quantitative proteomics to determine a high-confidence glycosome proteome for the procyclic life cycle stage of the parasite Trypanosoma brucei.

### Sample Protocol
T. brucei procyclic form cells with and without the GFP-Pex13.1 plasmid were labelled with normal isotopic or [U-13C]-L-Arginine.HCl and [4,4,5,5-2H]-L-Lysine.2HCl and the expression of GFP-Pex13.1 was induced by adding 40 ng/mL fresh tetracycline 16 h prior to harvesting. Cells were harvested separately by centrifugation, washed, and combined 1:1. The combined cells were lysed at 10,000 psi, centrifuged twice at 2,000 g for 15 min at 4 ºC, twice at 5,000 × g for 15 min, and the supernatant pre-cleared by rotating with 0.2 mL magnetic beads without antibody for 1h at 4 ºC. The supernatant was immunoprecipitated using magnetic beads coupled to anti-GFP, and the beads were washed 4 times with 1 mL STE, and resuspended in 35 µL TBS. Samples for analysis by mass spectrometry were prepared either by SDS-PAGE separation followed by in-gel trypsin digestion or by FASP followed by SCX chromatography.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using a protein sequence database containing T. brucei brucei 927 annotated proteins (Version 4 downloaded from TriTrypDB, (http://www.tritrypdb.org/) supplemented with the VSG221 sequence and those of frequently observed contaminants. Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 10 ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 0.6 Da and full trypsin specificity, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines, N-terminal protein acetylation and N-pyroglutamate were allowed as variable modifications. Peptides were required to be at least 6 amino acids in length, and a MaxQuant score >5 and false discovery rates (FDRs) of 0.01 calculated at the levels of peptides, proteins and modification sites based on the number of hits against the reversed sequence database. SILAC ratios were calculated using only peptides that could be uniquely mapped to a given protein group, and required a minimum of 2 SILAC pairs. Quantitation: SILAC based quantitation, with replicate trimming applied by calculating the mean and standard deviation (σ) of the distribution of the log2 (H/L × L/H),30 and discarding data > 2σ from the mean.

### Publication Abstract
The glycosome of the pathogenic African trypanosome Trypanosoma brucei is a specialized peroxisome that contains most of the enzymes of glycolysis and several other metabolic and catabolic pathways. The contents and transporters of this membrane-bounded organelle are of considerable interest as potential drug targets. Here we use epitope tagging, magnetic bead enrichment, and SILAC quantitative proteomics to determine a high-confidence glycosome proteome for the procyclic life cycle stage of the parasite using isotope ratios to discriminate glycosomal from mitochondrial and other contaminating proteins. The data confirm the presence of several previously demonstrated and suggested pathways in the organelle and identify previously unanticipated activities, such as protein phosphatases. The implications of the findings are discussed.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Orbitrap velos, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Lancaster University

### Submitter
Michael Urbaniak

### Lab Head


