### Accession
PXD009321

### Title
Human cytomegalovirus alters the peroxisome proteome

### Description
Peroxisomes are primarily metabolic organelles with important functions in lipid metabolism, such as fatty acid oxidation and ether phospholipid synthesis (e.g., plasmalogens). Certain viruses, such as human cytomegalovirus (HCMV), hijack organelle functions to facilitate their replication and spread. However, the role of peroxisomes in herpesvirus replication remains elusive. Therefore, we used targeted mass spectrometry to quantify 60 peroxisome proteins through the HCMV infection cycle. We provide two proteomic experiments. The first experiment (raw files labeled as 20180123) is of samples in biological triplicate from uninfected human fibroblasts and infected human fibroblasts at 6, 24, 48, 72, and 120 hours post infection. The second experiment (raw files labeled as 201806) is from uninfected/infected fibroblasts during phosphonoformate (PFA) treatment and fibroblasts infected with UV-treated HCMV.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cells were lysed (4% SDS, 0.1M NaCl, 50mM TrisHcl, 0.5mM EDTA, pH8.0) and reduced/alkylated using 25mM TCEP solution (Thermo Fisher #77720) and 50mM 2-chloroacetamide (MP Biomedicals #ICN15495580) at 70°C for 20 min. Proteins were recovered by methanol-chloroform precipitation and resuspended in 25mM HEPES (pH8.2) with MS-grade Pierce trypsin (Thermo Fisher #90057) at a 1:50 trypsin:protein weight ratio for 16hrs at 37°C. Peptides were adjusted to 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using the StageTip method (Rappsilber, Mann, and Ishihama 2007) and SDBP-RPS material (3M Analytical Biotechnologies). Peptides were washed with 0.2% TFA, and eluted (5% ammonium hydroxide, 80% acetonitrile), followed by drying completely in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher) and resuspension in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN). Samples were analyzed by nLC-MS in a Dionex Ultimate nRSLC coupled to a Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer using PRM mode. Peptides were separated in a 60 minutes reverse-phase linear gradient (2 to 27% solvent B; solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA/ 97% ACN) in a PepMap RSLC C19 2μm particle size, 75μm x 50cm EASYSpray column (ThermoFisher ES803) set to 50°C. The instrument was set to 30,000 resolution, 100ms maximum injection time, 5E5 acquisition target, 0.7 m/z isolation window, NCE to 28, and 150m/z fixed first mass.

### Data Protocol
ThermoFisher RAW files containing MS2 spectra collected in PRM mode were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (ThermoFisher). A processing workflow containing the SEQUEST algorithm was used to search tandem MS spectra against a UniProt-SwissProt human database and common contaminants, generating peptide spectrum matches. Percolator was used to calculate matches q-values based on reverse sequence database searches. Next, RAW files were imported into Skyline to extract product ion chromatograms (XICs) and calculate peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
Viral proteins have evolved to target cellular organelles and usurp their functions for virus replication. Despite the knowledge of these critical functions for several organelles, little is known about peroxisomes during infection. Peroxisomes are primarily metabolic organelles with important functions in lipid metabolism. Here, we discovered that the enveloped viruses human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) and herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) induce the biogenesis of and unique morphological changes to peroxisomes to support their replication. Targeted proteomic quantification revealed a global virus-induced upregulation of peroxisomal proteins. Mathematical modeling and microscopy structural analysis show that infection triggers peroxisome growth and fission, leading to&#xa0;increased peroxisome numbers and irregular disc-like structures. HCMV-induced peroxisome biogenesis increased the phospholipid plasmalogen, thereby enhancing virus production. Peroxisome regulation and dependence were not observed for the non-enveloped adenovirus. Our findings uncover a role of peroxisomes in viral pathogenesis, with likely implications for multiple enveloped viruses.

### Keywords
Human, Virus, Cytomegalovirus, Hcmv, Peroxisome, Prm, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Molecular Biology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA

### Submitter
Pierre Jean Beltran

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Molecular Biology Department, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA


