### Accession
PXD013735

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Plant Protein Complexes, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, DSSO crosslinking

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromatography fractions that were subsequently crosslinked with DSSO and digested with one of two enzymes, Trypsin or Chymotrypsin.  The starting material was a native extract prepared from Chlamydomonas reinhardtii.  The mass spectrometry used a data-dependent MS2-MS3 method to identify crosslinks.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid cultures of live Chlamydomonas reinhardtii were from the UTEX 90 strain.  Cells were washed in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and Collected by centrifugation.  Lysis was by freeze/thaw, grinding in liquid nitrogen, and subsequent thawing and sonication in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, w mM DTT, and phosphatase and protease inhibitors.  2.1 mg of the clarified extract was fractionated on a BioSep SEC-s-4000 column (Phenomenex) with PBS pH 7.2 as the mobile phase and individual fractions were crosslinked by addition of DSSO to 0.5 mM for 1 hour.  Samples were not enriched for crosslinked peptides, but were prepared by our standard 96-well pipeline:  ultrafiltration for buffer exchange (Pall AcroPrep Advance Omega, 3k MWCO), reduction/alkylation, and overnight digestion.  For this experiment samples were split in two after alkylation, and one half digested with Trypsin and the other half with Chymotrypsin.  Peptides were desalted using a C18 Lab-in-a-Plate (Glygen)and data were acquired from each singly digested sample with two identical runs on a Thermo Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer using a data dependent 135 minute top speed MS2-MS3 method to identify crosslinks.  MS2 spectra were acquired after 25% CID and MS3 spectra after 30% HCD.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 with the Xlinkx node to identify crosslinks.  Workflows used were PWF_Fusion_Basic_SequestHT_XlinkxCleavable_MS2_MS3, and CWF_Basic_Xlinkx.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sec, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Xl-ms, Cx-ms, Cl-ms, Dsso, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


