### Accession
PXD018996

### Title
Urinary Proteomic Spectra Analysis Based on Machine Learning for Classification of Kidney Diseases

### Description
To extract urinary proteome spectral features based on advanced mass spectrometer and machine learning algorithms, it could get more accurate reporting results for disease classification. We tried to establish a novel diagnosis model of kidney diseases by combining machine learning XGBoost algorithm with complete urinary proteomic information.

### Sample Protocol
We enrolled 134 patients (including IgAN, MN, and DKD) with a total of 610,102 urinary proteomic mass spectra produced for training and validating of the diagnostic model. We divided the urinary proteomic mass spectral data into a training dataset (80%) and validation dataset (20%). The training dataset were directly used to create the diagnosis model by extreme gradient boosting (XGBoost), Random Forest (RF), Support Vector Machine (SVM) and Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs). The diagnostic accuracy was evaluated by confusion matrix. We also constructed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves, Lorenz curve and gain cure for evaluating the diagnosis model.

### Data Protocol
Compared with RF, SVM and ANNs, XGBoost model showed the best performance. The accuracy of the diagnostic XGBoost model was 96.03% (CI: 95.17%-96.77%) (Kapa = 0.943, Mcnemar’ Test P value = 0.00027). The AUC value of XGBoost model was 0.952 (CI: 0.9307- 0.9733). The KS value of Lorenz curve was 0.8514. The Lorenz curve and gain curve showed the strong robustness of this model.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kidney disease classification; urinary proteomics; machine learning algorithm; diagnosis

### Affiliations
West China Hospital,Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital,Sichuan University


