### Accession
PXD014662

### Title
Cyanobacterial proteome mapping reveals distinct compartment organisation and metabolism dispersed throughout the cell

### Description
Cyanobacteria are complex prokaryotes, incorporating a Gram-negative cell wall and internal thylakoid membranes (TM). However, localisation of proteins within cyanobacterial cells is poorly understood. Using subcellular fractionation and quantitative proteomics we report the first subcellular map of the proteome of an entire cyanobacterial (or any other prokaryotic) cell, identifying ~67% of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 proteins, ~1000 more than previous studies. 1,712 proteins were assigned to six specific subcellular regions. Proteins involved in energy generation localised to TMs. The majority of transporters, with the exception of the TM localised copper importer CtaA, resided in the plasma membrane (PM). Most metabolic enzymes are soluble although numerous pathways terminated in the TM (notably those involved in peptidoglycan monomer, NADP+, heme, lipid and carotenoid biosynthesis), or the PM (specifically those catalysing lipopolysaccharide, molybdopterin, flavin adenine dinucleotide and menaquinone biosynthesis). Furthermore, we identified the proteins involved in the TM and PM electron transport chains. The majority of ribosomal proteins and enzymes synthesising the storage compound polyhydroxybuyrate formed distinct clusters within the data suggesting that they have similar subcellular distributions to one another as one would expect for proteins operating within multi-component protein structures. Moreover, heterogeneity within membrane and cytoplasmic regions is observed, indicating further cellular complexity. Cyanobacterial TM protein localisation is conserved in Arabidopsis thaliana chloroplasts, suggesting similar proteome organisation in higher photosynthetic organisms. The organisation of a cyanobacterial cell revealed here will significantly aid our understanding of these environmentally and biotechnological important organisms. The successful application of this technique in Synechocystis suggests it could be applied to mapping the proteomes of other cyanobacteria and complex single-celled organisms.

### Sample Protocol
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 was routinely cultured in liquid BG11 medium with 10 mM sodium bicarbonate (Castenholz, 1988) at 30°C and grown under continuous moderate white light (50 µmol photons m-2 s-1) with vigorous air bubbling and shaking at 160 rpm.  Whole-cell lysate was fractionated by sucrose density ultracentrifugation, as previously described (Schottkowski et al., 2009), with modifications. All steps were carried out at 4°C. Cells were harvested from 2 l cultures, by centrifugation at 5,000g for 10 min. The cell pellet was washed in 50 ml Buffer I (5 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8) and centrifuged at 5,000g for 10 min. The resulting cell pellet was re-suspended in 75 ml Buffer II (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM PMSF, 600 mM sucrose, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% lysozyme, pH 6.8), and shaken at 160 rpm for 2 h at 30°C before centrifugation at 5,000g for 10 min. The cell pellet was washed twice with Buffer III (20 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM PMSF, 600 mM sucrose, pH 6.8) and re-suspended in 17.5 ml of the same buffer, to which half the volume of 425-600 µm acid-washed glass beads was added. Cells were disrupted in a Mini Bead Beater-16 (BioSpec Products) for 10 min at 3,450 oscillations/min, with 1 min intervals on ice. The cell suspension was centrifuged at 3,000g for 10 min to pellet unbroken cells. The supernatant was concentrated to 50% sucrose by the addition of 80% sucrose (w/w) in Buffer II to a final volume of 10 ml. The refractive index of sucrose solutions was measured to ensure correct concentrations by using a hand-held refractometer (Reichert). A discontinuous sucrose gradient containing Buffer II was made, consisting of 10 ml 50% (w/w) including cell lysate, 8 ml 39% (w/w), 6 ml 30% (w/w), and 6 ml 10% (w/w), and centrifuged at 125,000g for 17 h (SW 32 Ti Swinging Bucket Rotor, Beckman Coulter Optima L-100 XP Ultracentrifuge). Fractions 10% (I), 30% (II), 39% (III), and 50% (IV) were collected using a fraction collector (LabConco). Fraction V was diluted with 5 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 6.8) to a concentration of 20% (w/w) and added onto a continuous sucrose gradient from 30% (w/w) to 60% (w/w) and centrifuged at 125,000g for 17 h. 2.5 ml fractions were collected (1-12) using a fraction collector.  After protein precipitation  protein concentration was determined using the DC Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad). Sucrose gradient fractions 1 and 2, as well as 11 and 12 were combined, leaving 10 samples for TMT 10-plex labelling. Each sample was normalised to 100 µg of protein in 25 mM TEAB, before being reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin.  Peptides were labelled with 10 TMT tags for 2 h at room temperature. Un-reacted TMT tags were quenched with 8 µl 5% hydroxylamine in 100 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) for 1 h at room temperature. 100 µl of ultrapure water was added and the samples incubated at 4°C overnight. The samples were then combined and reduced to dryness by vacuum centrifugation.  For solid-phase extraction of TMT-labelled peptides the samples were re-suspended in 1 ml of 0.4% (v/v) formic acid, and placed onto 100 mg Sep Pak tC28 solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters Corporationand processed suing the manufacturers protocl. After drying samples were resuspended in 0.1 ml 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), 4% (v/v) acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded onto an Acquity bridged ethyl hybrid C18 UPLC column (Waters; 2.1 mm inner diameter x 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size), and profiled with a linear gradient of 5-75% acetonitrile + 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) over 50 min, at a flow rate of 50 µl/min. 44 fractions were collected from 11 min onwards in 1 min intervals. Fractions 1-8 were pooled together, and the rest were pooled pair-wise, giving 19 samples for mass spectrometry analysis. All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) system and a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS. Peptides were separated on a Proxeon EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific; 50 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size) using a 5-25% gradient of acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid over 95 min at 300 nL/min, followed by 25-40% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid over 10 min.  An electrospray voltage of 2.1 kV was applied. The mass spectrometry settings were as in Geladaki et al (2019) doi: 10.1038/s41467-018-08191-w

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific), interfaced with Mascot server (v.2.3.02, Matrix Science). Mascot searches were performed against the CyanoBase database, with carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and TMT 10-plex modification of lysine and peptide N termini set as modifications. Precursor and fragment ion tolerances of ±20 p.p.m and ±0.1 Da were applied. Up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Proteins were reported with a FDR of 1%. TMT 10-plex quantification was also performed via Proteome Discoverer by calculating the sum of centroided ions within a ±2 mmu window around the expected m/z for each of the 10 TMT reporter ions. For protein-level reporting, protein grouping was enabled, and values were calculated from the median of all quantifiable peptide spectral matches (PSMs) for each group. TMT values were then reported as a ratio to the sum of reporters in each spectrum. Machine learning, multivariate analysis, and visualisation of data The Bioconductor (Gentleman et al., 2004) packages MSnbase (Gatto and Lilley, 2012) and pRoloc (Gatto et al., 2014) for the R statistical programming language(R Core Team, 2013) were used for handling of the quantitative proteomics data and the protein-localisation prediction. pRolocGUI(Gatto et al., 2014) was employed for interactive visualisation of the data. Protein markers for the plasma membrane, thylakoid membrane, cytosol, and small and large ribosomal subunits were curated from a literature review (Supplemental Table 7). A Support Vector Machine (SVM) classifier was employed on the combined dataset, with a radial basis function kernel, using class specific weights for classification of unassigned proteins to one of the 5 defined sub-cellular niches, TM, PM, soluble, small ribosomal subunit, large ribosomal subunit. The weights used in classification were set to be inversely proportional to the subcellular class frequencies to account for class imbalance. Algorithmic performance of the SVM on the dataset was estimated (as described in Trotter et al (Trotter et al., 2010)). Scoring thresholds were calculated per subcellular niche and were set based on concordance with existing subcellular knowledge annotation to attain a 7.5% false discovery rate (FDR). Unassigned proteins were then classified to 1 of the 5 compartments according to the SVM prediction if greater than the calculated class threshold.  All protein level datasets are available in the R Bioconductor pRolocdata package (https://bioconductor.org/packages/pRolocdata version 1.19.2) and can be interactively explored using the pRolocGUI package (https://bioconductor.org/packages/pRolocGUI) or using the standalone online interactive app (https://lgatto.shinyapps.io/synechocystis/).

### Publication Abstract
Cyanobacteria are complex prokaryotes, incorporating a Gram-negative cell wall and internal thylakoid membranes (TMs). However, localization of proteins within cyanobacterial cells is poorly understood. Using subcellular fractionation and quantitative proteomics, we produced an extensive subcellular proteome map of an entire cyanobacterial cell, identifying &#x223c;67% of proteins in <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803, &#x223c;1000 more than previous studies. Assigned to six specific subcellular regions were 1,712 proteins. Proteins involved in energy conversion localized to TMs. The majority of transporters, with the exception of a TM-localized copper importer, resided in the plasma membrane (PM). Most metabolic enzymes were soluble, although numerous pathways terminated in the TM (notably those involved in peptidoglycan monomer, NADP<sup>+</sup>, heme, lipid, and carotenoid biosynthesis) or PM (specifically, those catalyzing lipopolysaccharide, molybdopterin, FAD, and phylloquinol biosynthesis). We also identified the proteins involved in the TM and PM electron transport chains. The majority of ribosomal proteins and enzymes synthesizing the storage compound polyhydroxybuyrate formed distinct clusters within the data, suggesting similar subcellular distributions to one another, as expected for proteins operating within multicomponent structures. Moreover, heterogeneity within membrane regions was observed, indicating further cellular complexity. Cyanobacterial TM protein localization was conserved in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) chloroplasts, suggesting similar proteome organization in more developed photosynthetic organisms. Successful application of this technique in <i>Synechocystis</i> suggests it could be applied to mapping the proteomes of other cyanobacteria and single-celled organisms. The organization of the cyanobacterial cell revealed here substantially aids our understanding of these environmentally and biotechnologically important organisms.

### Keywords
Spatial proteomics, Cyanobacteria, Synechocystis, Lopit

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge Cambridge UK  CB2 1GA
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Kathryn Lilley

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn S Lilley
Department of Biochemistry University of Cambridge Cambridge UK  CB2 1GA


