### Accession
PXD009968

### Title
AMPK-dependent activation of the Cyclin Y/CDK16 complex controls autophagy

### Description
The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a master sensor of the cellular energy status and is crucial for the adaptive response to limited energy availability. AMPK is implicated in the regulation of many cellular processes, including autophagy. However, the precise mechanisms by which AMPK controls these processes and the identities of relevant substrates are not fully understood. With a protein microarrays we identified Cyclin Y as novel AMPK substrate that is phosphorylated at S326 both in vitro and in cells. Phosphorylation of Cyclin Y at S326 promotes its interaction with the cyclin-dependent kinase 16 (CDK16), thereby stimulating its catalytic activity. When expressed in cells, Cyclin Y/CDK16 is sufficient to promote autophagy. Moreover, Cyclin Y/CDK16 is necessary for efficient AMPK-dependent activation of autophagy. This functional interaction is mediated by AMPK phosphorylating S326 of Cyclin Y. Collectively, we define Cyclin Y/CDK16 as downstream effector of AMPK for inducing autophagy.

### Sample Protocol
Home     Submit data     Browse data     Help     Publications     About PRIDE Archive     Feedback     Profile     Logout  PRIDE > Archive > PXD009968 Project PXD009968 PRIDE Assigned Tags: Biological Dataset Download Project Files Recombinant Cyclin Y and CDK16 were incubated in vitro in the presence or absence of recombinant AMPK and ATP. Additionally, GFP-CDK16 was overexpressed in cells which were stimulated with an AMPK activator or mock treated and subsequently immunoprecipitated. The samples were run on SDS PAGE and the corresponding protein bands were excised and subjected to in- gel tryptic digestion. The extracted peptides were desalted using homemade STAGE-tips and analysed via nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Elite or a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analysed using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the human UniProt database version 06/2015 (canonical and isoforms). The search settings for MaxQuant were: Trypsin as the protease, two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation (Cys) as the fixed modification; oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (STY) and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The FDR was set to 0.01% on protein, peptide and PTM level.

### Publication Abstract
The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a master sensor of the cellular energy status that is crucial for the adaptive response to limited energy availability. AMPK is implicated in the regulation of many cellular processes, including autophagy. However, the precise mechanisms by which AMPK controls these processes and the identities of relevant substrates are not fully understood. Using protein microarrays, we identify Cyclin Y as an&#xa0;AMPK substrate that is phosphorylated at Serine 326 (S326) both in vitro and in cells. Phosphorylation of Cyclin Y at S326 promotes its interaction with the Cyclin-dependent kinase 16 (CDK16), thereby stimulating its catalytic activity. When expressed in cells, Cyclin Y/CDK16 is sufficient to promote autophagy. Moreover, Cyclin Y/CDK16 is necessary for efficient AMPK-dependent activation of autophagy. This functional interaction is mediated by AMPK phosphorylating S326 of Cyclin Y. Collectively, we define Cyclin Y/CDK16 as downstream effector of AMPK for inducing autophagy.

### Keywords
Human, Phosphorylation, Nanolc-msms, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vervoorts
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School, RWTH Aachen University, 52074 Aachen, Germany


