### Accession
PXD026246

### Title
Identification of a host protein interacting with Tomato spotted wilt virus ribonucleoproteins from Nicotiana benthamiana and yeast.

### Description
Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens that depend on host factors to complete their infection cycle. Very little is known of which plant factors are required for successful Tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (TSWV) infection. The viral ribonucleoprotein (RNP) fraction from TSWV infected Nicotiana benthamiana plants was purified and its protein composition was analysed by proteomics by mass spectrometry to identify host proteins that co-purify with viral RNPs. Related, we expressed a TSWV replicon system in a non-host system, Bakers’ yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae), and purified as well the RNP fraction from yeast. Comparative proteomics was used to find common enriched proteins observed in both yeast and plant RNP fractions.

### Sample Protocol
TSWV virus particles or control fractions were isolated from systemically infected or non-infected N. benthamiana plant material as described previously (Griep et al. 2000) and 80 ug of the purified RNPs protein was denatured with SDS by heating to 85 °C for 5 minutes. All sample was loaded on a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein gradient gel (Bio Rad) followed by a short electrophoresis run at low voltage to fix all proteins in the gel. The gel was stained in Coomassie PageBlue (ThermoFischer) for one hour and the protein bands were excised. Disulphide bonds were reduced (10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 1 hour) and reduced cysteines were alkylated (20 mM acrylamide in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, room temperature in the dark for 1 hour). Next, the gel was cut in small pieces and tryptic digestion was performed by adding 5 ng/µL Trypsin (sequencing grade, Roche) in ABC buffer with overnight shaking at 20 °C. Protein digestion was terminated by acidifying the digest to pH 3 using 10% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide samples were measured by injecting (5 μl) into a nanoLC-MS/MS (Thermo nLC1000 connected to a Q Exactive HFX).  Griep, R. A., Prins, M., van Twisk, C., Keller, H. J. H. G., Kerschbaumer, R. J., Kormelink, R., Goldbach, R. W., and Schots, A. (2000) Application of phage display in selecting Tomato spotted wilt virus-specific single-chain antibodies (scFvs) for sensitive diagnosis in ELISA. Phytopathology, 90, 183-190

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
The tripartite genome of the negative-stranded RNA virus <i>Tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus</i> (TSWV) is assembled, together with two viral proteins, the nucleocapsid protein and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase, into infectious ribonucleoprotein complexes (RNPs). These two viral proteins are, together, essential for viral replication and transcription, yet our knowledge on the host factors supporting these two processes remains limited. To fill this knowledge gap, the protein composition of viral RNPs collected from TSWV-infected <i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i> plants, and of those collected from a reconstituted TSWV replicon system in the yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, was analysed. RNPs obtained from infected plant material were enriched for plant proteins implicated in (<i>i</i>) sugar and phosphate transport and (<i>ii</i>) responses to cellular stress. In contrast, the yeast-derived viral RNPs primarily contained proteins implicated in RNA processing and ribosome biogenesis. The latter suggests that, in yeast, the translational machinery is recruited to these viral RNPs. To examine whether one of these cellular proteins is important for a TSWV infection, the corresponding <i>N. benthamiana</i> genes were targeted for virus-induced gene silencing, and these plants were subsequently challenged with TSWV. This approach revealed four host factors that are important for systemic spread of TSWV and disease symptom development.

### Keywords
Ribonucleoproteins; rnp; susceptibility factor tomato spotted wilt orthotospovirus (tswv), Eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1a (eef1a), Host factor; pro-viral factor

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


