### Accession
PXD007704

### Title
Human cWAF LC-MS/MS

### Description
Chronic skin wounds accompany many widespread, chronic and age-related diseases and are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Both, keratinocytes and skin fibroblasts contribute to the pathomechanisms observed in chronic wounds. Whereas dysregulated pathways in the epidermis have been extensively studied, little is known on the influence of dermal fibroblasts on chronic wounding. We isolated fibroblasts from chronic wounds and show that they are a distinct cell type that can be propagated in vitro. Chronic wound-associated fibroblasts (cWAFs) exhibit a unique proteome profile characteristic for a decreased propensity for cell proliferation and migration but with an enhanced ability to contract the extracellular matrix. Commonly, they display lysosomal dysfunction and dysregulated TGFbeta signaling. Here, we define intrinsic and extrinsic properties of cWAFs that may contribute to pathological wound healing.

### Sample Protocol
whole cell lysate of triple SILAC labeled cells was separated by SDS-PAGE; in-gel trypsin digestion, 10 slices per gel lane; STAGE tipp purification of peptides; DDA LC-MS/MS analysis

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 for peak detection, generation of peak lists of mass error corrected peptides, and for database searches. A full-length UniProt human database additionally containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in–gel digestion (based on UniProt human FASTA version August 2015) was used as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino–terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Triple SILAC was chosen as quantitation mode.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic skin wounds accompany many prevalent age-related diseases and are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Both keratinocytes and fibroblasts contribute to the pathomechanisms in chronic skin wounds. Dysregulated pathways in the epidermis have been extensively studied, but little is known of the influence of dermal fibroblasts on chronic wounding. We isolated fibroblasts from chronic wounds, propagated them in&#xa0;vitro, and analyzed them using proteomic profiling in combination with functional characterization of the proteomic changes. Chronic wound-associated fibroblasts exhibit a unique proteome profile characteristic of lysosomal dysfunction and dysregulated TGF&#x3b2; signaling. They display a decreased propensity for cell proliferation and migration, combined with an enhanced ability to contract the extracellular matrix. With these properties, chronic wound-associated fibroblasts actively contribute to pathological inabilities to close wounds and represent potential targets for pharmacological interference for changing cellular phenotypes.

### Keywords
Human, Chronic wound, Skin fibroblasts

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland


