### Accession
PXD027101

### Title
Quantitative proteomics unravels molecular networks of neuroprotection conferred by Brahmi extract in Aβ42 -induced toxicity model of Drosophila melanogaster

### Description
Ayurvedic drug formulations Bacopa monnieri and Centella asiatica are known to have neuroprotective effects. These have been traditionally used in the treatment of Alzhemeir’s disease, and other neurological deficits. Using pan neuronal Aβ42 model of Drosophila melanogaster, a mass spectrometry based quantitative proteomic analysis platform was used to generate the data on proteins altered in response to the Aβ42 toxicity and restoration of altered proteins by consumption of aqueous extracts of two Ayurvedic drug formulations Bacopa monnieri and Centella asiatica aqueous extract. Quantitative proteomic analysis resulted in 0.67 million mass spectra corresponding to 2,59,168 peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) mapping to 24,305 non- redundant peptides corresponding to 11,480 Drosophila melanogaster proteins. Proteins were filtered for >3 PSMs, resulting in 9,540 proteins. Flies expressing Aβ42 significantly altered 517 proteins which were involved in maintaining essential neuronal functions. Supplementing flies with Bacopa monnieri or Centella asiatica extract commonly rescued 224 proteins from Aβ42 toxicity, moreover, extract supplemented group significantly altered proteins which were additionally supporting neuronal maintenance in flies with Aβ42 stress.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from each treatment were reduced with 100mM dithiothreitol, and 200mM alkylated with iodoacetamide followed by acetone precipitation at -20°C. The mixture was centrifuged at 27°C for 30 minutes and the obtained pellet was air-dried. The protein pellet was resuspended in 200µl of 50mM TEABC buffer and digested overnight at 37°C with TPCK-trypsin. Digestion efficiency was checked by resolving the sample on 10% SD-PAGE. Peptides were dried overnight in SpeedVac and stored at -20°C until TMT labeling. Peptide palette from each group was resuspended in 200 µl of 0.1% FA and was desalted using C18 stage tip method. Post-clean-up the peptides were dried using SpeedVac and reconstituted in 50mM TEABC. An equal amount of peptide sample from each condition was used for labeling, with labels from the TMT 10plex kit (126 - WT, 127N - WT+CA, 127C -WT+BM, 128N - AD, 128C - AD+CA and 129N - AD+BM). Peptides were labeled using manufactures protocol. An equal volume (5ul) of peptides sample was taken from each condition for TMT label check to conform to the labeling efficiency and amount of labeled peptides across the samples. Peptide fractionation was carried out using a C18 Stage Tip protocol with high PH mobile phase (2%TEABC). Peptide desalting was carried out with the C18 Stage Tip method. Tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with an Easy-nl C1200 nanoflow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). The data-dependent acquisition was formed within the mass range of 400-1600 m/z in Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation mode along with normalized collision energy of 35% was applied in scan range of 400-1600 m/z at a resolution of 60000 at 200 m/z using the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer (PD) version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used for processing MS raw files. The data were searched against the Drosophila melanogaster protein database RefSeq v203 along with known contaminants using MASCOT and SequestHT search algorithms. The search parameters were set at a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, two missed cleavage with trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme. Precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance were kept at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. Static modification with TMT at peptide N-terminus and lysine residue along with carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set. Oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminus acetylation was set as a dynamic modification. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 1% at peptide and PSM level using percolator node in PD. Data were normalized using the total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroprotection, Mitochondrial dysfunction, Quantitative proteomics, Neurodegeneration, Amyloid toxicity, Centella asiatica, Aqueous extract, Bacopa monnieri, Alzheimer's disease

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Centre for Systems Biology and Molecular Mechanism, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be Univeristy), Mangalore, Karnataka, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Centre for Systems Biology and Molecular Mechanism, Yenepoya Research Center, Yenepoya (Deemed to be Univeristy), Mangalore, Karnataka, India


