### Accession
PXD019370

### Title
Proteomic analysis of cerebellar synaptosomes in presymptomatic cystatin B –deficient mice

### Description
Loss-of-function mutations in cystatin B (CSTB) cause progressive myoclonus epilepsy of Unverricht-Lundborg type (EPM1). Cstb-deficiency in mice leads to early alterations in GABAergic signaling, and causes neuroinflammation followed by progressive neurodegeneration, manifesting as progressive myoclonus and ataxia. The proteome of cerebellar synaptosomes of presymptomatic Cstb-/- mice were characterized by LC-ESI-MS/MS to gain insight into disease formation and progression.

### Sample Protocol
- isolation and enrichment of synaptosomes by ultracentrifugation and acetone precipitation, - sample preparation by trypsin, C18, and HILIC, - LC-ESI-MS/MS (Easy-nLC1000 + QExactive mass spectrometer), - MS analysis by Thermo Xcalibur 3.0., data-dependent acquisition (DDA)

### Data Protocol
Peptide quantification by Progenesis LC-MS, and protein identification by the Mascot 2.4.1 search engine through the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. The SwissProt Mus musculus database, uploaded in January 2016, was used as reference. Error tolerances on peptide and fragment ions were max 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Database searches were limited to fully tryptic peptides with maximum one missed cleavage, and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) and methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da) were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively. Peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, and minimal peptide length to 7 amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synaptosome, Cystatin b, Mouse, Lc-esi-ms/ms, Cerebella

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


