### Accession
PXD012198

### Title
Proteomic analysis of glomerular organoid extracellular matrix

### Description
Introduction Points to consider adding: -The matrix in the kidney/glomerulus is specialised and complex with basement membrane structures in addition to interstitial matrix components. -The glomerular basement membrane undergoes change in isoform composition of key matrix components including type IV collagen and laminin. -The matrix composition of kidney organoids has not been yet been investigated in a global manner.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular matrix isolation and enrichment ECM enrichment was carried out as previously described {Lennon:2014ez}. Briefly, the organoids were lysed in Tris-buffer (10 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1% [vol/vol] Triton X-100, 25 mM EDTA, 25 mg/ml leupeptin, 25 mg/ml aprotinin, and 0.5 mM 4-(2-aminoethyl)-benzenesulfonyl fluoride hydrochloride) to extract soluble proteins, and the samples were centrifuged at 14,000Xg for 10 minutes at 4.0oC. The supernatant was kept on ice (fraction C1), and the pellets were resuspended in alkaline detergent buffer for 30 minutes (20 mM NH4OH and 0.5% [vol/vol] Triton X-100 in PBS) to solubilise and disrupt the ECM interaction with the remaining cellular components. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000Xg for 10 minutes at 4.0oC, and the supernatant was kept on ice (C2). To degrade the genomic materials (DNA/RNA) in the remaining pellets, the pellets were resuspended in a deoxyribonuclease buffer (10 mg/ml deoxyribonuclease I [Roche, Burgess Hill, UK] in PBS) for 30 minutes. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000Xg for 10 minutes at 4.0oC, and the supernatant was kept on ice (C3). The residual pellet contains most ECM components, which were resuspended in reducing sample buffer (50 mM TrisHCl, pH 6.8, 10% [wt/vol] glycerol, 4% [wt/vol] SDS, 0.004% [wt/vol] bromophenol blue, and 8% [vol/vol] b-mercaptoethanol) to yield the ECM fraction (C4). Samples were heat denatured at 95°C for 10 minutes.   Mass spectrometry data acquisition: Protein samples were run into SDS-PAGE gels for 3 minutes to concentrate proteins in the gel top and these were visualised by InstantBlue staining. Gel tops from C1 and C4 fractions were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as described previously (Lennon: 2014). Liquid chromatography–tandem MS analysis was performed using a nanoACQUITY UltraPerformance liquid chromatography system (Waters, Elstree, UK) coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were concentrated and desalted on a Symmetry C18 preparative column (20-mm length, 180-mm inner diameter, 5-mm particle size, 100-Å pore size; Waters).Peptides were separated on a bridged ethyl hybrid C18 analytical column (250-mm length, 75-mm inner diameter, 1.7-mm particle size, 130-Å pore size; Waters) using a 45-minute linear gradient from 1% to 25% (vol/vol) acetonitrile in 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data- dependent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted using ProteoWizad msConvert {Chambers:2012du} executed in Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK). Peak list files were searched against Swiss-Prot and Trembl Database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine and hydroxylation of proline and lysine were allowed as variable modifications. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. MS quantification and proteomic data analyses were performed using Progenesis QI software (version 2.3; Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK), where the sample were submitted to automatic alignment and reference selection at default settings, and peptides with a rank greater than 4 were removed. The proteins were quantified using Hi-N relative quantification with a minimum of three peptides per protein, and the normalised abundance calculated within Progenesis QI was used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Matrix, Proteomics, Glomerulus, Organoid, Mass spectrometry, Ecm

### Affiliations
The University of Manchester
The University of Manchester (UK)
King Abdul Aziz University

### Submitter
Salman Hosawi

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
The University of Manchester


