### Accession
PXD008372

### Title
Processing and Structure of the New Lantibiotic Peptide Nso From the Human GI Tract Bacterium Blautia obeum A2-162 analysed by Mass Spectrometry

### Description
A previously reported gene cluster encoding four nisin-like peptides, three with the same sequence (NsoA1-3) and the unique NsoA4, produced antimicrobial activity in the presence of trypsin after heterologous expression in Lactococcus lactis. Protein extracts were prepared by SDS gel electrophoresis or immunoprecipitation using an antibody to the NsoA2 leader. The tryptic peptides observed by LC-MS/MS covered the complete sequence of preNsoA1-3 and part of the leader sequence of preNsoA4 and confirmed the expression and the predicted sequences of the preNsoA peptides. Further, the data revealed that the preNsoA1-3 peptides were partly modified with dehydrations and formation of lanthionine rings. A certain amount of fully modified preNsoA1-3 was observed. Details of modifications of the core peptide and the C-terminal tryptic peptide TATCGCHITGK covering rings D and E indicated that 22% of these preNsoA1-3 peptides were completely modified. A lower amount is estimated for rings A-C. Intact masses of immunoprecipitation derived peptides determined by LC-MS accurately matched the expected preNsoA precursor peptides. The most abundant peptides detected were preNsoA2-3-8H2O followed by preNsoA1-8H2O and other states of dehydration. The results indicate that processing occurs but is incomplete for preNsoA peptides in the heterologous system with the formation of a certain amount of fully modified and active peptides.

### Sample Protocol
The L. lactis strain UKLc10(1) carrying the nso gene cluster was used to produce preNso peptides which were separated by SDS gel electrophoresis. Gel slices containing a 6 kDa band reacting with the anti-Nso leader peptide antibody were washed, treated with trypsin, and extracted according to standard procedures32. Aliquots were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer coupled to an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK). The sample was separated on a PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column (C18, 2 µm, 500x0.75 mm, Thermo) using a gradient of 0.75% min-1 acetonitrile from 6% to 40% in water/0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.3 µl min-1 and infused directly into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was run in positive ion mode with quad isolation at 120K resolution over the mass range 400-1600 (m/z) for the precursor scans (orbitrap).

### Data Protocol
Recalibrated peaklists were generated using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30, and the database search was performed with the merged HCD and CID peaklists using Mascot 2.4.1 (Matrixscience, London, UK). The search was performed on a Lactococcus lactis protein sequence database (uniprot.org) to which the preNsoA peptide sequences had been added with a precursor tolerance of 6 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da. The enzyme was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 or 3 allowed missed cleavages. Dehydration (-18) of serine and threonine, oxidation of methionine and carbamido-methylation (CAM) of cysteine were set as variable modifications. The Mascot search results were imported into Scaffold 4.4.1.1 (www.proteomsoftware.com) using identification probabilities of 99% for proteins and 95% or 0% for peptides.

### Publication Abstract
A previously reported gene cluster encoding four nisin-like peptides, three with the same sequence (NsoA1-3) and the unique NsoA4, produced antimicrobial activity in the presence of trypsin after heterologous expression in Lactococcus lactis. Protein extracts were separated by SDS gel electrophoresis or immunoprecipitation using an antibody to the NsoA2 leader. Tryptic peptides observed by LC-MS/MS covered the complete sequence of preNsoA1-3 and part of the leader sequence of preNsoA4 and confirmed the expression and the predicted sequences of the preNsoA peptides. Further, the data revealed that the preNsoA1-3 peptides were partly modified with dehydrations and formation of lanthionine rings. A certain amount of fully modified preNsoA1-3 was observed. Details of modifications of the core peptide and the C-terminal tryptic peptide TATCGCHITGK covering rings D and E indicated that 22% of these preNsoA1-3 peptides were completely modified. A lower amount of ring formation is estimated for rings A-C. Intact masses of immunoprecipitation-derived peptides determined by LC-MS accurately matched the expected preNsoA precursor peptides. The most abundant peptides detected were preNsoA2-3-8H<sub>2</sub>O followed by preNsoA1-8H<sub>2</sub>O and other states of dehydration. The results confirm incomplete processing of preNsoA peptides in the heterologous system, with the formation of a certain amount of fully modified peptides.

### Keywords
Nisin, Modification, Gut pathogens, Lachnospiraceae, Lantibiotic, Nso, Dehydration, Structure, Mass spectrometry, Methyllanthionine ring, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
Biological Chemistry
Quadram Institute Bioscience, Department of Gut Health and Food Safety, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UA, UK Phone:  +44 (0)1603 255284

### Submitter
Gerhard Saalbach

### Lab Head
Dr Melinda J. Mayer
Quadram Institute Bioscience, Department of Gut Health and Food Safety, Norwich Research Park, Norwich, NR4 7UA, UK Phone:  +44 (0)1603 255284


