### Accession
PXD009256

### Title
Total Proteome Analysis in RNAi treated C. elegans (mrps5, fzo1, drp1, eat3)

### Description
A SWATH-based worflow has been developed for C. elegans proteome profiling, including sample preparation, SWATH spectral library generation and downstream data treatment. The influences of several RNAi treatments (including mrps5, fzo1, drp1, eat3) on C. elegans total proteome were studied.

### Sample Protocol
C. elegans samples were freeze dried then homogenized using a high powered sonicator UP200St-G (Hielscher, Germany). The sonicator was used at 150 watts for 10 x 10 cycles of 10 seconds, in order to break worm cuticle. Extracted proteins were subsequently quantified by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA), 300  of proteins were then aliquoted and precipitated by acetone at -20 °C overnight. After removed acetone supernatant, samples were re-suspended in urea 8 M , reduced with DTT , alkylated with IAA, digested with trypsin (trypsin to protein ratio of 1:25) and incubated at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, silica C18 columns were performed to remove salts and other contaminants. The cleaned peptides were then quantified with NanoDrop, evaporated to dryness and stored at -80 °C before data acquisition on MS.   LC-MS/MS of was performed on a NanoLC-1D Plus system (Eksigent) coupled with a SCIEX 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer. The MS was operated in SWATH mode without technical replicates. For each sample, 1 μg of peptide were injected onto a 20 cm PicoFrit emitter(in-house packed with Magic C18 resin) and then separated using a 60 min linear gradient from 2 - 35% B at flow rate of 300 nL/min (mobile phase A (0.1% (v/v) FA, 2% (v/v) ACN) and B (0.1% (v/v) FA, 98% (v/v) ACN)). MS1 data were acquired within the range of 399.5 - 1200.5 m/z, following an optimized setting for the selection of 64 precursor ion isolation windows. MS2 data were acquired within the range of 50 - 2000 m/z, the MS2 signal were accumulated during 50 ms for all isolation windows. Together with a survey scan of 250 ms, a 3.45 s duty cycle were repeated during the data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
OpenSWATH workflow (OpenMS 2.1.0) was run with m/z extraction window 0.05 Th, retention time extraction window 600 ms. PyProphet was run per run to separate true from false positive. TRIC and requantification was run to align features across all MS runs, output files (.tsv) were generated for further data analysis. The TRIC output was quantile normalized, filtered by SWATH2stat and fed into MSstats to infer protein level quantification data.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial form and function are closely interlinked in homeostasis and aging. Inhibiting mitochondrial translation is known to increase lifespan in C. elegans, and is accompanied by a fragmented mitochondrial network. However, whether this link between mitochondrial translation and morphology is causal in longevity remains uncharacterized. Here, we show in C. elegans that disrupting mitochondrial network homeostasis by blocking fission or fusion synergizes with reduced mitochondrial translation to prolong lifespan and stimulate stress response such as the mitochondrial unfolded protein response, UPRMT. Conversely, immobilizing the mitochondrial network through a simultaneous disruption of fission and fusion abrogates the lifespan increase induced by mitochondrial translation inhibition. Furthermore, we find that the synergistic effect of inhibiting both mitochondrial translation and dynamics on lifespan, despite stimulating UPRMT, does not require it. Instead, this lifespan-extending synergy is exclusively dependent on the lysosome biogenesis and autophagy transcription factor HLH-30/TFEB. Altogether, our study reveals the mechanistic crosstalk between mitochondrial translation, mitochondrial dynamics, and lysosomal signaling in regulating longevity.

### Keywords
Mrps-5, Caenorhabditis elegans, Rnai, Fzo1, Swath, Eat3, Drp1

### Affiliations
University of Luxembourg
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Evan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich


