### Accession
PXD037954

### Title
Micro-topographies induce epigenetic reprogramming and quiescence in human mesenchymal stem cells

### Description
Biomaterials can control cell and nuclear morphology. Since the shape of the nucleus influences chromatin architecture, gene expression, and cell identity, surface topography can control cell phenotype. This study explores how surface topography influences nuclear morphology, histone modifications, and expression of histone-associated proteins through advanced histone mass spectrometry and microarray analysis. We found that nuclear confinement is associated with loss of both histone acetylation and nucleoli abundance, while pathway analysis revealed a substantial reduction in gene expression associated with chromosome organization. In light of previous observations where we found a decrease in proliferation and metabolism induced by micro-topographies, we connect these findings with a quiescent phenotype in mesenchymal stem cells, as further shown by a reduction of ribosomal proteins and the maintenance of multipotency on micro-topographies after long-term culture conditions. Furthermore, this influence of micro-topographies on nuclear morphology and proliferation was reversible, as shown by a full return of proliferation when re-cultured on a flat surface. Our findings provide novel insights on how biophysical signaling influences nuclear organization and subsequent cellular phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells were seeded on flat and PS-1018 surfaces and cultured for 4, 24, 48, and 72 hours in basic medium at a density of 15,000 cells/cm2 in 6-well plate format. Cells from a plate were pooled together, after which the cell pellet was flash frozen. This process was repeated 5 times to obtain 6 replicas. Histone extraction was performed using a direct acid protocol as described elsewhere [86]. Therefore, 2 million cells were resuspended in 250 µl of 0.4N HCl and incubated for 4 hours on a rotator at 4 °C. The histones were precipitated with 33% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) while incubated on ice for 30 minutes. Afterwards, the precipitated histones were washed twice with ice cold acetone to remove residual TCA. A small amount of the extracted histone fraction, corresponding to 200.000 cells was quantified by gel-electrophoresis using a 8-16% TGX gel (Biorad) and a commercially available bovine histone standard (Roche). The remaining purified histones of each sample were vacuum dried and propionylated [87,88]. In short, histones were dissolved in 20 µL 1M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.5 before 20 μL of propionylation reagent (1:79 (v/v) of a propionic anhydride and 2-propanol mixture) was added, for an incubation of 30 minutes at room temperature. This was followed by adding 20 µl milliQ water (Merck Millipore) for 30 minutes at 37°C. Histones were then digested overnight at 37°C using trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme/histone ratio of 1:20 (m/m) in 500 mM TEAB, supplemented with CaCl2 and ACN to a final concentration of 1.0 mM and 5 % respectively. Subsequently, the propionylation reaction was carried out again to cap peptide N-termini. Overpropionylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine was reversed by resuspending the vacuum dried sample in 50 μL 0.5 M NH2OH and 15 μL NH4OH at pH 12 for 20 minutes at room temperature after which 30 μl pure formic acid was added. Finally, the samples were vacuum dried again and stored for LC-MS analysis. The samples were resuspended in 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) in water to achieve a histone concentration of 200 ng/µL. Internal standards Beta-Galactosidase (B-gal) (Sciex) and MPDS2 (Waters) were spiked in a concentration of 12.5 fmol/µL. Quality control (QC) samples were made by mixing 1 μl of each biological sample. Histones were analysed by micro-RPLC-MS using a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) coupled to a Synapt G2-Si Q-TOF (Waters) mass spectrometer. An ACQUITY Symmetry C18 180 µm x 20 µm trap column (Waters) was combined with an ACQUITY M-Class CSH™ C18 300µm x 100mm column (Waters) at a flow rate of 5 μL/min (0.1% FA spiked with 3% DMSO). A 90 minute gradient from 3-40% ACN in 0.1% FA was applied with a total scan time of 105 minutes per sample. The sample list was randomized and interspersed with QC injections. Each cycle consisted in one full MS1 scan (m/z 50-5000) of 200 millseconds (ms), followed by an MS2 scan of 100 ms. The 10 most intense precursor ions were selected from a single MS survey scan for MS2 fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The .raw data was imported and aligned in Progenesis QI for Proteomics (QIP) 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters) before feature detection was performed. For identification, the five tandem MS2 spectra closest to the elution apex were selected for each feature and exported as .mascot generic format file (.mgf) to search with Mascot 2.6.1 (Matrix Science). The obtained .mgf is searched using three types of searches: (a) a standard search for the identification of non-propionylated histones and to validate the presence of the internal standards B-gal and MPDS2; (b) an error tolerant search to identify all the proteins in the sample; (c) multiple sequential searches with six different PTM sets for the identification of modified histone peptides. The different PTM sets were selected using an established concept, to reduce the ambiguity in annotation. The following parameters were set in all three searches: two missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 50 ppm. For search a) trypsin is set as digestion enzyme, while ArgC (only cleaves after arginine residues) is set for the error tolerant search (b) and the sequential searches (c). Next, the identification files were exported as .xml files and imported in Progenesis QIP. Manual validation of the annotated histone features was performed to resolve isobaric near-coelution. Afterwards, the same procedure for identification was repeated and finally these identification results were also imported in Progenesis QIP.

### Publication Abstract
Biomaterials can control cell and nuclear morphology. Since the shape of the nucleus influences chromatin architecture, gene expression and cell identity, surface topography can control cell phenotype. This study provides fundamental insights into how surface topography influences nuclear morphology, histone modifications, and expression of histone-associated proteins through advanced histone mass spectrometry and microarray analysis. The authors find that nuclear confinement is associated with a loss of histone acetylation and nucleoli abundance, while pathway analysis reveals a substantial reduction in gene expression associated with chromosome organization. In light of previous observations where the authors found a decrease in proliferation and metabolism induced by micro-topographies, they connect these findings with a quiescent phenotype in mesenchymal stem cells, as further shown by a reduction of ribosomal proteins and the maintenance of multipotency on micro-topographies after long-term culture conditions. Also, this influence of micro-topographies on nuclear morphology and proliferation is reversible, as shown by a return of proliferation when re-cultured on a flat surface. The findings provide novel insights into how biophysical signaling influences the epigenetic landscape and subsequent cellular phenotype.

### Keywords
Dda, Nucleus, Mechanobiology, Epigenetics, Biomaterials, Mesenchymal stem cells

### Affiliations
Faculity of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,Ghent University

### Submitter
Maarten Dhaenens

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Dhaenens
ProGenTomics, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology,Ghent University


