### Accession
PXD042937

### Title
p97/VCP targets Toxoplasma gondii vacuoles for parasite restriction in interferon-stimulated cells

### Description
Infection with the parasite Toxoplasma gondii leads to production of interferon gamma (IFN) that stimulates cells to upregulate defence proteins targeting the parasite for cell intrinsic elimination or growth restriction. Various host defence mechanisms operate at the parasitophorous vacuole (PV) in different human cell types leading to PV disruption, acidification, or membrane envelopment. Ubiquitin and p62 are players in all human host control mechanisms of Toxoplasma, but other unifying proteins have not been identified. Here, we show that p97/valosin-containing protein (VCP), as well as its associated proteins ANKRD13A and UBXD1 control Toxoplasma infection while recruited to the PV in IFN-stimulated endothelial cells. Convergent deposition of ANKRD13A, p97/VCP and UBXD1 onto the same vacuole is dependent on vacuolar ubiquitination and observed within 2h post-infection. ANKRD13A, p97/VCP and UBXD1 all drive the acidification mechanism of the vacuole, which is the IFN-dependent control pathway of Toxoplasma in endothelial cells. We assessed p97/VCP in Toxoplasma control in various human cells and demonstrate that p97/VCP is a universal IFN-dependent host restriction factor targeting the Toxoplasma PV in epithelial (HeLa) and endothelial cells (HUVEC), fibroblasts (HFF) and macrophages (THP1).

### Sample Protocol
SILAC Mass Spectrometry was used to quantitate ubiquitination of host cell proteins in epithelial cells infected with Tg. A549 were cultured in SILAC heavy and light media containing 100mg/L L-proline (DMEM containing ‘heavy’ 13C-Lys and 13C-Arg, #K8R10 or ‘light’ 12C-Lys and 12C-Arg, #K0R0 and supplemented with 10% dialysed FBS), for six cell doublings to allow incorporation of 13C-amino acids.   Both ‘heavy’ and ‘light’ A549 were transferred to corresponding SILAC media containing 0.5% dialysed serum for 12h before stimulating with 100U/ml IFN for 18h. The ‘light’ A549 cells were then infected with syringe-lysed, type II Toxoplasma MOI=4 for 2.5h after which infected cultures were washed with 3 x 10ml PBS to remove free parasites. ‘Heavy’ uninfected cultures and ‘light’ infected cultures were resuspended using trypsin EDTA and mixed in a 1:1 ratio. The cell mixture was lysed with 9M urea in 20mM HEPES pH8.0, supplemented with 1000U benzonase/10ml urea, and sonicated on ice (3mm probe, 50% amplitude, 3 x 15s bursts). Chloroacetamide was added to 20mM to inhibit deubiquitination enzymes. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford Dye method (BioRad) with ~30mg protein extracted in total. A final concentration of 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT)(Sigma) was added to reduce the proteins and incubated at 37oC for 30mins. Next, the extracted proteins were alkylated using 20mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) and incubated 30 min at RT in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by addition of 10mM DTT for 10 min RT. Initial digestion with 15g Lys-C (Promega) was performed by incubation 2h RT. A ~20g aliquot was taken to evaluate digestion by SDS-PAGE. The lysate was then diluted with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% acetonitrile to a final urea concentration of <2M. Samples were then digested by addition of trypsin 1:100 enzyme to protein (w/w) and incubated 37oC overnight. The following day the sample was digested two more times with trypsin (1:100, w/w) for 4h each at 37oC.     Enrichment of di-Gly peptides  Peptides containing the di-Gly remnant were enriched using K--GlyGly affinity resin (Cell Signalling Technologies #5562) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, digests were reconstituted in 1.4 ml of immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer as supplied by the manufacturer. One aliquot (∼40-µl packed bead volume) was washed four times with PBS and mixed with the peptide sample. Incubation of sample and beads was performed with gentle rotation at 4 °C for 2 hours followed by a 30 sec 2000 ×g spin to pellet the beads. The antibody beads were washed twice with ice-cold IAP buffer followed by three washes with ice-cold water. DiGly peptides were eluted from the beads with the addition of 50 µl of 0.15 % TFA and allowed to stand at room temperature for 5 min. After a 30 sec 2000 ×g spin, the supernatant was carefully removed and lyophilised for further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS  For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % TFA and loaded on 50 cm Easy Spray PepMap column (75 µm inner diameter, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an integrated electrospray emitter. Reverse phase chromatography was performed using the RSLC nano U3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a binary buffer system at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO, and solvent B was 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid, 5 % DMSO. The diGly enriched samples were run on a linear gradient of solvent B (2- 40 %) in 90 min, total run time of 120 min including column conditioning. The nanoLC was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer using an EasySpray nano source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode acquiring HCD MS/MS scans (R=17,500) after an MS1 scan (R=70, 000) on the 10 most abundant ions using MS1 target of 1 × 106 ions, and MS2 target of 5 × 104 ions. The maximum ion injection time utilized for MS2 scans was 120 ms, the HCD normalized collision energy was set at 28, the dynamic exclusion was set at 10 s, and the peptide match and isotope exclusion functions were enabled.     MS Data processing  Data processing was performed with MaxQuant software (version 1.3.0.5) as described previously (Cox et al., 2009). Parent ion and tandem mass spectra were searched against Toxoplasma gondii database. A list of 247 common laboratory contaminants provided by MaxQuant was also added to the database. For the search the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with maximum of three missed cleavages for the diGly dataset and two missed cleavages for the rest of the data. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for mass re-calibration) and to 6 ppm for the main search. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as fixed modification, oxidized methionines and N-terminal protein acetylation were searched as variable modifications. Di-glycine-lysine was added to the list of variable modifications. The datasets were filtered on posterior error probability to achieve 1 % false discovery rate on protein, peptide and site level.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> (Tg) is a ubiquitous parasitic pathogen, infecting about one-third of the global population. Tg is controlled in immunocompetent people by mechanisms that are not fully understood. Tg infection drives the production of the inflammatory cytokine interferon gamma (IFN&#x3b3;), which upregulates intracellular anti-pathogen defense pathways. In this study, we describe host proteins p97/VCP, UBXD1, and ANKRD13A that control Tg at the parasitophorous vacuole (PV) in IFN&#x3b3;-stimulated endothelial cells. p97/VCP is an ATPase that interacts with a network of cofactors and is active in a wide range of ubiquitin-dependent cellular processes. We demonstrate that PV ubiquitination is a pre-requisite for recruitment of these host defense proteins, and their deposition directs Tg PVs to acidification in endothelial cells. We show that p97/VCP universally targets PVs in human cells and restricts Tg in different human cell types. Overall, these findings reveal new players of intracellular host defense of a vacuolated pathogen.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Toxoplasma gondii, Ubxd1, P97/vcp, Innate immunity, Ankrd13a, Parasitophorous vacuole

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, The University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT
Institute for Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT UK

### Submitter
Barbara Clough

### Lab Head
Dr Eva-Maria Frickel
Institute for Microbiology and Infection, School of Biosciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 2TT UK


