### Accession
PXD015178

### Title
Rabbit Liver LC-MS/MS for characterization of two important proteins.

### Description
This study purified two enzymes from rabbit liver capable of catalyzing the NADPH-dependent conversion of erythrose to erythritol:  alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1) and sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD).

### Sample Protocol
Samples were separated in an SDS gel and proteins were idenitfied by in-gel digestion/extraction followed by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis in Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
The raw dyata files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 for protein idneitficaitons.

### Publication Abstract
The low-calorie sweetener erythritol is endogenously produced from glucose through the pentose phosphate pathway in humans. Erythritol is of medical interest because elevated plasma levels of this polyol are predictive for visceral adiposity gain and development of type 2 diabetes. However, the mechanisms behind these associations remain unknown because the erythritol biosynthesis pathway, particularly the enzyme catalyzing the final step of erythritol synthesis (reduction of erythrose to erythritol), is not characterized. In this study, we purified two enzymes from rabbit liver capable of catalyzing the conversion of erythrose to erythritol: alcohol dehydrogenase 1 (ADH1) and sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD). Both recombinant human ADH1 and SORD reduce erythrose to erythritol, using NADPH as a co-factor, and cell culture studies indicate that this activity is primarily NADPH-dependent. We found that <i>ADH1</i> variants vary markedly in both their affinity for erythrose and their catalytic capacity (turnover number). Interestingly, the recombinant protein produced from the <i>ADH1B2</i> variant, common in Asian populations, is not active when NADPH is used as a co-factor <i>in vitro</i> We also confirmed SORD contributes to intracellular erythritol production in human A549 lung cancer cells, where ADH1 is minimally expressed. In summary, human ADH1 and SORD catalyze the conversion of erythrose to erythritol, pointing to novel roles for two dehydrogenase proteins in human glucose metabolism that may contribute to individual responses to diet. Proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD015178.

### Keywords
Protein identification, Liver, Rabbit, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University. Ithaca, NY USA
Cornell University

### Submitter
Sheng Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng Zhang
Proteomics Facility, Institute of Biotechnology, Cornell University. Ithaca, NY USA


