### Accession
PXD001354

### Title
Hepatic proteome analysis of Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) after exposure to environmental concentrations of human pharmaceuticals

### Description
Pharmaceuticals are pseudo persistent aquatic pollutants with unknown effects at environmentally relevant concentrations. Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) were exposed to Acetaminophen: 54.77 ± 34.67; Atenolol: 11.08 ± 7.98 and Carbamazepine: 7.85 ± 0.13 µg•L-1 for 5 days. After Acetaminophen treatment, 19 proteins were differently expressed, of which 11 were significant with respect to the control group (eight up-regulated and three down-regulated). After Atenolol treatment, 7 differently expressed proteins were obtained in comparison with the control, of which 6 could be identified (four up-regulated and 2 down-regulated). Carbamazepine exposure resulted in 15 differently expressed proteins compared with the control, with 10 of them identified (seven up-regulated and three down-regulated). Out of these, 3 features were common between Acetaminophen and Carbamazepine and one between Carbamazepine and Atenolol. One feature was common across all treatments. Principal component analysis and heat map clustering showed a clear grouping of the variability due to the applied treatments. The obtained data suggest (1) that exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of the pharmaceuticals alters the hepatic protein expression profile of the Atlantic salmon; and (2) the existence of treatment specific processes that may be useful for biomarker development.

### Sample Protocol
Exposure: Atlantic salmon parr (approximately one year old) were purchased from the Stirling University aquaculture facility (Howietown Fish Farm, Stirling, UK). The fish were acclimated to laboratory conditions for 14 days and 15 fish per treatment were exposed to environmentally relevant concentrations of the pharmaceuticals for five days under continuous flow through conditions. The experiments were carried out in duplicate and control trials were run simultaneously. Water flow through the system was adjusted to 360 L•d-1. Water samples were analysed by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). APAP and CBZ were measured using the UV signal at 250nm, AT using the fluorescence signal at 271nm. Compounds were identified and quantified by comparing retention times and peaks in samples and standard solution chromatograms. After five days of exposure, all fish were killed and liver tissues immediately frozen and stored at -70ºC.  Proteomic analysis: Frozen liver tissues were homogenised in lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30 mM Tris at pH adjusted to 8.5) on ice using a glass mortar with pestle for protein solubilization. Following homogenization the tissue lysates were centrifuged at 14000 g for 10 min at 4ºC to remove any insoluble particles. The supernatant was then transferred into 50 µL aliquots and stored at −80ºC until gel electrophoresis was performed. Protein concentration was determined by the method based on Bradford (Bio-Rad Protein Assay, Hercules, USA) and adjusted to 5µg•µL-1 by dilution with lysis buffer. 24cm long immobilized pH gradient (pH 3-11NL) IPG strips were rehydrated overnight in 450µL DeStreak with 2.25 µL IPG buffer (pH 3-11NL) added (GE Healthcare). After rehydration, five individual protein samples (biological replicates; 50 μg for each sample) per treatment were labeled with 400 pmol Cy3 or Cy5 minimal NHS ester dyes (Ge Healthcare) allocated randomly to provide both Cy3 and Cy5 labeled samples for each treatment. A pool of material from all 20 samples was labeled with Cy2 (GE Healthcare). Different pairs of Cy3- and Cy5-labeled samples (randomly allocated and each containing 50 μg of protein) were combined and mixed with a 50-μg aliquot of the Cy2-labeled pooled standard. These mixtures were diluted 1:1 with lysis buffer containing 0.5% IPG buffer (pH 3-10) and then applied onto the IPG strips. Isoelectric focussing (IEF, 1st dimension) was carried out on an IPGphor system (GE Healthcare) in four stages with a ramped voltage change between each step: step & hold: 30V, 12h; gradient 300V, 1h; step & hold: 300V, 1h; gradient: 1000V,1h; step & hold: 1000V, 1h; gradient: 8000V, 2h; step & hold: 8000V, 8h. Focussing was stopped after a total of 70,000 Vh accumulated. After IEF, the IPG strips were equilibrated for 15 min in equilibration buffer I (6 M urea, 2% SDS, 0.05 M Tris–Cl at pH 8.8, 50% glycerol, and 2% DTT) followed by 15 min in equilibration buffer II (same as buffer I but containing  2.5% iodacetamide instead of DTT and 0.02% bromophenol blue). The second dimensional separations were carried out on 12.5% SDS-polyacrylamide gels on the Ettan

### Data Protocol
Image analysis: Labeled proteins were visualized using the Typhoon 9000 series imager (GE Healthcare) and the Cy2, Cy3, and Cy5 components of each gel were individually imaged using excitation/emission wavelengths specific for Cy2 (488/520 nm), Cy3 (532/580 nm) and Cy5 (633/670 nm).  PMT was varied in order to equalise fluorescence intensities between channels and to prevent over saturation of the signal. Background subtraction, quantitation, normalization and first-level-of matching (within gel) was performed by Differential In-gel Analysis (DIA) using DeCyder 2-D Differential Analysis Software v6.5 (GE Healthcare). For each gel, normalized spot volumes (area multiplied by density of the spot) were calculated as the ratio of each spot volume to total spot volume in the gel. Within the Biological Variation Analysis (BVA) module, each drug treatment set was combined, compared to the control treatment set (T-test) and spots with a p-value <0.05 returned. In gel digestion and mass spectrometry: A preparative gel with 300 μg of protein was used for spot picking and visualized with silver staining to pick spots of interest. The gel pieces were destained and digested by trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). Upon concentrating and desalting tryptic fragments using Millipore C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Bedford, MA, USA), samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid matrix (saturated solution in 50% ACN and 2.5% TFA) and spotted onto the target plate. MS/MS analyses were performed on a 4800 MALDI-TOF/ TOF instrument (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Measurements were taken in the positive ion mode between 900 and 3000 m/z. Sequences were automatically acquired by scanning first in peptide mass fingerprint (MS) mode.  Peaklist-generating software and release version: 4000 Series Explorer Software v3.5.3  Name of sequence data/spectral library searched and release: NCBInr 18-05-2010 # of entries in the database: 10997816 sequences; 3742302330 residues # of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted: 1 List of all fixed modification(s) (including residue specifity) considered: Carbamidomethyl (C) List of all variable modification(s) (including residue specifity) considered: Oxidation (M) Mass tolerance for precursor ions: ± 100 ppm Mass tolerance for fragment ions: ± 0.2 Da Known contaminants excluded: Known trypsin and keratin mass signals were removed from the peak list

### Publication Abstract
Pharmaceuticals are pseudopersistent aquatic pollutants with unknown effects at environmentally relevant concentrations. Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) were exposed to Acetaminophen: 54.77 &#xb1; 34.67; Atenolol: 11.08 &#xb1; 7.98, and Carbamazepine: 7.85 &#xb1; 0.13 &#x3bc;g&#xb7;L(-1) for 5 days. After Acetaminophen treatment, 19 proteins were differently expressed, of which 11 were significant with respect to the control group (eight up-regulated and three down-regulated). After Atenolol treatment, seven differently expressed proteins were obtained in comparison with the control, of which six could be identified (four up-regulated and two down-regulated). Carbamazepine exposure resulted in 15 differently expressed proteins compared with the control, with 10 of them identified (seven up-regulated and three down-regulated). Out of these, three features were common between Acetaminophen and Carbamazepine and one between Carbamazepine and Atenolol. One feature was common across all treatments. Principal component analysis and heat map clustering showed a clear grouping of the variability caused by the applied treatments. The obtained data suggest (1) that exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of the pharmaceuticals alters the hepatic protein expression profile of the Atlantic salmon; and (2) the existence of treatment specific processes that may be useful for biomarker development.

### Keywords
Salmon liver; pharmaceuticals; environmental levels; lc-msms

### Affiliations
University of Cádiz
J. Forja Dpt. Physical Chemistry CACYTMAR Campus de Excelencia Internacional del Mar University of Cadiz (Spain)

### Submitter
Miriam Hampel

### Lab Head
Dr Jesus Forja
J. Forja Dpt. Physical Chemistry CACYTMAR Campus de Excelencia Internacional del Mar University of Cadiz (Spain)


