### Accession
PXD035018

### Title
Inhibition of pro-inflammatory signalling in human primary macrophages by enhancing Arginase-2 via target site blockers

### Description
A favourable immunotherapeutic strategy in the treatment of chronic inflammatory disease, is to dampen the pro-inflammatory macrophage response and upregulate the anti-inflammatory macrophage response. Previous studies have shown that Arginase-2 (Arg2), a mitochondrial enzyme, is a key regulator of the macrophage anti-inflammatory response with an essential role in IL-10 signalling. Here we show that IL-10 in the presence of LPS increased Arg2 expression in human macrophages and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Target site blockers (TSBs) (locked nucleic acid antisense oligonucleotides) specifically designed to target the 3’ UTR of Arg2 messenger RNA were used to inhibit binding of specific microRNAs thus enhancing Arg2 expression. Eleven Arg2-TSBs were screened and the TSB targeting miR-155 (TSB-155) and the TSB targeting miR-3202 (TSB-3202) were found to increase Arg2 expression in human macrophages resulting in decreased gene expression and cytokine production of TNF-α and CCL2. In addition, following TSB-3202 stimulation, there were statistically significant increases in the ‘M2-like’ macrophage marker, CD206; and CD16, associated with an IL-10 response, and a decrease in the ‘M1-like’ macrophage marker, HLA-DR, indicating a shift in the macrophage phenotype. Proteomic analysis demonstrated that multiple pro-inflammatory responsive proteins including Signal Transducer and Activator of Transcription 1 (STAT-1), Toll-like receptors, Signalling Lymphocytic Activation Molecule F7 (SLAMF7) and Interferon Induced Protein with Tetratricopeptide Repeats 3 (IFIT3), were downregulated by TSB-155 and TSB-3202 while Sequestomsome-1 (SQSTM1) was increased after treatment. In silico analysis of significantly dysregulated proteins predicted that TSB-3202 supressed several upstream pro-inflammatory regulators including STAT-1 and Interferon α2 (IFNA2) while enhancing anti-inflammatory associated interleukin 1 receptor antagonist (IL1RN) and STAT-3. Proteomic data was validated by confirming increased levels of SQSTM1, decreased levels of phosphoylated-STAT-1 and STAT-1, and downregulation of Ifit3 and Slamf7 by TSB treatment.  In conclusion, upregulation of Arg2 protein by TSBs inhibits several pro-inflammatory signalling proteins resulting in reduced pro-inflammatory cytokine secretion, reduced ‘M1-like’ marker expression and enhanced ‘M2-like’ macrophage marker expression. Arg2 is a promising novel therapeutic target to modulate inflammatory signalling in macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
Treated macrophages were harvested in urea (6M) (Fisher Scientific, Cat. U/0450/53) and protein concentration was determined by Bradford Assay. Dithiothreitol (5mM) (Sigma, Cat. 43819) was added to 50µg of protein sample in urea and samples were incubated in a Thermomixer for 30mins at 37°C. Iodoacetemide solution (10mM) (Sigma Cat. I1149) was added to each sample and incubated in the dark for 30min at RT. An ammonium bicarbonate solution (50mM) was added to dilute the urea concentration to <2M. Trypsin (0.5µg) (Sigma Aldrich, Cat. T7575) was added to the samples. Samples were incubated overnight in a Thermomixer at 37°C after which acetic acid (AA) was added in a ratio of 1:100.  C18 Stage tips were prepared as per Rappsilber et al. [36]. Stage tips were activated with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) +0.5% AA solution. Samples were centrifuged through the Stage tip. Stage tips containing samples were washed with 0.5% AA. Peptides were eluted from the stage tips in 80% ACN + 0.5% AA. Sample flow through was then evaporated in a SpeedVac Concentrator ~30min at 45°C. Peptides were resuspended in mass spec grade water containing 0.5% AA + 2.5% ACN. The peptides were quantified using a DeNovix DS-11 Fx Spectrophotometer, normalised to a peptide concentration of 0.2mg/mL, and then transferred to mass spectrometry vials. Peptides from macrophages were analysed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was fitted with a reversed-phase NanoLC UltiMate 3000 high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific). In brief, peptides were separated on a reverse-phase column (10cm × 75μm inner diameter) packed in-house with 3μm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Germany) using a 2hr gradient at a flow rate of 250nL/min. Mobile phases were 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid with 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN) in water (phase A) and 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid in 97% ACN (phase B). The peptides were separated by a gradient starting from 1% of mobile phase B and increased linearly to 28% for 118min. This was increased to 95% of mobile phase B where it was maintained for 10min. The volume injected was 5μL. The Orbitrap, operating in data dependent mode, automatically altered between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1600) had a resolution of 70,000. MS2 spectra had a resolution of 17,500. The twelve most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented via higher energy C-trap dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive was processed using the MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against Uniprot homo sapiens database (2021_03) containing 78,120 entries. All searches were performed using the default setting of MaxQuant, with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. For the generation of label free quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities for protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptides in different nano-HPLC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant in a maximum time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
The modulation of macrophage phenotype from a pro-inflammatory to an anti-inflammatory state holds therapeutic potential in the treatment of inflammatory disease. We have previously shown that arginase-2 (Arg2), a mitochondrial enzyme, is a key regulator of the macrophage anti-inflammatory response. Here, we investigate the therapeutic potential of Arg2 enhancement via target site blockers (TSBs) in human macrophages. TSBs are locked nucleic acid antisense oligonucleotides that were specifically designed to protect specific microRNA recognition elements (MREs) in human <i>ARG2</i> 3' UTR mRNA. TSBs targeting miR-155 (TSB-155) and miR-3202 (TSB-3202) MREs increased <i>ARG2</i> expression in human monocyte-derived macrophages. This resulted in decreased gene expression and cytokine production of TNF-&#x3b1; and CCL2 and, for TSB-3202, in an increase in the anti-inflammatory macrophage marker, CD206. Proteomic analysis demonstrated that a network of pro-inflammatory responsive proteins was modulated by TSBs. <i>In silico</i> bioinformatic analysis predicted that TSB-3202 suppressed upstream pro-inflammatory regulators including STAT-1 while enhancing anti-inflammatory associated proteins. Proteomic data were validated by confirming increased levels of sequestosome-1 and decreased levels of phosphorylated STAT-1 and STAT-1 upon TSB treatment. In conclusion, upregulation of Arg2 by TSBs inhibits pro-inflammatory signaling and is a promising novel therapeutic strategy to modulate inflammatory signaling in human macrophages.

### Keywords
Multiple sclerosis, Proteomics, Inflammation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Science, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland
UCD

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Claire McCoy
School of Pharmacy and Biomolecular Science, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland


