### Accession
PXD002140

### Title
AG3C glucose starvation time course

### Description
This data set consists of a long term glucose starvation time course of E. coli grown in minimal media for up to two weeks. Unlike previous studies of long term starvation,Our study focuses on the physiological response of E. Coli in stationary phase as a result of being starved for glucose, not on the genetic adaptation of E. coli to utilize alternative nutrients.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli cell pellets were resuspended in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT.  2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (Sigma) was added to 50% (v/v) final concentration and samples were incubated at 56°C for 45 min.  Following incubation, iodoacetamide was added to a concentration of 25 mM and samples were incubated at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Samples were diluted 10-fold with 2 mM CaCl2, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce) at 37°C for 5 h. Digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to 1% (v/v).  Tryptic peptides were filtered through Amicon Ultra 30 kD spin filtration columns and bound, washed, and eluted from HyperSep C18 SpinTips (Thermo Scientific). Eluted peptides were dried by speed-vac and resuspended in Buffer C (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  For LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were subjected to separation by C18 reverse phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC column (Dionex; Thermo Scientific) and eluted using a 5-40% acetonitrile gradient over 250 min at 300 nl/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were directly injected into an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by nano-electrospray and subject to data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry, with full precursor ion scans (MS1) collected at 60,0000 resolution.  Monoisotopic precursor selection and charge-state screening were enabled, with ions of charge >+1 selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID).  Up to 20 fragmentation scans (MS2) were collected per MS1.  Dynamic exclusion was active with 45 s exclusion for ions selected twice within a 30 s window.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against an E. coli strain REL606 protein sequence database and common contaminant proteins (MaxQuant using SEQUEST (Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Thermo Scientific). Fully-tryptic peptides were considered, with up to two missed cleavages.  Tolerances of 10 ppm (MS1) and 0.5 Da (MS2), carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification, and oxidized methionine as dynamic modification were used.  High-confidence peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered at <1% false discovery rate determined by Percolator (Proteome Discoverer 1.4; Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
How do bacteria regulate their cellular physiology in response to starvation? Here, we present a detailed characterization of Escherichia coli growth and starvation over a time-course lasting two weeks. We have measured multiple cellular components, including RNA and proteins at deep genomic coverage, as well as lipid modifications and flux through central metabolism. Our study focuses on the physiological response of E. coli in stationary phase as a result of being starved for glucose, not on the genetic adaptation of E. coli to utilize alternative nutrients. In our analysis, we have taken advantage of the temporal correlations within and among RNA and protein abundances to identify systematic trends in gene regulation. Specifically, we have developed a general computational strategy for classifying expression-profile time courses into distinct categories in an unbiased manner. We have also developed, from dynamic models of gene expression, a framework to characterize protein degradation patterns based on the observed temporal relationships between mRNA and protein abundances. By comparing and contrasting our transcriptomic and proteomic data, we have identified several broad physiological trends in the E. coli starvation response. Strikingly, mRNAs are widely down-regulated in response to glucose starvation, presumably as a strategy for reducing new protein synthesis. By contrast, protein abundances display more varied responses. The abundances of many proteins involved in energy-intensive processes mirror the corresponding mRNA profiles while proteins involved in nutrient metabolism remain abundant even though their corresponding mRNAs are down-regulated.

### Keywords
Bacterial physiology, Multi-omic dataset, Long term glucose starvation

### Affiliations
University of Texas
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, The University of Texas at Austin Faculty of Arts and Sciences Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
John Houser

### Lab Head
Dr Claus O. Wilke
Institute for Cellular and Molecular Biology, The University of Texas at Austin Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, The University of Texas at Austin Faculty of Arts and Sciences Center for Systems Biology, Harvard University Department of Molecular Biosciences, The University of Texas at Austin


