### Accession
PXD021781

### Title
Profile of growth factors in calf costochondral junction – the site of initial bone formation

### Description
Endochondral bone formation is orchestrated by growth factors produced by chondrocytes and deposited in cartilage matrix. Some of these factors were identified, but their complete list and relationship remains unknown. In this work the growth factors were isolated from calcified cartilage of costochondral junctions. The isolation involved hyaluronidase digestion, guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl) extraction, HCl decalcification and GuHCl extraction of decalcified matrix. Growth factors were purified by heparin chromatography and estimated by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or used for protein sequence analysis. Bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7), Growth/differentiation factor 5 (GDF-5), and NEL-like protein 1 (NELL-1) quantitatively dominated in material obtained in all steps of isolation. During ossification perivascular cells and septoclasts enter the cartilage and release growth factors stimulating osteoclastogenesis. Osteoclasts dissolve calcified cartilage and transport released factors needed for stimulation of osteoprogenitor cells. Presence of BMP-7, GDF-5 and NELL-1 at the site of initial bone formation may suggest  that their synergistic action favors osteogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
The cartilage was dissected from costochondral junction of ribs of 6 to 20 weeks old calves (at the level of metaphysis). The calcified cartilage was lyophilized and pulverized in liquid nitrogen.  Isolation of calcified cartilage Cartilage powder was rehydrated in 40 ml of dH2O for 15 min at 4ᴏC and spun down at 500g for 5 min. The pellet was suspended in 10 ml of dH2O and incubated 5 min at 4 ᴏC. After next centrifugation (500g for 5 min) the pellet was resuspended in 10 ml of dH2O, overlaid on the gradient consisting of 1.25g and 1.0 g/ml of barium iodide in dH2O and spun down at 500g for 10 min. The pellet contained large fragments of calcified cartilage usually attached to some non-calcified substance, while in the material from the gradient interface predominated the latter. Interface material was discarded, the pellet were rinsed in dH2O and lyophilized. Pellet obtained after gradient separation was digested in 10 ml of 0.1% bovine testes hyaluronidase in PBS (4-5 hours) to obtain the fraction of growth factors (fraction 1) present in the matrix adjacent to calcified cartilage. Fraction 1 was separated from the solid material (sediment 1) by centrifugation (500g for 10 min), desalted in PD-10 columns and lyophilized. Lyophilized material was dissolved in 4M GuHCl in 50 mM TRIS (pH 8.0) with 0.15 M NaCl. GuHCl served as the binding buffer during separation of growth factors in heparin columns.  After hyaluronidase digestion Sediment 1 was extracted with 4M GuHCl twice for 2h at 4°C. Extracts were pooled  (fraction 2) and applied in 4M GuHCl to heparin columns.  The sediment 2 after extraction was digested with 0.25% collagenase and 0.05% DNase solution at 37°C for 2 h, in 0.25% trypsin at 37°C for 1 h and again in collagenase. The enzymatic solutions were discarded and the calcified cartilage (sediment 3) was rinsed twice with 4M GuHCl for 15 min, followed two changes of dH2O. Sediment 3 purified by enzymatic digestion was decalcified in 4 ml 0.6M HCl for 30 min at room temperature. The material was neutralized with 10 N NaOH, supernatant (fraction 3) was separated by centrifugation (500g for 5 min), desalted in PD-10 columns, lyophilized, dissolved in 4M GuHCl and applied to heparin columns. The pellet after HCl decalcification  (sediment 4) was extracted with GuHCl and fraction 4 was applied to heparin columns. HiTrap heparin affinity columns Fractions were applied to HiTrap heparin affinity columns in binding buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15M NaCI, 4M GuHCl (pH 8.0). Elution buffer contained 20 mM Tris-HCl with 2 M NaCl. Eluate was desalted in PD-10 columns and lyophilized. The fraction 4 and 3 samples of sediment 4 were used for protein sequence analysis. All solutions contained 10 μl of 100x concentrated protease inhibitors per 1 ml.  Analysis and data processing was done on the commercial basis in Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland according to the following procedure.  Prior to the analysis, proteins were subjected to standard ”in-solution digestion” procedure during which proteins were reduced with 50 TCEP (for 60 minutes at 60°C), alkylated with 200 mM MMTS (45 minutes at room temperature) and digested overnight with trypsin (sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin - Promega V5111).  As the material for sequencing served 300 mg pellets of enzymatically purified (hyaluronidase, collagenase, DNase, and trypsin) calcified cartilage from the costochondral junction of calf ribs. Four samples were sequenced: One sample of proteins released during decalcification in 0,6N HCl, and three samples of decalcified material. Peptide mixtures were separated by liquid chromatography prior to molecular mass measurements on Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Peptide mixture was applied to RP-18 precolumn (nanoACQUITY Symmetry® C18 – Waters 186003514) using water containing 0.1% TFA as mobile phase and then transferred to nano-HPLC RP-18 column (nanoACQUITY BEH C18 - Waters 186003545) using an acetonitrile gradient (0 % - 60 % ACN in 70 minutes) in the presence of 0.05% formic acid with the flow rate of 150 nl/min. Column outlet was directly coupled to the ion source of the spectrometer working in the regime of data dependent MS to MS/MS switch. A blank run ensuring lack of cross contamination from previous samples preceded each analysis.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed by Mascot Distiller (MDRO v. 2.6.1.0) followed by Mascot Search (v. 2.5.1, Matrix Science, London, UK, on-site license) against SwissProt database restricted to mammalian entries. Search parameters for precursor and product ions mass tolerance were 30 ppm and 0.1 Da, respectively, enzyme specificity: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 1, fixed modification of cysteine by methylthio and variable modification of methionine oxidation. Peptides with Mascot Score exceeding the threshold value corresponding to < 5% expectation value, calculated by Mascot procedure were considered to be positively identified.

### Publication Abstract
Endochondral bone formation is orchestrated by growth factors produced by chondrocytes and deposited in the cartilage matrix. Whilst some of these factors have been identified, the complete list and their relationship remains unknown. In the present study, the growth factors were isolated from non-calcified and calcified cartilage of costochondral junctions. Cartilage dissected from the ribs of 6-20-week-old calves was purchased from a local butcher within 24 h of the death of the animal. The isolation involved hyaluronidase digestion, guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl) extraction, HCl decalcification and GuHCl extraction of the decalcified matrix. Growth factors were purified by heparin chromatography and their quantities were estimated using ELISA. Decalcified cartilage was also used for protein sequence analysis (data are available via ProteomeXchange; ID, PXD021781). Bone morphogenetic protein-7 (BMP-7), growth/differentiation factor-5 (GDF-5) and NEL-like protein-1 (NELL-1), all known growth factors that stimulate bone formation, quantitatively accounted for the majority of the material obtained in all steps of isolation. Thus, cartilage serves as a store for growth factors. During initial bone formation septoclasts release osteoclastogenesis-stimulating factors deposited in non-calcified cartilage. Osteoclasts dissolve calcified cartilage and transport the released factors required for the stimulation of osteoprogenitor cells to deposit osteoid. High concentrations of BMP-7, GDF-5 and NELL-1 at the site of initial bone formation may suggest that their synergistic action favours osteogenesis.

### Keywords
Calcified cartilage, Endochondral bone formation, Osteoclasts, Growth factors

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS
Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS

### Submitter
Michał Kistowski

### Lab Head
Dr Michał Dadlez
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics PAS


