### Accession
PXD040179

### Title
Peptidylarginine deiminase 2 (PADI2) is a key regulator for osteoblast differentiation and bone formation through the maintenance of citrullination-mediated RUNX2 stability

### Description
Peptidylarginine deiminase (PADI) 2 catalyzes the posttranslational conversion of peptidyl-arginine to peptidyl-citrulline, a process called citrullination. However, the exact function of PADI2 in bone development and bone homeostasis remains unknown. In this study, we found that Padi2 deficiency lead to loss of bone mass and cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD)-like phenotype with delayed calvarial ossification and clavicular hypoplasia due to impaired osteoblast differentiation. Mechanistically, Padi2 depletion drastically reduced RUNX2 protein level and PADI2 stabilized RUNX2 from ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, we identified a new modification at RUNX2, citrullination of arginine and its conversion to citrulline by PADI2. PADI2 citrullinates RUNX2 via a direct physical interaction and the citrullination sites at RUNX2 by PADI2 were identified by high-resolution liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Interestingly, in mouse RUNX2 isoform 1 (528 a.a), loss of R381, a citrullination site by PADI2, drastically reduced RUNX2 protein levels, indicating that the citrullination of RUNX2 by PADI2 is required for the maintenance of RUNX2 protein stability. Collectively, our study demonstrates that PADI2-mediated citrullination play key roles in bone formation and bone homeostasis. Also, CCD may result from functional defects of RUNX2 by Padi2 deficiency. These insights into the role of PADI2 in postnatal bone formation and homeostasis and CCD pathogenesis may assist in the development of new therapies for bone diseases including CCD.

### Sample Protocol
rhRUNX2 (Origene) and citullinated rhRUNX2 were separated using SDS-PAGE and Coomassie stained with Imperial™ Protein Stain (Thermo), respectively. For LC-MS/MS analyses, the gel was de-stained and bands cut and processed as follows. Briefly, purified proteins bands were divided into 10 mm sections and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin / Lys-C. The tryptic digests were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Eazy nano LC 1200 UHPLC equipped with an autosampler using a reversed-phase peptide trap Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length) and a reversed-phase analytical column PepMapTM RSLC C18 (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, 3 μm particle size), both from Thermo Scientific, followed by electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nl min−1. Samples were eluted using a split gradient of 3-50% solution B (80% ACN with 0.1% FA) in 60 min and 50–80% solution B in 10 min followed column wash at 100% solution B for 10 min. The chromatography system was coupled in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the 120,000 resolution MS1 scan (375–1500 m/z), AGC target of 5e5 and max injection time of 50 ms. Peptides above threshold 5e3 and charges 2–7 were selected for fragmentation with dynamic exclusion after 1 time for 15 s and 10 ppm tolerance.

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15) and X! Tandem (The GPM, thegpm.org; version X! Tandem Alanine (2017.2.1.4)). Sequest was set up to search Citrullinated proteins.fasta (unknown version, 12 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. X! Tandem was set up to search a reverse concatenated subset of the Citrullinated proteins database (unknown version, 24 entries) also assuming trypsin. Sequest and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 5.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest and X! Tandem as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and arginine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and phospho of serine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications. Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidated of asparagine and arginine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and phospho of serine were specified in X! Tandem as variable modifications.  CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Peptide Probabilities from Sequest were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Peptidylarginine deiminase (PADI) 2 catalyzes the post-translational conversion of peptidyl-arginine to peptidyl-citrulline in a process called citrullination. However, the precise functions of PADI2 in bone formation and homeostasis remain unknown. In this study, our objective was to elucidate the function and regulatory mechanisms of PADI2 in bone formation employing global and osteoblast-specific Padi2 knockout mice. Our findings demonstrate that Padi2 deficiency leads to the loss of bone mass and results in a cleidocranial dysplasia (CCD) phenotype with delayed calvarial ossification and clavicular hypoplasia, due to impaired osteoblast differentiation. Mechanistically, Padi2 depletion significantly reduces RUNX2 levels, as PADI2-dependent stabilization of RUNX2 protected it from ubiquitin-proteasomal degradation. Furthermore, we discovered that PADI2 binds to RUNX2 and citrullinates it, and identified ten PADI2-induced citrullination sites on RUNX2 through high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis. Among these ten citrullination sites, the R381 mutation in mouse RUNX2 isoform 1 considerably reduces RUNX2 levels, underscoring the critical role of citrullination at this residue in maintaining RUNX2 protein stability. In conclusion, these results indicate that PADI2 plays a distinct role in bone formation and osteoblast differentiation by safeguarding RUNX2 against proteasomal degradation. In addition, we demonstrate that the loss-of-function of PADI2 is associated with CCD, thereby providing a new target for the treatment of bone diseases.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Lc-msms, Ptm, Padi2, Runx2

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Basic Research Lab for “Epigenetic Regeneration of Aged Skeleto-Muscular System (ERASMUS)”, Department of Molecular Genetics and Dental Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Hyun-Mo Ryoo
Basic Research Lab for “Epigenetic Regeneration of Aged Skeleto-Muscular System (ERASMUS)”, Department of Molecular Genetics and Dental Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, Dental Research Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea


