### Accession
PXD009731

### Title
O-GlcNAc pattern of sOGT regulates its substrate selectivity and function

### Description
O-GlcNAcylation occurs on thousands of proteins involved in various cellular events. O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), one of the enzymes responsible for protein O-GlcNAcylation, is known to be auto-O-GlcNAcylated at multiple sites. However, the role of O-GlcNAcylation on OGT is still unknown. Here, we report the role of O-GlcNAcylation on short form OGT (sOGT). By LC-ETD-MS analysis and western blot, we show that sOGT was mainly O-GlcNAcylated in the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) motifs with T12 and S56 being two “key” sites. T12 was a predominant O-GlcNAcylation site and the absence of S56 O-GlcNAcylation enhanced sOGT O-GlcNAcylation level. We found that O-GlcNAcylation of sOGT did not affect the enzyme activity but increased its binding to substrate proteins. S56A bound to and hence glycosylated more proteins, while T12A associated with fewer substrates. Proteomic studies combined with cell proliferation/cell cycle analyses indicated that S56A substantially enhanced cell proliferation, while T12A reduced it, and T12A led to a G2/M cell cycle arrest, due to O-GlcNAcylation of diverse proteins. These findings demonstrate that the O-GlcNAc pattern on sOGT modulates its function in cells by targeting different proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with OGT-shRNA and sOGT mutant in duplicate and were cultured routinely for 48 hrs. The cells were disrupted and 1 mg of cell lysates was pre-treated with 50 μL protein A/G beads (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) for 30 min and O-GlcNAc proteins were enriched via immunoprecipitation using 30 μL RL2 antibody (ab2379), after 3 times washes with PBST, the proteins along with the beads were suspended in 60 μL 2 and boiled for 5 min, followed with a purification on stacking gel.  P-GlcNAc proteins were digested in gel with trypsin, the resultant peptides were fractionated using an online nanoflow liquid chromatography and analyzed with an electrospray ionization mass spectrometry system (EASY-nLC Q-Exactive). The sample was separated by a 10 cm long, 75 μm inner-diameter analytical column packed with reversed-phase 3 μm C18 material. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and 2 % ACN in water, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1 % formic acid and 2 % water in ACN; a linear mobile phase B gradient from 5 % to 30 % with a flow rate of 450 nL/min was applied for 60 min. The Q-Exactive ion source was operated at 2.0 kV. For full MS survey scans, the AGC target was 3e6, the scan range was from m/z 300 to 1400 with the resolution of 70,000. The 20 most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were selected for sequencing and fragmented in the HCD cell with the normalized collision energy of 27%. For data dependent MS/MS scans, the AGC target was 5e4, the maximum injection time was 80 ms with the resolution of 17,500. The exclude isotope option was on and the dynamic exclusion time was set as 18 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer were searched against the human UniProt database (Release 2014-09, 140916 entries) using MaxQuant software (version1.5.3.8). The search parameters were set as follows: fixed modification of cysteine residues (+57.02 Da), variable modification of methionine oxidation (+15.99 Da), protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.01 Da). Two missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. All other settings were set at the default values, and the protein groups were filtered to 1% FDR based on the number of hits obtained for searches against the forward and decoy databases. The raw data files of intact O-glycopeptides were searched against the human UniProt database using Byonic (v2.10.21, Protein Metrics, Inc.). The search parameters were as follows: the initial precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed for enzyme digestion. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation, asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic modifications. Additionally, the “HexNAc” O-glycans on Ser/Thr was also specified as a customized modification for all searches. HCD was chosen as the fragmentation type. Three common modifications and 2 rare modifications were allowed to be included per peptide. All other settings were set at the default values, and the protein groups were filtered to 1% FDR. For O-glycopeptides, a Byonic score of 300 was considered a good score.

### Publication Abstract
<i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation is a ubiquitous protein glycosylation playing different roles on variant proteins. <i>O</i>-GlcNAc transferase (OGT) is the unique enzyme responsible for the sugar addition to nucleocytoplasmic proteins. Recently, multiple <i>O</i>-GlcNAc sites have been observed on short-form OGT (sOGT) and nucleocytoplasmic OGT (ncOGT), both of which locate in the nucleus and cytoplasm in cell. Moreover, <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation of Ser<sup>389</sup> in ncOGT (1036 amino acids) affects its nuclear translocation in HeLa cells. To date, the major <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation sites and their roles in sOGT remain unknown. Here, we performed LC-MS/MS and mutational analyses to seek the major <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation site on sOGT. We identified six <i>O</i>-GlcNAc sites in the tetratricopeptide repeat domain in sOGT, with Thr<sup>12</sup> and Ser<sup>56</sup> being two "key" sites. Thr<sup>12</sup> is a dominant <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation site, whereas the modification of Ser<sup>56</sup> plays a role in regulating sOGT <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation, partly through Thr<sup>12</sup><i>In vitro</i> activity and pulldown assays demonstrated that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation does not affect sOGT activity but does affect sOGT-interacting proteins. In HEK293T cells, S56A bound to and hence glycosylated more proteins in contrast to T12A and WT sOGT. By proteomic and bioinformatics analyses, we found that T12A and S56A differed in substrate proteins (<i>e.g.</i> HNRNPU and PDCD6IP), which eventually affected cell cycle progression and/or cell proliferation. These findings demonstrate that <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation modulates sOGT substrate selectivity and affects its role in the cell. The data also highlight the regulatory role of <i>O</i>-GlcNAcylation at Thr<sup>12</sup> and Ser<sup>56</sup>.

### Keywords
O-glcnac pattern;sogt;site mapping;functional regulation

### Affiliations
college of pharmacy, Nankai university,Tianjin, 300353, China
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lianwen zhang
college of pharmacy, Nankai university,Tianjin, 300353, China


