### Accession
PXD020283

### Title
Evaluating the stress response in Candida albicans by data independent acquisition (DIA) proteomics

### Description
Candida albicans is a fungal opportunistic pathogen responsible for cause severe infections in immunocompromised patients. Despite nowadays an effective antifungal armoury is available, the emergence of antifungal resistance is promoting the urge to develop alternative treatments to combat this fungal pathogen. For this purpose it is essential to go deepen in the knowledge of C. albicans response to several stressors. With this aim we performed a proteomic study of C. albicans exposed to 5 and 10 mM of hydrogen peroxide and 40 and 60 mM of acetic acid taking advantage of data independent acquisition mass spectrometry. Four biological replicates of each condition were analysed. For protein identification we used a C. albicans spectral library previously constructed by DDA analysis allowing the DIA quantitation of nearby 2000 proteins. Changes in protein abundance after the treatments reflected highly different proteomic patterns after each treatment. The exposure of C. albicans to hydrogen peroxide led to an increase in many proteins related to oxidative stress response, proteasome and protein folding while few proteins from mitochondria decreased their abundance. In contrast, acetic acid treatment triggered the decrease in the abundance of proteins related to aminoacid biosynthesis, actin polymerization, oxidative stress response and proteasome. This extensive proteomic study provided valuable information for the development of new drug targets against decisive proteins for cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples from C. albicans were digested in solution by trypsin and 1 µg of peptides were injected on a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out by an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-Spray (Thermo Scientific, 75µm x 2 cm, column temperature 45 ᵒ). A linear gradient from 5% to 30 % acetonitrile in aqueous 0.1% formic acid was run for 60 min (DDA) or 120 min (DIA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. For data dependent acquisition (DDA) full MS survey scans (resolution 70,000 at 200 m/z) at mass range 400-1600 m/z were followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the top 15 most intense ions using higher energy collision induced dissociation. For DIA, MS1 analysis was performed at a resolution 70000 at 200 m/z; mass range 400 to 1200 m/z. Then 32 MS2 fragmentations were performed at a resolution 35000 at 200 m/z with an isolation width of 26 m/z (including a 0.5 m/z overlap between the windows (Malmström et al., 2016).

### Data Protocol
Protein FDR was set to 1 % (peptide q-value<0.01) excluding proteins identified with only one peptide and non-proteotypic peptides. Protein identification was performed by using a C. albicans spectral library previously constructed in DDA mode. Shortly, data acquired in DDA and DIA was converted to mzML using MSconvert. MS searches were performed using X! Tandem towards Candida Genome Database Assembly 21 protein reference database (A21-s02-m09-r10) or synthetic retention time peptide sequences with reverse decoys. X! Tandem search parameters were fixed to 1 missed peptide cleavage and the following modifications: fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine and N-terminal variable modifications: acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modification. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered to FDR of 1%. For library construction the pipeline Fraggle-Franklin-Tramler was used (Teleman et al., 2017). For DIA quantitation, DIANA v2.0.0 (Teleman et al., 2015) and protein intensity was calculated with the top 3 most intense peaks.

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is a commensal fungus that causes systemic infections in immunosuppressed patients. In order to deal with the changing environment during commensalism or infection, C.&#xa0;albicans must reprogram its proteome. Characterizing the stress-induced changes in the proteome that C. albicans uses to survive should be very useful in the development of new antifungal drugs. We studied the C. albicans global proteome after exposure to hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>) and acetic acid (AA), using a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) strategy. More than 2,000 C. albicans proteins were quantified using an ion library previously constructed using data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry (DDA-MS). C. albicans responded to treatment with H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> with an increase in the abundance of many proteins involved in the oxidative stress response, protein folding, and proteasome-dependent catabolism, which led to increased proteasome activity. The data revealed a previously unknown key role for Prn1, a protein similar to pirins, in the oxidative stress response. Treatment with AA resulted in a general decrease in the abundance of proteins involved in amino acid biosynthesis, protein folding, and rRNA processing. Almost all proteasome proteins declined, as did proteasome activity. Apoptosis was observed after treatment with H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> but not AA. A targeted proteomic study of 32 proteins related to apoptosis in yeast supported the results obtained by DIA-MS and allowed the creation of an efficient method to quantify relevant proteins after treatment with stressors (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>, AA, and amphotericin B). This approach also uncovered a main role for Oye32, an oxidoreductase, suggesting this protein as a possible apoptotic marker common to many stressors. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Fungal infections are a worldwide health problem, especially in immunocompromised patients and patients with chronic disorders. Invasive candidiasis, caused mainly by C.&#xa0;albicans, is among the most common fungal diseases. Despite the existence of treatments to combat candidiasis, the spectrum of drugs available is limited. For the discovery of new drug targets, it is essential to know the pathogen response to different stress conditions. Our study provides a global vision of proteomic remodeling in C.&#xa0;albicans after exposure to different agents, such as hydrogen peroxide, acetic acid, and amphotericin B, that can cause apoptotic cell death. These results revealed the significance of many proteins related to oxidative stress response and proteasome activity, among others. Of note, the discovery of Prn1 as a key protein in the defense against oxidative stress as well the increase in the abundance of Oye32 protein when apoptotic process occurred point them out as possible drug targets.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Oxidative stress, Dia ms, Acetic acid, Apoptosis, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil García
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


