### Accession
PXD011835

### Title
HEK293T MS -  Representing dynamic biological networks with multi-scale probabilistic models

### Description
As an example of a comprehensive model of signal transduction, we provide a Wnt network that shows remarkable robustness under a range of phenotypical and pathological conditions. Its simulation allows the clarification of controversially discussed molecular mechanisms of Wnt signalling by predicting wet-lab measurements. A loss of Rac1 (Ras-related C3 botulinum toxin substrate 1) or JNK2 affected the TCF/LEF reporter whereas a loss of JNK1 had only mild effects, likely due to low abundance of JNK1.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were treated for 48 hours with stealthRNAs, suspended in PBS and centrifuged for 5 minutes at 1,100 rpm. Supernatant was discarded and cell pellets were send on dry ice to mass spectrometry. Proteins were separated using standard 12.5% SDS-Page followed by colloidal Coomassie staining. Two gel slices were cut at 21 kDa and 48 kDa for Rac1, JNK1 and JNK2, respectively. Individual pieces were washed by alternating incubation in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate / 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) thrice for 10 minutes each. Following vacuum drying, samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT (AppliChem, Darmstadt, Germany) for 20 min at RT and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide (SigmaAldrich, St. Louis, USA) for 20 min at 37°C. After a second vacuum drying step, proteins were subjected to tryptic digest overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted in two rounds by adding 20 µl 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% ACN and incubation in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min each. ACN was evaporated and samples filled to 15 µl with 0.1% TFA. Samples were measured using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) online coupled to an U3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Idstein, Germany) as described in Mohr et al, with the following exceptions: Separation was carried out using a binary solvent gradient consisting of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (86% ACN, 0.1% FA). The column was initially equilibrated in 5% B. In a first elution step, the percentage of B was raised from 5% to 15% in 5 min, followed by an increase from 15% to 40% B in 30 min. The column was washed with 95% B for 4 min and re-equilibrated with 5% B for 25 min.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MaxQuant Ver. 1.5.2.8 (www.maxquant.org). For peptide identification, MS/MS spectra were correlated with the UniProt human reference proteome set (www.uniprot.org) employing the build-in Andromeda search engine. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was considered as a fixed modification along with oxidation(M), and acetylated protein N-termini as variable modifications. False Discovery rates were set on both, peptide and protein level, to 0.01. Calculated intensity values for JNK2 and Rac1 were normalized to the summed intensity in the respective band to correct for gel loading differences.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic models analyzing gene regulation and metabolism face challenges when adapted to modeling signal transduction networks. During signal transduction, molecular reactions and mechanisms occur in different spatial and temporal frames and involve feedbacks. This impedes the straight-forward use of methods based on Boolean networks, Bayesian approaches, and differential equations. We propose a new approach, ProbRules, that combines probabilities and logical rules to represent the dynamics of a system across multiple scales. We demonstrate that ProbRules models can represent various network motifs of biological systems. As an example of a comprehensive model of signal transduction, we provide a Wnt network that shows remarkable robustness under a range of phenotypical and pathological conditions. Its simulation allows the clarification of controversially discussed molecular mechanisms of Wnt signaling by predicting wet-lab measurements. ProbRules provides an avenue in current computational modeling by enabling systems biologists to integrate vast amounts of available data on different scales.

### Keywords
Human, Hek293t, St-rna knockdown, Jnk2, Jnk1, Rac1

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Systems Biology, Ulm University, Germany
Ulm University

### Submitter
Johann Kraus

### Lab Head
Dr Hans A. Kestler
Institute of Medical Systems Biology, Ulm University, Germany


