### Accession
PXD041331

### Title
ER-trafficking triggers NRF1 ubiquitination to promote its proteolytic activation

### Description
The endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is a multifaceted organelle that plays an essential role in cellular processes such as protein folding, modification, and trafficking. It also acts as a proteostasis sensor and contributes to adaptation responses to maintain cellular homeostasis. The transcription factor NRF1 resides in the ER and is constantly transported from the ER to the cytosol for proteasomal degradation. However, when the proteasome function is defective, NRF1 escapes degradation and undergoes proteolytic cleavage by the protease DDI2, generating a transcriptionally active form that restores proteostasis, including proteasome function. Despite the importance of NRF1 in these processes, the mechanisms that regulate its proteolytic activation and transcriptional potential remain poorly understood. In this study, we utilized a functional molecular approach to elucidate the critical steps involved in NRF1 cleavage. Our results demonstrate that the ER is a crucial regulator of NRF1 function, orchestrating its ubiquitination by the ER-localized E3 ubiquitin ligase HRD1, a component of the ER-associated degradation (ERAD) pathway. Furthermore, we show that HRD1-mediated NRF1 ubiquitination is necessary for DDI2-mediated processing in cells. Notably, we found that the fusion of a ubiquitin moiety to NRF1 was sufficient to promote its proteolytic maturation by DDI2, thus bypassing the requirement for its trafficking to the ER. Our findings highlight the intricate mechanism by which NRF1 is activated by DDI2 and coordinates the transcriptional activity of an adaptation response in cells and suggest potential avenues for therapeutic interventions in conditions associated with proteasome impairment.

### Sample Protocol
Nrf1 Cleavage site determination  Protein samples were loaded on a 9 % mini polyacrylamide gel, migrated about 7 cm and stained by Coomassie blue. Gel lanes between 90-170 kDa were excised into 6 pieces (labelled A-F from highest to lowest MW). Each band was further split vertically into two equal halves and each was digested with sequencing-grade trypsin or chymotrypsin as described (Shevchenko, et al., 2006). Extracted peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. Nrf1 PTMs (phospho, ubiquitin)  Protein samples were loaded on a 12 % mini polyacrylamide gel, migrated about 2.5 cm and stained by Coomassie. A gel band corresponding to a MW of 90-250 kDa was excised from each lane and further split into two halves vertically.  Each half band was digested with sequencing-grade trypsin or chymotrypsin as described (Shevchenko, et al., 2006), except that cysteine alkylation was performed with iodoacetic acid (80 mM final) to differentiate modified Cys from potentially isobaric ubiquitin remnants (Nielsen et al. 2008). Extracted peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry analyses Nrf1 Cleavage site determination  Data-dependent LC-MS/MS analyses of samples were carried out on a Fusion Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced through a nano-electrospray ion source to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Dionex). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase custom packed 45 cm C18 column (75 μm ID, 100Å, Reprosil Pur 1.9 um particles, Dr. Maisch, Germany) with a 4-76% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid (total time 65 min, 4-27% MeCN in 28 min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 120'000 resolution. A data-dependent acquisition method controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used that optimized the number of precursors selected (“top speed”) of charge 2+ to 5+ while maintaining a fixed scan cycle of 0.6 s. Peptides were fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with a normalized energy of 32%. The precursor isolation window used was 1.6 Th, and the MS2 scans were done in the ion trap. The m/z of fragmented precursors was dynamically excluded from selection during 60 s. Nrf1 PTMs (phospho, ubiquitin)  Tryptic peptide mixtures were injected on a Dionex RSLC 3000 nanoHPLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) interfaced via a EASY-Spray source to a high resolution QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto a trapping microcolumn Acclaim PepMap100 C18 (20 mm x 100 μm ID, 5 μm, Dionex) before separation on a C18 EASY-Spray column (PepMap100, 75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2 μm particles, Thermo Fisher), using a gradient from 4 to 76 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid for peptide separation (total time: 65min). Full MS survey scans were performed at 70,000 resolution. In data-dependent acquisition controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher), the 10 most intense multiply charged precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan were selected for higher energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy NCE=27 %) and analysis in the orbitrap at 17’500 resolution. The window for precursor isolation was of 1.5 m/z units around the precursor and selected fragments were excluded for 60s from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications with MASCOT MS data were analyzed using MASCOT 2.6 (Matrix Science, London, UK). For determination of cleavage site, semiTrypsin (cleavage at K,R at one end, unspecific at the other end) was used as the enzyme definition, allowing 2 missed cleavages, and the human  reference proteome (RefProt) (www.uniprot.org, version of October 29th, 2017, containing  72’133 sequences) was used as the database. For the PTM searches, normal full Trypsin specificity (K,R ) was used, with the SwissProt database restricted to human taxonomy (20’405 sequences, www.uniprot.org , version of May 2022). For all searches, an additional custom contaminant database containing the most usual environmental contaminants and enzymes used for digestion (keratins, trypsin, etc) was also used. MASCOT searches used a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da (ion trap MS2 spectra for cleavage site determination ) or 0.03 Da (orbitrap MS2 spectra for PTM analysis). Carbamidomethylation (for cleavage site determination) or carboxymethylation (for PTM analysis) of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification.  Protein N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were specified as variable modifications in all searches. HexNAc  on Ser/ Thr or ubiquitin remnants (GlyGly) on Lys were specified as variable modifications.  Downstream data analysis  Nrf1 IP for determination of cleavage site Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) were generated manually from raw MS files based on MASCOT peptide identifications by matching precursor masses within +/- 10 ppm. The identity of the desired precursor was confirmed by inspecting the associated MS2 spectra used for identification and their RT’s. Peak heights were derived and used as a quantitative measure for comparisons across samples.   Nrf1 IP for PTMs Mascot search results were imported into the MsViz software (Martin-Campos et al. 2017), which was used for validation of the PTM localization and quantitation of modified peptide intensities across samples based on extracted ion chromatograms (XIC). Peak heights in XIC traces as extracted by MSViz were used as quantitative measure. Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V, and Mann, M. (2006). In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat. Protoc. 1, 2856–2860. M.L. Nielsen, M. Vermeulen, T. Bonaldi, J. Cox, L. Moroder, M. Mann, Iodoacetamide-induced artifact mimics ubiquitination in mass spectrometry., Nat. Methods. 5 (2008) 459–60.  T. Martín-Campos, R. Mylonas, A. Masselot, P. Waridel, T. Petricevic, I. Xenarios, M. Quadroni, MsViz: A Graphical Software Tool for In-Depth Manual Validation and Quantitation of Post-translational Modifications., J. Proteome Res. 16 (2017) 3092–3101.

### Publication Abstract
The transcription factor NRF1 resides in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and is constantly transported to the cytosol for proteasomal degradation. However, when the proteasome is defective, NRF1 escapes degradation and undergoes proteolytic cleavage by the protease DDI2, generating a transcriptionally active form that restores proteostasis, including proteasome function. The mechanisms that regulate NRF1 proteolytic activation and transcriptional potential remain poorly understood. This study demonstrates that the ER is a crucial regulator of NRF1 function by orchestrating its ubiquitination through the E3 ubiquitin ligase HRD1. We show that HRD1-mediated NRF1 ubiquitination is necessary for DDI2-mediated processing in cells. Furthermore, we found that deficiency in both <i>RAD23A</i> and <i>RAD23B</i> impaired DDI2-mediated NRF1 processing, indicating that these genes are essential components of the DDI2 proteolytic machinery. Our findings highlight the intricate mechanism by which the ER activates NRF1 to coordinate the transcriptional activity of an adaptation response in cells.

### Keywords
Erad, Ubiquitination, Proteostasis, Ddi2, Nrf1

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
University of Lausanne, Department of Immunobiology, Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland

### Submitter
Manfredo Quadroni

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Martinon
University of Lausanne, Department of Immunobiology, Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Epalinges, Switzerland


