### Accession
PXD006997

### Title
Salivary proteomics of sP and sNP rats

### Description
Sardinian alcohol-preferring (sP) and Sardinina alcohol-non preferring (sNP) rats have been selectively bred for opposite alcohol preference and consumption. The project proposed to identify salivary markers distinguishing the two rat lines possibly correlated to alcohol preference, by a proteomic approach.

### Sample Protocol
We investigated by an RP-HPLC-ESI-MS top-down/bottom/up integrated approach the protein composition of submandibular saliva secreted in response to intravenous infusion of the beta-adrenoceptor agonist isoprenaline. Alcohol-naive sP and sNP male rats from the 85th generation were used (16 sP, and 14 sNP). The rats were anesthetized and the duct of subamandibular (SM) gland was incannulatde to collect saliva, which was immediately tretaed with acqueous TFA 0.1%, an appropriate volume of TFA 0.1% was added to reach a ratio saliva:TFA 0.1% 30:70 (V/V). Solution was centrifuged and the supernatant used 1) to determine the total protein concentration by the bicinconinic acid assay (BCA); 2)to RP-HPLC-ESI-MS analysis. Search and quantification pf peptides and proteins were made by LC-low resolution-ESI-MS (SURVEYOR HPLC system connected to an LCQ Advantage mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific). To characterize peptides and proteins present in SM saliva we applied a top-down proteomic approach on the intact proteins/peptides present in the acidic supernatant of SM saliva. Enriched HPLC fractions of some proteins were analyzed both by top-down and bottom-up approach for thei characterization. Enriche fraction were obtained by preparative RP-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 300, ThermoFisher SCientific) of SM saliva. The proten concentartion of each fraction was determined by the BCA assay. For the bottom-up analysis, proteolytic digestion was perfomed by trypsin or by endoproteinase Glu-C. Top-down and bottom-up characterization was performed by HPLC-nanoESI-high resolution MS/MS experiments (Ultimate 3000 Micro HPLC apparatus coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific). MS and MS/MS (CID) spectra were collected in positive mode with resolution of 60000 and 30000 respectively.

### Data Protocol
RP-HPLC-low resolution-ESI-MS analysis: Experimental mass values were obtained by deconvolution of averaged ESI-MS spectra, generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48, automatically performed using MagTran 1.0 software and compared with those present in the UniProtKB DataBank.  RP-HPLC-high resolution-ESI-MS/MS analysis: MS and MS/MS data were generated by Xcalibur 2.2 SP1.48 using Xtract program for deconvolution. MS/MS data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 1.2 program, based on SEQUEST cluster as a search engine against UniprotKB rat proteome (February, 2014 released, 33591 entries). Limits were: Xcorr scores greater than 1.5 for singly charged ions, 2.0 and 2.5 for doubly and triply charged ions. Cleavage specificity was set to trypsin or endo-proteinase GluC with two missed cleavages in the bottom-up analysis. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragmnmet tolerance 0.8 Da. Following modifications were searched: phosphorylation, acetylation, pyro-glutammination, oxidation of methionine residues. De-novo sequencing by manual inspection of MS/MS spectra was performed to identify several peptides/proteins with the help of BAST program. peptide sequences and sites of PTM were validated by manual insepction of the experimental fragmentation spectra against the theoretical ones generated by MS-Product software (ProteinProspector web site).  Quantification: the eXtracted Ion Current (XIC) strategy was applied to quantified peptides and proteins identified in SM saliva. The area of the LC-low resolution-ESI-MS XIC peaks was used (signal/noise ratio >5). Estimated percentage error of the XIC procedure was <8%. A window of +/- 0.5 Da was used to extract XIC peaks. The multiply-charged ions used to selectively extract and quantify proteins and peptides was carefully selected to exclude values in common with other co-eluting proteins. XIC peak areas were corrected for the dilution factor 0.1 and normalized to the total protein concentration. Statistical analysis: GraphPad prism (5.0) was used for statistical analysis. Means and standard deviation were calculated for XIC peak area values of all the peptides and proteins. Depending on data distribution (normal or skewed) and variance (homogeneous or unequal) we used paarmetri t test (varaince homogeneous); t test with Welch correction (normal distribution, varaince unequal); nonparametric Mann-Whitney test (skewed distribution, variance unequal).

### Publication Abstract
Sardinian alcohol-preferring (sP) and Sardinian alcohol-non preferring (sNP) rats have been selectively bred for opposite alcohol preference and consumption. Aiming to verify possible differences at the proteomics level between sP and sNP rats, we investigated the salivary proteome by a a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry top-down-bottom-up integrated approach. For this purpose, submandibular saliva was collected from alcohol-naive sP and sNP rats under isoprenaline stimulation. A total of 200 peptides and proteins were detected and quantified in the two rat lines, 149 of which were characterized in their naturally occurring structure. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006997. Surprisingly, sP rats exhibited marked quantitative and qualitative differences with respect to sNP rats, namely higher levels of proteoforms originating from submandibular gland protein C, and from submandibular rat protein 2, as well as those of several unidentified peptides and proteins. sP rats expressed some proteins not detectable in sNP rats such as the glutamine and glutamic acid-rich protein (GRP)-CB. The isoform GRP-B, detectable in both rat lines, was more abundant in sNP rats. The submandibular saliva of sNP rats was also characterized by very high levels of GRP-B proteolytic peptides and rat salivary protein 1. Whether these differences could contribute to the opposite alcohol preference and consumption of sP and sNP rats is currently unknown and requires further investigation.

### Keywords
Saliva submandibular rat alcohol-preferring

### Affiliations
University of Cagliari, DISVA
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical section, Proteomics Lab. University of Cagliari

### Submitter
Tiziana Cabras

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Cabras
Department of Life and Environmental Sciences, Biomedical section, Proteomics Lab. University of Cagliari


