### Accession
PXD012005

### Title
Polypeptide targeting to distinct areas of the human ER

### Description
There is at least one additional targeting pathway for proteins to the human endoplasmic reticulum, which involves a cytosolic as well as an ER-membrane resident receptor, belonging to the family of PEX proteins. In contrast to the precursor protein targeting pathways, the additional pathway targets proteins to distinct ER sites and does not target proteins to the Sec61 complex. To characterize substrate proteins of this pathway, we combined siRNA-mediated PEX3-depletion in HeLa cells with label-free quantitative proteomics and and differential protein abundance analysis.

### Sample Protocol
as described in PXD0008178  and Nguyen et al., 2018, Nat. Commun. 3765

### Data Protocol
as described in PXD008178 and Nguyen et al., 2018, Nat. Commun. 3765

### Publication Abstract
Protein import into the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) is the first step in the biogenesis of around 10,000 different soluble and membrane proteins in humans. It involves the co- or post-translational targeting of precursor polypeptides to the ER, and their subsequent membrane insertion or translocation. So far, three pathways for the ER targeting of precursor polypeptides and four pathways for the ER targeting of mRNAs have been described. Typically, these pathways deliver their substrates to the Sec61 polypeptide-conducting channel in the ER membrane. Next, the precursor polypeptides are inserted into the ER membrane or translocated into the ER lumen, which may involve auxiliary translocation components, such as the TRAP and Sec62/Sec63 complexes, or auxiliary membrane protein insertases, such as EMC and the TMCO1 complex. Recently, the PEX19/PEX3-dependent pathway, which has a well-known function in targeting and inserting various peroxisomal membrane proteins into pre-existent peroxisomal membranes, was also found to act in the targeting and, putatively, insertion of monotopic hairpin proteins into the ER. These either remain in the ER as resident ER membrane proteins, or are pinched off from the ER as components of new lipid droplets. Therefore, the question arose as to whether this pathway may play a more general role in ER protein targeting, i.e., whether it represents a fourth pathway for the ER targeting of precursor polypeptides. Thus, we addressed the client spectrum of the PEX19/PEX3-dependent pathway in both PEX3-depleted HeLa cells and PEX3-deficient Zellweger patient fibroblasts by an established approach which involved the label-free quantitative mass spectrometry of the total proteome of depleted or deficient cells, as well as differential protein abundance analysis. The negatively affected proteins included twelve peroxisomal proteins and two hairpin proteins of the ER, thus confirming two previously identified classes of putative PEX19/PEX3 clients in human cells. Interestingly, fourteen collagen-related proteins with signal peptides or N-terminal transmembrane helices belonging to the secretory pathway were also negatively affected by PEX3 deficiency, which may suggest compromised collagen biogenesis as a hitherto-unknown contributor to organ failures in the respective Zellweger patients.

### Keywords
Hela, Pex3

### Affiliations
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität des Saarlandes, Kirrbergerstr. 100, 66421 Homburg, Deutschland  Dr. Nagarjuna Nagaraj, Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility (contact)
Saarland University

### Submitter
Richard Zimmermann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bianca Schrul & Prof. Dr. Richard Zimmermann (lab heads)
Medizinische Biochemie und Molekularbiologie, Universität des Saarlandes, Kirrbergerstr. 100, 66421 Homburg, Deutschland  Dr. Nagarjuna Nagaraj, Max-Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility (contact)


