### Accession
PXD013198

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply conse4rved Plant Protein Complexes, soy

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from 2 Size exclusion chromatography experiments.  The material was a native extract prepared from the green leafy tissue of approximately two-week-old soy sprouts.  For size calibration the extract for the second fractionation was spiked with three size markers (Sigma-Aldrich MWGF1000) Thyroglobulin, beta-amylase, and BSA.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen powdered plant tissue was solubilized in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, 1 mM DTT, plus phosphatase inhibitors and plant-specific protease inhibitors.  Fractionation was on a BioSep-SEC-s4000 column (Phenomenex).  Fractions from the first column were prepped for mass spec by reduction/alkylation followed by a modified version of the SP3 bead binding and on-bead digestion protocol of Hughes et al. 2014, Molecular Systems Biology 10(10):1-10, followed by desalting with C18 lab-in-a-plate (Glygen)  .  Data were collected using data-dependent acquisition and a 75 minute method.  SEC fractions dated 20172110 were collected on a fusion mass spec using a topspeed CID method, and the "SECwithStandards" fractions were collected on a Fusion Lumos mass spec usign a top speed HCD method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RQW filese was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem)was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Size exclusion, Soy, Glycine max, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


