### Accession
PXD048045

### Title
Loss of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Trim9 or Trim67 alters the post-synaptic density proteome

### Description
During development, neurons undergo expansive growth and shape change to achieve their mature morphology and physiological function. As cellular remodeling occurs, proteins are synthesized, transported, degraded, and recycled. As such, protein levels and localization are tightly regulated. E3 ubiquitin ligases play a key role in proteostasis by altering protein localization, intracellular trafficking, and protein lifetime via the addition of ubiquitin modifiers. TRIM9 and TRIM67 are brain-enriched E3 ubiquitin ligases implicated in numerous stages of neuronal morphogenesis. We previously demonstrated both proteins are required for axon pathfinding and growth cone shape changes in developing neurons. In particular, TRIM9 and TRIM67 regulate filopodia number and stability in early stages of neuronal development.   Our published in vivo studies suggest TRIM9 and TRIM67 may function at the synapse as well. We observed distinct deficits in spatial learning and memory of Trim9-/- and Trim67-/- mice in the Morris Water Maze test, compared to their littermate controls. Furthermore, adult-born neurons in the dentate gyrus in Trim9-/- mice also displayed a decreased number of dendritic spines. Here we demonstrate TRIM9 and TRIM67 localize to the post-synaptic density (PSD), a structure attached to the post-synaptic membrane in dendritic spines. We identified 148 proteins that were significantly changed (p < 0.05) in the Trim67-/-  mice compared to their Trim67+/+ littermates. Gene Ontology analysis of these proteins demonstrated enrichment of several cellular pathways, including peptidyl-amino acid modification, microtubule dynamics, and Ras signal transduction. Likewise, we identified 109 proteins that were significantly changed (p < 0.05) in the Trim9-/-  mice compared to their Trim9+/+ littermates. Following Gene Ontology analysis, we observed the prominent enrichment of one pathway in our significantly different proteins: the actin cytoskeleton. Changes in these actin cytoskeleton proteins were bidirectional, suggesting the presence of altered cytoskeletal architecture and organization in the Trim9-/-  PSD.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates (0.2 mg per sample; 4 replicates per condition) were precipitated using 4x cold acetone and stored at -20 ºC overnight. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 15000xg at 4 ºC for 15 min, then protein pellets were reconstituted in 8M urea. All samples were reduced with 5mM DTT for 45 min at 37ºC, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature, then diluted to 1M urea with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8). Samples were digested with LysC (Wako, 1:50 w/w) for 2 hr at 37ºC, then digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) overnight at 37ºC. The resulting peptide samples were acidified, desalted using desalting spin columns (Thermo), then the eluates were dried via vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was determined using Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Pierce).    A total of 16 samples (50 µg each) were labeled with TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fisher) for 1 hr at room temperature. Prior to quenching, the labeling efficiency was evaluated by LC-MS/MS analysis. After confirming >98% efficiency, samples were quenched with 50% hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4%. Labeled peptide samples were combined 1:1, desalted using Thermo desalting spin column, and dried via vacuum centrifugation. The dried TMT-labeled sample was fractionated using high pH reversed phase HPLC 96 resulting fractions were then concatenated in a non-continuous manner into 24 fractions and 5% of each were aliquoted, dried down via vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80ºC until further analysis.  LC/MS/MS Analysis: The 24 TMT labeled proteome fractions were analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an Easy nLC 1200-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an Easy Spray PepMap C18 column (75 μm id × 25 cm, 2 μm particle size) (Thermo Scientific) and separated over a 120 min method. The gradient for separation consisted of 5–42% mobile phase B at a 250 nl/min flow rate, where mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. The Lumos was operated in SPS-MS3 mode with a 3s cycle time. Resolution for the precursor scan (m/z 400–1500) was set to 120,000 with a AGC target set to standard and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 scans consisted of CID normalized collision energy (NCE) 32; AGC target set to standard; maximum injection time of 50 ms; isolation window of 0.7 Da. Following MS2 acquisition, MS3 spectra were collected in SPS mode (10 scans per outcome); HCD set to 55; resolution set to 50,000; scan range set to 100-500; AGC target set to 200% with a 100 ms maximum inject time.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5, set to ‘reporter ion MS3’ with ‘16pex TMT’. Peak lists were searched against a reviewed Uniprot mouse database (downloaded Feb 2021 containing 17,051 sequences), appended with a common contaminants database, using Sequest HT within Proteome Discoverer. Data were searched with up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites, fixed modifications: TMT16plex peptide N-terminus and Lys, carbamidomethylation Cys, dynamic modification: N-terminal protein acetyl, oxidation Met. Precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da (MS3). Peptide false discovery rate was set to 1%.  Reporter abundance was calculated based on intensity; for MS3 data, SPS mass matches threshold was set to 50 and co-isolation threshold was set to 100. Razor and unique peptides were used for quantitation. Proteins with >50% missing TMT intensities across samples were removed. Student’s t-tests were conducted within Proteome Discoverer, and a p-value <0.05 was considered significant. Log2 fold change ratios were calculated for each pairwise comparison. See attached SampleKey.xls

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synapse; post-synaptic density; trim9; trim67; e3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
UNC-Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Laura Herring

### Lab Head
Dr Stephanie Gupton
UNC-Chapel Hill


