### Accession
PXD037610

### Title
Asp caterpillar (Megalopyge ssp.) venom proteomes

### Description
Larvae of the genus Megalopyge (Lepidoptera: Zygaenoidea: Megalopygidae), called asp or puss caterpillars, produce defensive venoms that cause severe acute pain. Here, we present the anatomy, chemistry, and mode of action of the venom systems of caterpillars of two megalopygid species, the Southern flannel moth Megalopyge opercularis and the black-waved flannel moth Megalopyge crispata. We show that megalopygid venom is produced in secretory cells that lie beneath the cuticle and are connected to the venom spines by canals. Megalopygid venoms consist of larger aerolysin-like pore-forming toxins, which we have named megalysins, and a small number of peptides. Venom potently activates mammalian sensory neurons via membrane permeabilization and causes sustained spontaneous pain behaviours and paw swelling in mice. These bioactivities can be easily ablated by treatment with heat, organic solvents, or proteases, suggesting they are mediated by larger proteins, most likely the megalysins. We show that the megalysins were recruited as venom toxins in the Megalopygidae following horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to the ancestors of Lepidoptera. The megalopygid venom system differs markedly from those of previously studied venomous zygaenoids of the family Limacodidae, suggestive of independent origins. Megalopygids have recruited aerolysin-like proteins as venom toxins convergently with centipedes, cnidarians, and fish. This study highlights the role of horizontal gene transfer in venom evolution.

### Sample Protocol
We analysed venom samples using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) that were either in their natural untreated form (N); or reduced and alkylated (RA); or reduced, alkylated, and trypsinised (RAT). An estimated 20–50 µg of venom used for each sample. Native (N) samples were prepared by diluting venom samples to 25 µL in 1% FA. For the reduced and alkylated samples, venom was reduced and alkylated at 37C for 1 h in reducing/alkylating buffer (1% 2-iodoethanol, 0.25% triethylphosphine, 48.75% ACN, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 11.0). For the trypsinised (RAT) sample, reduced and alkylated venom was dried in a vacuum centrifugal concentrator (1 h) then resuspended in digestion buffer (40 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0, 10% acetonitrile) with 20 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA); the sample was then incubated for 2 h at 37C. Trypsin was inactivated by addition of 50 µL extraction reagent (50% ACN, 5% formic acid (FA)) then the sample was dried in a vacuum centrifugal concentrator (1 h). Sample were resuspended in 25 µL 1% formic acid, centrifuged to remove particulates (5 min at 14,000 × G, room temperature), and 20 µL of the supernatant transferred to a mass spectrometry tube with a low-volume insert.   LC-MS/MS samples were loaded onto a 150 × 0.1 mm Zorbax 300SB-C18 column (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) on a Shimadzu Nano LC system with the outflow coupled to a SCIEX 5600 Triple TOF (Framingham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with a Turbo V ion source. Peptides were eluted using a 70 min gradient of 1–40% solvent B (90% ACN/0.1% FA) in solvent A (0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. For MS1 scans, m/z was set between 350 and 2200. Precursor ions with m/z 350–1500, charge of +2 to +5, and signals with >100 counts/s (excluding isotopes within 2 Da) were selected for fragmentation, and MS2 scans were collected over a range of 80–1500 m/z. Scans were obtained with an accumulation time of 250 ms and a cycle of 4 s.

### Data Protocol
The generated mass spectra were compared to the transcriptome-derived amino acid sequence database obtained from venom scoli of the corresponding Megalopyge species using the Paragon 4.0.0.0 algorithm in ProteinPilot 4.0.8085 software (SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Incomplete ORFs were re-analysed by mapping trimmed reads with Geneious 2019.0.4 software (Biomatters, Auckland, New Zealand). Final protein annotation was performed using SignalP 5.0 (Almagro Armenteros et al. 2019), BLAST searches (Altschul et al. 1990) with cutoff E < 1e-5 against the UniRef90 and Swiss-Prot databases, and HMMER searches (Eddy 2008) against the Pfam database. Toxins were named according to rational nomenclature (King et al. 2008) as megalopygitoxins (MPTX) in the form e.g. U-MPTX1-Mo1 (in which the U- prefix is a placeholder designating pharmacology, the subscript 1 denotes a family of homologous polypeptides, Mo indicates the species Megalopyge opercularis, and the final number is a unique identifier).

### Publication Abstract
Larvae of the genus <i>Megalopyge</i> (Lepidoptera: Zygaenoidea: Megalopygidae), known as asp or puss caterpillars, produce defensive venoms that cause severe pain. Here, we present the anatomy, chemistry, and mode of action of the venom systems of caterpillars of two megalopygid species, the Southern flannel moth <i>Megalopyge opercularis</i> and the black-waved flannel moth <i>Megalopyge crispata</i>. We show that megalopygid venom is produced in secretory cells that lie beneath the cuticle and are connected to the venom spines by canals. Megalopygid venoms consist of large aerolysin-like pore-forming toxins, which we have named megalysins, and a small number of peptides. The venom system differs markedly from those of previously studied venomous zygaenoids of the family Limacodidae, suggestive of an independent origin. Megalopygid venom potently activates mammalian sensory neurons via membrane permeabilization and induces sustained spontaneous pain behavior and paw swelling in mice. These bioactivities are ablated by treatment with heat, organic solvents, or proteases, indicating that they are mediated by larger proteins such as the megalysins. We show that the megalysins were recruited as venom toxins in the Megalopygidae following horizontal transfer of genes from bacteria to the ancestors of ditrysian Lepidoptera. Megalopygids have recruited aerolysin-like proteins as venom toxins convergently with centipedes, cnidarians, and fish. This study highlights the role of horizontal gene transfer in venom evolution.

### Keywords
Megalopygidae, Megalopyge, Venom, Lepidoptera

### Affiliations
Institute for Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland
University of Queensland

### Submitter
Andrew Walker

### Lab Head
Dr Glenn F. King
Institute for Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland


