### Accession
PXD025013

### Title
Within-host adaptive phenotypic responses of bovine Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
The Gram-positive bacterium S. aureus is one of the most common causes of contagious bovine mastitis. A predominant S. aureus clone persists within its host over a long period. In the present study, we compared the surface proteome of two isolates, collected from a naturally infected dairy cow with chronic, subclinical mastitis: an initial isolate (IN) and a host-adapted strain (HA). The isolates were grown under iron- and oxygen-limiting conditions in RPMI 1640 medium. Bacterial cells were isolated at the early stationary phase and used for preparation of surface-associated proteins by applying a surface-shaving and a surface-biotinylation approach. Proteins were identified by gelfree (surface-shaving approach) and GeLC-MS/MS (biotinylation approach) analyses.

### Sample Protocol
For the surface-biotinylation approach, cell pellets of 90 ml S. aureus culture at OD600 of 0.4 were suspended in 1 ml PBS (pH 8) and further processed according to Hempel et al. 2010. Biotinylated proteins were mixed in a ratio of 1:2 with a labeled SILAC standard protein sample (IN and HA, cultivated in the same manner in medium containing 13C-labeled L-Lysine and 13C-labeled L-Arginine and mixed in equal parts after digestion) and separated via one dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. In gel digestion of proteins was carried out by dividing each lane into eight subsamples with similar protein amounts which were densitometrically determined using AIDA software (Raytest Isotopenmeßgeräte GmbH). Extraction and desalting of the peptides was done according to Boedeker et al. 2017. For the shaving approach, cell pellets of 3 ml S. aureus culture at OD 0.2 were suspended in 50 mL PBS, 40% sucrose 20 mM azide and processed as described by Dreisbach et al. 2010. After trypsin digestion, the samples were acidified with 10% formic acid (4 µL per 100 µL). Peptides were desalted using Zip Tips (Dreisbach, 2010). For liquid chromatography –coupeled tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis a nanoAQUITY Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography System (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) was combined with a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc). Peptides from each subsample were solved in 3 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid, centrifuged for 20 min at 109,000 x g and loaded onto a BEH C18 column, 130 Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm at a flow rate of 0.35 μl min-1 (Waters Corporation). Elution of peptides from the column was performed using a 222 min gradient starting with 3.7 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid) and 96.3 % buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in Ultra-LC-MS-water): 0–30 min 3.7% B; 30–65 min 3.7–22.1% B; 65–88 min 22.1–29.3% B; 88–148 min 29.3–48.3% B; 148–175 min 48.3–62.5% B; 175–192 min 62.5–99% B; 192–195 min 99% B; 195–200 min 99–3.7% B, 200–205 min 3.7% B. MS scans were performed in the Fourier transformation mode scanning an m/z of 350-1900 with a resolution (full width at half maximum at m/z 400) of 60,000 and a lock mass of 445.12003. Primary ions were fragmented in a data-dependent collision induced dissociation mode for the 20 most abundant precursor ions with an exclusion time of 12 s and analyzed by the LTQ Velos Pro ion trap. The following ionization parameters were applied: normalized collision energy: 35, activation Q: 0.25, activation time: 10 ms, isolation width: 2 m/z, charge state: > +2. The signal to noise threshold was set to 2,000. Hempel, K.; Pané-Farré, J.; Otto, A.; Sievers, S.; Hecker, M.; Becher, D. Quantitative cell surface proteome profiling for SigB-dependent protein expression in the human pathogen Staphylococcus aureus via biotinylation approach. J. Proteome Res. 2010, 9, 1579–90, doi:10.1021/pr901143a. Boedeker, C., Schuler, M., Reintjes, G., Jeske, O., van Teeseling, M.C., Jogler, M., et al. Determining the bacterial cell biology of Planctomycetes. Nature Communications, 8 (2017), 14853-66 Dreisbach, A.; Hempel, K.; Buist, G.; Hecker, M.; Becher, D.; van Dijl, J.M. Profiling the surfacome of Staphylococcus aureus. Proteomics 2010, 10, 3082–309

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max Plack Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.2.8) and the following parameters: peptide tolerance 5 ppm; a tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da; variable modifications: methionine oxidation, Biotin, Biotin alkylated, Biotin reduced; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation; a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed; a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein; fixed false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % for proteins, peptides and site decoy fraction.  All samples were searched against a database containing all protein sequences of S. aureus strains Newbould 305, RF122 and ST97 extracted from NCBI at 2017_05_30 with a decoy mode of reverted sequences and common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant. Quantification based on unique peptides was done using the SILAC mode for the biotinylation approach and the label-free mode for the shaving approach . Using the software tool Perseus (Version 1.4.1.3, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, www.maxquant.org) contaminants and reverse identifications were removed from the dataset. Data were log2 transformed and a z-score standardization was performed. A permutation based t-test (p-value ≤ 0.1) was applied to receive proteins which are significantly different in amount. A protein was considered when it was detected by at least two unique peptides each with a minimum of two MS/MS scans from at least two MS samples (replicates or samples) of a proteomics project and a total intensity of >500,000 of all replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biotinylaton, Cell surface proteome, Host adaption, Chronic bovine mastitis, Surface shaving, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
TU Braunschweig
Institut für Mikrobiologie
Spielmannstr. 7
Germany
Microbial Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany; intituite of Microbiology, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kucklick

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Engelmann
Microbial Proteomics, Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research, Braunschweig, Germany; intituite of Microbiology, Technische Universität Braunschweig, Braunschweig, Germany


