### Accession
PXD038678

### Title
MRM Analysis of Cap, Ven and plasma

### Description
Samples were quantitatively analyzed by a liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry method targeting 114 peptides representing 60 HSP proteins and by a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry discovery method, resulting in up to 3,811 protein identifications.  The  data from the three biofluids indicate that remote collection devices are a viable option for personal blood proteome biosignature stratification and health analysis.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 8 volunteers signed a consent form to donate venous blood, drawn from a phlebotomist at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center and collected with 10mL K2 EDTA vial. Plasma was isolated from the venous blood by pipetting 500µl into microtainer tubes.  In addition, 10µL of venous blood was pipetted onto six Mitra tips for each volunteer.   Each volunteer also collected six Mitra device tips (10µl) of their own capillary whole blood from a lancet finger prick.  Mitra Device tips containing capillary whole blood, venous whole blood, and plasma (5.5µl) were added to 2.2mL 96 well plate according to the experiment plate layout.

### Data Protocol
PBL in house ProEpic platform was used to analyze raw data, where raw data files information on precursor m/z, product m/z, RT and component name from Analyst are converted (MS Convert) to mzML files that run through SmartPeak software. A custom feature for QC component rules is uploaded specifying 15s width at 50 and a minimum of 6 points across half height was used for all 466 transitions. The MRM report is ranked for quantifier and qualifier peptides reporting peak areas and calculating peak area ratios from endogenous peak area divided by SIL peak area, and calculating %CV.

### Publication Abstract
Telehealth, accessing healthcare and wellness remotely, should be a cost-effective and efficient way for individuals to receive care. The convenience of having a reliable remote collection device for blood tests will facilitate access to precision medicine and healthcare. Herein, we tested a 60-biomarker health surveillance panel (HSP), containing 35 FDA/LDT assays and covering at least 14 pathological states, on 8 healthy individuals' ability to collect their own capillary blood from a lancet finger prick and directly compared it to the traditional phlebotomist venous blood and plasma collection methods. All samples were spiked with 114 stable-isotope-labeled (SIL) HSP peptides and quantitatively analyzed by liquid chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring-mass spectrometry (LC/MRM-MS) scheduled method targeting 466 transitions from 114 HSP peptides and by a discovery data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) method. The average peak area ratio (PAR) of the HSP quantifier peptide transitions from all 8 volunteers' capillary blood (<i>n</i> = 48), venous blood (<i>n</i> = 48), and matched plasma (<i>n</i> = 24) was &lt;20% coefficients of variation (CV). Heat map analysis of all 8 volunteers demonstrated that each individual had a unique biosignature. Biological replicates from capillary blood and venous blood clustered within each volunteer in <i>k</i>-means clustering analysis. Pearson statistical analysis of the three biofluids indicated that there was &gt;90% similarity. Discovery DIA-MS analysis of the same samples using a plasma spectral library and a pan-human spectral library identified 1121 and 4661 total proteins, respectively. In addition, at least 122 FDA-approved biomarkers were identified. DIA-MS analysis reproducibly quantitated (&lt;30% CV) &#x223c;600-700 proteins in capillary blood, &#x223c;800 proteins in venous blood, and &#x223c;300-400 proteins in plasma, demonstrating that an expansive biomarker panel is possible with current mass spectrometry technology. Both targeted LC/MRM-MS and discovery DIA-MS analysis of whole blood collected on remote sampling devices are viable options for personal proteome biosignature stratification in precision medicine and precision health.

### Keywords
Plasma mrm, Venous blood, Capillary blood

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai
Cedars-Sinai Precision Biomarker Laboratories

### Submitter
Stephen Whelan

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Whelan
Cedars-Sinai Precision Biomarker Laboratories


