### Accession
PXD000349

### Title
2D-DIGE global protein profiling of alcohol-dependent mouse brain

### Description
Data analysis.  Spot detection and matching were performed with a comparative cross analysis of all the gels using DeCyder software v.6.5 (GE Healthcare).  178 spots were selected based on 1.15-fold for protein ratio cut-off, allowing for the appearance of the spots in 23 out of 28 gels (69 out of 84 total images). Data from 95 spots were submitted. 93 spots were identified with high confidence.  Spot picking and Trypsin digestion.  The spots of interest were picked up by Ettan Spot Picker (GE Healthcare) based on the in-gel analysis and spot picking design by DeCyder software. The gel spots were washed a few times then digested in-gel with modified porcine trypsin protease (Promega, Fitchburg, WI). The digested tryptic peptides were desalted using a Zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Peptides were eluted from the Zip-tip with 0.5 uL of matrix solution (alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid, 5 mg/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate) and spotted on a MALDI plate.  Mass Spectrometry.  MALDI-TOF MS and TOF/TOF tandem MS/MS were performed on AB SCIEX TOF/TOF 5800 System (AB SCIEX). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode, averaging 4000 laser shots per spectrum. TOF/TOF tandem MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 7-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions).  Database search.  Both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to GPS Explorer workstation equipped with MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) to search the Swiss-Prot database. Searches were performed without constraining protein molecular weight or isoelectric point, with variable carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine residues, and with one missed cleavage also allowed in the search parameters. Candidates with either protein score C.I.% or Ion C.I.% greater than 95 were considered significant. When multiple IDs were significant for a given spot, the selection was made by evaluating apparent molecular weight, isoelectric point, the location of the spot in the gel, and the presence of strips of multiple protein isoforms in the adjacent spots.

### Sample Protocol
Data analysis.  Spot detection and matching were performed with a comparative cross analysis of all the gels using DeCyder software v.6.5 (GE Healthcare).  178 spots were selected based on 1.15-fold for protein ratio cut-off, allowing for the appearance of the spots in 23 out of 28 gels (69 out of 84 total images). Data from 95 spots were submitted. 93 spots were identified with high confidence.  Spot picking and Trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis.  Spot detection and matching were performed with a comparative cross analysis of all the gels using DeCyder software v.6.5 (GE Healthcare).  178 spots were selected based on 1.15-fold for protein ratio cut-off, allowing for the appearance of the spots in 23 out of 28 gels (69 out of 84 total images). Data from 95 spots were submitted. 93 spots were identified with high confidence.  Spot picking and Trypsin digestion.

### Publication Abstract
Alcohol abuse causes dramatic neuroadaptations in the brain, which contribute to tolerance, dependence, and behavioral modifications. Previous proteomic studies in human alcoholics and animal models have identified candidate alcoholism-related proteins. However, recent evidences suggest that alcohol dependence is caused by changes in co-regulation that are invisible to single protein-based analysis. Here, we analyze global proteomics data to integrate differential expression, co-expression networks, and gene annotations to unveil key neurobiological rearrangements associated with the transition to alcohol dependence modeled by a Chronic Intermittent Ethanol (CIE), two-bottle choice (2BC) paradigm. We analyzed cerebral cortices (CTX) and midbrains (MB) from male C57BL/6J mice subjected to a CIE, 2BC paradigm, which induces heavy drinking and represents one of the best available animal models for alcohol dependence and relapse drinking. CIE induced significant changes in protein levels in dependent mice compared with their non-dependent controls. Multiple protein isoforms showed region-specific differential regulation as a result of post-translational modifications. Our integrative analysis identified modules of co-expressed proteins that were highly correlated with CIE treatment. We found that modules most related to the effects of CIE treatment coordinate molecular imbalances in endocytic- and energy-related pathways, with specific proteins involved, such as dynamin-1. The qRT-PCR experiments validated both differential and co-expression analyses, and the correspondence among our data and previous genomic and proteomic studies in humans and rodents substantiates our findings. The changes identified above may play a key role in the escalation of ethanol consumption associated with dependence. Our approach to alcohol addiction will advance knowledge of brain remodeling mechanisms and adaptive changes in response to drug abuse, contribute to understanding of organizational principles of CTX and MB proteomes, and define potential new molecular targets for treating alcohol addiction. The integrative analysis employed here highlight the advantages of systems approaches in studying the neurobiology of alcohol addiction.

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Cortex, Alcohol dependence, Midbrain, 2d-dige, Cie

### Affiliations
The University of Texas at Austin
Waggoner Center for Alcohol and Addiction Research

### Submitter
Giorgio Gorini

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Gorini
The University of Texas at Austin


