### Accession
PXD009797

### Title
Lys-C/Arg-C, a New Enzyme Combination for Next-Generation Proteomics

### Description
Today, the most widely used bottom-up proteomics studies necessitate a proteolysis step prior to MS analysis. Trypsin is often the best protease in choice due to its high specificity and MS-favored proteolytic products. Trypsin has been challenged for its low cleavage efficiency at Lys-X bonds, and tandem Lys-C/trypsin digestion approach has been developed to alleviate the problem. However, the identification capacity of the two digestions often disagrees among different research groups. Herein, we report a new tandem digestion using Lys-C and Arg-C (Lys-C/Arg-C), which we have proven to be more efficient and specific than trypsin and Lys-C/trypsin approaches. Analysis of our previous data (Anal. Chem. 2018, 90, 1554-1559) revealed that both Lys-C and Arg-C perform better in trypsin-mode digestion. In particular for Arg-C, the identification capacity is increased to 2.6 times and even comparable with trypsin. The good complementarity, high digestion efficiency and high specificity of Lys-C and Arg-C prompt a tandem Lys-C/Arg-C digestion. We systematically evaluated the Lys-C/Arg-C digestion using qualitative and quantitative proteomics approaches and confirmed its superior performance in digestion efficiency, specificity and identification capacity to the currently widely used trypsin and Lys-C/trypsin digestions. As a result, we concluded that Lys-C/Arg-C digestion approach would be the choice of next-generation digestion approach for better results in both qualitative and quantitative proteomics studies.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction from HeLa Cells HeLa (Human epithelial carcinoma) Cells (ATCC) were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in humidified atmosphere with 5% CO2 at 37 °C and were grown as monolayer cultures in 10 cm tissue culture plate. HeLa cells were harvested by 2,000 g centrifugation at 4 °C for 20 min. The harvested cells were washed three times with PBS buffer and then resuspended in lysis buffer containing 4 M guanidine hydrochloride and 100 mM TEAB. The slurry solution was sonicated for 6 min (2 s sonication with 5 s intervals) in ice incubation, and the supernatant was collected by centrifugation at 20,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. A volume of 20 μL of sample aliquot was kept for protein determination using Bradford assay. Subsequently, the sample was submitted to reduction by incubation with DTT at 37 °C for 45min, followed by alkylation using 100 mM acrylamide for 1 h at room temperature. The excess acrylamide was quenched by adding 40 mM DTT. The protein solution was diluted to 1 mg/mL with lysis buffer prior to the following application.  Protein Digestion by FASP The FASP method was adapted for the following procedures.32 The samples were transferred to Microcon YM-10 filters and centrifuged at 13,800g for three-time buffer displacement with digestion buffer. After buffer displacement, digestion was carried out using different proteases with a ratio of enzyme/protein as 1:50. For Lys-C/Arg-C digestion, Lys-C proteolysis were carried out with 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) at 37 °C for 6 h, and then Arg-C digestion was performed overnight with 5 mM DTT, 8.5 mM calcium chloride and 0.5 mM EDTA. For Lys-C/trypsin digestion, after Lys-C digestion at 37 °C for 6 h, trypsin was added for overnight digestion. After digestion, the solution was filtrated out and the filter was washed twice with 15% ACN. All filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried to reach a final concentration to about 1 mg/mL.

### Data Protocol
Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) Analysis LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis was performed using a nanoflow EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1μg of peptide was applied for all analyses. Samples were first loaded onto a homemade pre-column (100 μm i.d. × 2 cm; 5 μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and then analyzed on a homemade analytical column (75 μm i.d. × ~25 cm; 2.4μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases consisted of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid) and Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted using the following gradients: 2-5% B in 3min, 5−28% B in 100 min, 28-35% B in 5 min, 35-90% B in 2 min and 90% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS scan at a resolution of 60,000 (m/z 350-1,600, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and maximum ion injection time (IIT) of 100 ms) and followed by 15 MS/MS scans of the most intense ions using HCD (normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35; isolation width of 2 m/z; resolution of 15,000; AGC target of 5e4 and maximum IIT of 100 ms). Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was applied with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.  Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) Analysis The LC conditions in DIA analysis were as same as that for DDA analysis. To facilitate the retention time calibration, iRT calibration kit was spiked into samples according to the supplier’s protocol.33, 34 The DIA method consisted of a survey scan from 350 to 1,600 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 and the followed 21 predefined MS/MS scans of contiguous precursor windows at a resolution of 15,000. The widths of precursor window were set as 50 m/z in the range of 350-450 m/z, 25 m/z in the range of 450-800 m/z, 50 m/z in the range of 800-900 m/z, 100 m/z in the range of 900-1,100 m/z, and 500 m/z in the range of 1,100-1,600 m/z. The data were analyzed by Spectronaut 9.0 (Biognosys, Switzerland) 35 using default settings as previous reported.36  Database searching and Data Analysis The raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK).37 Human protein database (20160213, 20,186 sequences) were downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.05 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modifications; oxidation on methionine as variable modifications. Semi-trypsin/P was set as the enzyme for the analysis of wrong cleavage sites. The incorporated Target Decoy PSM Validator in Proteome Discoverer and the mascot expectation value was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 and MASCOT expected value ≤ 0.05 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, bottom-up approaches are predominantly adopted in proteomics studies, which necessitate a proteolysis step prior to MS analysis. Trypsin is often the best protease in choice due to its high specificity and MS-favored proteolytic products. A lot of efforts have been made to develop a superior digestion approach but hardly succeed, especially in large-scale proteomics studies. Herein, we report a new tandem digestion using Lys-C and Arg-C, termed Lys-C/Arg-C, which has been proven to be more specific and efficient than trypsin digestion. Reanalysis of our previous data ( Anal. Chem. 2018, 90 (3), 1554-1559) revealed that both Lys-C and Arg-C are trypsin-like proteases and perform better when considered as trypsin. In particular, for Arg-C, the identification capacity is increased to 2.6 times and even comparable with trypsin. The good complementarity, high digestion efficiency, and high specificity of Lys-C and Arg-C prompt the Lys-C/Arg-C digestion. We systematically evaluated Lys-C/Arg-C digestion using qualitative and quantitative proteomics approaches and confirmed its superior performance in digestion specificity, efficiency, and identification capacity to the currently widely used trypsin and Lys-C/trypsin digestions. As a result, we concluded that the Lys-C/Arg-C digestion approach would be the choice of next-generation digestion approach in both qualitative and quantitative proteomics studies. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD009797.

### Keywords
Lys-c / arg-c / trypsin / dia / mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


