### Accession
PXD007085

### Title
An immunoproteomic approach to characterize the CAR interactome and signalosome

### Description
Adoptive transfer of chimeric antigen receptor (CAR)-T cells is expected to become the first line of treatment for multiple malignancies, following the enormous success of anti-CD19 therapies. However, their mechanism of action is not fully understood, and clear guidelines for the design of safe and efficient receptors are missing. We hereby describe a systematic analysis of the CAR “interactome” in human primary T cells, which allowed us to identify molecular traits that influence CAR-T cell efficacy. Interactome analysis was based on immunoprecipitation of CARs followed by protein identification by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-PSCA CARs were used as baits to immunoprecipitate interacting partners, which were eluted with 6X Laemmli sample buffer. Three biological replicates were prepared of each second generation CAR (PSCA2), third generation CAR (PSCA3), or mock-transduced controls (GFP). Samples were reduced with XT reducing agent (Bio-Rad) and heated at 95 °C for 5 min. Forty µL of each sample was loaded onto a 10% Bis-Tris gel and run at 150 V for 10 min. The stacked gel bands from each lane was excised, reduced with 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins in the gel bands were enzymatically digested with 600 ng of trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The peptide mixture from each sample was dried in a vacuum centrifuge and re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% FA. The peptide mixtures were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (U3000, Dionex) coupled to a hybrid linear trap quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a data-dependent manner for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing. After peptide capture (100 µm ID x 2 cm, C18 PepMap100, Dionex), tryptic digests were separated using reversed phase chromatography on a 75 µm × 50 cm C18 column (PepMap 100, Dionex) using a 70 min linear gradient of 5-38.5% B over 90 min with a flow rate of 300 nL/min (Ultimate, Dionex). Solvent A was composed of 98% HPLC water 2% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (FA). Solvent B was 90% acetonitrile and 10% HPLC grade H2O containing 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MASCOT and SEQUEST and the Human database was modified to include the CAR sequence. Both MASCOT and SEQUEST search results were summarized in Scaffold 4.3.4 (Proteome Software, http://www.proteomesoftware.com). The relative quantification of peptides was calculated using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5). Peaks were searched against human entries in the UniProt database (20,151 sequences, including the user-entered CAR sequence; released August 2015) with the Andromeda search engine. The raw files were processed using similar parameters including at least seven amino acids per peptide, as many as three missed cleavages, and a false discovery rate of 0.01 was selected for peptides and proteins. Methionine oxidation and peptide N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications in protein quantification. Data was searched by MaxQuant against human entries in the UniProt database (downloaded 7/2015). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Following protein ID the data was normalized using iterative rank order normalization (IRON), and the data was then imported into Galaxy for analysis with the affinity proteomics analysis tool, APOSTL (http://apostl.moffitt.org). The data was pre-processed into inter, bait and prey files and analyzed by SAINTexpress and the CRAPome within APOSTL. SAINTexpress results were further filtered (SaintScore > 0.8), processed and analyzed in APOSTL’s interactive environment. Following APOSTL analysis, the data was filtered (MaxP > 0.8) to capture the maximum amount of interactions for STRING network analysis (confidence > 0.9).

### Publication Abstract
Adoptive transfer of T cells that express a chimeric antigen receptor (CAR) is an approved immunotherapy that may be curative for some hematological cancers. To better understand the therapeutic mechanism of action, we systematically analyzed CAR signaling in human primary T cells by mass spectrometry. When we compared the interactomes and the signaling pathways activated by distinct CAR-T cells that shared the same antigen-binding domain but differed in their intracellular domains and their in vivo antitumor efficacy, we found that only second-generation CARs induced the expression of a constitutively phosphorylated form of CD3&#x3b6; that resembled the endogenous species. This phenomenon was independent of the choice of costimulatory domains, or the hinge/transmembrane region. Rather, it was dependent on the size of the intracellular domains. Moreover, the second-generation design was also associated with stronger phosphorylation of downstream secondary messengers, as evidenced by global phosphoproteome analysis. These results suggest that second-generation CARs can activate additional sources of CD3&#x3b6; signaling, and this may contribute to more intense signaling and superior antitumor efficacy that they display compared to third-generation CARs. Moreover, our results provide a deeper understanding of how CARs interact physically and/or functionally with endogenous T cell molecules, which will inform the development of novel optimized immune receptors.

### Keywords
Chimeric antigen receptors, Interactome, Tonic signaling

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Abate-Daga
Moffitt Cancer Center


