### Accession
PXD040302

### Title
Control of TurboID-dependent biotinylation intensity in proximity ligation screens

### Description
Proximity biotinylation screens are a widely used strategy for the unbiased identification of interacting or vicinal proteins. The latest generation biotin ligase TurboID has broadened the range of potential applications, as this ligase promotes an intense and faster biotinylation, even in subcellular compartments like the endoplasmic reticulum. On the other hand, the uncontrollable high basal biotinylation rates deny the system´s inducibility and are often associated with cellular toxicity precluding its use in proteomics. We report here an improved method for TurboID-dependent biotinylation reactions based on the tight control of free biotin levels. Blockage of free biotin with a commercial biotin scavenger reversed the high basal biotinylation and toxicity of TurboID, as shown by pulse-chase experiments. Accordingly, the biotin-blockage protocol restored the biological activity of a bait protein fused to TurboID in the endoplasmic reticulum and rendered the biotinylation reaction inducible by exogenous biotin. Importantly, the biotin-blockage protocol was more effective than biotin removal with immobilised avidin and did not affect the cellular viability of human monocytes over several days. The method presented should be useful to researchers interested in exploiting the full potential of biotinylation screens with TurboID and other high-activity ligases for challenging proteomics questions.

### Sample Protocol
THP-1 cells cultured in standard RPMI/10 % FCS were washed once in RPMI/10% FCS medium depleted of biotin with biolock and resuspended in the same, followed by incubation in a fresh cell culture flask for 24h. On the following day cells were harvested, washed once in RPMI/10 % FCS, resuspended in the same and placed 1h in the incubator to allow for residual biolock reagent molecules to diffuse out of the cells. To start biotinylation reactions, cells were placed in fresh RPMI/10%FCS supplemented with 100 uM D(+) Biotin (Roth Cat 3822) and incubated for 4 h. 4e7 THP-1 cells were then washed with ice cold PBS and resuspended in 1X Lysis Buffer (10X Lysis buffer (Cell Signalling Cat 9803) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF (Thermo Fisher Cat 36978)). Lysates were incubated 5 min on ice, briefly sonicated in an bath sonicator and cleared by centrifugion for 10 min at 14.000 g in the cold. 100 µl (1:1 slurry) Pierce NeutrAvidin Agarose beads (Thermo Cat 29200) per sample were washed two times and equilibrated in 1X Lysis Buffer. The washed beads were added to the cell extracts and samples were incubated on a spinning wheel (500 rpm/4°C) overnight. On the following day, the supernatant was discarded and beads were washed 3 x with 1 ml 1X Lysis Buffer by placing the tubes on a Thermomixer for 8 min/ 700 rpm at room temperature. After all washing steps, biotinylated proteins bound to the beads were eluted by addition of 200 µl Elution Buffer (200 mM NaCl, 2% SDS, 100 mM Tris pH 8 + 30 mM Biotin) and incubation at 95°C under mixing (700 rpm) for 10 min on the Thermomixer. The elution step was carried out twice and the eluates were pooled. Cysteine thiols were reduced and carbamidomethylated in one step for 30 min at 70°C by addition of each 8 µL of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) and 625 mM 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) per 400 µl eluates. Proteins were precipitated by addition of 20% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, final concentration) and incubation for 30 min on ice, followed by centrifugation (20 min, 20000 × g, 1°C) and removal of the supernatant. Precipitates were washed with 90% acetone, centrifuged as before and the proteins were resolubilized in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB in 5:95 trifluoroethanol/H2O (v/v). Proteins were digested for 18 h at 37°C after addition of Trypsin/Lys-C mix at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:25. Tryptic peptides were dried in vacuum concentrator and resolubilized in 30 µL of 0.05% TFA in H2O/ACN 98/2 (v/v) filtered through 0.2 µm Ultrafree-MC hydrophilic PTFE filters (Merck-Millipore). The filtrate was transferred to HPLC vials and 4 µl were injected into the LC-MS/MS instrument. Each sample was measured in triplicate (3 analytical replicates). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system connected to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with FAIMS. Peptide trapping for 5 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm) at 5 µL/min was followed by separation on an analytical Acclaim Pep Map RSLC nano column (50 cm x 75 µm, 2µm). Mobile phase gradient elution of eluent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water) mixed with eluent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90/10 acetonitrile/water) was performed using the following gradient: 0 min at 4% B, 6 min at 8% B, 30 min at 12% B, 75 min at 30% B, 85 min at 50% B, 90-95 min at 96% B, 95.1-120 min at 4% B. Positively charged ions were generated at spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a stainless steel emitter attached to the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The quadrupole/orbitrap instrument was operated in Full MS / data-dependent MS2 mode. Precursor ions were monitored at m/z 300-1200 at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM using an ITmax of 60 ms and 300% normalized AGC target. Precursor ions with a charge state of z=2-5 were filtered at an isolation width of m/z 4.0 amu for further fragmentation at 28% HCD collision energy. MS2 ions were scanned at 15,000 FWHM (ITmax=50 ms, AGC= 200%). 2 different compensation voltages were applied (-50V, -70V).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt proteome databases (2023/01/26 (YYYY/MM/DD) (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 3.0 (Thermo) and the database search algorithms Mascot 2.8, Comet, MS Amanda 2.0, Sequest HT with and without INFERYS Rescoring, and CHIMERYS. Human NIST spectral libraries were used for further peptide mapping with MSPepSearch (https://chemdata.nist.gov/dokuwiki/doku.php?id=peptidew:lib:humanhcd20160503). Two missed cleavages were allowed for the tryptic digestion. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Modifications were defined as dynamic Lys biotinylation, Met oxidation, protein N-term acetylation with and without Met-loss as well as static Cys carbamidomethylation. A strict false discovery rate (FDR) < 1% (peptide and protein level) was required for positive protein hits . Furthermore, search engine scores were filtered for either Mascot (>30), Comet (>3), MS Amanda 2.0 (>300), Sequest HT (>3), CHIMERYS (>2) or MSPepSearch (>600). The Percolator node of PD3.0 and a reverse decoy database was used for q-value validation of spectral matches. Only rank 1 proteins and peptides of the top scored proteins were counted.

### Publication Abstract
Proximity biotinylation screens are a widely used strategy for the unbiased identification of interacting or vicinal proteins. The latest generation biotin ligase TurboID has broadened the range of potential applications, as this ligase promotes an intense and faster biotinylation, even in subcellular compartments like the endoplasmic reticulum. On the other hand, the uncontrollable high basal biotinylation rates deny the system's inducibility and are often associated with cellular toxicity precluding its use in proteomics. We report here an improved method for TurboID-dependent biotinylation reactions based on the tight control of free biotin levels. Blockage of free biotin with a commercial biotin scavenger reversed the high basal biotinylation and toxicity of TurboID, as shown by pulse-chase experiments. Accordingly, the biotin-blockage protocol restored the biological activity of a bait protein fused to TurboID in the endoplasmic reticulum and rendered the biotinylation reaction inducible by exogenous biotin. Importantly, the biotin-blockage protocol was more effective than biotin removal with immobilized avidin and did not affect the cellular viability of human monocytes over several days. The method presented should be useful to researchers interested in exploiting the full potential of biotinylation screens with TurboID and other high-activity ligases for challenging proteomics questions. SIGNIFICANCE: Proximity biotinylation screens using the last generation biotin ligase TurboID represent a powerful approach for the characterisation of transient protein-protein interaction and signaling networks. However, a constant and high basal biotinylation rate and the associated cytotoxicity often preclude the use of this method in proteomic studies. We report a protocol based on modulation of free biotin levels that prevents the deleterious effects of TurboID while allowing inducible biotinylation, even in subcellular compartments such as the endoplasmic reticulum. This optimised protocol greatly expands the applications of TurboID in proteomic screens.

### Keywords
Biotinylation, Proximity ligation screens, Proteomics, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Leibniz-HKI, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745 Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology, Hans Knöll Institute Jena, Leibniz-HKI, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745 Jena, Germany


