### Accession
PXD029675

### Title
Chemical Probing Discovers New Insights into the Native Assembly State of a  Bacterial Microcompartment

### Description
Microcompartments (BMCs) are widespread in bacteria and are used for a variety of metabolic purposes, including catabolism of host metabolites. A suite of proteins self-assembles into the shell and cargo layers of BMCs. However, the native assembly state of these large complexes remains to be elucidated. Herein, chemical probes were used to discover structural features of a native BMC. While the exterior could be demarcated with fluorophores, the interior was unexpectedly permeable, suggesting the shell layer may be more dynamic than thought. This allowed access to cross-linking chemical probes, which were analyzed for discovery of the protein interactome. These cross-links revealed a complex multivalent network among cargo proteins that contained encapsulation peptides and demonstrated that the shell layer follows discreet rules in its assembly. These results are consistent overall with a model where biomolecular condensation drives interactions of cargo proteins prior to envelopment by shell layer proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Xlinking buffer is 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 50 mM KCl, 5 mM MgCl2. Xlinked for 1 hour at RT covered from light. Reaction was quenched by the addition of DTT to 50 mM. Samples were then flash frozen and stored at -20C. Samples were prepared utilizing the S-Trap mini protocol 4.1 detailed at https://protifi.com/pages/protocols.   Add  350  µL  of  binding/wash  buffer  to  the  sample  and  mix. Place  S-Trap  mini  in  a  2  mL  receiver  tube  for  waste flow  through.  Apply sample to S-Trap column.   Centrifuge  the  S-Trap  column  at  4,000  g  for  30 sec  to trap proteins.   Add  400  µL  binding/wash  buffer;  centrifuge  at  4,000  g  for  30 sec.  Repeat  3  times  and  discard  flow  through as  necessary. Centrifuge S-Trap column  at  4,000  g  for  1  min  to  fully  remove  binding/wash  buffer. Transfer  S-Trap  mini  column  to  a  clean  2  mL sample  tube for  the  digestion. Add  125  µL  of  digestion  buffer  containing  protease,  most  commonly  trypsin or  a trypsin/lys-C  mix,  at  a  1:10  weight  to weight (wt:wt)  ratio  into  the  top of  the  S-Trap.  By example,  for  200  µg  of  protein  to  digest,  apply  20  µg of  trypsin dissolved in  125  µL. Incubate for 1 – 2 hrs at 47 °C for trypsin or trypsin/lys-C, or overnight at 37 °C. Preferably use a water bath or stationary thermomixer. Add 80 µL of elution buffer 1 to the S-Trap then centrifuge (4,000 rcf, 1 min). Add 80 µL of elution buffer 2 to the S-Trap then centrifuge (4,000 rcf, 1 min). Add 80 µL of elution buffer 3 to the S-Trap then centrifuge (4,000 rcf, 1 min). This elution assists in recovery of hydrophobic peptides. Other organics may also be used as needed. Pool eluted peptides, dry down and resuspend in 5% ACN, 0.1% Formic.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed with Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.5.0.400. Full data search was performed using Sequest HT with precursor match tolerance being 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance being either 0.02 Da or 0.6 Da, dependent on orbitrap or ion trap fragment scan respectivly. Modifications were restricted to the crosslinker, oxidation (M) being a dynamic modifications and acetylation being dynamic on the N-terminus. Catbamidomethylation was set as a static modification on C. Crosslinker search was performed with the XlinkX nodes utilizing the template in Proteome Discoverer. 10 ppm mass tolerance for the precursor ion scan, 20 ppm for FTMS fragment mass tol, and 0.6 Da for the ITMS fragment match. FDR threshold was set to 0.05 FDR. Results were exported and visualized in xiNET.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial microcompartments (BMCs) are widespread in bacteria and are used for a variety of metabolic purposes, including catabolism of host metabolites. A suite of proteins self-assembles into the shell and cargo layers of BMCs. However, the native assembly state of these large complexes remains to be elucidated. Herein, chemical probes were used to observe structural features of a native BMC. While the exterior could be demarcated with fluorophores, the interior was unexpectedly permeable, suggesting that the shell layer may be more dynamic than previously thought. This allowed access to cross-linking chemical probes, which were analyzed to uncover the protein interactome. These cross-links revealed a complex multivalent network among cargo proteins that contained encapsulation peptides and demonstrated that the shell layer follows discrete rules in its assembly. These results are consistent overall with a model in which biomolecular condensation drives interactions of cargo proteins before envelopment by shell layer proteins.

### Keywords
Chemical modification, Dynamic, Cross-linking, Interactome, Bacterial microcompartment

### Affiliations
US Army DEVCOM CBC
The University of Maryland Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
Conor Jenkins

### Lab Head
Dr Wade C. Winkler
The University of Maryland Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics


