### Accession
PXD043587

### Title
Guanine-containing ssDNA and RNA induce dimeric and tetrameric SAMHD1 in cryo-EM and binding studies

### Description
The dNTPase activity of tetrameric SAM and HD domain containing deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1 (SAMHD1) plays a critical role in cellular dNTP regulation. SAMHD1 also associates with stalled DNA replication forks, DNA repair foci, ssRNA, and telomeres. The above functions require nucleic acid binding by SAMHD1, which may be modulated by its oligomeric state. Here we establish that the guanine-specific A1 activator site of each SAMHD1 monomer is used to target the enzyme to guanine nucleotides within single-stranded (ss) DNA and RNA. Remarkably, nucleic acid strands containing a single guanine base induce dimeric SAMHD1, while two or more guanines with ~20 nucleotide spacing induce a tetrameric form. A cryo-EM structure of ssRNA-bound tetrameric SAMHD1 shows how ssRNA strands bridge two SAMHD1 dimers and stabilize the structure. This ssRNA-bound tetramer is inactive with respect to dNTPase and RNase activity.

### Sample Protocol
One-hundred and fifty micrograms of protein from each of the three SAMHD1 purification steps from E. coli lysate (post-Ni affinity, post-S Sepharose and post-SEC) were analyzed as follows. Protein samples were combined with denaturation buffer (4% sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) to a total volume of 50 µL. Samples were shaken at 95 °C, 1000 rpm for 5 min. To each sample 5 µL reduction/alkylation buffer (100 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 400 mM chloroacetamide) was added, and samples were shaken at 45 °C, 1000 rpm for 5 min. SP3 (single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation) technology was used and digestion was performed on bead. A fresh 1:1 SP3 bead mix was prepared by combining equal volumes of stock beads (Sera-Mag SpeedBeads, GE Healthcare, cat. no 45152105050250 and cat. no 65152105050250) and washing the beads 3 times with ultrapure water. During the washes, beads were vortexed for 10 s and placed on the magnetic stand for 2 min to be collected. Supernatant was discarded. A total of 15 µL 50 mg/mL washed mixed beads were added to each sample before the addition of 70 µL ethanol for a final ethanol concentration of 50%. Samples were vortexed to mix, and were shaken at R.T., 1000 rpm for 10 min. The samples were spun briefly and placed on magnetic stand for 2 min. The beads were washed 3 times with 500 µL 80% ethanol. During the washes, beads were vortexed for 30 s then placed on magnetic stand for 2 min. After the washes, the beads were air dried for 30 s. The beads from each sample were resuspended in 50 µL 20 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) pH 8.5 and were sonicated to mix. To each sample 5 µL trypsin (1 µg/µL in 20 mM TEAB) was added and samples were shaken at 37 °C, 1000 rpm overnight. The next day samples were sonicated and placed on magnetic stand for 2 min. Supernatant was transferred to a new tube and placed on magnetic stand again for 2 min. The supernatant was dried on a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 50 µL 1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Two µg of peptides were injected onto an EASY-Spray column (ES803A, 50 cm, 75 µm ID, 2 µm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) heated to 60 °C. The peptides were separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a linear gradient from 10 to 32% B over 172 min at flow rate of 450 nL min-1. Chromatography buffer A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. Mass spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an EASY-Spray NG ion source. MS1 scan was conducted in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, maximum injection time of 50 ms, automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 x 105 and mass range of 385-1415 Th. MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000, using data-dependent acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, CE=30%), normal m/z scan range mode, maximum injection time of 86 ms, AGC target of 2 x 104, dynamic exclusion (DE=90 s), and isolation window of 0.5 Th by quadrupole isolation. The MS1 scans were in profile mode and the MS2 scans were in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were searched using Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Sequest HT against the Homo sapiens database (SwissProt TaxID=9606_and_subtaxonomies), the Escherichia coli database (sp_canonical TaxID=562_and_subtaxonomies) and an in-house contaminants database. The searches were performed with the following parameters: MS tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.02 Da, trypsin digestion with 2 missed cleavages allowed, fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine, variable methionine oxidation, variable asparagine deamidation, variable acetylation of protein N-terminus, variable methionine loss of protein N-terminus and variable acetylation in addition to methionine loss of protein N-terminus. Only peptides with high confidence (false discovery rate or FDR < 1%) and proteins with medium or high confidence (FDR < 5%) were used. Only proteins with at least 2 unique peptides were used in the analysis

### Publication Abstract
The dNTPase activity of tetrameric SAM and HD domain containing deoxynucleoside triphosphate triphosphohydrolase 1 (SAMHD1) plays a critical role in cellular dNTP regulation. SAMHD1 also associates with stalled DNA replication forks, DNA repair foci, ssRNA&#xa0;and telomeres. The above functions require nucleic acid binding by SAMHD1, which may be modulated by its oligomeric state. Here we establish in cryo-EM and biochemical studies that the guanine-specific A1 activator site of each SAMHD1 monomer is used to target the enzyme to guanine nucleotides within single-stranded (ss) DNA and RNA. Remarkably, nucleic acid strands containing a single guanine base induce dimeric SAMHD1, while two or more guanines with &#x223c;20 nucleotide spacing induce a tetrameric form. A cryo-EM structure of ssRNA-bound tetrameric SAMHD1 shows how ssRNA strands bridge two SAMHD1 dimers and stabilize the structure. This ssRNA-bound tetramer is inactive with respect to dNTPase and RNase activity.

### Keywords
Rnase, Aicardi-goutieres syndrome, Hiv, Dna repair, Sammhd1

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Orris

### Lab Head
Dr James T. Stivers
Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA


