### Accession
PXD013403

### Title
Daedalus and Gasz recruit Armitage to mitochondria, bringing piRNA precursors to the biogenesis machinery

### Description
The piRNA pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. piRNA biogenesis requires a specialised machinery that converts long single-stranded precursors into small RNAs of ~25-nucleotides in length. This process involves factors that operate in two different subcellular compartments: the nuage/Yb-bodies and mitochondria. How these two sites communicate to achieve accurate substrate selection and efficient processing remains unclear. Here, we investigate a previously uncharacterized piRNA biogenesis factor, Daedalus (Daed), that is located on the outer mitochondrial membrane. Daed is essential for Zucchini-mediated piRNA production and for the correct localisation of the indispensable piRNA biogenesis factor, Armitage (Armi). We find that Gasz and Daed interact with each other and likely provide a mitochondrial “anchoring platform” to ensure that Armi is held in place, proximal to Zucchini, during piRNA processing. Our data suggest that Armi initially identifies piRNA precursors in nuage/Yb-bodies in a manner that depends upon Piwi and then moves to mitochondria to present precursors to the mitochondrial biogenesis machinery. These results represent a significant step in understanding a critical aspect of transposon silencing, namely how RNAs are chosen to instruct the piRNA machinery in the nature of its silencing targets.

### Sample Protocol
4x10^6 OSCs were transfected using Xfect (Takara Bio Europe 631318) as described (Saito 2014) with 10 μg of plasmid expressing Zuc-CBirA*-6xHis and 10 µg of plasmid expressing Zuc-NBirA*-HA or 20 µg of HA-ZsGreen, as a negative control. After 36 hrs, the growth media was supplemented overnight (~18 hrs) with 50 mM Biotin. The cells were then harvested, lysed in 1.8 ml Lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 2% Triton-100 supplemented with protease inhibitors) and sonicated using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, 3x cycles 30 sec on / 30 sec off). Sonicated lysates were then diluted 2x in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 and cleared for 10 min at 16,500g. Following pre-clearing of the lysate using 100 μl of Protein A/G Dynabeads (Thermo Fischer Scientific 10015D), biotinylated proteins were isolated by incubation with 200 μl of Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1; Life Technologies) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed two times in 2% SDS, two times in Wash Buffer 1 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.5), two times with Wash Buffer 2 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris, pH 8), and two times with 50 mM Tris. Washed beads were rinsed two times with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, before submission for Mass Spectrometry. Zuc-SplitBioID pulldowns were analysed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files from data dependent acquisition were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.2 software. Data was searched against a FlyBase database (dmel-all-translation-r6.24-headers-ID-GN-tags.fa.fasta). The node for SequestHT included the following parameters: Precursor Mass Tolerance 20 ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.02 Da, Dynamic Modifications were methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), aspartamine and glutamine deamination (+0.984 Da), biotinylation of lysine and protein N-terminus (+226.078). The Precursor Ion Quantifier node (Minora Feature Detector) included a Minimum Trace Length of 5, Max. ΔRT of Isotope Pattern 0.2 minutes. The consensus workflow included peptide validator, protein filter and scorer. For calculation of Precursor ion intensities, Feature mapper was set True for RT alignment, with the mass tolerance of 10ppm. Precursor abundance was quantified based on intensity and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with a Strict FDR at q-value < 0.01. Analysis of label-free quantification protein intensity data was carried out in R (version 3.5.1) using the qPLEXanalyzer package (version 1.0.3) [Papachristou et al., 2018]. Only unique peptides identified with high confidence (peptide FDR < 1%) and mapping to a single protein were used for analysis. Peptide intensities were normalised between samples by median scaling within sample groups. Peptides for which all control (ZsGreen) samples lacked measurements or for which more than 1 target protein sample lacked measurements were discarded. Remaining missing values were then imputed using the nearest neighbour averaging (knn) imputation method provided in the R package MSnbase (version 2.8.3) [Gatto L, Lilley K (2012)]. Peptide data was summarised to protein level by summing intensities for all peptides. Differential analysis was then carried out by linear modelling using the limma based methods provided by the qPLEXanalyzer package. Multiple testing correction of p-values was applied using the Benjamini & Yekutieli method to control FDR [Benjamini et al., 2001].

### Publication Abstract
The Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. piRNA biogenesis requires a specialized machinery that converts long single-stranded precursors into small RNAs of &#x223c;25-nucleotides in length. This process involves factors that operate in two different subcellular compartments: the nuage/Yb body and mitochondria. How these two sites communicate to achieve accurate substrate selection and efficient processing remains unclear. Here, we investigate a previously uncharacterized piRNA biogenesis factor, Daedalus (Daed), that is located on the outer mitochondrial membrane. Daed is essential for Zucchini-mediated piRNA production and the correct localization of the indispensable piRNA biogenesis factor Armitage (Armi). We found that Gasz and Daed interact with each other and likely provide a mitochondrial "anchoring platform" to ensure that Armi is held in place, proximal to Zucchini, during piRNA processing. Our data suggest that Armi initially identifies piRNA precursors in nuage/Yb bodies in a manner that depends on Piwi and then moves to mitochondria to present precursors to the mitochondrial biogenesis machinery. These results represent a significant step in understanding a critical aspect of transposon silencing; namely, how RNAs are chosen to instruct the piRNA machinery in the nature of its silencing targets.

### Keywords
Pirna piwi drosophila

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
Cancer Research UK  Cambridge Institute  University of Cambridge  Li Ka Shing Centre  Cambridge CB2 0RE  United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marzia Munafo

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J Hannon
Cancer Research UK  Cambridge Institute  University of Cambridge  Li Ka Shing Centre  Cambridge CB2 0RE  United Kingdom


