### Accession
PXD018875

### Title
Cdh1 (Fzr1) Interactome in Neuroblastoma (N2A) cells

### Description
In this study, we wanted to explore the protein interactors of Cdh1, a subunit of the E3 Ubiquitin-Ligase Cdh1-APC. Our data show that in addition to interacting with other components of the Cdh1-APC complex, Cdh1 interacts with regulators of translation.

### Sample Protocol
To do so, N2A cells were transfected with FLAG-Cdh1 and underwent FLAG immunoprecipitation. The samples were then run on a Bis-Tris Novex mini gel and excised and processed. Gels were then analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. MS and MS/MS were performed in Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM resolution, and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were slected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin Database: Swissprot Mouse (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2  Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered at 1% protein and peptide level FDR and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Maintaining a balance between protein degradation and protein synthesis is necessary for neurodevelopment. Although the E3 ubiquitin ligase anaphase promoting complex and its regulatory subunit Cdh1 (Cdh1-APC) has been shown to regulate learning and memory, the underlying mechanisms are unclear. Here, we have identified a role of Cdh1-APC as a regulator of protein synthesis in neurons. Proteomic profiling revealed that Cdh1-APC interacts with known regulators of translation, including stress granule proteins. Inhibition of Cdh1-APC activity caused an increase in stress granule formation that is dependent on fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP). We propose a model in which Cdh1-APC targets stress granule proteins, such as FMRP, and inhibits the formation of stress granules, leading to protein synthesis. Elucidation of a role for Cdh1-APC in regulation of stress granules and protein synthesis in neurons has implications for how Cdh1-APC can regulate protein-synthesis-dependent synaptic plasticity underlying learning and memory.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Fzr1, Cdh1, Protein synthesis

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine
Emory University

### Submitter
Victor Faundez

### Lab Head
Dr Arielle Valdez-Sinon
Emory University School of Medicine


