### Accession
PXD007135

### Title
Tasmanian Devil Facial Tumour Disease - Imiquimod treatment of DFT1 cells

### Description
A Tasmanian Devil Facial Tumour Disease (DFTD) tumor cell line was treated with the drug Imiquimod

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were prepared and protein extracts were trypsin digested using standard methods. LC/MS performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC and LTQ-Orbitrap

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant platform for LFQ proteomics and Perseus for statistical analysis

### Publication Abstract
As a topical cancer immunotherapy, the toll-like receptor 7 ligand imiquimod activates tumor regression via stimulation of immune cell infiltration and cytotoxic responses. Imiquimod also exerts direct pro-apoptotic effects on tumor cells <i>in vitro</i>, but a role for these effects in imiquimod-induced tumor regression remains undefined. We previously demonstrated that cell lines derived from devil facial tumor disease (DFTD), a transmissible cancer threatening the survival of the Tasmanian devil (<i>Sarcophilus harrisii</i>), are sensitive to imiquimod-induced apoptosis. In this study, the pro-apoptotic effects of imiquimod in DFTD have been investigated using RNA-sequencing and label-free quantitative proteomics. This analysis revealed that changes to gene and protein expression in imiquimod treated DFTD cells are consistent with the onset of oxidative and endoplasmic reticulum stress responses, and subsequent activation of the unfolded protein response, autophagy, cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Imiquimod also regulates the expression of oncogenic pathways, providing a direct mechanism by which this drug may increase tumor susceptibility to immune cytotoxicity <i>in vivo</i>. Our study has provided the first global analysis of imiquimod-induced effects in any tumor cell line. These findings have highlighted the potential of cell stress pathways as therapeutic targets in DFTD, and will allow for improved mechanistic use of imiquimod as a therapy in both the Tasmanian devil and human cancers.

### Keywords
Dftd, Imiquimod, Proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics core manager

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics core manager


