### Accession
PXD026410

### Title
Naa10 mutant mouse N-terminome LC-MS

### Description
This project have LC-MSMS analysis results of label free quantitation of N-terminome enrichment of mouse proteome. N-terminal modification of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) lacking Naa10 show negligible difference between wild-type and Naa10 mutant.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins of MEFs cells extracted using ultrasonication. We followed the N-terminome enrichment method iNrich (PMID: 32267142).

### Data Protocol
We used proteome discoverer 2.1 for LFQ method provided as example from thermo. However we tweaked the processing step as tandem sequest search. Detailed workflow including processing step, consensus step and parameters were included in result_summaries.txt

### Publication Abstract
Amino-terminal acetylation is catalyzed by a set of N-terminal acetyltransferases (NATs). The NatA complex (including X-linked Naa10 and Naa15) is the major acetyltransferase, with 40-50% of all mammalian proteins being potential substrates. However, the overall role of amino-terminal acetylation on a whole-organism level is poorly understood, particularly in mammals. Male mice lacking <i>Naa10</i> show no globally apparent in vivo amino-terminal acetylation impairment and do not exhibit complete embryonic lethality. Rather <i>Naa10</i> nulls display increased neonatal lethality, and the majority of surviving undersized mutants exhibit a combination of hydrocephaly, cardiac defects, homeotic anterior transformation, piebaldism, and urogenital anomalies. <i>Naa12</i> is a previously unannotated <i>Naa10</i>-like paralog with NAT activity that genetically compensates for <i>Naa10</i>. Mice deficient for <i>Naa12</i> have no apparent phenotype, whereas mice deficient for <i>Naa10</i> and <i>Naa12</i> display embryonic lethality. The discovery of <i>Naa12</i> adds to the currently known machinery involved in amino-terminal acetylation in mice.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Inrich, Mouse, N-terminome, Naa10, Lfq, Mef

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
KIST

### Submitter
Shinyeong Ju

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul, Republic of Korea.


