### Accession
PXD029656

### Title
The short isoform of the host antiviral protein ZAP acts as an inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 programmed ribosomal frameshifting

### Description
Programmed ribosomal frameshifting (PRF) is a fundamental gene expression event in many viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. It allows production of essential viral structural and replicative enzymes that are encoded in an alternative reading frame. Despite the importance of PRF for the viral life cycle, it is still largely unknown how and to what extent cellular factors alter mechanical properties of frameshift  elements and thereby impact virulence. This prompted us to comprehensively dissect the interplay between the SARS-CoV-2 frameshift element and the host proteome. We reveal that the short isoform of the zinc-finger antiviral protein (ZAP-S) is a direct regulator of PRF in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. ZAP-S overexpression strongly impairs frameshifting and inhibits viral replication. Using in vitro ensemble and single-molecule techniques, we further demonstrate that ZAP-S directly interacts with the SARS-CoV-2 RNA and interferes with the folding of the frameshift RNA element. Together, these data identify ZAP-S as a host-encoded inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 frameshifting and expand our understanding of RNA-based gene regulation.

### Sample Protocol
eluted proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide followed by acetone precipitation. In solution digests were performed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 M urea using Lys-C and after reducing the urea concentration to 4 M with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips and lyophilized. LC-MS/MS was performed at the RVZ Proteomics Facility (Würzburg, Germany) and analyzed as described previously 60.

### Data Protocol
eluted proteins were alkylated using iodoacetamide followed by acetone precipitation. In solution digests were performed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 6 M urea using Lys-C and after reducing the urea concentration to 4 M with trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips and lyophilized. LC-MS/MS was performed at the RVZ Proteomics Facility (Würzburg, Germany) and analyzed as described previously 60.

### Publication Abstract
Programmed ribosomal frameshifting (PRF) is a fundamental gene expression event in many viruses, including SARS-CoV-2. It allows production of essential viral, structural and replicative enzymes that are encoded in an alternative reading frame. Despite the importance of PRF for the viral life cycle, it is still largely unknown how and to what extent cellular factors alter mechanical properties of frameshift elements and thereby impact virulence. This prompted us to comprehensively dissect the interplay between the SARS-CoV-2 frameshift element and the host proteome. We reveal that the short isoform of the zinc-finger antiviral protein (ZAP-S) is a direct regulator of PRF in SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. ZAP-S overexpression strongly impairs frameshifting and inhibits viral replication. Using in vitro ensemble and single-molecule techniques, we further demonstrate that ZAP-S directly interacts with the SARS-CoV-2 RNA and interferes with the folding of the frameshift RNA element. Together, these data identify ZAP-S as a host-encoded inhibitor of SARS-CoV-2 frameshifting and expand our understanding of RNA-based gene regulation.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Translation regulation, Frameshifting

### Affiliations
HIRI
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Zentrum für Infektionsforschung (Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research), Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, 97080, Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Matthias Zimmer

### Lab Head
Dr Neva Caliskan
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Zentrum für Infektionsforschung (Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research), Josef-Schneider-Strasse 2, 97080, Würzburg, Germany


