### Accession
PXD011901

### Title
Hsa-miR-139-5p expression regulates the abundance of proteins related to poor survival cancer in CAL-62 thyroid cancer cell line

### Description
We studied the impact of hsa-miR-139-5p on the protein output by means of an iTRAQ-based approach. First, we established two CAL-62 isogenic cell lines expressing either the mature hsa-miR-139-5p or a non-targeting control upon a doxycycline inducible promoter (PTRE3G-tGFP, Dharmacon). Total proteins of P-tGFP-hsa-miR139-5p untreated or treated with doxycycline (1ug/ml) for 96 and 120 hours were isolated and labeled with iTRAQ® reagent 8-plex. Two independent experiments were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed using 5% SDS 50 mM TEAB pH 7.55. Protein concentration was determined using the Thermo Scientific™ NanoDrop™. Then, samples (150 µg) were digested by means of the Protifi™ S-Trap™ Mini Spin Column Digestion Protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced (15 mM TCEP, 30 min, RT), alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and digested with trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 1 h at 47 °C). Samples (150 µg) were labeled using iTRAQ® reagent 8-plex following manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were mixed in 1:1 ratios based on total peptide amount, which was determined from an aliquot by comparing overall signal intensities on a regular LC-MS/MS run. The final mixture was desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters) and dried prior high pH reverse phase HPLC pre-fractionation.  High pH reverse phase chromatography Peptides were pre-fractionated offline by means of high pH reverse phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system equipped with a sample collector. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 100 µL of phase A (10 mM NH4OH) and loaded onto a XBridge BEH130 C18 column (3.5 µm, 150 mm length and 1 mm ID) (Waters). Phase B was 10 mM NH4OH in 90% CH3CN. The following gradient (flow rate of 100 µL/min) was used: 0-50 min 0-25% B, 50-56 min 25-60% B, 56-57 min 60-90% B. 50 fractions were collected and concatenated into 15 fractions. 13 concatenated fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  Mass spectrometry LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to an Impact mass spectrometer (Bruker) via a Captivespray source (Bruker) supplemented with a nanoBooster operated at 0.2 bar/min with isopropanol as dopant. Peptides were loaded into a trap column (NS-MP-10 BioSphere C18 5 µm, 20 mm length, Nanoseparations) for 10 min at a flow rate of 2.5 µl/min in 0.1% FA. Then peptides were transferred to an analytical column column (Dr. Maisch, ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ GmbH 2.4 µm, 500x0.075 mm) and separated using a 128 min effective curved gradient (buffer A: 4% ACN, 0.1% FA; buffer B: 100% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min from 2% to 35.2% of buffer B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.35 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a heated capillary temperature of 180 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS (80-1850 m/z) and MS/MS (80-1850 m/z) scans using a top 20 method (threshold signal ≥ 500 counts, z ≥ 2 and m/z ≥ 350). An active exclusion of 60 sec was used. The precursor intensities were re-evaluated in the MS scan (n) regarding their values in the previous MS scan (n-1). Any m/z intensity exceeding 5 times the measured value in the preceding MS scan was reconsidered for MS/MS. Peptides were isolated using a 2 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with a collision energy of 23-56 eV as function of the m/z value.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.7.4) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, December 2013, 20,187 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was enabled for iTRAQ 8-plex. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines, protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “msms.txt” file was loaded into Isobar (v 1.10) for statistical analysis, using a noise model that accounts for both technical and biological variabilities. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Proteins with a p-value ≤0.05 (in both models) and with a log2 ratio > 0.3 or < - 0.3 were considered regulated.

### Publication Abstract
It is critical to identify biomarkers and functional networks associated with aggressive thyroid cancer to anticipate disease progression and facilitate personalized patient management. We performed miRNome sequencing of 46 thyroid tumors enriched with advanced disease patients with a median follow-up of 96&#x2009;months. MiRNome profiles correlated with tumor-specific histopathological and molecular features, such as stromal cell infiltration and tumor driver mutation. Differential expression analysis revealed a consistent hsa-miR-139-5p downexpression in primary carcinomas from patients with recurrent/metastatic disease compared to disease-free patients, sustained in paired local metastases and validated in publicly available thyroid cancer series. Exogenous expression of hsa-miR-139-5p significantly reduced migration and proliferation of anaplastic thyroid cancer cells. Proteomic analysis indicated RICTOR, SMAD2/3 and HNRNPF as putative hsa-miR-139-5p targets in our cell system. Abundance of HNRNPF mRNA, encoding an alternative splicing factor involved in cryptic exon inclusion/exclusion, inversely correlated with hsa-miR-139-5p expression in human tumors. RNA sequencing analysis revealed 174 splicing events differentially regulated upon HNRNPF repression in our cell system, affecting genes involved in RTK/RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT/MTOR signaling cascades among others. These results point at the hsa-miR-139-5p/HNRNPF axis as a novel regulatory mechanism associated with the modulation of major thyroid cancer signaling pathways and tumor virulence.

### Keywords
Impact, Thyroid cancer, Hsa-mir-139-5p, Cal-62, Itraq

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Mercedes Robledo
CNIO


