### Accession
PXD001909

### Title
Proteomic Identification of Nuclear Processes Manipulated by Cytomegalovirus Early during Infection

### Description
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a herpesvirus that is ubiquitously distributed world-wide and causes life-threating disease upon immunosuppression. HCMV expresses numerous proteins that function to establish an intracellular environment that supports viral replication. Like most DNA viruses, HCMV manipulates processes within the nucleus. We have quantified changes in the host cell  nuclear proteome at 24 hpi following infection with a clinical viral isolate. We have combined SILAC with multiple stages of fractionation to define changes. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by RP-HPLC combined with LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos massspectrometer. Data from three biological replicates were processed with MaxQuant. A total of 1281 cellular proteins were quantified and 77 were found to be significantly differentially expressed. In addition, we observed 36 viral proteins associated with the nucleus. Diverse biological processes were significantly altered including increased aspects of cell cycling, mRNA metabolism, and nucleocytoplasmic transport while decreased immune responses. We validated changes for several proteins including a subset of classical nuclear transport proteins. In addition, we demonstrated that disruption of these import factors is inhibitory to HCMV replication. Overall,   we have identified HCMV-induced changes in the nuclear proteome and uncovered several processes that are important for infection.

### Sample Protocol
At 24 hours post infection (hpi), mock-infected L-labeled MRC-5 cells and H-labeled HCMV-infected cells were collected and washed with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Equal numbers of L and H cells were mixed and pelleted by centrifugation at 500xg for 5 min. Cells were then suspended in an Igepal buffer (10mM HEPES, 10mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl 2, 0.5mM DTT, 0.5% Igepal) with EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The combined cells were then incubated on ice for 5 min followed by gentle mixing. The nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 300xg for 5 minutes, and the cytosol was transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. The nuclei pellet was resuspended and washed in the hypotonic buffer with gentle mixing and pelleted again by centrifugation at 300 x g for 5 minutes. The resulting supernatant was added to the cytosol fraction. Pelleted nuclei were lysed using UPX protein extraction buffer (Expedeon) with the addition of protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma). Protein concentration in nuclear extracts was determined using Bradford Assay Reagent (Sigma). Protein samples were fractionated by mass into 12 liquid-soluble fractions using gel-eluted liquidfraction entrapment electrophoresis or GELFrEE [12] (Expedeon). Briefly, 400 µg of nuclear extract in 150 µl sample volume was denatured at 95°C for 5 minutes and the sample was loaded onto a 10% Tris-Acetate gel column cartridge (Expedeon). For resolution of nuclear proteins, a constant voltage was applied between the anode and cathode reservoirs. Proteins were eluted  from the column at multiple time intervals. The resulting twelve fractions were collected and proteins precipitated by chloroform-methanol extraction. For each of the 12 fractions, proteins were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Excess alkylating agent was removed by the addition of 10 mM DTT. Samples were digested with Trypsin gold, mass spectrometry grade (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 overnight at 37°C. Digestion reactions were stopped by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%. Samples were then desalted and processed by Zip-Tip C18 columns (Millipore). For each of the 12 fractions, approximately 5 µg of tryptic peptides were loaded via autosampler (AS-2; Eksigent Technologies Inc.) onto a 100 µm ID trapping column that was hand-packed with 2.5 cm of 5 µm, 200Å C18 (Magic C18 AQ) over 6 minutes in 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the trapping column onto a 75 µm ID analytical column that was hand-packed with 10 cm of 3 µm, 200Å C18 (Magic C18 AQ). Elution occurred over a 180 minute 2–98% buffer B gradient at a flow rate of ∼300 nL/min delivered by a NanoLC 2D HPLC pump (AB Sciex Eskigent). Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid in H 2O and buffer B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The HPLC effluent was directly coupled to the nanoelectrospray ionization source of an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos hybrid mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Precursor ion scans were collected with one internal lock mass at a resolution setting with a resolution of 60,000 for full MS followed by data-dependent and targeted MS/MS acquisitions of the 10 most abundant ions. The normalized collision energy was set to 35. Dynamic exclusion, monoisotopic precursor selection, and predicted ion injection  time were enabled. This was done in technical duplicate for three independent biological experiments.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 [13] and UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome database containing 70,136 canonical and isoform sequences (retrieved February 2013) through MaxQuant’s built-in Andromeda search engine. HCMV reference proteome for strains TB40/E, FIX, AD169, and Toledo was added and used for HCMV peptide identification. Default parameters in MaxQuant were used wherever applicable. Briefly, variable modifications included Lys8 and Arg10, protein N-terminus acetylation, and oxidized methionine. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was the only fixed modification specified. Full trypsin specificity was selected as digestion mode and maximum missed cleavages were set to 2. Peptides with lengths of a minimum of 7 amino acids were considered, with both the peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) set to 1%.Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main search. Product ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm. Protein identification required a minimum of two peptides with at least one razor or unique peptide. Relative ratio quantification was performed using quantities of unique and razor peptides and required a minimum of two peptides. Identified proteins that could be reconstructed from a set of peptides are “grouped” and termed protein groups. The top matched or leading protein in a protein group is defined as the protein with the greatest number of identified peptides within the group, and these are listed in Tables 1 and S1. Protein groups marked as contaminant, reverse, or “identified by site only” in MaxQuant results were discarded. Protein groups identified by MaxQuant were imported to Perseus version 1.4.1.3 for statistical analysis. Normalized protein group quantity relative ratios  were first converted to log base 10, and significantly changed protein groups were identified using an outlier significance score for log protein ratios, Significance A calculation in Perseus with default parameters (threshold value 0.05). Significance B was then calculated to correct for the biased statistical spread of highly abundant proteins. MaxQuant protein group ID, peptide ID, and parameter files have been deposited to ProteomeXchange consortium.

### Publication Abstract
Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) is a herpesvirus that is ubiquitously distributed worldwide and causes life-threating disease upon immunosuppression. HCMV expresses numerous proteins that function to establish an intracellular environment that supports viral replication. Like most DNA viruses, HCMV manipulates processes within the nucleus. We have quantified changes in the host cell nuclear proteome at 24 h post infection following infection with a clinical viral isolate. We have combined SILAC with multiple stages of fractionation to define changes. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by RP-HPLC combined with LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. Data from three biological replicates were processed with MaxQuant. A total of 1281 cellular proteins were quantified and 77 were found to be significantly differentially expressed. In addition, we observed 36 viral proteins associated with the nucleus. Diverse biological processes were significantly altered, including increased aspects of cell cycling, mRNA metabolism, and nucleocytoplasmic transport and decreased immune responses. We validated changes for several proteins including a subset of classical nuclear transport proteins. In addition, we demonstrated that disruption of these import factors is inhibitory to HCMV replication. Overall, we have identified HCMV-induced changes in the nuclear proteome and uncovered several processes that are important for infection. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001909 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001909).

### Keywords
Cytomegalovirus, Quantitative proteomics, Hcmv, Silac

### Affiliations
Biotechnology and Bioengineering Center, Deptartment of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin
Medical College of Wisconsin

### Submitter
Dominique Carter

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Terhune
Biotechnology and Bioengineering Center, Deptartment of Microbiology, Medical College of Wisconsin


