### Accession
PXD002224

### Title
Mining Missing Membrane Proteins by High-pH Reverse Phase StageTip Fractionation and Validation by Multiple Reaction Monitoring Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Several significant efforts have been made in the past decade to map all human proteome. However, more than 3000 proteins are grouped as missing having no evidence of translation. Membrane protein annotation of the current missing proteins list showed 34%to be missing membrane proteins, which are challenging even in standard shotgun proteomics. So as to find missing membrane proteins, we employed a highly sensitive and efficient peptide pre-fractionation of membrane enriched sample from 11 non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines of different EGFR mutation status by High-pH Reverse Phase StageTip. Besides, we analyzed 20 tumor and adjacent normal lung cancer tissue membrane samples to enhance identification coverage. With the use of multiple search engines and FDR analysis: X!Tandem and Comet followed by MAYU through TPP as well as Mascot followed PeptideShaker for FDR estimation, we were able to confidently identify 7701 proteins from which 5120 (66%) were annotated to be membrane proteins with below 1% FDR at protein, peptide and PSMs level having at least one unique peptide of 7 or more amino acid residues. Of this 181 proteins belong to the missing proteins in neXtProt (09-2014 release) and 75 are annotated to be missing membrane proteins. Furthermore we were able to validate 8 selected missing proteins (7 membrane proteins with TMH domain) using 10 synthetic peptides assisted multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry. This study indicates membrane sub-proteome focus with efficient pre-fractionation and bioinformatics filtering followed by targeted validation by MRM is useful approach to assist mapping of all human proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Membrane proteins from lung cancer cell lines were extracted through a two-step centrifugation process and then digested using the gel-assisted digestion protocol.  The peptides were fractionated using hig-pH RP StageTip techniques. The samples were injected into 75 µm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 µm BEH C18 column using a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LCTM (Waters Corp., Milford, MA) connected to Synapt G1 High Definition Mass Spectrometer (HDMS) from Waters Corp.  Duplicate runs of fractions from high-pH RP with C18 was done using 100 µm × 150 mm self-packed 3 µm C18-AQ column in a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LC in AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 System.  For the proteomic analysis of lung cancer cell lines, protein digests were run using both Synapt G1 HDMS and AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 instruments. Membrane protein from 20 lung tumor and adjacent normal tissue samples were also processed similarly but without Hp-RP fractionation. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) mass spectrometry validation was done using scheduled with synthetic reference peptides based MRM transition development and optimizations. MRM data were acquired dividing the 14 synthetic peptides into respective Hp-RP fractions as in DDA and using ABSCIEX QTRAP5500 coupled to 100 µm × 150 mm self-packed 3 µm C18-AQ column in a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LC. Instrument parameters are 5 mins. and scan time of 1.5 s. Window, 2500V ions pray voltage, both Q1 and Q3 at unit resolutions.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (2014_06 release, 20,264 entries) appended with reversed decoy sequences using Mascot26 (Matrix Science; version 2.3.02) with p-value < 0.05, and against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot human database (2014_11 release, 20,193 entries) with reversed sequences added for target-decoy analysis using X! Tandem27, and Comet28 search engines. For database searches using X! Tandem and Comet, the .wiff raw files from ABSciex 5600 TripleTOF system were first converted into mzML format by the AB MS Data Converter (AB Sciex version 1.3 beta) using “centroid” option, and the resulting mzML files were further converted into mzXML format by the msconvert.exe from ProteoWizard (version 3.0.4462)29,30 package using default parameters. Raw files from Waters Synapt G1 HDMS were converted directly into mzXML format using msconvert.exe. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion with variable modifications of deamidation (Asn and Gln), oxidation (Met) and methylation (Cys). In the Mascot search, a parent ion tolerance of 20.0 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.1 Da for AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 runs were used, while in both X!Tandem and Comet searches, precursor ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance of 40 ppm were applied. For Synapt G1 HDMS runs 0.1 Da tolerance for both parent and fragment ion were used in three search engines. Additional X! Tandem parameters include using top 160 peaks for matching, and default modifications: pyroglutamate from Gln and Glu and N-terminal acetylation. For Comet search, high resolution binning was used (0.02 tolerance and 0.0 offset). Search results from Mascot were imported into the PeptideShaker version 0.38.431 for peptide and protein inference. Peptide spectrum matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution.  Output files from X! Tandem and Comet were processed by PeptideProphet32 using the parameters “-OpdEAP -PPM”. PepXML files from PeptideProphet were further combined using iProphet33 via the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP)34.  The final protein and peptide identification lists for each run were determined by Mayu35 (version 1.07) based on 1% FDR. The parameters used for Mayu analysis are the following: “-I 2 -P pepFDR=0.01:t -G 0.1 -H 200 -PprotFeat –PmFDR”.  All the identified peptides were screened based from being a unique match to the inferred protein or being shared by two of more proteins. In addition, peptides with less than 7 amino acid residues were not considered. Only proteins with protein FDR < 1% and with matched peptides passing the FDR threshold of < 1% in both the peptide and PSM level, having at least one unique peptide were considered as identified. Membrane protein annotation was based from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org/)36, neXtProt (http://www.nextprot.org/)37, and The Human Protein Atlas (HPA) (http://www.proteinatlas.org/)38. Missing protein annotation, protein existence evidence, and chromosome assignments were based from neXtProt (2014-09-19 release). TMH distribution was obtained from UniProtKB (2015_05 release). Family or domain annotation was from InterPro39. All the peptides were also cross-referenced to the peptide entries of the Peptide Atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/)40 repository. Multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) validation was done using 14 synthetic peptides (95% purity) corresponding to 11 proteins for MRM transition selection, collision energy and declustering potential optimization and scheduling. The MRM data was acquired by dividing the peptides in to the respective Hp-RP fractions as in DDA discovery mode. A 5 min time window and scan time of 1.5 was used for scheduled MRM in ABSciex QTRAP5500 at both precursor and fragment unit resolution.  Synthetic reference peptide spectrum was finally used to analyze the peak features from cell lines. The MRM from membrane sample without Hp-RP fraction was acquired by combining all the 14 peptides and scheduling with a time window of 5 mins. and 2.5 s scan time. All MRM data were processed importing to Skyline software (v3.1).

### Publication Abstract
Despite significant efforts in the past decade toward complete mapping of the human proteome, 3564 proteins (neXtProt, 09-2014) are still "missing proteins". Over one-third of these missing proteins are annotated as membrane proteins, owing to their relatively challenging accessibility with standard shotgun proteomics. Using nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) as a model study, we aim to mine missing proteins from disease-associated membrane proteome, which may be still largely under-represented. To increase identification coverage, we employed Hp-RP StageTip prefractionation of membrane-enriched samples from 11 NSCLC cell lines. Analysis of membrane samples from 20 pairs of tumor and adjacent normal lung tissue was incorporated to include physiologically expressed membrane proteins. Using multiple search engines (X!Tandem, Comet, and Mascot) and stringent evaluation of FDR (MAYU and PeptideShaker), we identified 7702 proteins (66% membrane proteins) and 178 missing proteins (74 membrane proteins) with PSM-, peptide-, and protein-level FDR of 1%. Through multiple reaction monitoring using synthetic peptides, we provided additional evidence of eight missing proteins including seven with transmembrane helix domains. This study demonstrates that mining missing proteins focused on cancer membrane subproteome can greatly contribute to map the whole human proteome. All data were deposited into ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD002224.

### Keywords
Lung cancer, Missing proteins, Stagetip, High-ph reverse phase

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Baby Rorielyn Dimayacyac-Esleta

### Lab Head
Dr Baby Rorielyn T. Dimayacyac-Esleta
Academia Sinica


