### Accession
PXD036979

### Title
Dissecting the cellular architecture of neuroblastoma bone marrow metastasis using single-cell transcriptomics and epigenomics

### Description
The bone marrow (BM) is the third most frequent site of metastasis for solid tumors, creating an unfavorable clinical outcome. It provides a unique microenvironment that promotes growth of tumors, however, the role of different BM cells, their molecular features, and their interactions with tumor cells, are poorly defined. Here, we investigate the BM niche in neuroblastoma (NB), a pediatric cancer of the sympathetic nervous system. NB has been molecularly defined at the primary cancer site, yet, the metastatic site is poorly characterized. We performed single-cell transcriptomics (scRNA-seq) and epigenomic profiling (scATAC-seq) of BM aspirates from 11 subjects spanning three major NB subtypes: patients with MYCN amplification (MNA), ATRX mutations (ATRXmut), and cases that lack these alterations (sporadic): NB cases were then compared to five age-matched and metastasis-free BM (controls), followed by in-depth single cell analyses of tissue diversity and cell-cell interactions. We present the first map of the epigenetic and transcriptomic effects of bone marrow metastases. Our analyses demonstrate that tumor cells in the metastatic niche display plasticity that differs among NB subtypes. NB cells via cell-cell interaction signal to the bone marrow microenvironment, rewiring specifically monocytes, which exhibit M1 and M2 features, marked by activation of pro- and anti-inflammatory programs, and express tumor-promoting factors, reminiscent of tumor-associated macrophages. Our study may provide the basis for a therapeutic approach, targeting tumor-to-microenvironment interactions.

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analysis of control and activated primary monocytes, peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were isolated following Ficoll-Paque protocol from fresh blood of healthy donors. Next, washed PBMCs were subjected to magnetic-activated cell sorting using a positive selection kit (CD14 microbeads MACS, Miltenyi Biotec) to isolate the monocyte fraction following the recommend protocol. Monocyte population purity was determined to be >92% through FACS using a monoclonal antibody against human CD14 (clone 61D3, PerCP conjugated, eBioscience). Monocytes were cultured in IMDM media (GE Healthcare) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (GE Healthcare), 10ug/mL gentamycin (Sigma Aldrich), and 1.25ug/mL amphotericin B (Sigma Aldrich). To induce inflammatory response, monocytes were treated with 100ng/mL LPS (Sigma Aldrich) for 24h. To obtain the cytoplasmic fraction, washed cells were lysed with mechanical shear stress and an isotonic lysis buffer (10mM HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 0.25M sucrose, 10mM NaCl, 3mM MgCl2, and 0.5% Triton X-100) supplemented with protease inhibitors (pepstatin, leupeptin, aprotinin, each 1 µg/ml, and 1mM PMSF; all Sigma-Aldrich). Nuclei were removed via centrifugation (2,200 × g, 5 min, +4°C). The cytoplasmic proteins were precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol at −20°C. All fractionation steps were performed on ice. The precipitated proteins were digested via a modified filter-aided sample preparation protocol (FASP), as previously described (Mayer et al., 2018). In short, 20 µg of protein was loaded onto a 10 kD molecular weight cut-off filter (Pall, Vienna, Austria). After reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide (all Sigma-Aldrich), the protein digestion was achieved by applying trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade; Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 and 4 h, respectively. The eluted peptide solution was dried via vacuum centrifugation and stored at −20°C until further analysis.   LC-MS/MS analyses Dried peptides were reconstituted in 5 µl 30% formic acid, containing four synthetic peptides [Glu1-fribrinopeptide B, EGVNDNEEGFFSAR; M28, TTPAVLDSDGSYFLYSK; HK0, VLETKSLYVR; HK1, VLETK(ε-AC)SLYVR] for quality control. The samples were further diluted with 40 µl mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were analyzed with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 Nano LC system coupled to a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer, equipped with a NanoSpray Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria). Preconcentration of the peptides was done on a C18 2 cm × 100 μm precolumn and LC separation was performed with a 50 cm × 75 μm PepMap100 analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and injection volume of 10 µl. Gradient elution of the peptides was achieved by increasing the mobile phase B (79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) from 8% to 40%, with a total chromatographic run time of 135 min including washing and equilibration. Mass spectrometric resolution on the MS1 level was set to 70,000 (at m/z = 200) with a scan range from 400 to 1,400 m/z. The 12 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation at 30% normalized collision energy and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500 (at m/z = 200).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were subjected to the freely available software MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox and Mann, 2012) utilizing the Andromeda search engine, followed by statistical evaluation with the Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). For the Andromeda search, a minimum of two peptide identifications, at least one of them being a unique peptide, was required for valid protein identification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both on peptide and protein level. The database applied for the search was the human UniProt database (version 12/2019, reviewed entries only) with 20,380 protein entries. For statistical data evaluation of the search files obtained from MaxQuant, the Perseus software was used. Reverse sequences and potential contaminants as well as proteins identified only by site were removed. For statistical analysis, data obtained from both biological and technical replicates were used. Label-free quantification values were logarithmized to base 2 and technical replicates averaged. Proteins were filtered for valid values, keeping only proteins that were identified in at least two out of three measurements in at least one sample group. Evaluation of regulatory events between different samples groups was achieved by two-sided t-tests using an FDR <0.05 (permutation-based FDR calculation).

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the major cause of cancer-related deaths. Neuroblastoma (NB), a childhood tumor has been molecularly defined at the primary cancer site, however, the bone marrow (BM) as the metastatic niche of NB is poorly characterized. Here we perform single-cell transcriptomic and epigenomic profiling of BM aspirates from 11 subjects spanning three major NB subtypes and compare these to five age-matched and metastasis-free BM, followed by in-depth single cell analyses of tissue diversity and cell-cell interactions, as well as functional validation. We show that cellular plasticity of NB tumor cells is conserved upon metastasis and tumor cell type composition is NB subtype-dependent. NB cells signal to the BM microenvironment, rewiring via macrophage mgration inhibitory factor and midkine signaling&#xa0;specifically monocytes, which exhibit M1 and M2 features, are marked by activation of pro- and anti-inflammatory programs, and express tumor-promoting factors, reminiscent of tumor-associated macrophages. The interactions and pathways characterized in our study provide the basis for therapeutic approaches that target tumor-to-microenvironment interactions.

### Keywords
Heterogeneity, Monocytes, Bone marrow, Single cell, Neuroblastoma, Microenvironment, Scrna-seq, Metastasis, Scatac-seq

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


