### Accession
PXD012481

### Title
Phenotypic analysis of 5000 year-old human teeth using optimized large-scale and targeted proteomics approaches

### Description
Tooth is a remarkable source of information for paleoanthropologists. Investigation of ancient dental proteomes is able to provide biomolecular data helping at understanding past life. In particular, the enamel protein amelogenin (AMEL) offers the possibilty to determine the sex of the specimen. In this study, we have analysed eleven 5000 year-old human teeth from a French Neolithic site to set up dedicated paleoproteomics strategies for phenotypic and taxonomic characterization of ancient samples. We have developed an optimized 3-step iterative search strategy using a custom human protein database of shotgun proteomics nanoLC-MS/MS data. This allowed the identification of a total number of 1496 proteins in two replicate experiments. Most of the proteins were identified thanks to the no-enzyme database search mode included in the dedicated bioinformatics data analysis pipeline based on iterative database search strategy. In particular, in addition to specific tooth proteins, this optimized shotgun proteomics approach led to the identification of two other proteins of interest, cementum protein 1 (CEMP1) and collagen alpha-1(X) (COL10A1). Noteworthy, the presence of single amino acid variations K55E and D128N could also be identified in CEMP1 and COL10A1, respectively. These polymorphisms are rarely found in the European population today. We have also designed a targeted nanoLC-PRM strategy using the sex specific peptides TALVLTPLK and IALVLTPLK of the AMELX and AMELY proteins. This sensitive approach allowed to successfully identify the sex of the individuals in 91% of the samples.

### Sample Protocol
The archeological material originates from the French Neolithic necropole of Mont Aimé (3650-3380 cal BC) located in the Bassin Parisien. Eleven teeth were randomly collected from individuals of the hypogea 1 (1H01, 1H05, 1H06, 1H07, 1H12, 1H15, 1H18) and the hypogea 2 (2H08, 2H10, 2H11, 2H12, 2H23). The sex of the individuals (4 females and 7 males) was previously determined by genetic analyses. Teeth were manipulated under a laminar flow hood in a cleanroom laboratory and, after abrasion of the tooth surfaces by manual drilling with a Dremel instrument, were totally reduced into a ﬁne powder in liquid nitrogen using a Spex SamplePrep TM6870 Freezer/MillTM (Fisher Scientiﬁc). Then, protein extraction was performed on 10-50 mg of tooth powder by using an adapted filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol, including extraction blank (Blk-E) samples with no material but exactly processed as the tooth samples. Finally, protein extracts were subjected to enzymatic digestion and the obtained tryptic peptides was dried by using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and kept at -20°C.The dried peptides were resuspended with 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile at a concentration of 1µg/µl, and analysed by on-line nanoLC using an UltiMate® 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 1µg of the samples were loaded on a 300 μm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 pre-column (Thermo Scientific, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 min of desalting, peptides were on-line separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80 min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using a top-speed approach (cycle time of 3s). The survey scans MS were performed in the Orbitrap over m/z 350-1550 with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4e5, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Most intense ions per survey scan were selected at 1.6 m/z with the quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD). The monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on, the intensity threshold for fragmentation was set to 50,000 and the normalized collision energy was set to 35%. The resulting fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 (at 200 m/z), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 5e4, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. For internal calibration the 445.120025 ion was used as lock mass. Based on the shotgun analysis results, two sex-specific peptides TALVLTPLK and IALVLTPLK from AMELX and AMELY proteins, respectively, were selected for sex determination using targeted mass spectrometry analysis. Corresponding peptides used as standard references were synthetized as heavy stable isotope labelled C-terminus Lys U-13C6,15N2 peptides. Both labelled peptides were coated together on a water-soluble biopolymer bead in a controlled amount (READYBEADS™, ANAQUANT, Villeurbanne, France). One coated READYBEADTM was dissolved in 1ml of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile for 5 min by vortexing, releasing the heavy isotope-labelled peptides at final concentrations of 1 pmol/µL for TALVLTPLK and 1.2 pmol/µL for IALVLTPLK, respectively. Subsequently, 10 µl of each sample at a concentration of 1µg/µl were spiked with 1µl of the standard heavy peptide solution. 1.1µl of each spiked-in sample was analysed by a targeted mass spectrometry approach conducted in parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with the same instrument and chromatographic conditions as for shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS analyses. The PRM acquisition method combined two scan events starting with a full scan followed by targeted MS/MS of the doubly charged precursor ions for both light (at m/z 478.3130 and 484.3312, respectively) and heavy (at m/z 482.3201 and 488.3383, respectively) sex-specific peptides (AMELX-TALVLTPLK and AMELY-IALVLTPLK) along the complete chromatographic run. The full scan event employed a m/z 350–1550 mass range selection, an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), a target automatic gain control (AGC) value of 4e5, and maximum filling times of 50 ms. The targeted MS/ MS was run at an Orbitrap resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z), target AGC value of 1e5, and maximum filling times of 120 ms. The targeted peptides were isolated using a 2 m/z unit window with the quadrupole and fragmented by Higher Energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 35 eV.

### Data Protocol
Data obtained from the shotgun nanoLC-MS/MS analysis were processed using an iterative search method in Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.1.1.21, Thermo Fischer Scientific). Protein identification was performed with the Mascot search engine (version 2.6.1, Matrix Science, London, UK) combined with the Percolator algorithm (version 2.05) for calculation of q-values and Posterior Error Probability (PEP) of peptide-spectrum matches (PSM). For all steps, data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database released 2016_02 with Homo sapiens taxonomy (20,295 sequences) implemented with a number of isoforms and variants relevant for dental diseases, morphostructure or taxonomic discrimination, and retrieved from Ensembl.org and. A target-decoy approach was used for FDR estimation using reversed or randomised databases for semi-tryptic or no enzyme searches (see below), respectively. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 10 ppm and 20 mmu, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The iterative search approach consists of three steps. Step 1: the MS raw files were pre-processed for selecting MS/MS spectra and the derived peaklist was searched using semi-tryptic enzyme specificity with a maximum of three missed cleavages. The main protein modifications affecting damaged ancient proteins were set as variable modifications. It includes asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine and proline oxidation, peptide N-terminal and lysine carbamylation, and N-terminal glutamine conversion to pyro-glutamic acid. Validated PSM based on Percolator q-value with a false discovery rate (FDR) worse than 1% were exported in mgf format for searching in the next step. Step 2: the pool of spectra imported from step 1 was searched with no enzyme specificity and only methionine and proline oxidation as variable modifications. Validated PSM based on Percolator q-value with a false discovery rate (FDR) worse than 1% were exported in mgf format for searching in the next step. Step 3: the pool of spectra imported from step 2 was searched with no enzyme specificity and the same variable modifications as in step1. In a final consensus step, all the processed data (msf files) were combined, validated and filtered with the following parameters: only PSM with rank 1 and a Mascot  ion score ≥ 20 were considered. PSM and peptides were validated based on Percolator PEP values at a FDR set to 1%. Then, the peptide identifications were grouped into proteins according to the law of parsimony and filtered to 5% FDR. PRM data were processed in Skyline 3.7.0.11317. Firstly, the peptide search results (.dta files) were used for spectral library building with a cut-off score of 0.95. The MS/MS spectra of imported PRM data were matched (dotp ≥ 0.8) with that of the spectral library to confirm the sex-specific peptide identities. The heavy isotope-labelled sex-specific peptides were invoked as standard references for supplemental reliable identification (rdotp ≥ 0.96) and peak selection. All the extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) of selected fragments were manually inspected. The peak areas intensity from the selected peptide transitions,the results of comparison on retention time (RT) and the product ions peak area percentage were exported for heavy and light sex-specific peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagene i(x), Sex, Genetically variant peptides, Paleoproteomics, Prm, Cementum protein 1, Tooth, Amelogenin

### Affiliations
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Mollereau
Laboratoire d’Anthropologie Moléculaire et Imagerie de Synthèse (AMIS), Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, Toulouse, France


