### Accession
PXD023301

### Title
Change in the plasma proteome associated with canine cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CCDS) in Thailand

### Description
Canine cognitive dysfunction syndrome (CCDS) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder found in senior dogs. Due to the lack of biological markers, CCDS is commonly underdiagnosed. The aim of this study was to identify potential plasma biomarkers using proteomics techniques and to increase our understanding of the pathogenic mechanism of the disease. Plasma amyloid beta 42 (Aβ42) has been seen to be a controversial biomarker for CCDS. Proteomics analysis was performed for protein identification and quantification. The nano-LC-MS/MS data revealed that the predictive underlying mechanism of CCDS was the co-occurrence of inflammation-mediated acute phase response proteins and complement and coagulation cascades that partly functioned by apolipoproteins and lipid metabolism. Some of the differentially expressed proteins may serve as potential predictor biomarkers along with Aβ42 in plasma for improved CCDS diagnosis.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected from the cephalic or jugular vein into vials containing ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and the samples were centrifuged at 3000 rpm for 10 min. Prior to gel-based separation, each plasma was pooled in the same volume and diluted at 1:1 ratio with 1% Triton X-100, 1% NaCl and 1% SDS. The samples were measured protein concentration by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Benicia, CA, USA) at 590 nm with bovine serum albumin (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) as a standard.  For gel-based separation by SDS-PAGE, total of 30µg of protein was used to load into each lane of 12% SDS-PAGE. After that, the gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Bio-Rad, Benicia, CA, USA) and de-stained with 30% ethanol (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) in 10% acetic acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The gel was then scanned using a GS-710 scanner (Bio-Rad, Benicia, CA, USA). The protein band was divided into 11 segments per lane according to size and chopped into 1 mm3 pieces. For protein identification, each piece was subjected to in-gel digested prior to being subjected to nano liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC-MS/MS). Gel pieces were de-stained using 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). After that, disulfide bonds were reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Omnipur, Darmstadt, Germany) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 10 min at 60 °C. Gel pieces were alkylated in 250 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The gel pieces were dehydrated 2 times in 100% ACN for 15 min and dried at room temperature. Then, trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis. MO, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added, and the gel pieces were incubated overnight at 37 °C. The tryptic peptides were extracted from the gels using 100% ACN. Finally, peptide mixtures were dried in a vacuum centrifuge to dryness and kept at -80 °C until further nano-LC-MS/MS analysis.After tryptic digestion, all peptide solution was completely dried and reconstituted in 15 µL of 0.1% formic acid (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Five µL of each sample were subjected to the nano-LC/MS-MS three times. Peptide separation was performed on a C18 column. The flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. The elution occurred during the 30-min gradient from the 4% mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to the 50% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water), and the eluent was infused into a microTOF-Q (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The mass spectra from the mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) covered mass ranges of m/z 400–2000 and m/z 50–1500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric analysis was performed by data-dependent acquisition. None of exclusion condition was used. The electrospray voltage was 4500V and collision energy was 10eV. LC-MS/MS data files were converted to a mascot generic file (.mgf) format with DataAnalysis 3.4 version software. Mascot daemon version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) was used to merge the .mgf files and to identify the proteins against those in the NCBInr database (24 October 2019). The entries was 61,390,244 sequences. Mammalia was set as the taxonomy filter. Missed cleavage was set to 1, the peptide tolerance was set to 0.8 Da, and the tandem MS tolerance was set to 0.6 Da. Variable modifications were set to include methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation. Selecting protein hits were with p-value ≤ 0.05. The proteins that reported in this research were 95% confidence. The protein expression was quantified by peptide count analysis using the emPAI value provided by Mascot. Differentially expressed proteins in at least two of the biological replicates were reported as protein alterations in each group

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amyloid beta 42, Canine cognitive dysfunction syndrome, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Science, Mahidol University 
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Sataporn Phochantachinda

### Lab Head
Dr Onrapak Reamtong
Department of Molecular Tropical Medicine and Genetics, Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


