### Accession
PXD011019

### Title
Wfs1-deficient mouse muscle LC–MSMS

### Description
This dataset reports the analysis of Wfs1-deficient mouse heart, musculus soleus, and white part of musculus rectus femoris by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
LC–MS/MS was performed on an Q Exactive Plus tandem mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17 software package. LFQ was conducted using the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm. A search was performed against the UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Mus musculus reference proteome database (downloaded on November 11, 2015)

### Publication Abstract
The data presented in this article are related to the research article entitled "Increased Mitochondrial Protein Levels and Bioenergetics in the <i>musculus rectus femoris</i> of Wfs1-Deficient mice" (Eimre et al., accepted for publication). This dataset reports the analysis of Wfs1-deficient mouse heart, <i>musculus soleus</i>, and white part of <i>musculus rectus femoris</i> by liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry. Label-free quantitative analysis of the mass spectrometry data identified 4056 proteins, with 114, 212, and 1290 proteins differentially expressed (<i>t</i>-test; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05) in the heart, <i>m</i>. <i>soleus</i>, and <i>m. rectus femoris</i>, respectively, between the Wfs1-deficient and wild-type groups. Eight proteins were found to be differentially expressed in all mentioned muscles, with 1 protein differently expressed in oxidative (<i>m. soleus</i> and heart) and 88 in skeletal muscles. This dataset supports the cited study and can be used to extend additional analyses. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD011019.

### Keywords
Skeletal muscle; animal proteomics, Wolfram syndrome; wfs1; myocardium

### Affiliations
Chair of Pathological Physiology, Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, 50411 Tartu, Estonia
Chair of Pathological Physiology, Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu

### Submitter
Margus Eimre

### Lab Head
Dr Sulev Kõks
Chair of Pathological Physiology, Institute of Bio- and Translational Medicine, University of Tartu, Ravila 19, 50411 Tartu, Estonia


