### Accession
PXD004073

### Title
iTRAQ quantification of hippocampal proteins in a mouse model of unpredictable maternal separation and maternal stress

### Description
Adverse experiences in early life are risk factors for the development of behavioral and physiological symptoms that can lead to psychiatric and cognitive disorders later in life. Some of these symptoms can be transmitted to the offspring, in some cases by non-genomic mechanisms involving germ cells. Using a mouse model of unpredictable maternal separation and maternal stress, we show that postnatal trauma alters coping behaviors in adverse conditions in exposed males when adult and in their adult male progeny. The behavioral changes are accompanied by increased glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression and decreased DNA methylation of the GR promoter in the hippocampus. DNA methylation is also decreased in sperm cells of exposed males when adult. Transgenerational transmission of behavioral symptoms is prevented by paternal environmental enrichment, an effect associated with the reversal of alterations in GR gene expression and DNA methylation in the hippocampus of the male offspring. These findings highlight the influence of both, negative and positive environmental factors on behavior across generations, and the plasticity of the epigenome across life.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation, iTRAQ labeling and LTQ-Orbitrap VELOS mass spectrometric analysis   Hippocampi dissected from adult mice were homogenized in 200 μl lysis buffer (100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH ~8, 0.1% SDS, 2M urea) by up-and-down strokes using a 27 gauge syringe, sonicated for 2 min and centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min to remove insoluble material. Proteins (50 μg) were precipitated using 6 volumes ice-cold acetone, solubilized, reduced and cysteines were blocked according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Proteins were then digested into peptides with trypsin overnight (1:10 enzyme:substrate). Peptides were differentially labeled with iTRAQ 8-plex reagents (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, and then combined. Peptide samples were desalted and separated in-solution with an Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Fractions were acidified by adding 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 1% trifluoroacetic acid (1:10) and detergents were removed using ZipTip C18 columns (Millipore). Samples were lyophilized, then resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid for LTQ-Orbitrap Velos analysis using collision induced dissociation and higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peak list generation and database search   Mascot Distiller 2.4.3.3 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to generate Mascot generic format peak lists. Peak lists were concatenated and searched with ProteinPilot, against a concatenated to a target-decoy (reversed) FASTA database. Methylthio (C), iTRAQ 8-plex labeling at the N terminus and lysine were set as fixed modifications, methionine oxidation, iTRAQ 8-plex labeling of tyrosine, and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine as variable modifications. The iTRAQ 8-plex (Applied Biosystems Zug, Switzerland) quantitation method was used along with the isotope and impurity correction factors for each iTRAQ label provided by the manufacturer. Precursor and fragment tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with an allowance of up to one missed cleavage. The ProteinPilot peptide summary was exported and subjected to further processing using R.

### Publication Abstract
Adverse experiences in early life are risk factors for the development of behavioral and physiological symptoms that can lead to psychiatric and cognitive disorders later in life. Some of these symptoms can be transmitted to the offspring, in some cases by non-genomic mechanisms involving germ cells. Using a mouse model of unpredictable maternal separation and maternal stress, we show that postnatal trauma alters coping behaviors in adverse conditions in exposed males when adult and in their adult male progeny. The behavioral changes are accompanied by increased glucocorticoid receptor (GR) expression and decreased DNA methylation of the GR promoter in the hippocampus. DNA methylation is also decreased in sperm cells of exposed males when adult. Transgenerational transmission of behavioral symptoms is prevented by paternal environmental enrichment, an effect associated with the reversal of alterations in GR gene expression and DNA methylation in the hippocampus of the male offspring. These findings highlight the influence of both negative and positive environmental factors on behavior across generations and the plasticity of the epigenome across life.

### Keywords
Mouse, Environmental enrichment, Trangenerational inheritance, Itraq, Paternal trauma, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
ETH Zürich, D-HEST
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Andrea Mizzi Brunner

### Lab Head
Dr Isabelle M Mansuy
ETH Zürich, D-HEST


