### Accession
PXD016477

### Title
Time-lapse of the post-mortem proteome.

### Description
The biochemical processes that comprise cell death at the level of the whole organism have significant associations with inflammation, neoplasia’s, metabolic and developmental anomalies in the living. Greater awareness of the activation of ‘death’ pathways have particular relevance to the study of disease and could influence the findings of proteomics through the ‘deep-time’ of individuals  with no historically recorded cause of death. Proteomics is able to address the interplay of all affected pathways concurrently. This study goes beyond the limits of survival to demonstrate the machinery for survival persists, and in some cases even continues to function. Here, we present a reference set of proteins detectable in the post-mortem proteome. We have used  high-resolution, mass spectrometry to retrieve proteomic profiles of the mouse mandible through 720 hours of post mortem time.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were euthanised by cervical dislocation and  left dentary was extracted rapidly (<1hour post-mortem and labelled as time point ‘1’). Whole mouse was then reposed in a petri dish in a controlled 21°C environment until the next extraction. Three dentaries from different mice were used at each time point of 1, 3, 6, 96, 168 and 720 hours PM. We used 4 dentaries for the 24 hour time point from 3 different mice. Eleven mice were used in total for this study.  Dentaries were prepared on ice by sonicating in a 1% solution of non-ionic detergent for 5 min, the removal of sinews by fine grade sandpaper and rinsing in sterile deionised water. The frozen dentaries were then crushed and washed for 18 hours in 100µL 0.5M HCL at 4°C on a shaker. Each sample was then washed in sterile deionised water, centrifuged at 14,000 x g, and the pellet retained. Samples were resuspended in 50µl AMBIC, 10mM DTT, 2M urea at pH 8 and 100µg of total protein used for trypsin digestion at 25°C for 16 hours in a 1:100 ratio based on the weight. Peptides were eluted using a linear gradient of H2O:CH3CN (98:2, 0.1% formic acid) to H2O:CH3CN (64:36, 0.1% formic acid) at 250 nlmin−1over 120 min. The QExactive (Thermo Electron, Bremen,Germany) mass spectrometer was run in DDA mode. Briefly, high voltage 2000V was applied to a low volume union and the column (45°C) positioned 0.5cm from the heated capillary (275°C). A survey scan 350-1750 m/z was acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 70,000 at 200m/z) with an accumulation target of 1e6 ions, lock mass enabled and up to the 10 most abundant ions (AGC target set to 1.0e5 and minimum AGC target set to 1.5e4) with charge states greater than +2 and <6 sequentially isolated and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Protein dataset-peak lists were generated from raw files using Mascot Daemon v2.5.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK, www.matrixscience.com). All MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot (downloaded Feb 2018; 556,568 sequences for protein identification with the following criteria: 1) species, Rodent; 2) allowed 2 missed cleavage; 3) variable modifications, Oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S,T,Y);4) peptide tolerance, ±4 ppm; 5) Fragment tolerance, ±0.4 Da  6) peptide charge+2and+3; and 7) enzyme specificity, semi-tryptic. A decoy database search was also performed.  Scaffold Software (version 4.6.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to compare the mouse proteome through post-mortem time using spectral counting. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability using the Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR) and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Expression changes across the samples were measured via spectral count, normalised by total ion count with missing values kept at zero and recorded as not detected (ND). ANOVA was used to report abundance changes controlled by the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure for multiple comparisons, p values set to <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Death proteome, Coordinated gene-expression, Rbp, Paleoproteomics, Sips, Post-mortem index

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.   Palaeontology, Geobiology and Earth Archives Research Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.
UNSW

### Submitter
Valerie Wasinger

### Lab Head
Dr Valerie Christine Wasinger
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.   Palaeontology, Geobiology and Earth Archives Research Centre, University of New South Wales Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia.


