### Accession
PXD019216

### Title
Reductionist approach using primary and metastatic cell-derived extracellular vesicles prospect proteins associated with oral cancer prognosis

### Description
Oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) shows high mortality rates that are largely associated with the presence of lymph node metastasis. However, the molecular mechanisms that drive OSCC metastasis are unknown. Here, we used a reductionist approach mapping the proteomic, miRNA, metabolomic and lipidomic profiles of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from human primary tumor (SCC-9 cells) and matched lymph node metastasis (LN1 cells) to explore the role of EV cargo in OSCC metastasis. Distinct omics profiles were associated with the metastatic phenotype, including 670 proteins, 217 miRNAs, 26 metabolites and 64 lipids differentially abundant between LN1 and SCC-9-derived EVs. A multi-omics integration indicated 11 ‘hub proteins’ significantly modulated in the metastatic site when compared to primary site-derived EVs, seven of them correlated with aggressiveness in cancer patients. The multi-omics approach allowed the prospection of proteins transported by EVs that potentially serves as prognostic markers in OSCC.

### Sample Protocol
SCC-9 and LN1 cells (3 biological replicates for each group) and EVs (3x10e10 particles; 3 biological replicates for each group) were submitted to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Peptide desalting was performed using Stage tips method in C18 Empore disks (3M, USA) (Rappsilber et al., 2007). Peptides from cell samples were quantified using the Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) and 2 µg were submitted to subsequent analysis. The samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an ETD enabled Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) connected to the EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystem, USA) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid using an analytical column EASY-Column (10 cm x id 75 μm, 3 μm particle size) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over 200 min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was set to 1.7 kV and the source temperature was 275°C. All instrument methods were set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. The full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 1e6. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r= 60,000 and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%). The signal threshold for triggering an MS/MS event was set to 1,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 60 s, and repeat count of 1. An activation q=0.25 and activation time of 10 ms were used.

### Data Protocol
Identification of proteins was performed with MaxQuant v.1.5.8.0 (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011) against the Uniprot Human Protein Database (release May, 2017). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications; maximum 2 trypsin missed cleavage and a tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor mass and 0.5 Da for fragment ions were set for protein identification. Protein identifications assigned as “Reverse” were excluded from further analysis and LFQ intensity values were used for statistical analysis. Differentially abundant proteins between LN-1 and SCC9-derived EVs and/or cells were determined using log2 intensity values in Perseus v. 1.3.0.4 software (Student´s t-test; P≤0.05) (Pathan et al., 2015). The overlay between molecules for two conditions was visualized in Venn diagrams generated in Funrich tool (Pathan et al., 2015). SCC-9-EVs and LN1-EVs were grouped according to molecular profiles using principal component analysis (PCA) in the web-server Metaboanalyst 4.0 (Chong et al., 2019), and hierarchical cluster heatmaps in R environment. Meaningful Gene Ontology (GO) biological processes significantly enriched in proteomics data were determined in Funrich (Pathan et al., 2015) tool. The subcellular location was assigned from information available in the Human Protein Atlas (Thul et al., 2017). A P-value≤0.05 was used to determine significance in functional characterization analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Metabolomics, Prognosis, Oral cancer squamous cell carcinoma, Mirna, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Multi-omics approach, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory - LNBio, Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials - CNPEM
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory - LNBio, Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials - CNPEM


