### Accession
PXD047030

### Title
Evaluating protein crosslinking as a therapeutic strategy to stabilize SOD1 variants in a mouse model of familial ALS

### Description
Mutations in the gene encoding Cu-Zn superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) cause a subset of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (fALS) cases. A shared effect of these mutations is that SOD1, which is normally a stable dimer, dissociates into toxic monomers that seed toxic aggregates. Considerable research effort has been devoted to developing compounds that stabilize the dimer of fALS SOD1 variants, but unfortunately, this has not yet resulted in a treatment. We hypothesized that cyclic thiosulfinate cross-linkers, which selectively target a rare, two cysteine-containing motif, can stabilize fALS-causing SOD1 variants in vivo. We created a library of chemically diverse cyclic thiosulfinates and determined structure-cross-linking-activity relationships. A pre-lead compound, “S-XL6,” was selected based upon its cross-linking rate and drug-like properties. Co-crystallographic structure clearly establishes the binding of S-XL6 at Cys 111 bridging the monomers and stabilizing the SOD1 dimer. Biophysical studies reveal that the degree of stabilization afforded by S-XL6 (up to 24 °C) is unprecedented for fALS, and to our knowledge, for any protein target of any kinetic stabilizer. Gene silencing and protein degrading therapeutic approaches require careful dose titration to balance the benefit of diminished fALS SOD1 expression with the toxic loss-of enzymatic function. We show that S-XL6 does not share this liability because it rescues the activity of fALS SOD1 variants. No pharmacological agent has been proven to bind to SOD1 in vivo. Here, using a fALS mouse model, we demonstrate oral bioavailability; rapid engagement of SOD1G93A by S-XL6 that increases SOD1G93A’s in vivo half-life; and that S-XL6 crosses the blood-brain barrier. S-XL6 demonstrated a degree of selectivity by avoiding off-target binding to plasma proteins. Taken together, our results indicate that cyclic thiosulfinate-mediated SOD1 stabilization should receive further attention as a potential therapeutic approach for fALS.

### Sample Protocol
In vivo crosslinking from purified RBC was confirmed using an H-Class Acquity UPLC (Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography) system coupled to a Xevo G2-S Q-ToF (Quadrupole Time of Flight) mass spectrometer (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) as previously described (58, 73). The LC system was equipped with reversed phase Acquity UPLC Protein BEH C4 (300 Å pore size, 1.7 µm particle size, 100 mm bed length, 2.1 mm ID x 100 mm) column at 60 ºC with a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. The mobile phase consisted of a mixture of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). The sample was introduced in 10% formic acid and 5 µL was injected for analysis. UNIFI software (Waters Corp, Milford, MA) was used for system control and data processing. Solvents A and B were combined in a gradient: 0-2 min: 95% A; 2-70 min: 30% A; 72-75 min: 5% A; 78-80 min: return to initial conditions. The MS was operated in positive mode and calibrated prior to analysis (ca. daily). The chromatographic window containing the SOD1G93A monomer and dimer were assigned using EICs (Extracted Ion Chromatogram) m/z 1322.5-1323.5 (monomer) and m/z 1180.0-1180.5 (dimer) and mass spectra from this region were summed.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data from this composite spectrum were deconvoluted and average masses were calculated using the MaxEnt1 algorithm. The ratio of dimer intensity (31836 Da, SD 1.3 Da) to the sum of monomer (15858 Da, SD 0.8 Da) plus dimer intensity were then used to calculate the percentage of SOD1G93A dimer at different time points. 10 picomole of the SOD1G93A monomer and dimer were analyzed (as above) in individual experiments and their MS signal intensities were within 10% (i.e., the differences in their chromatographic retention and ionization efficiency were within experimental error). The half-life of the S-XL6 cross-linked complex was calculated from apparent half-life of disappearance of the % dimer by linear regression of the terminal beta phase (24 to 168 hours time point).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), Cross-linking, Stabilization, Pharmacological chaperone, Sod1

### Affiliations
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Md Amin Hossain

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey N. Agar
Northeastern University


