### Accession
PXD042806

### Title
Cardiomyocyte precursors generated by direct reprogramming and molecular beacon selection attenuate ventricular remodeling after experimental myocardial infarction

### Description
Background: Direct cardiac reprogramming is currently being investigated for the generation of cells with a true cardiomyocyte (CM) phenotype. Based on the original approach of cardiac transcription factor-induced reprogramming of fibroblasts into CM-like cells, various modifications of that strategy have been developed. However, they uniformly suffer from poor reprogramming efficacy and a lack of translational tools for target cell expansion and purification. Therefore, our group has developed a unique approach to generate proliferative cells with a pre-CM phenotype that can be expanded in vitro to yield substantial cell doses.  Methods: Cardiac fibroblasts were reprogrammed toward CM fate using lentiviral transduction of cardiac transcriptions factors (GATA4, MEF2C, TBX5, and MYOCD). The resulting cellular phenotype was analyzed by RNA sequencing and immunocytology. Live target cells were purified based on intracellular CM marker expression using molecular beacon technology and fluorescence-activated cell sorting. CM commitment was assessed using 5-azacytidine–based differentiation assays and the therapeutic effect was evaluated in a mouse model of acute myocardial infarction using echocardiography and histology. The cellular secretome was analyzed using mass spectrometry. Results: We found that proliferative CM precursor-like cells were part of the phenotype spectrum arising during direct reprogramming of fibroblasts toward CMs. These induced CM precursors (iCMPs) expressed CPC- and CM-specific proteins and were selectable via hairpin-shaped oligonucleotide hybridization probes targeting Myh6/7-mRNA–expressing cells. After purification, iCMPs were capable of extensive expansion, with preserved phenotype when under ascorbic acid supplementation, and gave rise to CM-like cells with organized sarcomeres in differentiation assays. When transplanted into infarcted mouse hearts, iCMPs prevented CM loss, attenuated fibrotic scarring, and preserved ventricular function, which can in part be attributed to their substantial secretion of factors with documented beneficial effect on cardiac repair.  Conclusions: Fibroblast reprogramming combined with molecular beacon-based cell selection yields an iCMP-like cell population with cardioprotective potential. Further studies are needed to elucidate mechanism-of-action and translational potential.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic profiling of medium supernatants from induced cardiomyocyte precursors and cardiac fibroblasts, cultured under serum-free normoxic (21% O2, 1g/l glucose) or ischemic (1% O2, no glucose) conditions for 24 h or 72 h, were analyzed by liquid chromatography/electron spray ionization mass spectrometry (LC/ESI–MS). Medium supernatants were harvested, centrifuged for 10 min at 1000g and 4 °C to remove cell debris, and frozen at -80 °C until further analysis. When all samples were collected, supernatants were thawed and transferred to amico filters (10kDA cut off, Merck) followed by an overnight trypsin digestion (12 µg trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate; Promega) at 37 °C. Thereafter, peptide samples were extracted with trifluoroacetic acid (0.1%; Fluka) and measured by UPLC-ESI-QTOF mass spectrometer (Dionex Ultimate 3000, ThermoFisher; Impact II, bruker daltonics).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were analyzed using the SwissProt database with MASCOT software (version number 2.2, Matrix Science). The analysis parameters were as follows: (i) taxonomy: Mus musculus (Mouse); (ii) proteolytic enzyme: trypsin; (iii) maximum of accepted missed cleavages: 1; (iv) mass value: monoisotopic; (v) peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm; (vi) fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da; and vii) variable modifications: oxidation. Identified proteins were considered for further analysis if scores corresponded to p < 0.05 and if at least two samples showed at least one detected peptide. Protein interaction networks were visualized and functional enrichment analyses were performed using the STRING database (version 11.5, http://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc/esi–ms, Induced cardiomyocyte precursor, Secretome, Paracrine profiling

### Affiliations
Deutsches Herzzentrum der Charité – Medical Heart Center of Charité and German Heart Institute Berlin, Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, 13353 Berlin, Germany
Berlin Institute of Health at Charité – Universitätsmedizin Berlin, BIH Center for Regenerative Therapies, 13353 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Kristin Klose

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Stamm
Deutsches Herzzentrum der Charité – Medical Heart Center of Charité and German Heart Institute Berlin, Department of Cardiothoracic and Vascular Surgery, 13353 Berlin, Germany


