### Accession
PXD009946

### Title
Alternative digestion approaches improve histone modification mapping by mass spectrometry in clinical samples

### Description
Profiling histone post-translational modifications (PTMs) in clinical samples holds great potential for the identification of epigenetic biomarkers and the discovery of novel epigenetic targets. We have recently developed a battery of mass spectrometry (MS)-based approaches to analyze histone PTMs in different types of primary samples. However, most of these protocols rely on SDS-PAGE separation following histone enrichment in order to eliminate detergents and isolate histones from other proteins present in the sample. As a consequence, many proteolytic enzymes, whose performance is poor in gel, cannot be used, limiting the digestions options for clinical samples, and hence the modification coverage. In this study, we used a simple procedure involving acetone protein precipitation followed by histone enrichment through a C18 StageTip column to obtain histone preparations suitable for various in solution digestion protocols.

### Sample Protocol
Histone enrichment. Histones were enriched from primary cells by resuspending 0.5-2*106 cells in 1 ml of PBS buffer containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors. Nuclei were isolated through a 10-min centrifugation at 2300×g, resuspended in 100 ul of the same buffer containing 0.1% SDS and incubated for few minutes at 37°C in the presence of 250 U of benzonase to digest nucleic acids. To enrich histones from frozen tissues, at least 20 mg of tissue were thawed on ice, cut with scissors and homogenized in 1 ml of PBS-Triton using a Dounce homogenizer. The homogenate was filtered through a 100 um cell strainer and nuclei were isolated and lysed as described for primary cells. Histones were isolated from FFPE tissues using the PAT-H-MS protocol, as described [3]. Briefly, four 10-μm tissue sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated using standard procedures. Tissue samples were homogenized by sonication in 200 μL of 20 mM Tris pH 7.4 containing 2% SDS and proteins were extracted and de-crosslinked at 95°C for 45 min and 65°C for 4 hrs. Histones were obtained from paraffin-embedded whole mouse brains harboring orthotopic GBM patient-derived xenografts from 7-10 uM-thick H&E stained sections that were subjected to manual macrodissection to isolate the tumor prior to PAT-H-MS [4]. The yield of histones deriving from the different purification protocols was estimated by SDS-PAGE gel by comparison with known amounts of recombinant histone H3.1, following protein detection with colloidal Comassie staining. StageTip column histone enrichment. Five to ten ug of histones were precipitated with 4 volumes of cold acetone and incubated for at least 5 hours at -20°C, washed once with cold acetone, allowed to air-dry and resuspended in 10-20 ul of 10% acetonitrile in water. The precipitated samples are then diluted in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and loaded through a 5-min centrifugation at 3700x g on reversed-phase C18 handmade “StageTip” columns [6, 7], which were made by placing three 14-gauge StageTip plugs of Empore material (3M) in an ordinary 200 ml pipette tip. The samples were washed once in buffer A and eluted sequentially with a buffer B containing 0.5% acetic acid and 40 and 45% acetonitrile. Finally, the eluates are combined and concentrated to a volume below 10 ul in a speedvac centrifuge, before undergoing different types of digestions. Histone digestion. About 5-10 μg of histones per run per sample were mixed with an approximately equal amount of super-SILAC mix and either separated on a 17% SDS-PAGE gel, or subjected to C18 StageTip column enrichment. For in gel distestions, bands corresponding to histones H3 were excised, chemically alkylated with D6-acetic anhydride anhydride, in-gel digested with trypsin (the combination of chemical alkylation and trypsin digestion generates an “Arg-C-like” digestion) [3].

### Data Protocol
Histone PTM data analysis. Acquired RAW data were analyzed using the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. The Uniprot HUMAN_histones 1502 database was used for histone peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%. The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. One missed cleavage was allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Variable modifications for in solution Arg-C digestions were lysine monomethylation (+14.016), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and acetylation (+42.010 Da). Variable modifications for the Prop-PIC protocol include lysine propionylation (+56.0262 Da), monomethylation-propionylation (+70.0422, which corresponds to the sum of monomethylation and propionylation), dimethylation, trimethylation and acetylation, and N-terminal PIC labeling (+119.0371 Da). Peptides with Andromeda score less than 60 and localization probability score less than 0.75 were removed. Identifications and retention times were used to guide the manual quantification of each modified peptide using QualBrowser sofware.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Histone post-translational modifications, Proteomics, Epigenetics

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
European Institute of Oncology, Milan

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
European Institute of Oncology, Milan


