### Accession
PXD032085

### Title
Global post-translational modification profiling of HIV-1-infected cells reveals mechanisms of host cellular pathway remodeling

### Description
Viruses must effectively remodel host cellular pathways to replicate and evade immune defenses, and they must do so with limited genomic coding capacity. Targeting post-translational modification (PTM) pathways provides a mechanism by which viruses can broadly and rapidly transform a hostile host environment into a hospitable one. We used mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in protein abundance and two PTM types – phosphorylation and ubiquitination – in response to HIV-1 infection with viruses harboring targeted deletions of a subset of HIV-1 genes. PTM analysis revealed a requirement for Aurora kinase activity in HIV-1 infection and identified substrates of a phosphatase that is degraded during infection. Finally, we demonstrated that the Cullin4A-DDB1-DCAF1 E3 ubiquitin ligase ubiquitinates histone H1 somatic isoforms and that the HIV-1 Vpr protein inhibits this process, leading to defects in DNA repair.

### Sample Protocol
Infected cells were lysed in a buffer containing 8M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 150 mM NaCl, and PhosStop and Complete-EDTA free phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Roche) and sonicated to sheer membranes and DNA. Protein concentrations were measured by a Bradford assay. For SILAC analyses, light and heavy cells for each comparison (i.e., Env vs. mock, Env vs. EnvVif, Env vs. EnvVpr, Env vs. EnvVpu) were combined at equal protein concentrations. Lysates were reduced by the addition of 4 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 30 minutes at room temperature, disulfide bonds were alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature, and excess iodoacetamide was quenched with 20 mM DTT (Sigma). Lysates were diluted 1:4 in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin was added at a 1:100 enzyme:substrate ratio. Lysates were digested for 18 hours at room temperature with rotation. Digested lysates were acidifed with 0.1% TFA and peptides concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 solid phase extraction columns (Waters). For ubiquitin remnant analysis, an amount of digested lysate equivalent to 10 mg of protein was subjected to ubiquitin remnant immunoprecipitation according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Cell Signaling Technologies). For phosphorylation analysis, an amount of digested lysate equivalent to 1 mg of protein was lyophilized and then resuspended in a buffer containing 75% ACN with 0.1% TFA. Peptides were incubated with Fe3+-immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC) beads, washed with the same resuspension buffer, and then phosphopeptides were eluted with 500 mM HK2PO4. For both ubiquitin remnant-enriched and phosphopeptide-enriched samples, the purified material was desalted using homemade C18 STAGE tips, evaporated to dryness, and then resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis (Rappsilber et al., 2007).   Phosphorylation and protein abundance samples were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometry system equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 uHPLC system interfaced with the mass spectrometer via a Nanoflex II nanoelectrospray source. Samples were injected onto a C18 reverse phase capillary column (75 m inner diameter x 25 cm, packed with 1.9 m Reprosil Pur C18-AQ particles). Peptides were then separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 30% in 0.1% formic acid over 120 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. To build a spectral library, biological replicates were pooled and analyzed by a data-dependent acquisition method with a full scan in the Orbitrap (120,000 resolution, 400 – 1300 m/z scan range, 50 ms maximum injection time, AGC target of 400,000) followed by the maximum number of high energy collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scans that could be obtained within 3 s. MS/MS scans were collected in the Orbitrap (15,000 resolution, 22 ms maximum injection time, 50,000 AGC target, isolation in quadrupole, isolation window 1.6 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was enabled to exclude peaks with an exclusion duration of 45 s and a mass tolerance of +/- 10 ppm. Charge state screening was enabled to reject MS/MS analysis of singly charged species or species for which the charge could not be assigned. Individual samples were analyzed by a data-independent acquisition method with a full scan in the Orbitrap (60,000 resolution, 390 – 1010 m/z scan range, 50 ms maximum injection time, AGC target of 400,000) followed by 30 MS/MS scans in the Orbitrap spanning the full scan mass range in 8 m/z windows (15,000 resolution, 22 ms maximum injection time, 400,000 AGC target, isolation in quadrupole).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Mass spectrometry data was analyzed by MaxQuant and Spectronaut to identify peptides/proteins, localize post-translational modifications, and extract quantitative information. False discovery rates were estimated using a decoy database strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). All data were filtered to achieve a false discovery rate of 0.01 for peptide-spectrum matches, peptide identifications, and protein identifications. Search parameters included a fixed modification for carbamidomethyl cysteine and variable modifications for N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation for phosphoenriched samples and diglycine-modified lysine for ubiquitin remnant-enriched samples. All other search parameters were defaults for the respective algorithms.   The MSstats statistical package was employed to integrate data from technical and biological replicates to estimate log2fold-changes, p-values, and adjusted p-values (Choi et al., 2014). All data were normalized by equalizing median intensities, the summary method was Tukey’s median polish, and the maximum quantile for deciding censored missing values was 0.999.   Gene ontology enrichment analysis Gene ontology enrichment analysis was performed by hypergeometric testing using the dhyper function in R. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).   Kinase activity analysis Kinase activity analysis was performed using the FGSEA package in R and kinase-substrate annotations in the PhosphoSitePlus resource (Hornbeck et al., 2015; Korotkevich et al., 2021). P-values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995).

### Publication Abstract
Viruses must effectively remodel host cellular pathways to replicate and evade immune defenses, and they must do so with limited genomic coding capacity. Targeting post-translational modification (PTM) pathways provides a mechanism by which viruses can broadly and rapidly transform a hostile host environment into a hospitable one. We use mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify changes in protein abundance and two PTM types-phosphorylation and ubiquitination-in response to HIV-1 infection with viruses harboring targeted deletions of a subset of HIV-1 genes. PTM analysis reveals a requirement for Aurora kinase activity in HIV-1 infection and identified putative substrates of a phosphatase that is degraded during infection. Finally, we demonstrate that the HIV-1 Vpr protein inhibits histone H1 ubiquitination, leading to defects in DNA repair.

### Keywords
Hiv-1, Vif, Ubiquitination, Phosphorylation, B56, Systems biology, Proteomics, Vpr, Pp2a, Histone h1

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY, 10029; USA
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai

### Submitter
Jeffrey Johnson

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey Johnson
Department of Microbiology; Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai; New York, NY, 10029; USA


