### Accession
PXD016882

### Title
Study of matrix proteins synthesized by DU145 and PC3 prostate cancer cells alone or in co-culture with prostate-derived fibroblasts.

### Description
Tumor microenvironment or stroma has the potency to regulate the behavior of malignant cells. Fibroblast-like cells are abundant in tumor stroma and they are also responsible for the synthesis of many extracellular matrix components. Fibroblast–cancer cell interplay can modify the functions of both cell types.   We applied mass spectrometry and proteomics to unveil the matrisome in 3D spheroids formed by DU145 prostate cancer cells, PC3 prostate cancer cells or prostate derived fibroblasts. Similarly DU145/fibroblast and PC3/fibroblast co-culture spheroids were also analyzed. Western Blotting and immunofluorescence were used to confirm the presence of specific proteins in spheroids. Cancer dissemination was studied by utilizing "out of spheroids" migration and invasion assays.  In the spheroid model cancer cell–fibroblast interplay caused remarkable changes in extracellular matrix and accelerated the invasion of DU145 cells. Fibroblasts produced structural matrix proteins, growth factors and matrix metalloproteinases. In cancer cell/fibroblast co-cultures basement membrane components, including laminins (3, 5, 2, 3), heparan sulphate proteoglycan (HSPG2 gene product), and collagen XVIII accumulated in a prominent manner when compared to spheroids that contained fibroblasts or cancer cells only. Furthermore, collagen XVIII was intensively processed to different endostatin isoforms by cancer cell derived cathepsin L.  To sum up, fibroblasts can promote carcinoma cell dissemination by several different mechanisms. Extracellular matrix and basement membrane proteins provide attachment sites for cell locomotion promoting adhesion receptors. Growth factors and metalloproteinases are known to accelerate cell invasion. Additionally, cancer cell–fibroblast interplay generates biologically active fragments of basement membrane proteins, such as endostatin.

### Sample Protocol
Spheroids were collected and treated ON at +4 C with Hypotonic Lysis buffer (HLB) containing (10 mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA and 10 µg/ml DNAse) to release soluble cytoplasmic proteins. The next day samples were washed twice with HLB and centrifuged between washes at 12600g and +4 C for 2.5 min. Samples were recovered by centrifugation as mentioned above and dissolved in solution containing 8 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The cysteines were reduced by 10 mM diothiotreitol at +37 C for 2 h and alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was inactivated by increasing DTT concentration to 30 mM. Proteins were digested with Trypsin/Lys C –mixture (Promega) first for 4 h at +37 C so that Trypsin/Lys C -mixture added was 1/50 of the protein concentration. Urea concentration was decreased to 0.6 M and ammonium bicarbonate concentration was increased to 80 nM to reactivate trypsin. Trypsin/Lys C-mixture concentration was increased to 1/25 of the protein concentration and incubated overnight at +37 °C. The peptides were desalted by StageTips and loaded on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy‐nLCII, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano‐electrospray ionization source. Three repeated runs per sample were performed.  Approximately 500 ng peptides as a 5-µl injection were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 µm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 µm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were separated with a 60 min gradient from 7 to 35 % of solvent B. Before the end of the run, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Full MS scan over the mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300-2000 with a resolution of 140,000; AGC target of 3E6; and maximum ion trap fill time of 100 ms followed by data dependent acquisition with an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and a dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was performed. The top 10 ions were fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27 and scanned over the m/z range of 200-2000 with a resolution of 17,500; AGC target of 5E4; and maximum ion trap fill time of 250 ms.  After the MS2 scan for each of the top 10 ions had been obtained, a new full mass spectrum scan was acquired and the process repeated until the end of the 70 min run.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched using the MaxQuant (with a built-in Andromeda search engine) software (version 1.5.2.8) against a database containing reviewed human (SwissProt) and unreviewed (TrEMBL) sequences, including different isoforms, of UniProtKB release 2017_12. Peptide-spectrum-match- and protein-level false discovery rate thresholds were set to 0.01. Carbamidomethyl (C), as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M), hydroxylation (K, P) as dynamic modifications were included. A maximum of two missed cleavages by trypsin (also before P) was allowed. The LC-MS profiles were aligned (within 20 min), and the identifications were transferred to non-sequenced or non-identified MS features in other LC-MS runs (within 0.7 min). Label free quantitation based on extracted ion intensity was applied. The intensity of a protein was obtained by summing the intensities of identified peptides and transferred identifications for that protein. The protein was determined as detected in the sample if its identification had been derived from at least two unique peptide identifications. Filtering for contaminating proteins, reverse identification and identification by site was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pc3, Du145, Basement membrane proteins, Fibroblasts, Matrisome, Matrix proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Biochemistry, University of Turku, Turku, Finland


