### Accession
PXD012839

### Title
Ribosomal protein turnover under normal condition

### Description
The cytosolic ribosome is composed of a large number of distinct protein types and its overall function is responsible for the synthesis of most proteins in plants.  Defining the role of each of its protein subunits is a major challenge which is hampered by a lack of consistency in current attribution of proteins to the cytosolic ribosome or to the broader translatome associated with functioning ribosomes. The turover rates of several ribosomal proteins, including both small and large subunit proteins were measured, which showed that shows that some ribosomal proteins turnover much more rapidly that the ribosome as a whole and could be important to understand ribosome function, critical sites in their function or in vivo repair processes.

### Sample Protocol
7 days old Arabidopsis cell culture was labeld by using 15N (heavy nitrogen) via changing the cell culture media from 14N media to 15N media, the labelled cells were kept for 1, 3 and 5 days. Ribosome al protein turnover were measured by isolating ribosome from cell culture, followed by protein quantification, digestion and MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Aligent .d files were transferred to mzMl file by mascot convertand then to .mgf fileswere serached by mascot and the out put files were exported as .dat file.

### Publication Abstract
Cytosolic 80S ribosomes contain proteins of the mature cytosolic ribosome (r-proteins) as well as proteins with roles in ribosome biogenesis, protein folding or modification. Here, we refined the core r-protein composition in Arabidopsis thaliana by determining the abundance of different proteins during enrichment of ribosomes from cell cultures using peptide mass spectrometry. The turnover rates of 26 40S subunit r-proteins and 29 60S subunit r-proteins were also determined, showing that half of the ribosome population is replaced every 3-4 days. Three enriched proteins showed significantly shorter half-lives; a protein annotated as a ribosomal protein uL10 (RPP0D, At1g25260) with a half-life of 0.5 days and RACK1b and c with half-lives of 1-1.4 days. The At1g25260 protein is a homologue of the human Mrt4 protein, a trans-acting factor in the assembly of the pre-60S particle, while RACK1 has known regulatory roles in cell function beyond its role in the 40S subunit. Our experiments also identified 58 proteins that are not from r-protein families but co-purify with ribosomes and co-express with r-proteins; 26 were enriched more than 10-fold during ribosome enrichment. Some of these enriched proteins have known roles in translation, while others are newly proposed ribosome-associated factors in plants. This analysis provides an improved understanding of A. thaliana ribosome protein content, shows that most r-proteins turnover in unison in vivo, identifies a novel set of potential plant translatome components, and how protein turnover can help identify r-proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis or regulation in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis  cell culture, 80s cytosolic ibosome isolation, 15n isotopic labelling, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
Director of ARC center in PlantEnergy Bilology at School of Molcular Science at Univerity of Western Australia
UWA

### Submitter
Karzan Salih

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
Director of ARC center in PlantEnergy Bilology at School of Molcular Science at Univerity of Western Australia


