### Accession
PXD017972

### Title
Transgenerational long-term effects of the embryo cryopreservation-transfer procedure: a multi-omic approach

### Description
The DNA, its epigenetic information and signals from the direct environment, all work together to orchestrate the development of the single fertilized oocyte into a new individual. The concept of developmental programming, attributed to the embryonic plasticity, suggests that the early life environment influences offspring characteristics in later life, but also further generations. There is increasing awareness about the use of Assisted Reproductive Technologies (ART), because, due to its high inefficiency mimicking in vivo optimal conditions, implies an extraordinary change in the environment where the beginning of a new organism takes place. Here we assessed the transgenerational effects of the cryopreserved embryo replacement on a maternal tract using the rabbit as a model. Then, one progeny derived from vitrified-transferred embryos (VT group) was compared to a cohort of animals naturally-conceived (NC group). A multi-omic approach (metabolome, proteome and epigenome) were addressed on the liver tissue in order to complete or previous phenotypic and transcriptomic characterization of F3 animals. LC-ESI-MS and LC-APCI-MS analysis were performed to interrogate the semi-polar and non-polar metabolomes, respectively. For the proteomic study, the analysis was carried on by LC-SWATH-MS. Finally, genome-wide DNA methylation profiling was studied by MBD-Seq. The healthy state was evaluated by a haematological and biochemical analysis of the peripheral blood. Targeted and untargeted metabolome analysis revealed a global metabolome alteration in the VT livers, particularly for those pathways related with the lipid metabolism. Here was detected some disturbances in the metabolism of long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (LC-PUFA), which was corroborated by the proteomic data. Functional analysis of the subset of proteins that differs between VT and NC livers revealed significant changes in the metabolism of the linoleic (LIN) and arachidonic (ARA) acids, whose downstream consequences directly was related with dysregulations in the growth and immune system responses. Overall results denoted that these metabolic disturbances participated in a complex network of physiological pathways that together promotes the phenotypic deviations currently observed after an embryo cryopreservation-transfer procedure (CTP). The underlying hypothesis supported by our results, is that these developmental deviations respond to changes in the epigenome, as consequence of direct perturbation of the reprogramming process by ART, which are dragged until adult life and inherited by further generations. Changes in the epigenetic suggested possible interactions between lipid and apoptotic pathways that jointly reprograms the physiology of the liver. However, based on peripheral blood parameters, the healthy status of VT animals was comparable to that of the NC group. Our data provides valuable information about the transgenerational long-term molecular effects of the embryo CTP using high-throughput sciences, which should highlight the need to study ART not only to increase pregnancy rates, but also to use ART in the safest way possible.

### Sample Protocol
The proteome analyses were performed in the Proteomics Unit of the University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain (member of the PRB2-ISCIII ProteoRed Proteomics Platform). Proteins from liver biopsy were extracted in Lysis buffer (7M Urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 30mM Tris‐pH 8.5) using 2D Grinding Kit (GE Healthcare). Samples were quantified by RC_DC kit (BioRad) according manufactured instructions. Firstly, we conducted a data dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis, to study the complete proteome through a spectral library building by in-gel digestion and LC-MS/MS. The complete proteome was analysed from a pool obtained mixing aliquots with an equivalent amount of all the samples (100 µg in total) for build the spectral library from a 1D SDS PAGE gel. The career corresponding to the library was cut into 3 pieces and then were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Gel slides were digested using 500 ng of trypsin and digestion was set to 37 ºC. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the supernatant (SN) was removed, then the library gel slides were dehydrated with pure acetonitrile (ACN). The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and resuspended in 100 μL 2% ACN (v/v); 0.1% TFA (v/v). Five µl of the digested fragments were loaded onto a trap column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA (v/v) at 3µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ C18-CL, 75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% FA (formic acid) (v/v). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 90 min (A: 0.1% FA (v/v); B: ACN, 0.1% FA (v/v)) for at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 250-ms TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 150-ms product ion scans from 350-1500 m/z on the 25 most intense 2-5 charged ions. The rolling collision energies equations were set for all ions as for 2+ ions according to the following equations: |CE|=(slope)x(m/z)+(intercept).  After that, analysis of individual samples was carried on by LC-SWATH-MS acquisition. To determine quantitative differences in liver protein composition among our experimental rabbit progenies, the SWATH analysis of individual liver samples was performed. Thus, 20µg of total protein extracted from each sample was loaded in the 1D SDS PAGE and the carrier corresponding to each sample was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al., 1996), using 500 ng of trypsin for each sample and digestion was set to 37 ºC on. The trypsin digestion was stopped with 10% TFA (v/v) and the SN was removed, then the library gel slides were dehydrated with pure ACN. The new peptide solutions were combined with the corresponding SN. The peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and re suspended in 25 µL of 2 % ACN (v/v); 0.1% TFA (v/v). Five µL of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (3 μm particles size 18-CL, 350 µm diameter x 0.5 mm long; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA (v/v) at 3μL/min during 5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 μm C18-CL, 75μmx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% ACN (v/v) 0.1% FA (v/v). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 120 min (A: 0.1% FA (v/v); B: ACN, 0.1% FA (v/v)) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The tripleTOF was operated in swath mode, in which a 0.050-s TOF MS scan from 350-1250 m/z was performed, followed by 0.080-s product ion scans from 350-1250 m/z (3.05 sec/cycle). The used Swath windows were: 15 Da window widths from 450 to 1000 Da, 37 windows. Collision energy was set to optimum energy for a 2+ ion and the mass spectrometer was always operated in high sensitivity mode.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, validation and quantification, data were analysed as following. After library LC-MS/MS, the SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX). The Paragon algorithm (5.0.2.0, 5174) of ProteinPilot was used to search against the Uniprot Mammalia protein sequence database (1376814 proteins searched) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, without taxonomy restriction, and the search effort set to through and FDR correction for proteins (Shilov et al., 2007). To avoid using the same spectral evidence in more than one protein, the identified proteins were grouped based on MS/MS spectra by the Protein-Pilot Pro GroupTM Algorithm, regardless of the peptide sequence assigned. The protein within each group that could explain more spectral data with confidence was depicted as the primary protein of the group. The resulting Protein-Pilot group file was loaded into PeakView® (v2.2, AB SCIEX) and peaks from SWATH runs were extracted with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% confidence and a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%.  The number of peptides per protein was set in 50, and 6 transitions per peptide were necessary for quantify one peptide. Modified peptides were excluded. After peptide detection, peptides were aligned among different samples using high confidence detected peptides from the library.  The extracted ions chromatograms were integrated and the areas were used to calculate the total protein quantity

### Publication Abstract
Embryo manipulation is a requisite step in assisted reproductive technology (ART). Therefore, it is of great necessity to appraise the safety of ART and investigate the long-term effect, including lipid metabolism, on ART-conceived offspring. Augmenting our ART rabbit model to investigate lipid metabolic outcomes in offspring longitudinally, we detected variations in hepatic DNA methylation ART offspring in the F3 generation for embryonic exposure (multiple ovulation, vitrification and embryo transfer). Through adult liver metabolomics and proteomics, we identified changes mainly related to lipid metabolism (e.g., polyunsaturated fatty acids, steroids, steroid hormone). We also found that DNA methylation analysis was linked to changes in lipid metabolism and apoptosis genes. Nevertheless, these differences did not apparently alter the general health status. Thus, our findings suggest that ART is likely to be a player in embryo epigenetic events related to hepatic homeostasis alteration in adulthood.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Transgenerational effects, Swath, Cryopreserved embryo

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Marco-Jiménez
Laboratory of Biotechnology of Reproduction, Institute for Animal Science and Technology (ICTA), Universitat Politècnica de València, 46022 Valencia, Spain


