### Accession
PXD015726

### Title
Reanalysis of NOD mouse insulin granule and secreted peptidome data

### Description
Data from a previous publication from our lab (Nature 2018 Aug; 560 (7716): 107-111) were reanalyzed by performing a multiround search against a Uniprot-Mouse database followed by an in silico database of hybrid insulin peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos) with spectral acquisition for both MS and MS/MS in the Orbitrap as previously described (PXD009919).

### Data Protocol
Data files were processed and searched using PEAKS X. A multiround search was employed; data files were first searched against a Uniprot-Mouse database with no enzyme specificity, with parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.01 Da. Variable modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ) and trioxidation (C). Unassigned spectra were searched against an in silico HIP database from the Haskins lab.

### Publication Abstract
The nature of autoantigens that trigger autoimmune diseases has been much discussed, but direct biochemical identification is lacking for most. Addressing this question demands unbiased examination of the self-peptides displayed by a defined autoimmune major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) molecule. Here, we examined the immunopeptidome of the pancreatic islets in non-obese diabetic mice, which spontaneously develop autoimmune diabetes based on the I-A<sup>g7</sup> variant of MHC-II. The relevant peptides that induced pathogenic CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells at the initiation of diabetes derived from proinsulin. These peptides were also found in the MHC-II peptidome of the pancreatic lymph nodes and spleen. The proinsulin-derived peptides followed a trajectory from their generation and exocytosis in &#x3b2; cells to uptake and presentation in islets and peripheral sites. Such a pathway generated conventional epitopes but also resulted in the presentation of post-translationally modified peptides, including deamidated sequences. These analyses reveal the key features of a restricted component in the self-MHC-II peptidome that caused autoreactivity.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hybrid insulin peptides, Type 1 diabetes

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology and Immunology Bursky Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs Washington University in St. Louis 660 S. Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8118 St. Louis, MO 63110
Washington University

### Submitter
Cheryl Lichti

### Lab Head
Dr Cheryl Lichti
Department of Pathology and Immunology Bursky Center for Human Immunology and Immunotherapy Programs Washington University in St. Louis 660 S. Euclid Ave, Campus Box 8118 St. Louis, MO 63110


