### Accession
PXD033583

### Title
RcgA and RcgR, two novel proteins involved in conjugative transfer of rhizobial plasmids

### Description
Rhizobia are gram-negative bacteria able to establish a symbiotic interaction with leguminous plants. Due to their nitrogen fixing capacity, the study of these microorganisms has acquired great relevance for the agriculture. Rhizobia usually harbor many plasmids in their genome which can be transferred to other organisms by conjugation. Two main mechanisms of regulation of rhizobial plasmid transfer have been described: Quorum sensing (QS) and rctA/rctB system. Nevertheless, new genes and molecules that modulate conjugative transfer have been recently described, demonstrating that new actors can tightly regulate the process.  In this work, by means of bioinformatics tools and molecular biology approaches, two hypothetical genes are identified as playing key roles in conjugative transfer. These genes are located between conjugative genes of plasmid pLPU83a from Rhizobium favelukesii LPU83, a plasmid that showed a conjugative transfer behavior depending on the genomic background. One of the two mentioned genes, rcgA, is essential for conjugation, while the other, rcgR, acts as an inhibitor of the process. In addition to introducing this new regulatory mechanism, we show evidence of the functions of these genes in different genomic backgrounds, and confirmed that homologous proteins from non-closely related organisms play the same function. These findings set up a cornerstone for a new molecular circuit of conjugative transfer of plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
For protein isolation, 1.5 mL of cell cultures were centrifugated at 13000 rpm for 5 minutes and pellets were frozen in N2. Pellets were resuspended in 100 µl of 100mM Ambic [ammonium bicarbonate (Honeywell Fluka)]. Next, 100 µl of the organic solvent trifluoroethanol (TFE, Fluka biochemika) and 5 µl of 20nM DTT were added. The tubes were mixed by inversion and incubated for 60 minutes at 60°C. In a second step, 20 μL of 200 mM Iodoacetamid (IAA) was added and placed for 90 min in the dark at room temperature. Then, 5 µl of 20nM DTT were added again and incubated for 60 minutes at room temperature. Half of the mixture was saved at -80 ºC as backup. To the remaining sample, 437 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 437 μL of bidistilled water were added. In the next step, 10 μL Trypsin Gold (1 μg μL−1) (Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega, WI, USA) was added and the solution was incubated at 37 °C overnight.  The protein digestion was purified the next day with Sep Pak C18 cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The Sep Pak C18 cartridges were rinsed with 1 mL of solution B (65% Acetonitril, 35% bidistilled water; 0.1% TFA). The column was equilibrated with 1 mL of solution A (98% Acetonitril, 2% bidistilled water; 0.1% TFA). Next, the digest mixed with 1 mL of solution A was added and run through the column slowly. Subsequently, the cartridges were washed with 1 mL of solution A. The proteome was eluted with 100 μL solution B in low protein binding collection tubes and dried in a vacufuge concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Next, the dried peptide mixture was resuspended in 15 μL of solution A and quantified with a Nano-Drop™ 2000/2000c (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA).  LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out using a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) online coupled to the LC system. The peptides were separated on a 25 cm steel column Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18-LC-column with a particle size of 2 μm and a diameter of 75 μm (Thermo Fisher, MA, USA). Identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed using the software MaxQuant with default settings and a false discovery rate of padj < 0.05 (Cox & Mann, 2008).

### Data Protocol
Identification and label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis was performed using the software MaxQuant with default settings and a false discovery rate of padj < 0.05 (Cox & Mann, 2008). The statistical analysis of LFQ data obtained from MaxQuant was performed with Perseus 1.6.10.43 (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Rhizobia are Gram-negative bacteria that are able to establish a nitrogen-fixing symbiotic interaction with leguminous plants. Rhizobia genomes usually harbor several plasmids which can be transferred to other organisms by conjugation. Two main mechanisms of the regulation of rhizobial plasmid transfer have been described: quorum sensing (QS) and the <i>rctA</i>/<i>rctB</i> system. Nevertheless, new genes and molecules that modulate conjugative transfer have recently been described, demonstrating that new actors can tightly regulate the process. In this work, by means of bioinformatics tools and molecular biology approaches, two hypothetical genes are identified as playing key roles in conjugative transfer. These genes are located between conjugative genes of plasmid pRfaLPU83a from Rhizobium favelukesii LPU83, a plasmid that shows a conjugative transfer behavior depending on the genomic background. One of the two mentioned genes, <i>rcgA</i>, is essential for conjugation, while the other, <i>rcgR</i>, acts as an inhibitor of the process. In addition to introducing this new regulatory system, we show evidence of the functions of these genes in different genomic backgrounds and confirm that homologous proteins from non-closely related organisms have the same functions. These findings set up the basis for a new regulatory circuit of the conjugative transfer of plasmids. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> Extrachromosomal DNA elements, such as plasmids, allow for the adaptation of bacteria to new environments by conferring new determinants. Via conjugation, plasmids can be transferred between members of the same bacterial species, different species, or even to organisms belonging to a different kingdom. Knowledge about the regulatory systems of plasmid conjugative transfer is key in understanding the dynamics of their dissemination in the environment. As the increasing availability of genomes raises the number of predicted proteins with unknown functions, deeper experimental procedures help to elucidate the roles of these determinants. In this work, two uncharacterized proteins that constitute a new regulatory circuit with a key role in the conjugative transfer of rhizobial plasmids were discovered.

### Keywords
Plasmid, Rhizobia, Conjugation

### Affiliations
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular
Facultad de Ciencias Exactas. Universidad Nacional de La Plata. CCT La Plata CONICET
Calle 49 y 115
1900. La Plata
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular Facultad de Ciencias Exactas. Universidad Nacional de La Plata. CCT La Plata CONICET Calle 49 y 115 1900. La Plata Argentina

### Submitter
Gonzalo Torres Tejerizo

### Lab Head
Dr Gonzalo Torres Tejerizo
Instituto de Biotecnología y Biología Molecular Facultad de Ciencias Exactas. Universidad Nacional de La Plata. CCT La Plata CONICET Calle 49 y 115 1900. La Plata Argentina


