### Accession
PXD010282

### Title
Extensive OMICS resources for Sf21 and High Five cell lines

### Description
Insect derived cell-lines, from Spodoptera frugiperda (Sf21) and from Trichoplusia ni (High Five), are ones of the most widely used systems for recombinant protein expression in Baculoviral Expression Vector System (BEVS). Genomic sequences and annotations are still incomplete for Sf21 or absent for High Five. In this study we present an approach using different sequencing data types with short-read sequencing, long synthetic and Oxford Nanopore reads to build genomes at an unprecedented resolution. The Sf21 and High Five assemblies contain 4,020 scaffolds of size, 463 Mb with N50 of 364 Kb and 2,954 scaffolds of size, 332 Mb with N50 of 326 Kb, respectively. Furthermore, we build a new gene prediction workflow, which integrates transcriptome proteome information using pre-existing tools. Using this approach, we could predict 21,506 Sf21 genes and 14,159 High Five genes, which were then functionally annotated. Finally, we also generate and integrate proteomic datasets to validate predicted genes. This integrative approach could be theoretically applied to any uncharacterized genome and result in valuable new resources. With this information available, Sf21 and High Five cells will become even better tools for protein expression and could be used in a wider range of applications, from promoter identifications to genome engineering and editing.

### Sample Protocol
Sf21 or Hi5 cells were pelleted from 5 mL suspension, yielding approx. 10 million cells. Pellets were resuspended in 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.5 containing Rapigest™ (Waters) at 0.1% to a volume of 1 mL. Cells were lysed by high energy sonication (Bioruptor, Diagenode) and reduced (DTT, final concentration 15 mM and heating for 30 mins, 56 °C) then alkylated (IAA, final concentration 10 mM, 20 mins, dark). The proteins were precipitated using TCA (1 vol. ice cold 100% TCA to 4 vols sample) and left to stand on ice for 30 mins. Samples were then centrifuged (14,000 rpm, 20 mins, 4 °C). After removal of the supernatant, precipitates were washed 1x with 1 mL 10% TCA , vortexed, centrifuged again for 20 mins, 4°C then washed twice (2 x 1 mL with ice cold acetone). Vortexing and centrifugation steps repeated as before. The pellets were allowed to air-dry before being dissolved by sonication in digestion buffer (1 mL, 4M urea, 0,1M HEPES, pH 8); To a 50 µL aliquot, estimated to contain around 50-100 µg protein, 1 µg LysC enzyme (Wako) was added and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. The samples were then diluted with milliQ water (to reach 1.5M urea) and incubated with 1 µg trypsin for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30µm in the presence of a slow vacuum. In this process, the columns were conditioned with 3 x 100 µL solvent B (80% acetonitrile; 0.05% formic acid) and equilibrated with 3 x 100 µL solvent A (0.05% formic acid in milliQ water). The samples were loaded, washed 3 times with 100 µL solvent A, and then eluted into PCR tubes with 50 µL solvent B. Eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 50 µL 5% acetonitrile, 95% milliQ water, with 0.1% formic acid prior to pre-fractionation. Offline high pH reverse phase fractionation was performed using an Agilent 1260 (Hi5) or an Agilent 1200 (Sf21) Infinity HPLC System equipped with a binary (Hi5) or quarternary (Sf21) pump, degasser, variable wavelength UV detector (set to 220 and 254 nm), peltier-cooled autosampler (set at 10°C) and fraction collector. The column was a Waters XBridge C18 column (3.5 µm, 100 x 1.0 mm, Waters) with a Gemini C18, 4 x 2.0 mm SecurityGuard (Phenomenex) cartridge as a guard column. The solvent system consisted of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) as mobile phase (A) and 100% acetonitrile as mobile phase (B). 50 µg of the peptides were injected, and the separation was accomplished at a mobile phase flow rate of 0.1 mL/min using a linear gradient from 100% A to 31 % B in 91 min.  48 fractions were collected along with the LC separation, which were subsequently pooled into 10 discordant fractions. Pooled fractions were dried in a Speed-Vac and then stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis, where approximately 1 µg per fraction were used to acquire DDA data. Peptides were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 2.5 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The samples were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 µL/min, onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min.  Peptides were eluted via the analytical column at a constant flow of 0.3 µL/min, at 40°C. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 5% to 7% in 10 minutes, then from 7% B to 30% B in a further 105 min and to 45% B by 130 min.  The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360 µm OD x 20 µm ID; 10 µm tip (New Objective) and a spray voltage of 2.2kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 375-1500 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 60K using the quad isolation. The RF on the ion funnel was set to 30%. The fill time was set at max of 50 ms with an AGC target of 2 x 10^5 ions and 1 microscan.  The peptide MIPS was enabled and only charge states from 2+ to 7+ were selected for MS2. The most intense ions (3 second cycle time) from the full scan were selected for MS2, using quadrupole isolation (1.4 Da). An intensity threshold of 5 x10^3 ions was applied. HCD was performed with (CE30%). A max fill time of 22 ms with an AGC target of 1 x 10^5 for each precursor was set.  MS2 data were acquired in centroid in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 15K, with fixed first mass of 120 m/z. The dynamic exclusion list was with a maximum retention period of 15 sec and relative mass window of 10 ppm.  Isotopes were also excluded.

### Data Protocol
Using protein .fasta files generated from the annotation sequencing data (for the Sf21 andHi5 data 10 fractions separately) were searched with MaxQuant (v.1.5.3.28)and the Andromeda search engine. The data in both cases were searched against the generated species specific (Sf21 or Hi5) database with a list of common contaminants appended. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) (Variable). The mass error tolerance for the full scan MS spectra was set at 20 ppm and for the MS/MS spectra at 0.01 Da. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. From the MaxQuant searches, iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) values were exported and used to compile figures representing GO categories and dynamic range plots in both proteomes.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sf21, High five, Proteomic, Transcriptomic, Insect cell lines, Genomic

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Head of Genomics Core Facility EMBL Scientific Core Facilities, Services & Technology Unit  Meyerhofstr. 1 D-69117 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Joanna Kirkpatrick

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Benes
Head of Genomics Core Facility EMBL Scientific Core Facilities, Services & Technology Unit  Meyerhofstr. 1 D-69117 Heidelberg Germany


