### Accession
PXD015247

### Title
Comparative TMT-based quantitative proteomic analysis of the Tachaea chinensis isopod during parasitism

### Description
Parasitic isopods perforate and attach to the host integument via the mandibles, then feed on hemolymph and exudate from the wounds. Such isopods attack a variety of commercially important fish and crustacean hosts. Like other hematophagous parasites, isopods employ biomolecules that inhibit host blood conglutination and defense. In the present study, a tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomic approach was used to identify differentially expressed proteins in Tachaea chinensis parasites of shrimp, by comparing parasitic (fed) and pre-parasitic (unfed) individuals. We identified 888 proteins from 1510 total peptides, with a significant difference in 129 between the fed and unfed groups. Among these, 37 were upregulated and 92 were downregulated in unfed T. chinensis. This indicates that T. chinensis may require more energy before parasitism during its search for a host. In addition, as is the case for other blood-sucking parasites, it might secrete antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory molecules to facilitate blood meal acquisition. Our study is the first to use a TMT-based proteomic approach to analyze the proteome of isopod parasites, and our results will facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of isopod parasitism on crustaceans.

### Sample Protocol
Tachaea chinensis isopod parasites (0.82 ± 0.17 cm) and their host shrimp P. sinensis (3.48 ± 0.35 g) used in this study were collected from a rice field in Panjin City, Liaoning Province, China, in November 2018, and transported to the aquaculture laboratory at Shenyang Agricultural University. They were acclimated in two 300-L square fiberglass recirculation tanks with a circular flow system. Water temperature was kept at 24 °C ± 0.5 °C and the photoperiod was set at a 12:12 h light:dark cycle. After two weeks of acclimatization, 20 healthy T. chinensis were transferred into individual plastic tanks (15.8 cm diameter and 32.1 cm height), each containing 5 L water, with the same environmental conditions as during the acclimatization period.Following this, one P. sinensis each was placed in 10 of the prepared tanks, forming the fed group, with the other tanks kept as unfed pre-parasitism controls. After 7 d, fed and unfed T. chinensis were removed to individual 2-mL RNAse-free tubes and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage until protein extraction.

### Data Protocol
Three fed and three unfed isopods were ground into powder and vortexed in 600 µL SDT buffer (pH 8.0, 4 % SDS, 150 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM DTT). The mixture was heated at 100 °C for 10 min, then sonicated at 35 W, 4 s with 7 s intervals for 10 min. These were centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min and supernatants were collected into 0.22 µm filter tubes. One microliter underlayer liquid of each sample was used for BCA quantitative analysis, and 1 μg protein sample of each group were subjected to SDS-PAGE (12.5 % resolving gels) analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Parasitic isopods perforate and attach to the host integument via the mandibles and then feed on hemolymph and exudate from the wounds. Such isopods attack a variety of commercially important fish and crustacean hosts. Similar to other hematophagous parasites, isopods may also employ biomolecules that affect host blood conglutination and defense systems. In the present study, a tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomic approach was used to identify differentially expressed proteins in <i>Tachaea chinensis</i> parasites of shrimp, by comparing parasitic (fed) and pre-parasitic (unfed) individuals. We identified 888 proteins from a total of 1,510 peptides, with a significant difference in 129 between the fed and unfed groups. Among these, 37 were upregulated and 92 were downregulated in unfed <i>T. chinensis</i>. This indicates that <i>T. chinensis</i> may require more energy before parasitism during its search for a host. In addition, as is the case for other blood-sucking parasites, it might secrete antihemostatic, anti-inflammatory, and immunomodulatory molecules to facilitate blood meal acquisition. To our knowledge, this study is the first to use a TMT-based proteomic approach to analyze the proteome of isopod parasites, and the results will facilitate our understanding of the molecular mechanisms of isopod parasitism on crustaceans.

### Keywords
Isopod parasite, Blood-sucking, Comparative proteomic, During parasitism, Tachaea chinensis

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agriculture Universtiy
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, China

### Submitter
Yingdong Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yingdong Li
College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Shenyang, China


