### Accession
PXD040288

### Title
Insulin reverses impaired alveolar fluid clearance in ARDS by inhibiting LPS-induced autophagy and inflammatory

### Description
Until now, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) has been a difficult clinical condition with a high mortality and morbidity rate, and is characterized by a build-up of alveolar fluid and impaired clearance. The underlying mechanism is not yet fully understood and no specific treatment available. Autophagy activation is associated with ARDS caused by different pathogenic factors. It represents a new direction of prevention and treatment of ARDS to restrain autophagy to a reasonable level through pharmacological and molecular genetic methods. Na, K-ATPase is the main gradient driver of pulmonary water clearance in ARDS and could be degraded by the autophagy-lysosome pathway to affect its abundance and enzyme activity. As a normal growth hormone in human body, insulin has been widely used in clinical for a long time. To investigate the association of insulin with Na, K-ATPase, autophagy and inflammatory markers in LPS-treated C57BL/6 mice by survival assessment, proteomic analysis, histologic examination, inflammatory cell counting, myeloperoxidase, TNF-α, IL-1β activity analysis etc. This was also verified on mouse alveolar epithelial type Ⅱ (AT Ⅱ) and A549 cells by transmission electron microscopy. We found that insulin restored the transport efficiency of Na, K-ATPase, inhibited the activation of autophagy and reduced the release of inflammatory factors caused by alveolar epithelial damage. The regulation mechanism of insulin on Na, K-ATPase by inhibiting autophagy function may provide new drug targets for the treatment of ARDS.

### Sample Protocol
1.2.1 Sample lysis (1) Mix RIPA with protease inhibitor cocktail and 1mM PMSF immediately before use, chill on ice (2) ~ 100mg tissue (1 × 107 cell) in 1.5 mL ep, add 1000 µL RIPA buffer, homogenize or sonicate to dissolve at 4 °C (3) Centrifuge 15min at 4 °C with top speed, transfer the supernatant to new ep and keep it on ice 1.2.2 BCA assay (4) Mix regent A and B with a ratio of 50 : 1, 160 µL per well and 5 wells for calibration curve, 1 well for blank (5) Add 20 µL sample (dilute 5-10 times) or calibration standard (BSA, 5 different concentration levels) (6) Shake and incubate at 37 °C for 30min, read with 562 nm wave length (7) Calculate the protein concentration of each sample according to the calibration curve 1.2.3 Acetone precipitation (8) Take 100 µg protein for each sample and dilute samples to ~1 mg/ml (9) Add 4-6 fold volumes of pre-chilled acetone to alkylated protein and shake on ice for 30min or incubate at -20 °C overnight (10) Centrifuge at 4 °C with a speed of 10,000g, discard the supernatant carefully without disturbing the pellet (11) Wash the pellet twice with ~200 µL 80% chilled acetone 1.2.4 Re-suspend protein for tryptic digest (12) Add 200 µL 1% SDC + 100mM ABC, mix with vortex and spin down (13) Sonicate 5-30min in water bath to dissolve protein pellet (14) Add 5 mM TCEP to each sample, incubate and mix at 55 °C for 10 min (15) Add 10 mM IAA after samples cooling down to RT, incubate in the dark for 15min (16) Re-suspend trypsin with re suspension buffer to 0.5 µg / µL and incubate at RT for 5 min (17) Add trypsin solution to each sample (protein : trypsin = 50 : 1) (18) Mix well and spin down, incubate at 37 °C with thermomixer for about 8h or overnight 1.2.5 Cleaning up of SDC (19) Precipitate SDC with 2% TFA (final) (20) Centrifuge at top speed, transfer supernatant to new tube (21) Add n × 100 µL 2% TFA to the pellet, mix to extract co-precipitated peptides (22) Repeat the washing step twice (23) Merge 3 supernatants, centrifuge at top speed for 10-20 min, transfer supernatant to new tube carefully 1.2.6 Peptide desalting for base-RP fractionation (24) Equilibrate C18 column with 500 µL ACN (25) Wash out ACN with 500 µL 0.1% FA 2 times, discard the wash out (26) Load peptide solution to C18 column, let the solution flow through the column slowly, and collect flow through (A) (27) Repeat the peptide loading step once (28) Wash column with 1000 µL 0.1% FA, discard the wash out (29) Elute peptide with 400 µL 70% ACN, collect elution (B) with new ep (30) Repeat the desalting step (Equilibrate… to Elute…) once more with flow through (A) (31) Merge 2 elution (B) , vacuum dry the elution under 4 °C or RT 1.2.7 LC-MS/MS For each sample, ~2 µg peptide were separated and analyzed with a nano-UPLC (EASY-nLC1200) coupled to Q-Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Finnigan). Separation was performed using a reversed-phase column (100 µm, ID × 15 cm, Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9µm, Dr. Math). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1 % FA, 2 % ACN (phase A) and 80 % ACN, 0.1 % FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 120 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 8 to 30 % for 92 min, 30 to 40 % for 20 min, 40 to 100 % for 2 min, 100 % for 2 min, 100 to 2 % for 2 min and 2 % for 2 min. Data dependent acquisition was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 70,000 (@200 m/z) and m/z range of 350-1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 17,500 with a dynamic first mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3.0 E+6 with max IT 50ms, and 5.0 E+4 for MS2 with max IT 100ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 %, and isolation window of 2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 30 s. 1.2.8 MaxQuant database search Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.6.0). The protein sequence database (Uniprot_organism_2016_09) was downloaded from UNIPROT. This database and its reverse decoy were then searched against by MaxQuant software. The quantification type was LFQ with match between run and iBAQ; Trypsin was set as specific enzyme with up to 3 miss cleavage; Oxidation [M] and Acetyl [protein N-term] were considered as variable modification (max number of modifications per peptide is 3), Carbamidomethyl [C] was set as fixed modification; Both peptide and protein FDR should be less than 0.01. Only unique & razor peptides were used for quantification. All the other parameters were reserved as default.

### Data Protocol
2.1 Normalization summary The proteins quantity processed by maxLFQ are used for subsequent analysis without additional normalization procedure. Missing values were imputated by random values from a normal distribution ( the same as Perseus dose) after log transforming (1). For technology replicates, groups ratio were used as final values for statistics analysis. For multi-batch TMT labeling, reporter ratio to internal standard were used. 2.2 Cluster for all groups  In data mining and statistics, hierarchical clustering (also called hierarchical cluster analysis or HCA) is a method of cluster analysis which seeks to build a hierarchy of clusters. A heatmap is a graphical way of displaying a table of numbers by using colors to represent numerical values. The clustering algorithm groups related rows and/or columns together by similarity. The heatmap re-orders the rows and columns separately so that similar data are grouped together. A dendrogram shows the similarity of the rows, and a separate dendrogram shows the similarity of the columns. Although the row dendrogram and the column dendrogram are shown simultaneously on the heatmap, they are computed independently of each other, see Figure 3.  1. Proteins significant in any two comparing groups are used to perform clustering analysis.  2. Clustering is applied to the whole matrix and later split into sub-groups. This will enhance the visualization of group separation in the heatmap. Proteins listed bellow are corresponded to each sub-group and ordered the same as heatmap 2.3 Protein abundance ranking  Proteins iBAQ abundance (roughly the copy number) were plotted as Figure 4 , Y-axis was log10(iBAQ), X-axis was iBAQ ranking. Significant proteins were labeled as colored bar on X and Y axes. Generally, the iBAQ abundance range in a TMT experiment is about 6 - 7 order of magnitudes.

### Publication Abstract
Until now, acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) has been a difficult clinical condition with a high mortality and morbidity rate, and is characterized by a build-up of alveolar fluid and impaired clearance. The underlying mechanism is not yet fully understood and no effective medications available. Autophagy activation is associated with ARDS caused by different pathogenic factors. It represents a new direction of prevention and treatment of ARDS to restrain autophagy to a reasonable level through pharmacological and molecular genetic methods. Na, K-ATPase is the main gradient driver of pulmonary water clearance in ARDS and could be degraded by the autophagy-lysosome pathway to affect its abundance and enzyme activity. As a normal growth hormone in human body, insulin has been widely used in clinical for a long time. To investigate the association of insulin with Na, K-ATPase, autophagy and inflammatory markers in LPS-treated C57BL/6 mice by survival assessment, proteomic analysis, histologic examination, inflammatory cell counting, myeloperoxidase, TNF-&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; activity analysis etc. This was also verified on mouse alveolar epithelial type II (AT II) and A549 cells by transmission electron microscopy. We found that insulin restored the expression of Na, K-ATPase, inhibited the activation of autophagy and reduced the release of inflammatory factors caused by alveolar epithelial damage. The regulation mechanism of insulin on Na, K-ATPase by inhibiting autophagy function may provide new drug targets for the treatment of ARDS.

### Keywords
Na, K-atpase, Inflammatory response, Autophagy, Insulin, Ards

### Affiliations
wxpwy1216@163.com
Transplantation Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China

### Submitter
xupeng Wen

### Lab Head
Dr Xupeng Wen
Transplantation Center, the Third Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China


