### Accession
PXD001652

### Title
Mitochondrial Protein Hyperacetylation in the Failing Heart

### Description
Mitochondrial proteomics was used to identify energy metabolic derangements that occur during the early stages of heart failure in well-defined mouse models. Levels of β-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase 1 (BDH1), a key enzyme in ketone oxidation, was upregulated.  13C-substrate flux studies and metabolomic profiling confirmed that the hypertrophied and early stage failing heart shifts to ketone bodies as a fuel source in the context of reduced oxidation of fatty acids, the chief substrate for the normal heart.  This fuel shift is associated with an expansion of the acetyl pool and reduced levels of NAD+ levels resulting in increased mitochondrial protein acetylation.  Myocardium of humans with heart failure also exhibited mitochondrial protein hyperacetylation. We propose that a shift to ketones as a fuel source leads to maladaptive bioenergetic consequences during the development of heart failure.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation. All steps were performed at 4°C. Tissue was suspended in isolation buffer [(220 mM mannitol, 70 mM sucrose, 5 mM HEPESKOH, pH 7.4, 1 mM EGTA) supplemented with 10 mg/mL bovine serum albumin (BSA), protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche cOmplete tablets 1 tablet per 50 mL buffer), phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Roche PhosSTOP) and deacetylase inhibitors (10 mM nicotinamide, 10 μM TSA, 5 μM MS257, 10 mM sodium butyrate, 2 μM SAHA)]. Heart tissue was suspended to 0.1 g/mL in isolation buffer, and homogenized with four strokes of a Potter-Elvehjem glass/teflon homogenizer connected to a motorized stirrer at 1000 rpm. The homogenate was decanted and spun at 800g for 10 minutes. Any lipids were removed from the top of the supernatant by aspiration. The supernatant containing mitochondria was removed and transferred to a Beckman Ultra-clear centrifuge tube and spun at 8000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was resuspended in 1mL of isolation buffer. The crude mitochondria were transferred to a 1.5 mL microfuge tube and spun at 8000g for 10 minutes in a bench-top centrifuge. The supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with resuspension buffer [i.e., isolation buffer without bovine serum albumin (BSA)]. The mitochondria were pelleted by centrifugation at 8000g for 10 minutes in a bench top centrifuge. The supernatant was aspirated and the pellet was frozen immediately in liquid nitrogen. Purified mitochondria were suspended in 8 M urea, 40 mM Tris pH 8.0, 30 mM NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1x protease inhibitor tablet, 1x phosphatase inhibitor tablet, and 1x deacetylase inhibitors. Protein was extracted by sonication with a probe sonicator on ice and quantified by BCA assay. Protein from each sample (180 ug) was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 45 minutes at 58 °C and then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at ambient temperature in the dark. The alkylation was quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol. Following dilution to 1.5 M urea with 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, the samples were digested with trypsin (50:1 protein:enzyme) overnight. Additional trypsin (50:1 protein:enzyme) was spiked into the sample the following morning, digestions were quenched by TFA acidification two hours later, and samples were desalted with a tC18 sep-Pak. Desalted material was resuspended in 200 mM TEAB pH 8.5 and labeled with 8-plex TMT. Labeled peptides were combined and desalted. Labeling efficiency was evaluated by analyzing a test mixture by LC/MS/MS for each experiment. Labeling efficiency was > 95%, calculated by the number of N-terminal labeled peptides divided by the total number of peptide identifications. Labeled peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) on a polysulfoethyl A column (0.4 mm x 200 mm) with mobile phases A: 5 mM KH2PO4 pH 2.7 and 30% acetonitrile; B: 5 mM KH2PO4 pH 2.7, 350 mM KCl, and 30% acetonitrile; C: 5 mM KH2PO4 pH 6.5, 500 mM KCL and 20% acetonitrile; D: water. Peptides were eluted over the following gradient on a Surveyor LC quaternary pump (Thermo) at 3 mL/min: 0-2 min, 100% A; 2-5 min, 0-10% B; 5-35 min, 10-60% B; 35-41 min, 60-100% B; followed by washes with C and D prior to re-equilibration with mobile phase A. Sixteen fractions were collected and desalted. A small portion, 5%, of each was retained for protein analysis, while the remaining material was pooled into 6 fractions for acetyl lysine enrichment. These pooled fractions were dissolved in 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 100 mM NaCl, and each fraction was combined with approximately 50 uL pan-acetyl lysine antibody-agarose conjugate. The samples were rotated overnight at 4 °C and then rinsed eight times with cold 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 100 mM NaCl. Rinses were followed by elution with 0.1% TFA, and eluted peptides were desalted prior to analysis. All samples were analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography on a nanoAcquity (Waters) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo). Samples were loaded onto a 75 μm inner diameter analytical column made in-house, packed with 1.7m diameter, 130 Å pore size, BEH C18 particles (Waters) to a final length of 30 cm. The column was heated to 62 °C for all runs. The elution portion of the gradient was 5% to 30% B (A: water/0.2% formic acid; B: acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid) over 80 minutes for both acetyl enriched fraction and protein fractions. Mass spectrometry instrument methods all started with one MS1 survey scan (resolution = 60,000; 300 Th – 1,500 Th) followed by data dependent MS2 fragmentation and analysis (resolution = 30,000) of the fifteen most intense precursors by beam-type CAD (HCD; normalized collision energy = 35%, target value = 5e4). Only those precursors with charge state +2 or higher were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 40 seconds with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes, and monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were converted to searchable text files using DTA generator. Generated text files were searched for fully tryptic peptides with up to three missed cleavages against a UniProt target-decoy database populated with mouse canonical plus isoforms (downloaded 07Aug2013) using the Open Mass Spectrometry Search Algorithm (v. 2.1.8). Mass tolerance was set to ±2.5 Da for precursors and ±0.015 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, isobaric labeling of lysine, and isobaric labeling of the peptide N-terminus were searched as fixed modifications for all samples. Enriched fractions were additionally searched for variable acetylation modifications, in which the acetylation mass shift was set to the difference between an acetyl group and an isobaric label (-187.1523 Da) to allow the isobaric label on lysine to remain a fixed modification even for acetylated peptides. Search results were filtered to 1% FDR at the unique peptide level using the COMPASS software suite. TMT quantitation of identified peptides was performed within COMPASS. Peptides were grouped into proteins according to previously reported rules and protein identifications were further filtered to 1% FDR.8 Protein quantitation was performed by summing all reporter ion intensities within each channel for each protein. Acetylation events were localized to specific residues using previously described probabilistic methods. An acetylation event was considered localized if the calculated localization confidence is 95% or greater based on a comparisons to theoretically possible acetyl isoforms. If localized acetylated peptides shared identical modification sites, those peptides were grouped together and their reporter ion intensities were summed; peptides with C-terminal acetylation were excluded from quantitation. All reporter ion intensities were log2 transformed and mean normalized for every acetyl isoform and protein. To account for protein abundance differences, the acetyl isoforms were normalized by subtracting the quantitative value of the reporter ion channel for the corresponding protein from the value for each acetyl isoform reporter ion channel.  This gives a protein normalized acetylation mean normalized value which is then used to investigate fold changes between conditions. Fold change calculations were made by averaging the protein normalized values for each condition and then calculating the difference of averages. Proteins were identified as mitochondrial or non-mitochondrial based on inclusion or exclusion from the mitoCarta compendium of mitochondrial mouse proteins. MitoCarta EntrezID identifiers were converted to Uniprot identifiers with the Uniprot ID mapping function. This list was limited to contain only proteins that were in the mouse canonical database used for searching.

### Publication Abstract
Myocardial fuel and energy metabolic derangements contribute to the pathogenesis of heart failure. Recent evidence implicates posttranslational mechanisms in the energy metabolic disturbances that contribute to the pathogenesis of heart failure. We hypothesized that accumulation of metabolite intermediates of fuel oxidation pathways drives posttranslational modifications of mitochondrial proteins during the development of heart failure. Myocardial acetylproteomics demonstrated extensive mitochondrial protein lysine hyperacetylation in the early stages of heart failure in well-defined mouse models and the in end-stage failing human heart. To determine the functional impact of increased mitochondrial protein acetylation, we focused on succinate dehydrogenase A (SDHA), a critical component of both the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle and respiratory complex II. An acetyl-mimetic mutation targeting an SDHA lysine residue shown to be hyperacetylated in the failing human heart reduced catalytic function and reduced complex II-driven respiration. These results identify alterations in mitochondrial acetyl-CoA homeostasis as a potential driver of the development of energy metabolic derangements that contribute to heart failure.

### Keywords
Heart failure, Mitochondria, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Kelly:  Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Orlando, Florida, USA.   Coon:  Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA Genome Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA
Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute

### Submitter
Ola Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel P. Kelly; Joshua J. Coon
Kelly:  Diabetes and Obesity Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, Orlando, Florida, USA.   Coon:  Department of Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA Department of Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA Genome Center, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI 53706, USA


