### Accession
PXD003103

### Title
Time-dependent, Glucose-regulated Arabidopsis Regulator of G-Protein Signaling 1 Network

### Description
Plants lack 7-transmembrane, G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) because the G alpha subunit of the heterotrimeric G protein complex is “self-activating” - meaning that it spontaneously exchanges bound GDP for GTP without the need of a GPCR. In lieu of GPCRs, most plants have a seven transmembrane receptor-like Regulator of G Signaling (RGS) protein, a component of the complex that keeps G signaling in its non-activated state. The addition of glucose physically uncouples AtRGS1 from the complex through specific endocytosis leaving the activated G protein at the plasma membrane. Here, the complement of proteins in the AtRGS1/G-protein complex over time from glucose-induced endocytosis was profiled by immunoprecipitation coupled to mass spectrometry (IP-MS). A total of 119 proteins in the AtRGS1 complex were identified. Several known interactors of the complex were identified, thus validating the approach, but the vast majority were not known previously. AtRGS1 protein interactions were dynamically modulated by D-glucose. In response to D-glucose, a diverse range of proteins became maximally associated with AtRGS1, whereas endosomal trafficking proteins were more distinctively associated with AtRGS1 following D-glucose treatment. Functional analyses are consistent with core proteins operating in response to stimulus and other metabolic pathways and thus provide an insight into spatiotemporal and mechanistic aspects of AtRGS1 regulation.

### Sample Protocol
SYPRO Ruby stained protein bands were excised manually for downstream processing. The entire gel lane was processed accordingly. Gel slices were destained using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate / 50% acetonitrile (ACN) solution and an in-gel trypsin digestion (25 ng trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3) was performed overnight at 37° C. Following digestion, peptides were extracted first with 1% formic acid in 2% ACN, and second with 60% ACN. Peptide extracts were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 10 µl of 5% ACN / 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to separation using a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 MS/MS (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Samples (5 μL) were injected onto a trap column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-W/M Trap 5 μm Symmetry C18, 180 μm × 20 mm) at a flow rate of 5 μL / min for 5 min. Peptides were separated using a C18 column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 1.8 μm HSS T3, 75 μm × 250 mm) at a flow rate of 300 nL / min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in ACN. Peptides were separated using a 30-min linear gradient from 5% to 30% mobile phase B. Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented using CID to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral files were converted to mascot generic format (*.mgf) using the ProteinPilot algorithm (AB Sciex). All LC-MS/MS files for bands from the same gel lane were merged into a single peak list and protein identification was performed using a Mascot Server (Matrix Science, London, UK; v2.5.1) against the Arabidopsis thaliana UniProtKB database (Proteome ID: UP000006548, 31,527 entries; accessed July 15, 2015) appended with sequences for common laboratory contaminants (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/, 116 entries). Searches of MS/MS data used trypsin protease specificity with the possibility of up to 2 missed cleavages, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and MS/MS ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Acetylation of the protein N-terminus, carbamidomethylation of cysteine, deamidation of asparagine/glutamine, and oxidation of methionine were selected as variable modifications. Significant peptide identifications above the identity or homology threshold were adjusted in Mascot to ≤ 1% peptide FDR and resulting matches were exported for data processing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tandem affinity purification, Glucose signaling, Membrane protein complexes, Heterotrimeric g-protein, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA
Graduate Research Assistant

### Submitter
Evan McConnell

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie M. Hicks
Department of Chemistry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599 USA


