### Accession
PXD020711

### Title
Gu-Ben-Fang-Xiao decoction ameliorates airway remodeling by regulating the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway mediated by RTN4 in a chronic remission asthma murine model

### Description
Airway remodeling is a main pathological feature of asthma. The current therapy for asthma is mainly targeted for reducing inflammation, not particularly for airway remodeling. Herein, developing alternative and more effective therapy to attenuate remodeling is worthy of further study. Gu-Ben-Fang-Xiao Decoction (GBFXD) has been used to treat asthma for decades effectively and safely. In present study, GBFXD significantly regulated the airway inflammation, collagen deposition and the molecules relevant to airway remodeling such as Vimentin, α-SMA, hydroxyproline (HYP), and E-cadherin in chronic remission asthma (CRA) murine model. Subsequently, we found the overlapping differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between Model/Control and GBFXD/Model mainly belonged to Collagen and Laminin which were extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins by iTRAQ proteomics. In addition, the KEGG analysis showed GBFXD could regulate pathways related to airway remodeling, such as ECM-receptor interaction, Focal adhesion, and PI3K/AKT signaling pathway which were top three pathways of most DEPs (Model/Control and GBFXD/Model) significantly enriched simultaneously. Further validation research showed GBFXD regulated Reticulon-4 (RTN4), thus suppressing the activation of PI3K/AKT pathway to alleviate the ECM proteins deposition. Thus, our findings indicate GBFXD regulate the PI3K/AKT pathway via RTN4 to improve airway remodeling and provide a new insight into the molecular mechanism of GBFXD for treating CRA.

### Sample Protocol
Four-week-old female SPF mice (weight, 16–18 g) were purchased from Charles River (Beijing, China) and the CRA murine model was established as described previously (Dong et al., 2020). Briefly, the mice were subjected to adaptive feeding for one week firstly. On days 1 and 8, mice were sensitized with an intraperitoneal injection (i.p.) of 0.2 mL normal saline (NS) contained 100 μg of OVA mixed with 1 mg AL(OH)3. From day 15 to 28, the mice were challenged by aerosolized 2.5% OVA for 30 min/day and once every three days from day 32–55. On day 29, 42 and 55, the mice were intranasally administered with 50 μL(1.0×105 TCID50/mL) respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). From day 56–85, the mice in the treatment groups were administrated with different doses of GBFXD (12, 24, 36 g/kg) or Montelukast (2.6 mg/kg) per day. Mice in the control group received the same volume of NS. Protein extraction and digestion The frozen lung tissues were crushed into powder in liquid nitrogen and extracted by RIPA buffer (Beyotime, Haimen, China) including 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and protease inhibitor cocktails (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The mixture was sonicated and centrifuged at 4°C and 30,000 × g for 15 min. The supernatant was collected and added to five volumes of cold acetone containing 10% (v/v) trichloroacetic acid, mixed well, and incubated at −20°C overnight. Afterwards, the mixture was centrifuged again at 4 °C, 30,000×g and the suspension was discarded. The sediment left was washed three times with cold acetone, air-dried and finally dissolved in RIPA buffer. The protein was quantified by a BCA kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and the 300 µg protein from each sample was mixed with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, United States) at an enzyme to protein ratio (1:50) and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C. The peptides acquired from digestion were dried by vacuum centrifugation. iTRAQ labeling and high-pH reversed-phase fractionation The obtained peptides were processed by 8-plex iTRAQ reagent (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, United States) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Control samples were labeled with 115 iTRAQ tags, model samples were labeled with 116  iTRAQ tags, GBFXD samples were labeled with 113 iTRAQ tags. With the U3000 HPLC chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), High pH RP fractionation was performed. The iTRAQ-labeled peptide were reconstituted with 100 µL of high pH RP buffer A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) and loaded onto a C18 column (250 mm × 3 mm, Phenomenex, USA) with 5 µm particle size. The column was eluted (flow rate: 0.2 mL/min) with the following program: 3–18% buffer B (2% H2O, 98% acetonitrile, pH 10.0) for 30 min, 18–32% B for 15 min, 32–98% B for 6 min, and 98% B for 15 min. The elution was controlled by detecting the absorbance at 214 nm. LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were redissolved in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formate) and centrifuged (4 °C, 20,000 × g, 10 min). With the Nano LC System auto sampler (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), the 10 µL peptides were loaded onto a 2-cm C18 trap column and eluted onto a 15-cm analytical C18 column with an inner diameter of 75 µm by a 3–55% buffer B (84% acetonitrile, 0.1% formate). The elution process took 112 min (flow rate: 300 nL/min). With 2.2kV voltage, the peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization and then data-dependent MS/MS was performed by an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). With the MS1 full scan (resolution: 60,000), the five most abundant precursor ions above the 5,000 counts threshold were chosen for MS/MS analysis along with a dynamic exclusion duration of 60s. Normalized collision energy for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) was set to 40.0 and then the ion fragments were tested in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 7,500 whose scan ranges were 350–1800 (MS1) and 100-1800 Da (MS2).

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of protein Raw data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer (version: 2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The SEQUEST search engine was applied to identify the proteins and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm or 0.02 Da was permitted for intact peptide or fragmented ions, with allowance at most two missed cleavages in the trypsin digests.) Except for iTRAQ labels, the fixed modification was carbamidomethylation (C), and variable modifications were oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ). By SEQUEST probability analysis, peptides at the 99% confidence interval were counted as identified, which may reduce the probability of false peptide identification. At least two unique peptides contained were required to quantify the protein. To weight and normalize the quantitative protein ratios, the median ratio in SEQUEST was applied. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were determined by fold change >1.5 or <0.67, with FDR<1%.

### Publication Abstract
Airway remodeling is a primary pathological feature of asthma. The current therapy for asthma mainly targets reducing inflammation but not particularly airway remodeling. Therefore, it is worthwhile to develop alternative and more effective therapies to attenuate remodeling. Gu-Ben-Fang-Xiao Decoction (GBFXD) has been used to effectively and safely treat asthma for decades. In this study, GBFXD regulated airway inflammation, collagen deposition, and the molecules relevant to airway remodeling such as Vimentin, &#x3b1;-SMA, hydroxyproline, and E-cadherin in chronic remission asthma (CRA) murine model. Proteomic analysis indicated that the overlapping differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) (Model/Control and GBFXD/Model) were mainly collagens and laminins, which were extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. In addition, the KEGG analysis showed that GBFXD could regulate pathways related to airway remodeling including ECM-receptor interactions, focal adhesion, and the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway, which were the top three significantly enriched pathways containing the most DEPs for both Model/Control and GBFXD/Model. Further validation research showed that GBFXD regulated reticulon-4 (RTN4) and suppressed the activation of the PI3K/AKT pathway to alleviate ECM proteins deposition. In conclusion, our findings indicate that GBFXD possibly regulate the PI3K/AKT pathway via RTN4 to improve airway remodeling, which provides a new insight into the molecular mechanism of GBFXD for the treatment of CRA.

### Keywords
Airway remodeling, Chronic remission asthma, Gu-ben-fang-xiao decoction, Rtn4, Pi3k/akt pathway

### Affiliations
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine
Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine

### Submitter
Qiongqiong Xing

### Lab Head
Dr Xia Zhao
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing University of Chinese Medicine


