### Accession
PXD019356

### Title
Defects in sarcolemma repair and skeletal muscle function after injury in a mouse model of Niemann-Pick type A/B disease

### Description
Background: Niemann-Pick disease type A (NPDA), a disease caused by mutations in acid sphingomyelinase (ASM), involves severe neurodegeneration and early death. Intracellular lipid accumulation and plasma membrane alterations are implicated in the pathology. ASM is also linked to the mechanism of plasma membrane repair, so we investigated the impact of ASM deficiency in skeletal muscle, a tissue that undergoes frequent cycles of injury and repair in vivo. Methods: Utilizing the NPDA/B mouse model ASM−/− and wild type (WT) littermates, we performed excitation- contraction coupling/Ca2+ mobilization and sarcolemma injury/repair assays with isolated flexor digitorum brevis fibers, proteomic analyses with quadriceps femoris, flexor digitorum brevis, and tibialis posterior muscle and in vivo tests of the contractile force (maximal isometric torque) of the quadriceps femoris muscle before and after eccentric contraction-induced muscle injury. Results: ASM−/− flexor digitorum brevis fibers showed impaired excitation-contraction coupling compared to WT, a defect expressed as reduced tetanic [Ca2+]i in response to electrical stimulation and early failure in sustaining [Ca2+]i during repeated tetanic contractions. When injured mechanically by needle passage, ASM−/− flexor digitorum brevis fibers showed susceptibility to injury similar to WT, but a reduced ability to reseal the sarcolemma. Proteomic analyses revealed changes in a small group of skeletal muscle proteins as a consequence of ASM deficiency, with downregulation of calsequestrin occurring in the three different muscles analyzed. In vivo, the loss in maximal isometric torque of WT quadriceps femoris was similar immediately after and 2 min after injury. The loss in ASM−/− mice immediately after injury was similar to WT, but was markedly larger at 2 min after injury. Conclusions: Skeletal muscle fibers from ASM−/− mice have an impairment in intracellular Ca2+ handling that results in reduced Ca2+ mobilization and a more rapid decline in peak Ca2+ transients during repeated contraction-relaxation cycles. Isolated fibers show reduced ability to repair damage to the sarcolemma, and this is associated with an exaggerated deficit in force during recovery from an in vivo eccentric contraction- induced muscle injury. Our findings uncover the possibility that  skeletal  muscle functional defects may play a  role in the pathology of NPDA/B disease.

### Sample Protocol
Independently isolated (three biological replicates) quad- riceps femoris (QF), tibialis posterior (TP), and FDB muscles from WT or ASM−/− mice were lysed in 0.1 M Tris-HCL, pH 7.4, 0.1 M DTT and 4% SDS and incu- bated at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by homogenization in a Tissue-Tearer (Model 985370, Biospec Products). After sonication (Branson), the lysates were centrifuged at 16,000×g  for  10 min,  and  samples  of  the  supernatant containing about 25 μg protein were reduced,  alkylated,  and digested within S-Trap micro spin columns (Protifi) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. In short, homogenates containing 2% SDS were reduced with DTT and cysteine-alkylated with iodoacetamide. The protein so- lution was then acidified with phosphoric acid, diluted with 90% MeOH, and loaded into S-Trap micro columns. The captured protein was washed with 90% MeOH to remove SDS and trypsin was added at 1:25  w/w  ratio  followed  by incubation at 47 °C for 1 h. Tryptic peptides were sequentially eluted with 50 mM triethylamine bicar- bonate, 0.2% formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile con- taining 0.2% formic acid. Eluents were combined, and  the solvent removed by centrifugal evaporation.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification were carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software package (Thermo Scientific). Raw data was searched against a Mus musculus proteome database from Uni- prot (2016-05-10) along with a contaminant protein database with both Sequest HT and Mascot search en- gines. Proteins annotated in Uniprot and/or  reported  in the literature as functionally important in the skeletal muscle [29] were extracted from the Uniprot  database and used to generate a  subset  skeletal  muscle database to assist further analysis. Cysteine carbomidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as vari- able modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was ± 20 ppm for search and later filtered to 5 ppm in consensus re-  port; fragment mass tolerance was ± 0.8 Da. Only pro- teins with at least two peptides identified were  considered for further analysis. For relative quantifica- tion, label-free quantification (LFQ) was carried out  using the MINORA feature detection followed by precursor intensity quantification of unique and razor peptides. Peptides with variable modifications were ex- cluded from quantification. A protein was not  quantified if only detected in one replicate. Normalization between samples was carried out based on total peptide amount. Changes above twofold between WT and ASM−/− sam- ples from the same muscle were considered significant (ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Injury/repair, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
University of Maryland College Park
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Maryland College Park, College Park, MD 20742, USA

### Submitter
Yan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Wang
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Maryland College Park, College Park, MD 20742, USA


