### Accession
PXD016707

### Title
In-depth proteomics and natural peptidomics analyses of human endometrial fluid

### Description
Endometrial fluid reflects the status of the endometrium, being a good atraumatic source of information on embryo implantation and some pathological conditions. Although some attempts have been made to characterize it, the catalogue of the human endometrial fluid proteins remains incomplete and little has been done regarding the analysis of the containing natural peptides. In this work, we have thoroughly analyzed the protein and natural peptide content of endometrial fluid. Protein content coming from 11 different individuals was analyzed using the novel TIMS TOF Pro mass spectrometer. A total of 4694 proteins were identified with at least one peptide with FDR<1%, of which 2261 were identified in more than 50% of the samples. Besides, a pooled endometrial fluid sample was used for isolating the natural peptides and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Following this method we identified 3899 naturally-occurring peptides from 238 different proteins.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion was performed following the FASP protocol described by Wisniewski et al. with minor variations, using Amicon Ultra 30K devices (Merck-Millipore). Proteins were quantified with Bradford assays (Bio-Rad) prior to the addition of trypsin, and then incubated overnight at 37ºC. The resulting peptides were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA, and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis. Individual EFA samples (n = 11) were used for the analysis of the protein content of this fluid. On the other hand a pooled sample (n = 8) was used for the analysis of the EFA natural peptide content. This sample was concentrated in an AMICON ultra centrifuge filter and the flow-through obtained was kept for analyzing the natural peptides. These were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min, and alkylated with 25 mM IAA for another 30 min. Excess IAA was removed by an additional incubation with 10 mM DTT. Recovered peptides were desalted using stage-tip C18 microcolumns (Zip-tip, Millipore) and resuspended in 0.1% FA prior to MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics samples were loaded onto a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker) at 300 nl/min and ran twice using both a 60 and a 90 min linear gradient of 3–45% acetonitrile. Chromatograph was coupled on-line to a timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer using PASEF (Bruker Daltonics) where data was acquired. The mgf file generated by Data Analysis v3.0 (Bruker) was searched using Byonic software (Protein Metrics) through Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 software (Thermo). Applied search parameters were: 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.05 Da for fragment ions; Carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modifications; up to two missed cleavages. Database search was performed against a UniProt/SwissProt database containing only Homo sapiens entries. Results were filtered using 1% FDR cutoff at protein level. Natural peptide separation was performed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) connected to either a Synapt G2si (Waters) or an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD (Thermo) mass spectrometer. Samples were acquired as described before [21]. Searches were also performed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) on Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 software (Thermo). Orbi RAW files were directly searched, while mgf files were generated for Synapt files using ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.2 (PLGS, Waters) and searched. Spectra were searched against a human UniProt/Swissprot database restricted to Homo sapiens using 10 ppm and 0.5Da for LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD searches and 15ppm and 0.2Da for the Synapt G2si searches. No enzyme specificity was defined. Carbamidomethylation was defined as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Results were filtered using 1% FDR cutoff at protein level.

### Publication Abstract
The composition of endometrial fluid reflects the status of the endometrium; it is a good atraumatic source of information on embryo implantation processes and possible pathological conditions. Although some attempts have been made to characterise its proteome, the catalogue of its proteins remains incomplete and little has been done to analyse the natural peptides it contains. Here, we present a comprehensive analysis of the proteins and natural peptides of the endometrial fluid. The protein content of samples from 11 individuals was analysed using the novel timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer. We identified 4694 proteins with at least one peptide with FDR&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;1%, of which 2261 were found in &gt;50% of the samples. A pooled endometrial fluid sample was used for isolation and analysis of the natural peptides. Mass spectrometry analysis identified 3899 naturally occurring peptides from 238 different proteins. Among these, there were some putative natural antibacterial peptides. Antimicrobial activity of peptides derived from elafin and Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase was confirmed using microbiological assays. Our results substantially expand the catalogue of known endometrial fluid proteins and provide extensive new information on the natural peptide content of this fluid. SIGNIFICANCE: The endometrial fluid contains many proteins whose clinical relevance is still unknown. Some might be merely markers of endometrial function, but others might play a role in embryo nutrition and/or implantation. Human endometrial fluid analysis might open the door to new developments in embryo transfer strategies in in-vitro fertilisation programmes and lead to improvements in the composition of embryo culture media. Here, we report, for the first time, antimicrobial activity of endometrial fluid peptides. Such peptides could play an important role in the balance of the recently described uterine microbiota.

### Keywords
Natural peptidomics, Timstof, Endometrial fluid

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform CIC bioGUNE
Proteomics Platform, CIC bioGUNE, CIBERehd, ProteoRed-ISCIII, Bizkaia Science and Technology Park, Derio, Spain

### Submitter
Mikel Azkargorta

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
Proteomics Platform, CIC bioGUNE, CIBERehd, ProteoRed-ISCIII, Bizkaia Science and Technology Park, Derio, Spain


