### Accession
PXD011062

### Title
Protein kinase C-beta regulates environment mediated drug resistance in B cell malignancies

### Description
Environment-mediated drug resistance (EMDR) limits the efficacy of cancer therapies by providing anti-apoptotic signals from a non-malignant microenvironment to tumour cells. We show that EMDR is regulated by protein kinase C in stromal cells is required for EMDR. We used plasma membrane profiling to demonstrate that PKC-beta regulates numerous plasma membrane proteins required for cell-cell communications and EMDR.

### Sample Protocol
Cell surface biotinylation followed by strepatividin mediated enrichment of labelled cell surface proteins. On-bead trypsinisation follwoed by TMT labelling of peptides. High pH fractionation of pooled TMT labelled samples into 12 orthogonally recombined fractions.  Each fraction analysed by on-line 3h gradient program LC-MS3 (using multinotch isolation of MS2 fragements for MS2 analysis of reporter ions) analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were imported to Proteome Discoverer Ver 2.2 and searched using MASCOT within this environment against a recent version of the Uniprot Mouse Reference proteome plus a database containing common contaminants. FDR was controlled at 1% at both the PSM level and at 5% on the protein level. Reporter ion s/n were output and a moderated T-test (LIMMA) was applied to determine significant differences between sample groups, including correction for multiple hyopotheses (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Overcoming drug resistance remains a key challenge to cure patients with acute and chronic B cell malignancies. Here, we describe a stromal cell-autonomous signaling pathway, which contributes to drug resistance of malignant B cells. We show that protein kinase C (PKC)-&#x3b2;-dependent signals from bone marrow-derived stromal cells markedly decrease the efficacy of cytotoxic therapies. Conversely, small-molecule PKC-&#x3b2; inhibitors antagonize prosurvival signals from stromal cells and sensitize tumor cells to targeted and nontargeted chemotherapy, resulting in enhanced cytotoxicity and prolonged survival in vivo. Mechanistically, stromal PKC-&#x3b2; controls the expression of adhesion and matrix proteins, required for activation of phosphoinositide 3-kinases (PI3Ks) and the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)-mediated stabilization of B cell lymphoma-extra large (BCL-X<sub>L</sub>) in tumor cells. Central to the stroma-mediated drug resistance is the PKC-&#x3b2;-dependent activation of transcription factor EB, regulating lysosome biogenesis and plasma membrane integrity. Stroma-directed therapies, enabled by direct inhibition of PKC-&#x3b2;, enhance the effectiveness of many antileukemic therapies.

### Keywords
Stromal cells, Emdr, Plasma membrane, Cancer

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust/MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute & Department of Haematology, Univeristy of Cambridge,  Cambridge,  UK.
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Ingo Ringshuasen
Wellcome Trust/MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute & Department of Haematology, Univeristy of Cambridge,  Cambridge,  UK.


