### Accession
PXD018565

### Title
Comparative proteomic profiling of unannotated microproteins and alternative proteins in human cell lines

### Description
Ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry have revealed thousands of small and alternative open reading frames (sm/alt-ORFs) that are translated into polypeptides variously termed microproteins and alt-proteins in mammalian cells. Some micro-/alt-proteins exhibit stress-, cell type- and/or tissue-specific expression, and understanding this regulated expression will be critical to elucidating their functions. While differential translation has been inferred by ribosome profiling, quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is needed for direct measurement of microprotein and alt-protein expression between samples and conditions. However, while label-free quantitative proteomics has been applied to detect stress-dependent expression of bacterial microproteins, this approach has not yet been demonstrated for analysis of differential expression of unannotated ORFs in the more complex human proteome. Here, we present global micro-/alt-protein quantitation in two human leukemia cell lines, K562 and MOLT4. We identify 19 unannotated proteins that are differentially expressed in these cell lines. The expression of six micro/alt-proteins was validated biochemically, and two were found to localize to the nucleus. Thus, we demonstrate that label-free comparative proteomics enables quantitation of micro-/alt-protein expression between human cell lines, and that differentially expressed micro-/alt-proteins have properties, like subcellular localization, consistent with functionality. We anticipate that this workflow will enable discovery of regulated sm/alt-ORF products across many biological conditions in human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Protein-containing gel slices were digested with 13.3 µg/mL trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ for 14-16 h. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted from the gel, dried, extracted with ethyl acetate to remove residual detergent, and then re-suspended in 15 µl of 3:8 70% formic acid:0.1% TFA. A 5 μL aliquot of each sample was injected onto a pre-packed column attached to a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters) in-line with an LTQ Orbitrap Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) and a 130-min gradient was used to further separate the peptide mixtures as follows (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid): Single pump trapping was turned on for 6 min at a flow rate of 2.5 μL/min at 99% A. Isocratic flow was maintained at 0.25 μL/min at 1% B for 40 min, followed by linear gradients from 1% B to 6% B over 2 min, 6% B to 24% B over 58 min, 24% B to 48% B over 5 min, 48% B to 80% B over 5 min. Isocratic flow at 80% B was maintained for 5 min, followed by a gradient from 80% B to 1% B over 5 min, then maintained for 10 min. The full MS was collected over the mass range of 298-1,750 m/z with a resolution of 30,000. MS/MS data was collected using a top 10 high-collisional energy dissociation method in data-dependent mode with a normalized collision energy of 33.0 eV and a 2.0 m/z isolation window. The first mass was 100 m/z in fixed mode. MS/MS resolution was 7,500 and dynamic exclusion was 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For identification of microproteins, ProteoWizard MS Convert was used for peak picking and files were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.5.1). Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A mass deviation of 20 p.p.m. was set for MS1 peaks, with a peptide tolerance of 0.6 Da. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% both on peptide and protein levels. The minimum required peptide length was five amino acids. Protein quantitation was accomplished via spectral counting, followed by comparing the MS1 extracted ion chromatograph (EIC) peak intensity in both cell lines using Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo). As previously reported3,21, peptide spectra were matched against a 3-frame translation of mRNA-seq from the corresponding cell line, permitting identification of both known and unannotated peptides. Annotated peptides were excluded with a string-matching algorithm via comparison to the human proteome.

### Publication Abstract
Ribosome profiling and mass spectrometry have revealed thousands of small and alternative open reading frames (sm/alt-ORFs) that are translated into polypeptides variously termed as microproteins and alt-proteins in mammalian cells. Some micro-/alt-proteins exhibit stress-, cell-type-, and/or tissue-specific expression; understanding this regulated expression will be critical to elucidating their functions. While differential translation has been inferred by ribosome profiling, quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics is needed for direct comparison of microprotein and alt-protein expression between samples and conditions. However, while label-free quantitative proteomics has been applied to detect stress-dependent expression of bacterial microproteins, this approach has not yet been demonstrated for analysis of differential expression of unannotated ORFs in the more complex human proteome. Here, we present global micro-/alt-protein quantitation in two human leukemia cell lines, K562 and MOLT4. We identify 12 unannotated proteins that are differentially expressed in these cell lines. The expression of six micro/alt-proteins from cDNA was validated biochemically, and two were found to localize to the nucleus. Thus, we demonstrate that label-free comparative proteomics enables quantitation of micro-/alt-protein expression between human cell lines. We anticipate that this workflow will enable the discovery of regulated sm/alt-ORF products across many biological conditions in human cells.

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Alt-protein, Microprotein, Smorf

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School
Department of Chemistry Chemical Biology Institute (West Campus) Yale University

### Submitter
Alexandra Khitun

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah A. Slavoff
Department of Chemistry Chemical Biology Institute (West Campus) Yale University


