### Accession
PXD039147

### Title
Growth hormone supplementation reduces aneuploidy and improves  the quality of oocytes by activating ERK1/2 pathway in aged mice

### Description
The decline in oocyte quality is a limiting factor of female fertility; however, strategies to maintain the oocyte quality of aged women are not available. In this study, we showed that growth hormone (GH) supplementation in vivo not only alleviated the decline in oocyte number caused by aging, but also improved the quality and developmental potential of aged oocytes. Strikingly, GH supplementation reduced aneuploidy in aged oocytes. Proteomic analysis indicated that the ERK1/2 pathway was involved in the reduction in aneuploidy rate of aged oocytes, as confirmed both in vivo and in vitro. In addition, JAK2 might be involved in the regulation of ERK1/2 by GH in aged oocytes. Collectively, our findings revealed that GH supplementation protects oocytes from aging-related aneuploidy and enhances the quality of aged oocytes, and could be used to improve the outcome of assisted reproduction in aged women.

### Sample Protocol
To collect fully-grown GV oocytes, female mice were injected with 10 IU of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). After 48 h, the cumulus-oocyte complex was obtained by artificially rupturing antral follicles. The GV oocytes were obtained after removal of cumulus cells by repeated mouth pipetting, and cultured in M16 medium (Sigma-Aldrich) with liquid mineral oil at 37C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2 for 12-14 h. Female mice were injected with 10 IU of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG; Sigma-Aldrich) 48 h after PMSG initiation to collect ovulated mature oocytes. Oviducts were harvested 14-16 h after hCG administration, and incubated briefly in hyaluronidase (Sigma-Aldrich) to remove cumulus cells.

### Data Protocol
For liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), the peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore, Billerica, MA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v. 1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20,422 entries) and a reverse decoy database. The false discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Aged oocytes, Aneuploidy, Growth hormone, Oocyte quality

### Affiliations
Chongqing health center for women and children
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Human Embryo Engineering, Center for Reproductive Medicine, Women and Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China

### Submitter
Yunyao Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Yun-Yao Luo
Chongqing Key Laboratory of Human Embryo Engineering, Center for Reproductive Medicine, Women and Children’s Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China


