### Accession
PXD041563

### Title
Increased Basal MET phosphorylation is a Hallmark of Hepatocyte Dysregulation in Liver Disease: Mouse

### Description
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is gaining evermore importance due to rapidly rising incidence rates especially in western countries. As the disease progresses, it can develop into hepatocellular carcinoma. Related metabolic changes have been extensively studied in the past. However, the molecular mechanisms responsible for the development of fatty liver disease remain uncovered. Here we show that the basal phosphorylation of the MET receptor can be used as an indicator for hepatocyte dysregulation in fatty liver disease. Using primary hepatocytes isolated from a preclinical model fed with high-fat, high-sugar diet (Western diet; WD) or standard diet (SD), we find a strong downregulation of the PI3K-AKT pathway and upregulation of the MAPK pathway in the WD derived hepatocytes. By developing a mathematical model of HGF-induced signal transduction, calibrated with quantitative time-resolved measurements of both PI3K-AKT and MAPK pathways, we resolve molecular mechanisms responsible for these alterations. Thereby, we identify the basal MET phosphorylation rate as main driver for the altered signal transduction in WD hepatocytes that even leads to an increased proliferation behavior of the usually quiescent hepatocytes in the absence of growth factors. The adaptation of the dynamic pathway model of HGF signal transduction to patient-derived hepatocytes reveals a patient-specific variability of basal MET phosphorylation levels, which correlates with the clinical outcome of patients after liver surgery. These findings suggest that the dysregulated basal MET phosphorylation could be exploited to assess the health status of the liver and thereby inform estimation of the risk of a patient to suffer from liver failure after surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: Lysates of primary mouse hepatocytes of unstimulated samples were used for proteome analysis. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay and 20 µg protein was used for the analysis. Lysis, reduction and alkylation was performed by incubating the samples at 95°C for 5 min in a buffer containing 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA and 65 mM TEAB. Protein clean-up was performed using an adapted version of the SP3 protocol based on Hughes et al (2019). Briefly, 100% ethanol was added for a final concentration of 50% and the mix was incubated for 15 min on a shaker. Protein-bound beads were isolated on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed three times with 200 µl 80% ethanol. Beads were reconstituted with 75 µl digestion buffer containing 8 µg Trypsin Gold (Promega, 1:25 Enzyme:Protein) in 100 mM TEAB. Protein digestion was performed for 16 h at 37°C on a shaker. The supernatant was separated from the beads on a magnetic rack and after drying by vacuum centrifugation (45°C, 1300 rpm, RVC 2-18 CDplus, CHRIST), samples were stored at -80°C. Mass spectrometry measurements: For the primary mouse hepatocyte proteome analysis, nano-flow LC-MS/MS was performed by coupling an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) to a Orbitrap Exploris mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The samples were dissolved in 60 µl loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile in HPLC grade water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Proteome quantification: Raw MS spectra were processed and proteins quantified by Spectronaut (Biognosys, version SN15.5) using default settings as suggested by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data analysis: Only proteins without missing values were considered for the analysis. For the analysis of the proteome data the public server at usegalaxy.org was used (Afgan et al, 2016). Analysis was based on the R package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015). Statistical testing of significance was performed using the voom function from Bioconductor (Law et al, 2014). Significance was considered with adjusted p-value < 0.05. Functional annotation of canonical pathways was performed with the use of Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Krämer et al., 2014) by QIAGEN. Thresholds were set to an adjusted p-value of 0.05 and a log2 fold change < -0.5 or > 0.5.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic liver diseases are worldwide on the rise. Due to the rapidly increasing incidence, in particular in Western countries, metabolic dysfunction-associated steatotic liver disease (MASLD) is gaining importance as the disease can develop into hepatocellular carcinoma. Lipid accumulation in hepatocytes has been identified as the characteristic structural change in MASLD development, but molecular mechanisms responsible for disease progression remained unresolved. Here, we uncover in primary hepatocytes from a preclinical model fed with a Western diet (WD) an increased basal MET phosphorylation and a strong downregulation of the PI3K-AKT pathway. Dynamic pathway modeling of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) signal transduction combined with global proteomics identifies that an elevated basal MET phosphorylation rate is the main driver of altered signaling leading to increased proliferation of WD-hepatocytes. Model-adaptation to patient-derived hepatocytes reveal patient-specific variability in basal MET phosphorylation, which correlates with patient outcome after liver surgery. Thus, dysregulated basal MET phosphorylation could be an indicator for the health status of the liver and thereby inform on the risk of a patient to suffer from liver failure after surgery.

### Keywords
Western diet; dynamic pathway modeling; hepatocyte dysregulation; fatty liver disease; hgf signal transduction

### Affiliations
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Marcel Schilling

### Lab Head
Dr Ursula Klingmüller
Division Systems Biology of Signal Transduction German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)


