### Accession
PXD040022

### Title
How a tRNA modifying enzyme facilitates RNase P activity in Arabidopsis nuclei

### Description
RNase P is essential to perform the 5’ maturation of tRNA precursors. Beyond the ancestral form of RNase P containing a ribozyme, protein-only RNase P enzymes termed PRORP were identified in eukaryotes. In human mitochondria, PRORP forms a complex with two protein partners to become functional. In plants, although PRORP enzymes are active alone, we investigate their interaction network to understand their integration with gene expression pathways. Here we investigate functional interactions involving the Arabidopsis nuclear RNase P PRORP2. We show, using an immuno-affinity strategy, that PRORP2 makes a complex with the tRNA methyl transferases TRM1A and B in vivo. Beyond RNase P, these enzymes can also interact with RNase Z. We show that TRM1A/B localize in the nucleus and find that their double knock out mutation results in a severe macroscopic phenotype. Using a combination of immuno-detections, mass spectrometry and a transcriptome wide tRNAseq approach, we observe that TRM1A/B are responsible for the m2,2G26 modification of 70% of cytosolic tRNAs in vivo. We use the transcriptome wide tRNAseq approach as well as RNA blot hybridizations to show that RNase P activity is impaired in TRM1A/B mutants for specific tRNAs, in particular, tRNAs containing a m2,2G modification at position 26 that are strongly down-regulated in TRM1A/B mutants. Altogether, results indicate that the m2,2G adding enzymes TRM1A/B functionally cooperate with nuclear RNase P in vivo for the early steps of cytosolic tRNAs biogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
An A.thaliana TRM1A-CFP-HA construct was transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves. Triplicate coimmunoprecipitations were carried out using HA-specific antibodies.Similarly, the TRM1A-CFP-HA construct was transiently expressed in Nicotiana benthamiana leaves together with a construct expressing the nuclear AtTRZ3 (Arabidopsis nuclear RNase Z (CaninoPlantPhys2009)) in fusion with a FLAG tag. Immuno-purifications using both HA and FLAG antibodies were performed with three biological replicates. Eluted proteins were trypsin digested and mass spectrometry analyses were carried out by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS on a QExactive+ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Mascot algorithm (version 2.6.2, Matrix Science) against TAIR v10 (27222 forward A.thaliana sequences) or Niben v1.0.1 (57140 forward N.bentamiana sequences, Sol Genomics) databases with a target-decoy strategy, Proteins were validated with FDR<1% (False Discovery Rate) on PSM and proteins, with a pretty rank of 1 and a score >25 and quantified with spectral count with Proline software (Bouyssié et al., 2020). For the statistical analysis of the data, we compared the co-immunoprecipitation spectral count data collected for target samples against the controls’ using R v4.0.3 and a homemade R package (IPinquiry4, https://github.com/) based on the published msmsTests R package (Bioconductor) to process label-free LC-MS/MS data. The spectral counts were normalised according to the DESeq2 normalisation method (i.e., median of ratios method) and EdgeR was used to perform a negative-binomial test and calculate the fold change, a p-value and an adjusted p-value corrected by Benjamini–Hochberg for each identified protein. For this study, considered protein partners are statistically enriched in the samples with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 (adjp) and a minimum log fold change of 2.

### Publication Abstract
RNase P is the essential activity that performs the 5' maturation of transfer RNA (tRNA) precursors. Beyond the ancestral form of RNase P containing a ribozyme, protein-only RNase P enzymes termed PRORP were identified in eukaryotes. In human mitochondria, PRORP forms a complex with two protein partners to become functional. In plants, although PRORP enzymes are active alone, we investigate their interaction network to identify potential tRNA maturation complexes. Here we investigate functional interactions involving the Arabidopsis nuclear RNase P PRORP2. We show, using an immuno-affinity strategy, that PRORP2 occurs in a complex with the tRNA methyl transferases TRM1A and TRM1B in vivo. Beyond RNase P, these enzymes can also interact with RNase Z. We show that TRM1A/TRM1B localize in the nucleus and find that their double knockout mutation results in a severe macroscopic phenotype. Using a combination of immuno-detections, mass spectrometry and a transcriptome-wide tRNA sequencing approach, we observe that TRM1A/TRM1B are responsible for the m<sup>2</sup><sub>2</sub>G26 modification of 70% of cytosolic tRNAs in vivo. We use the transcriptome wide tRNAseq approach as well as RNA blot hybridizations to show that RNase P activity is impaired in TRM1A/TRM1B mutants for specific tRNAs, in particular, tRNAs containing a m<sup>2</sup><sub>2</sub>G modification at position 26 that are strongly downregulated in TRM1A/TRM1B mutants. Altogether, results indicate that the m<sup>2</sup><sub>2</sub>G-adding enzymes TRM1A/TRM1B functionally cooperate with nuclear RNase P in vivo for the early steps of cytosolic tRNA biogenesis.

### Keywords
Trna biogenesis, Arabidopsis, Rna modifications, Rnase p, Prorp interactome

### Affiliations
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, UPR2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg, France
Université de Strasbourg, Plateforme Protéomique Strasbourg-Esplanade, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique

### Submitter
Johana Chicher

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Giegé
Institut de biologie moléculaire des plantes, UPR2357 du CNRS, Université de Strasbourg, 12 rue du général Zimmer, 67084 Strasbourg, France


