### Accession
PXD030545

### Title
C11orf94/Frey is a key regulator for male fertility by controlling sperm fusion complex assembly

### Description
The sperm fusion complex built around the Izumo1 protein is the key male factor for mediation of gamete fusion. Loss of several complex members leads to male infertility. Here, we provide a detailed characterisation of the C11orf94/Frey protein which acts as central chaperone for assembly of the sperm fusion complex. By retaining Izumo1 in the endoplasmic reticulum, C11orf94 is essentially required to facilitate the recruitment of Izumo1-interacting proteins into the sperm fusion complex.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested on-beads twice with 200ng trypsin overnight (Trypsin Gold, Promega, USA/Germany) and subsequently with 100ng rLys-C (Promega, USA/Germany) overnight. Finally, 5µl of the digest solution were acidified with 3µl 30% formic acid in water supplemented with 25fmol/µl standard peptide mixture (Retention Time Calibration Mixture, ThermoPierce, Germany) and diluted to a final volume of 23µl with water 5µl of this solution were injected for nanoLC-MS/MS.  NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific, USA/Germany) hyphenated to nanoflow LC system (Dionex3000 RSLC, ThermoDionex, Germany). Peptides were separated in linear gradient of 0.1% aqueous formic acid (eluent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile (eluent B) in 120min and the mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA, TopN 10).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were imported into Progenesis QIP V4.2 (Nonlinear Dynamics, UK) software for analysis and quantification. Peptide and protein identification was performed with Mascot V2.6 (Matrixscience, UK). Fold-Changes were calculated in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Although gamete fusion represents the central event in sexual reproduction, the required protein machinery is poorly defined. In sperm cells, Izumo1 and several Izumo1-associated proteins play an essential role for this process. However, so far, the mechanisms underlying transport and maturation of Izumo1 and its incorporation into high molecular weight complexes are incompletely defined. Here, we provide a detailed characterization of the C11orf94 protein, which we rename Frey, which provides a platform for the assembly of Izumo1 complexes. By retaining Izumo1 in the endoplasmic reticulum, Frey facilitates its incorporation into high molecular weight complexes. To fulfill its function, the unstable Frey protein is stabilized within the catalytic center of an intramembrane protease. Loss of Frey results in reduced assembly of Izumo1 complexes and male infertility due to impaired gamete fusion. Collectively, these findings provide mechanistic insights into the early biogenesis and functional relevance of Izumo1 complexes.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Label-free quantitative co-ip, Gamete fusion, Mouse, Izumo1, C11orf94/frey, Male infertility, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Molecular Analysis - Mass Spectrometry,
Center for Molecular and Cellular Bioengineering (CMCB), TU Dresden
Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany Fetscherstr. 74 01307 Dresden

### Submitter
Marc Gentzel

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Torben Mentrup
Institute of Physiological Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden, Germany Fetscherstr. 74 01307 Dresden


