### Accession
PXD045609

### Title
SILAC proteomics studying the role of CAND1 in CRL2 dynamics

### Description
Effects of CAND1 and neddylation/deneddylation on CRL2 dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
DKOStrepII-CUL2 HEK293 cells were grown in light SILAC medium whereas DKO or DKO Flp-In HEK293 cells with CAND1 (DKOCAND1) were grown in heavy SILAC medium. Cells were treated with either 1 µM MLN4924 or 1 µM CSN5i-3 for one hour and were then collected. Equal number of cells from light and heavy SILAC media were lysed in the Cell Lysis Buffer, mixed, and incubated with Strep-Tactin resin. Subsequently, the resin was pelleted via centrifugation, washed twice with the Cell Lysis Buffer, and washed twice with. The resin was transferred to a spin column and eluted twice through incubating with elution buffer. The eluates were buffer exchanged to 4 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) using the Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns. At the room temperature, samples were further treated by DTT(for reduction) and by iodoacetamide (for alkylation of cysteine residues). For protease digestion of the eluted proteins, samples were incubated with LysC at room temperature, diluted with ammonium bicarbonate to bring the concentration of urea to 2 M, and incubated with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. The resulting peptides were loaded onto C18 silica micro-spin columns for desalting. Small aliquots of the eluates were used to determine the peptide concentration with a Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit. The rest of eluates were brought to complete dryness in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and stored at -80 °C until analyses by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a label-free quantification workflow and a customized SILAC 2plex (Arg10, Lys8) quantification method. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Homo sapiens protein database plus common contaminants. Search parameters included a maximum of three missed trypsin cleavage events, a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. Searches permitted variable modifications of oxidation (M), Label +8.014 Da (K), Label +10.008 Da (R), GG (K), deamidation (N,Q); protein N-terminus dynamic modificationss of Acetyl, Met-loss, and Met-loss plus Acetyl, and static modifications of cysteine (+57.0215 Da) for carbamidomethylation. SILAC H/L ratios of proteins were calculated using the median of all pairwise peptide ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Through targeting essential cellular regulators for ubiquitination and serving as a major platform for discovering proteolysis-targeting chimera (PROTAC) drugs, Cullin-2 (CUL2)-RING ubiquitin ligases (CRL2s) comprise an important family of CRLs. The founding members of CRLs, the CUL1-based CRL1s, are known to be activated by CAND1, which exchanges the variable substrate receptors associated with the common CUL1 core and promotes the dynamic assembly of CRL1s. Here we find that CAND1 inhibits CRL2-mediated protein degradation in human cells. This effect arises due to altered binding kinetics, involving CAND1 and CRL2<sup>VHL</sup>, as we illustrate that CAND1 dramatically increases the dissociation rate of CRL2s but barely accelerates the assembly of stable CRL2s. Using PROTACs that differently recruit neo-substrates to CRL2<sup>VHL</sup>, we demonstrate that the inhibitory effect of CAND1 helps distinguish target proteins with different affinities for CRL2s, presenting a mechanism for selective protein degradation with proper pacing in the changing cellular environment.

### Keywords
Cul2 exchange

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University
Purdue University

### Submitter
Kankan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Xing Liu
Department of Biochemistry, Purdue University


