### Accession
PXD025702

### Title
Neutrophils from patients with recurring Panton-Valentine Leukocidin-positive Staphylococcus aureus infections are more sensitive to PVL induced NETosis

### Description
Panton-Valentine Leukocidin (PVL) is a Staphylococcus aureus toxin that binds to and kills human neutrophils resulting in the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps. A subset of individuals colonized with PVL expressing S. aureus suffer from recurring infections. We found that neutrophils from affected individuals display increased spontaneous NET formation after isolation, and increased sensitivity to killing by PVL. Compared to healthy controls, the expression of the target receptors for PVL, CD45 and C5L2, but not CD88, was increased in these patients, and the expression correlated to the amount of PVL-induced NETs produced. NADPH-oxidase activity was not important for PVL induced NETosis as neutrophils from CGD patients produced NETs in response to PVL. Through NET proteome analysis we identified that the protein content of PVL induced NETs is different from mitogen induced NETs. The abundance of the antimicrobial proteins LL37, myeloperoxidase, azurocidin, and proteinase 3 was lower on PVL NETs and PVL-induced NETs were deficient in killing Staphylococcus aureus. Neutrophils from patients that suffer from recurring PVL-positive infections may be more sensitive to PVL-induced NETosis, impairing their ability to combat the infection.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were subjected to SP3 sample preparation (pubmed 30464214). Briefly, proteins were denatured, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Trypsin and Lys-C proteases. TMT 11plex (Pierce) labeling was used for peptide multiplexing and quantification. Samples were mixed, desalted using solid phase extraction (Seppak 1cc/50mg, Waters), and fractionated using basic reversed phase fractionation on a quaternary Agilent 1290 Infinity II UPLC system equipped with a Kinetex Evo-C18 column (150 x 2.1 mm, 2.6µm, 100 Å, Phenomenex). Fractions were concatenated into 8 final samples, dried down and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior MS analysis. All samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to a 3000 RSLC nano UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on a pepmap trap cartridge (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, C18, Thermo) with 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. Peptides were separated over a 50 cm analytical column (Picofrit, 360 µm O.D., 75 µm I.D., 10 µm tip opening, non-coated, New Objective) that was packed in-house with Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 µm (Agilent). Solvent A consists of 0.1% formic acid in water. Elution was carried out at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 180 minute method: 8-33% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) within 120 minutes, 33-48% solvent B within 25 minutes, 48-98% buffer B within 1 minute, followed by column washing and equilibration. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 375-1500 m/z at a resolution of 120,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 0.7 Da window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32%. The AGC target was set to 2e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 78 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 45,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST HT for peptide identification. Peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs) were filtered to a 1% FDR level using Percolator employing a target/decoy approach. The protein FDR was set to 1%. Further data processing was carried out in R and Perseus (v. 1.6.2.3). Only proteins identified with at least two peptides were included in the analysis. All contaminant proteins were filtered out. A three step normalization procedure was applied. First, the total intensity of each TMT channel was normalized to correct for mixing errors. Next, the common channel in both TMT sets was used for internal reference scaling (pubmed ref 28325852) in order to correct for batch effects. Afterwards the data was normalized applying trimmed mean of M values (TMM) using the edgeR package. Statistical analysis was performed using two-sample t-tests (fudge factor s0 (pubmed ref 11309499) was set to 0.1). Resulting p-values were corrected for multiple testing using a permutation-based FDR approach (number of randomizations = 500).

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus strains that produce the toxin Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL-SA) frequently cause recurrent skin and soft tissue infections. PVL binds to and kills human neutrophils, resulting in the formation of neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs), but the pathomechanism has not been extensively studied. Furthermore, it is unclear why some individuals colonized with PVL-SA experience recurring infections whereas others are asymptomatic. We thus aimed to (1) investigate how PVL exerts its pathogenicity on neutrophils and (2) identify factors that could help to explain the predisposition of patients with recurring infections. We provide genetic and pharmacological evidence that PVL-induced NET formation is independent of NADPH oxidase and reactive oxygen species production. Moreover, through NET proteome analysis we identified that the protein content of PVL-induced NETs is different from NETs induced by mitogen or the microbial toxin nigericin. The abundance of the proteins cathelicidin (CAMP), elastase (NE), and proteinase 3 (PRTN3) was lower on PVL-induced NETs, and as such they were unable to kill S. aureus. Furthermore, we found that neutrophils from affected patients express higher levels of CD45, one of the PVL receptors, and are more susceptible to be killed at a low PVL concentration than control neutrophils. Neutrophils from patients that experience recurring PVL-positive infections may thus be more sensitive to PVL-induced NET formation, which might impair their ability to combat the infection.

### Keywords
Nets, Mrsa, Pvl, Leukocidin, Netosis, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Frese

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Karl Frese
Max Planck Unit for the Science of Pathogens, Berlin, Germany


