### Accession
PXD008859

### Title
PHLDA1 mediates drug resistance in receptor tyrosine kinase driven cancer

### Description
Development of resistance causes failure of drugs targeting receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) networks, and represents a critical challenge for precision medicine. Here we show that PHLDA1 down-regulation is critical to acquisition and maintenance of drug resistance in RTK-driven cancer. Using FGFR inhibition in endometrial cancer cells, we identify an Akt-driven compensatory mechanism underpinned by down-regulation of PHLDA1. We demonstrate broad clinical relevance of our findings, showing that PHLDA1 down-regulation also occurs in response to RTK-targeted therapy in breast and renal cancer patients, as well as following trastuzumab treatment in HER2+ breast cancer cells. Crucially, knockdown of PHLDA1 alone was sufficient to confer de novo resistance to RTK inhibitors, and induction of PHLDA1 expression re-sensitised drug resistant cancer cells to targeted therapies, identifying PHLDA1 as a biomarker for drug response and highlighting the potential of PHLDA1 reactivation as a means of circumventing drug resistance.

### Sample Protocol
MFE-296 cells were plated at 7 x 105 cells per 10 cm dish and either left untreated or cultured with DMSO as a vehicle control, or 1 μM PD173074. Cells were lysed at 1, 7 or 14 days. Cell lysis, digestion, solid-phase extraction, TiO2 Metal Oxide Affinity Chromatography, Nanoflow-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry and Identification and quantification of phosphopeptides were performed as previously described (Wilkes et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Phosphorylation sites were identified and quantified using a well-established, label-free methodology (Alcolea et al., 2012, Casado et al., 2013, Wilkes et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Development of resistance causes failure of drugs targeting receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) networks and represents a critical challenge for precision medicine. Here, we show that PHLDA1 downregulation is critical to acquisition and maintenance of drug resistance in RTK-driven cancer. Using fibroblast growth factor receptor (FGFR) inhibition in endometrial cancer cells, we identify an Akt-driven compensatory mechanism underpinned by downregulation of PHLDA1. We demonstrate broad clinical relevance of our findings, showing that PHLDA1 downregulation also occurs in response to RTK-targeted therapy in breast and renal cancer patients, as well as following trastuzumab treatment in HER2<sup>+</sup> breast cancer cells. Crucially, knockdown of PHLDA1 alone was sufficient to confer de novo resistance to RTK inhibitors and induction of PHLDA1 expression re-sensitized drug-resistant cancer cells to targeted therapies, identifying PHLDA1 as a biomarker for drug response and highlighting the potential of PHLDA1 reactivation as a means of circumventing drug resistance.

### Keywords
Fgf, Targeted therapy, Tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Akt, Drug resistance, Cancer

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charter House Square London EC1M 6BQ
Centre for Haemato Oncology

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Pedro Cutillas
Centre for Haemato Oncology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charter House Square London EC1M 6BQ


