### Accession
PXD008029

### Title
An adaptive pipeline to maximize isobaric tagging data in large-scale MS-based proteomics

### Description
Isobaric tagging is a method of choice in Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics for comparing multiple conditions at a time. Despite its multiplexing capabilities, when multiple experiments are merged for comparison in large sample-size studies, some drawbacks appears, due to the presence of missing values, which result from the stochastic nature of the Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. Another indirect cause of data incompleteness might derive from the proteomic-typical data processing workflow that first identifies proteins in individual experiments and then only quantifies those identified proteins, leaving a large number of unmatched spectra with quantitative information unexploited.  Inspired by untargeted metabolomic and label-free proteomic workflows, we developed a quantification-driven bioinformatic pipeline (Quantify then Identify – QtI) that optimizes the processing of isobaric Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) data from large-scale studies. This pipeline includes innovative modules, such as the Peptide Match Rescue (PMR) and the Optimized Post-Translational Modification (OPTM) and outperforms a classical benchmark workflow in terms of quantification and identification rates, significantly reducing missing data while preserving unmatched features for quantitative comparison. The number of unexploited tandem mass spectra was reduced by 77% and 62% for two human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma datasets, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Pools of the 96 previous CSF and plasma samples were prepared and both samples were fractionated using off-gel electrophoresis. The 24 fractions from each sample were analyzed in duplicates with RP-LC-MS/MS using two different hybrid LTQ-OT Elite instruments coupled to Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano systems.

### Data Protocol
First, the .raw files were converted to .mzML peak lists using the ProteoWizard's MSConvert tool. Then the mzML files were searched using Mascot search engine. The results were exported in mzIdent format using as a significance threshold the p-value 0.05. The mzIdent files were then transformed to pepXML format using the idconvert tool of Proteowizard software. Then using the SpectraST software, we created a spectral library file in the SPLIB format for every pepXML file. As a final step we combined all the individual spectral library files.

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric tagging is the method of choice in mass-spectrometry-based proteomics for comparing several conditions at a time. Despite its multiplexing capabilities, some drawbacks appear when multiple experiments are merged for comparison in large sample-size studies due to the presence of missing values, which result from the stochastic nature of the data-dependent acquisition mode. Another indirect cause of data incompleteness might derive from the proteomic-typical data-processing workflow that first identifies proteins in individual experiments and then only quantifies those identified proteins, leaving a large number of unmatched spectra with quantitative information unexploited. Inspired by untargeted metabolomic and label-free proteomic workflows, we developed a quantification-driven bioinformatic pipeline (Quantify then Identify (QtI)) that optimizes the processing of isobaric tandem mass tag (TMT) data from large-scale studies. This pipeline includes innovative features, such as peak filtering with a self-adaptive preprocessing pipeline optimization method, Peptide Match Rescue, and Optimized Post-Translational Modification. QtI outperforms a classical benchmark workflow in terms of quantification and identification rates, significantly reducing missing data while preserving unmatched features for quantitative comparison. The number of unexploited tandem mass spectra was reduced by 77 and 62% for two human cerebrospinal fluid and plasma data sets, respectively.

### Keywords
Algorithms; bioinformatics; biomarkers; discovery; isobaric tagging; machine learning; protein identification; quantification; tandem mass spectrometry; tandem mass tag

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research
Proteomics Team Leader of Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences

### Submitter
Charlotte Macron

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Proteomics Team Leader of Nestlé Institute of Health Sciences


