### Accession
PXD006677

### Title
Dataset on fat body proteome of Anopheles stephensi Liston

### Description
Fat body is an important tissue in the context of vitellogenesis, vector immunity, vector physiology and vector-parasite interaction. However, the proteome of this vital organ has not been investigated in any Anopheline species so far. In this study, we employed multiple fractionation method followed by high resolution mass spectrometry to characterize fat body proteome of female mosquitoes An. stephensi Indian strain. In all, we identified 4, 535 proteins in the fat body and a subset of these proteins were found to be restricted to fat body. Gene ontology analysis of these proteins suggested their role in metabolism, lipid transport, vitellogenesis, mosquito immunity and oxidation-reduction processes. By far, this is the largest proteomic resource of fat body in any mosquito species.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from the fat body of An. stephensi female mosquitoes and processed further for SDS-PAGE and basic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography (bRPLC) based fractionation. Approximately, 300 micrograms of protein was subjected to SDS-PAGE and 20 bands were excised from the profile. The in-gel bands were destained, reduced, alkylated and subjected to trypsin digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega). Equal amount of proteins were digested for bRPLC fractionation. Alkylated and digested peptides were further cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 columns and fractionated on Xbridge C18 5 um 250 x 4.6 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) using Agilent 1100 binary pump. The peptides obtained from in-gel bands were then analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer interfaced with Proxeon Easy nLC system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). To achieve a broad coverage, each bRPLC fraction was analyzed on LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy- nanoLC II nano flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Southern Denmark).

### Data Protocol
The raw files obtained from mass spectrometer were searched against the protein database of An. stephensi Indian strain using Sequest and Mascot search engines on Proteome Discoverer 2.1 suite. The search parameters included oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modification. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Percolator was used and false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated by enabling peptide sequence analysis using a decoy database. The data was filtered at 1% PSM level FDR

### Publication Abstract
Fat body from <i>Anopheles stephensi</i> female mosquitoes were dissected and processed for proteomic analysis. Both SDS-PAGE and basic Reverse Phase Liquid Chromatography-based fractionation strategies were used to achieve a broad coverage of protein identification. The fractionated peptides were then analyzed on a high-resolution mass spectrometer. Searching the raw data against the protein database of <i>An. stephensi</i> resulted in identification of 4535 proteins, which is, to our knowledge, the largest catalog of fat body proteome in any mosquito vector species reported so far. Bioinformatics analysis on these fat body proteins suggested the enrichment of biological processes including carbon and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism, signal peptide processing and oxidation-reduction. In addition, using proteogenomic approaches, 43 novel proteins were identified, which were not listed in the annotated gene annotations of <i>An. stephensi</i>. The data used in the analysis are related to the article 'Integrating transcriptomic and proteomic data for accurate assembly and annotation of genomes' (Prasad et al., 2017).

### Keywords
Hemolymph, Vitellogenin, Secretory proteins, Immunity

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, Karnataka 560066, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, Karnataka 560066, India


