### Accession
PXD041028

### Title
HIV-1 Nef changes the proteome of T cells extracellular vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are biomolecule carriers for intercellular communication in health and disease. Nef is a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) virulence factor that is released from cells within EVs and is present in plasma EVs of HIV-1 infected individuals. We performed a quantitative proteomic analysis to fully characterize the Nef-induced changes in protein composition of T cell-derived EVs and identify novel host targets of HIV. Several proteins with well-described roles in infection or not previously associated with HIV pathogenesis were specifically modulated by Nef in EVs. Among the downregulated proteins are the interferon-induced transmembrane 1, 2 and 3 proteins (IFITM1-3), broad-spectrum antiviral factors known to be cell-to-cell transferable by EVs. Our data establish Nef as a modulator of EVs' global protein content and as an HIV factor that antagonizes IFITMs.

### Sample Protocol
We performed a quantitative proteomic analysis of the Nef-induced changes in the protein composition of T cell-derived EVs (GFP-EVs and Nef/GFP-EVs). MS-based proteomics sequencing was run in biological triplicates for EVs from GFP-EVs (control) and Nef/GFP_EVs to capture biological variation. For this, the EV pellet was suspended in 8 M urea, reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol for 25 minutes at 56 ºC and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature and light protected. The alkylation reaction was quenched with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 minutes at room temperature. After dilution of urea to 1.6 M with a solution containing 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1mM calcium chloride, 1 mg trypsin was added per sample and incubated for 16 hours at 37 ºC.  GFP-EVs and Nef/GFP-EVs derived peptides were loaded into the EASY-nLC II (Proxeon Biosystem, West Palm Beach, FL, USA) coupled to the mass spectrometer LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were analyzed by the mass spectrometer operating in the positive mode for data-dependent acquisition (DDA). Precursor ions (300-1,600 m/z) were scanned in the Orbitrap with resolution defined to r=60.000 and 1.0 x 10E6 target ions. Up to 20 most intense ions were isolated through a 3 m/z window and activated by collision-induced dissociation (CID).

### Data Protocol
We performed a quantitative proteomic analysis of the Nef-induced changes in the protein composition of T cell-derived EVs (GFP-EVs and Nef/GFP-EVs). MS-based proteomics sequencing was run in biological triplicates for EVs from GFP-EVs (control) and Nef/GFP_EVs to capture biological variation. The mass spectrometry analysis was carried out using the label-free method in MaxQuant software and Perseus, both accessed in December 2012. For this analysis were excluded: 16 reverse sequences, 100 contaminants proteins, and 99 exclusive bovine protein sequences. For statistical analysis, we used the 818 identified exclusive Human proteins, and 345 proteins shared between Human and Bovine taxonomies. The log2 intensities from the proteomics analysis are normally distributed and a two-sided Student's t-test was used in Perseus v. 1.3.0.4 software to determine proteins, differentially abundant between GFP-EVS and Nef/GFP_EVS (p-value ≤ 0.05). To avoid reducing the number of differentially abundant molecules and failing to perform process enrichment and the multi-omics analysis, we considered a nonadjusted p-value obtained from Student's t-test. (i) imputation of missing values was carried out for missing values, (ii) carrying out a comprehensive search of EVs and HIV markers using public databases. Hierarchical cluster heat map, volcano plot, and biological processes/pathways enrichment using FunRich and Gene Ontology (GO) database/Enrichr were used to characterize the group of molecules associated with the Nef-EVs.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are biomolecule carriers for intercellular communication in health and disease. Nef is a HIV virulence factor that is released from cells within EVs and is present in plasma EVs of HIV-1 infected individuals. We performed a quantitative proteomic analysis to fully characterize the Nef-induced changes in protein composition of T cell-derived EVs and identify novel host targets of HIV. Several proteins with well-described roles in infection or not previously associated with HIV pathogenesis were specifically modulated by Nef in EVs. Among the downregulated proteins are the interferon-induced transmembrane 1, 2, and 3 (IFITM1-3) proteins, broad-spectrum antiviral factors known to be cell-to-cell transferable by EVs. We demonstrate that Nef depletes IFITM1-3 from EVs by excluding these proteins from the plasma membrane and lipid rafts, which are sites of EVs biogenesis in T cells. Our data establish Nef as a modulator of EVs' global protein content and as an HIV factor that antagonizes IFITMs.

### Keywords
Extracelular vesicles, Hiv-1, Exosomes, Nef

### Affiliations
Centro de Pesquisa em Virologia (CPV) and Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Luis L P daSilva
Centro de Pesquisa em Virologia (CPV) and Departamento de Biologia Celular e Molecular, Faculdade de Medicina de Ribeirão Preto, Universidade de São Paulo, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil


