### Accession
PXD041762

### Title
PROTEOMICS EVOLUTION FROM ACUTE TO POST-COVID-19 CONDITION

### Description
We performed longitudinal plasma proteomics analysis and determined absolute protein levels in a Canadian cohort (n=74) at admission day to hospital for acute COVID-19 and at 3 and 6 months after diagnosis of acute COVID-19. We measured plasma protein on a triple quadrupole mass spectrometer operated in multiple reaction monitoring mode and used internal standards to deduce protein absolute concentrations. We used a validated panel of 269 surrogate heavy labeled peptides. We also measured % predicted forced vital capacity (FVC, %) and diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO, %) by routine pulmonary function testing. We did functional enrichment and pathway analyses and determined proteins that were increased or decreased from hospital admission to 3-months and 6-months, compared females to males and determined associations of proteins with FVC% and DLCO%.

### Sample Protocol
the sample digests were prepared through denaturation and reduction of the homogenate with 9M urea/20mM dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 37ºC. Denatured proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (40 mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at room temperature, and then samples were diluted to reach a final urea concentration of 0.55 mM prior to tryptic digestion. Digestion was carried out at a 10:1 substrate:enzyme ratio using tosyl phenylalanyl chloromethyl ketone (TPCK)‐treated trypsin (Worthington) for 18 hours at 37ºC. After digestion, samples were acidified with aqueous 1% formic acid (FA), and a chilled stable isotope‐labeled standard (SIS) peptide mixture was added. Samples were concentrated via solid phase extraction (SPE; 10 mg Oasis HLB cartridges; Waters), using the manufacturer's recommended protocol. The SPE column was conditioned with 100% methanol (1 mL), followed by washing with 100% H2O/0.1% FA (1 mL), the sample (diluted to 1 mL using 100% H2O/0.1% FA) was then loaded onto the column, followed by washing two times with water (1 mL each). Finally, the sample was eluted with 55% acetonitrile (can)/0.1% FA (300 μL) and lyophilized to dryness. The dried samples were rehydrated in 0.1% FA to a 1 μg/μL concentration for liquid chromatography (LC)/MRM‐MS analysis. The samples were separated on‐line with a reversed phase‐ultra high performance liquid chromatography (RP‐UHPLC) column (EclipsePlusC18 RRHD 150 × 2.1 mm i.d., 1.8 μm particle diameter; Agilent) maintained at 50°C. Peptide separations were performed at 0.4 mL⁄min over a 56‐minute run, via a multi‐step LC gradient.  The solvents were aqueous mobile phase – solvent A – with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water, and the organic mobile phase – solvent B – with 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade acetonitrile. The exact gradient was as follows (time point in minutes, solution B%): 0 min, 2%; 2 min, 7%; 50 min, 30%; 53 min, 45%, 53.5 min, 80%; 55.5 min, 80%; 56 min, 2%. A post‐column equilibration of 4 minutes was used after each sample analysis. The LC system was interfaced to a triple‐quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent 6490) via a standard‐flow electrospray ionization (ESI) source, operated in the positive ion mode. The MRM acquisition parameters employed for the quantitation were as follows: 3500 V capillary voltage, 300 V nozzle voltage, 11 L/min sheath gas flow at a temperature of 250°C, 15 L/min drying gas flow at a temperature of 150°C, 30 psi nebulizer gas pressure, 380 V fragmentor voltage, 5 V cell accelerator potential, and unit mass resolution in the first and third quadrupoles. For optimal peptide collision‐induced dissociation, peptide‐specific collision energy (CE) values had previously been determined experimentally. The exact CE values for each peptide is available from PeptideTracker

### Data Protocol
Skyline was used to inspect the peptide response peaks and ensure accurate selection, retention time, integration, and uniformity of peak shape for the endogenous and internal standard peptide signals. For each peptide, the relative peak area ratio of the endogenous to the heavy labeled internal standard peptide was calculated. This ratio and the known concentration of internal standard peptide were used to calculate the concentration of the endogenous peptide in the sample by comparison to a standard curve generated in pooled sample. The criteria used for the standard curve regression analysis were 1/x2 regression weighting, <15% deviation in a given level's precision and accuracy for each concentration level, as well as 20% at the lower limit of quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Many COVID-19 survivors have post-COVID-19 conditions, and females are at a higher risk. We sought to determine (1) how protein levels change from acute to post-COVID-19 conditions, (2) whether females have a plasma protein signature different from that of males, and (3) which biological pathways are associated with COVID-19 when compared to restrictive lung disease. We measured protein levels in 74 patients on the day of admission and at 3 and 6 months after diagnosis. We determined protein concentrations by multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) using a panel of 269 heavy-labeled peptides. The predicted forced vital capacity (FVC) and diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) were measured by routine pulmonary function testing. Proteins associated with six key lipid-related pathways increased from admission to 3 and 6 months; conversely, proteins related to innate immune responses and vasoconstriction-related proteins decreased. Multiple biological functions were regulated differentially between females and males. Concentrations of eight proteins were associated with FVC, %, and they together had <i>c</i>-statistics of 0.751 (CI:0.732-0.779); similarly, concentrations of five proteins had <i>c</i>-statistics of 0.707 (CI:0.676-0.737) for DLCO, %. Lipid biology may drive evolution from acute to post-COVID-19 conditions, while activation of innate immunity and vascular regulation pathways decreased over that period. (ProteomeXchange identifiers: PXD041762, PXD029437).

### Keywords
Covid-19, Restrictive lung disease, Targeted proteomics, Post-covid-19 condition

### Affiliations
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center
LUMC/UVIC

### Submitter
Yassene Mohammed

### Lab Head
Dr Yassene Mohammed
Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics Leiden University Medical Center


