### Accession
PXD025150

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of pancreatic cancer plasma

### Description
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive cancer with a high mortality rate, necessitating the de-velopment of effective diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers for disease manage-ment. Aberrantly fucosylated proteins in PC are considered a valuable resource of clinically useful biomarkers. The main objective of the present study was to identify novel plasma glyco-biomarkers of PC using the iTRAQ quantitative proteomics approach coupled with Aleuria au-rantia lectin (AAL)-based glycopeptide enrichment and isotope-coded glycosylation site-specific tagging, with a view to analyzing the glycoproteome profiles of plasma samples from patients with non-metastatic and metastatic PC and gallstones (GS). As a result, 22 glycopeptides with significantly elevated levels in plasma samples of PC were identified. Fucosylated SERPINA1 (fuco-SERPINA1) was selected for further validation in 121 plasma samples (50 GS and 71 PC) using an AAL-based reverse lectin ELISA technique developed in-house. Our analyses revealed significantly higher plasma levels of fuco-SERPINA1 in PC than GS subjects (310.7 ng/ml v.s. 153.6 ng/ml, p = 0.0114). Elevated fuco-SERPINA1 levels were associated with higher TNM stage (p = 0.024) and poorer prognosis for overall survival (log-rank test, p = 0.0083). The increased plasma fuco-SERPINA1 levels support the utility of this protein as a novel prognosticator for PC.

### Sample Protocol
Peripheral blood samples were drawn from participants with standardized phlebotomy procedures and collected into an EDTA tube. After blood samples were centrifuged at 2000 X g, plasma was isolated from the supernatants and then immediately aliquoted, transferred into plain polypropylene tubes, and stored in a dedicated freezer at −80 °C until use. Plasma samples from patients were obtained from Chang Gung Memorial Hospital (Linkou, Taiwan) after informed consent had been acquired from all subjects. Pathological staging of pancreatic cancer was based on AJCC edition 8. Three plasma samples pooled from 10 GS controls, non-metastatic PC (M0) and metastatic PC (M1) patients were subjected to depletion of 14 highly abundant proteins using the Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) column (4.6 X 100 mm; Agilent, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Depleted fractions were desalted and concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 Centrifugal Filter Devices (MW cutoff, 3000 Da; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Proteins were suspended in ddH2O, quantified using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific, Hudson, NH, USA), and stored at -80 °C for further analysis. Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) labeling were generated according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems, Forster City, CA). Briefly, lyophilized depleted plasma samples (80 ug protein) were reconstituted with 20 ul dissolved reagent and disulfide bonds reduced with 1 ul denaturant reagent and 2 ul reducing reagent, with incubation at 60 °C for 1 hour. After alkylation with 1 ul cysteine blocking reagent at room temperature for 10 min, each sample was digested with 8 ug sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, WI, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h. The resulting tryptic peptides of GS, M0, and M1 groups were labeled with iTRAQ tags 114, 115 and 116, respectively and incubated at room temperature for 2 h. Finally, iTRAQ-labeled products were pooled, separated into two fractions (30 ug and 200 ug) and desalted with solid-phase extraction Oasis HLB (30 um) cartridges (Waters, Massachusetts, USA). Lyophilized, iTRAQ-labeled samples (200 ug peptide) were reconstituted with 1 ml lectin binding buffer (20 mM Tris, 0.3 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.4) and incubated with 2 mg AAL agarose beads (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) via rotation at room temperature for 1 h. After washing with lectin binding buffer three times and 500 ul ddH2O twice, AAL pull-down peptides were transferred to a new tube and eluted using 10% acetic acid/30% ACN with shaking at room temperature for 10 minutes. Eluted peptides were re-lyophilized and dissolved in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.5, supplemented with 90% H218O and 40 U (1 unit/ul) N-glycosidase F (PNGase F; Roche Applied Science, Mannheim, Germany) and incubated at 37 °C with slight shaking for 20 h. Deglycosylated peptides were desalted with 40 ul C18 resin (source 15RPC, GE Healthcare, Björkgatan, Sweden) and lyophilized for further analysis using 2D-SCX/RP-LC-MS/MS. Dried peptides including total plasma peptides (30 ug) and AAL-enrichment peptides were reconstituted in HPLC mobile phase A (30% ACN/0.1% FA) and loaded onto home-made SCX column of two different sizes (0.5 x 200 mm and 0.5 x 100 mm; Luna SCX 5 um, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) at flow rate of 3 ul/minute for 30 min. Peptides were eluted with 0–95% HPLC mobile phase B (1 M ammonium nitrate/25% ACN/0.1% FA) and separated into 72 and 48 fractions using online 2D-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA). Each SCX fraction was further 40-fold diluted in-line using mobile phase A prior to trapping columns (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 um, 0.3 x 5 mm; Agilent Technologies, Wilmington, DE, USA) and diluted peptides resolved on an analytical C18 column (Synergi Hydro-RP 2.5 um, 0.075 x 200 mm with a 15 um tip; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA). A linear gradient of fractionation was applied as follows: 6–12% HPLC mobile phase C (99.9% ACN/0.1% FA) for 2 min, 12–28% mobile phase C for 28 min, 28–38% buffer C for 10 min, 38–48% buffer C for 5 min, 48–65% buffer C for 4 min, 65–95% buffer C for 2 min, 95% buffer C for 3 min, 95-6% buffer C for 1 min, and 6% buffer C for 5 min, with a flow rate of 0.25 ul/minute. The LC apparatus was coupled to a mass spectrometer of LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA) controlled using Xcalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA, USA). Full-scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap over a range of 400 to 2,000 Da and resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. Internal calibration was performed using the ion signal of [Si(CH3)2O]6H+ at m/z 445.120025 as a lock mass. Twelve data-dependent MS/MS scan events comprised of six collision-induced dissociation (CID) mode and six high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) mode events were followed by one MS scan for the six most abundant precursor ions identified in a preview MS scan.

### Data Protocol
RAW files of resulting MS/MS spectra obtained from LTQ-Orbitrap MS were searched against the database containing 20316 entries of Homo sapiens in SwissProt released on 20180304 and commercial Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA) employed for data processing. The cleaved enzyme was set to "trypsin" with a maximum of one missed cleavage site. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ions mass tolerance to 0.5 Da for CID mode via ion trap analysis and 0.05 Da for HCD mode via Orbitrap analysis. The fixed modification was set to methylthiolation at cysteine (+45.99 Da) and variable modifications set to acetylation at protein N-terminus (+42.01 Da), oxidation at methionine (+15.99 Da), pyroglutamate conversion at N-terminal glutamine (-17.03 Da) and iTRAQ 4plex labeling at lysine and peptide N-terminal (+144.10 Da). Moreover, variable modifications of deamination at asparagine (N to D) and deamination with 18O labeling at asparagine (N to D_18O) were set for glycosylated site identification. Based on Mascot search results, the score threshold of peptide identification was set to "1% false discovery rate (FDR)" in the processing workflow and Peptide Validator algorithm applied in calculation of FDR for peptide sequence analysis to distinguish true positives from random matches (decoy database). The decoy database was generated with Mascot and the size, including the number of amino acids and proteins, was the same as the original normal database. In iTRAQ quantification, each reporter ion was integrated by the mode of most confident centroid at 20 ppm tolerance and iTRAQplex of 114 (114.11 Da) set as a denominator to compare other iTRAQplex of 115 (115.11 Da), 116 (116.11 Da) and 117 (117.11 Da) to generate a quantifiable ratio. Glycopeptides were processed using Byonic software (v2.12.0) (Protein Metrics Inc., Cupertino, CA) in RAW files obtained from PC proteome analysis. The digested enzyme was set to “trypsin” with a maximum of one missed cleavage site. Mass tolerance and modification were the same as the above values. The library of 390 mammalian N-glycans was additionally set to the modified list for searching N-glycosylated peptides. Manual inspection was applied to confirm the confidence of identified glycopeptides and detect mass peaks of oxonium ion and glycan loss using Symbol Nomenclature for Glycans (SNFG).

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic cancer (PC) is an aggressive cancer with a high mortality rate, necessitating the development of effective diagnostic, prognostic and predictive biomarkers for disease management. Aberrantly fucosylated proteins in PC are considered a valuable resource of clinically useful biomarkers. The main objective of the present study was to identify novel plasma glycobiomarkers of PC using the iTRAQ quantitative proteomics approach coupled with <i>Aleuria aurantia</i> lectin (AAL)-based glycopeptide enrichment and isotope-coded glycosylation site-specific tagging, with a view to analyzing the glycoproteome profiles of plasma samples from patients with non-metastatic and metastatic PC and gallstones (GS). As a result, 22 glycopeptides with significantly elevated levels in plasma samples of PC were identified. Fucosylated SERPINA1 (fuco-SERPINA1) was selected for further validation in 121 plasma samples (50 GS and 71 PC) using an AAL-based reverse lectin ELISA technique developed in-house. Our analyses revealed significantly higher plasma levels of fuco-SERPINA1 in PC than GS subjects (310.7 ng/mL v.s. 153.6 ng/mL, <i>p</i> = 0.0114). Elevated fuco-SERPINA1 levels were associated with higher TNM stage (<i>p</i> = 0.024) and poorer prognosis for overall survival (log-rank test, <i>p</i> = 0.0083). The increased plasma fuco-SERPINA1 levels support the utility of this protein as a novel prognosticator for PC.

### Keywords
Plasma, Reverse lectin-based elisa, Fucosylated serpina1, Pancreatic cancer, Glycobiomarker, Aal, Itraq-based quantitative proteome

### Affiliations
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University

### Submitter
Chia-Chun Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Jau-Song Yu
Molecular Medicine Research Center, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.


