### Accession
PXD033408

### Title
Core fucosylation in mesenchymal glioblastoma

### Description
Glycoproteomic screening indicates that core fucosylation activation is more highly enhancedin mesenchymal (MES) than in proneural (PN) glioblastoma cancer stem cells (GSCs) and this pattern is retained in subgroup-specific xenograftsand human patients’ samples. Most MES-restricted core fucosylated proteins are involved in therapeutically relevant pathological processes, such as extracellular matrix interaction and tumor invasion.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from PN and MES GSCs/GCL lines (n=3 for each condition) were first denatured in 0.5 ml of 8 M urea in Tris HCl pH 7.6 with the addition of protease inhibitors (Halt™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail 100X) and of phosphatase inhibitors, then sonicated thoroughly for 3 min. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA protein assay kit. One mg of total proteins was then reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C and alkylated by addition of 27 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in ammonium bicarbonate buffer (ABC) 0.1 M. The sample was diluted 1:4 with ABC buffer 0.1 M, added with 1:50 w/w (20 µg for 1 mg of proteins) sequence-grade trypsin and incubated at 37°C overnight. Peptides were then purified and desalted with OASIS PRIME HLB C18 cartridges. The samples were eluted in 1 ml (twice 0.5 ml) of ACN/ MeOH 90/10 and dried under nitrogen. The agarose bound LCA was prepared from biotinylated Lens Culinaris agglutinin conjugate and Streptavidin agarose. Before use, 0.1 ml high-capacity streptavidin agarose was washed twice with 0.5 ml PBS to remove sugars added to stabilize the lectin. The agarose was incubated in 0.5 ml PBS with 1 mg of biotinylated LCA for 1h at RT. The agarose bound LCA was washed 3 times with 0.5 ml TBS and incubated with the desalted peptides in 0.5 ml of TBS buffer at 4°C overnight. LCA conjugate samples were then centrifuged for 1 min at 2500 g and the supernatant was removed and used to follow the unbound proteins. The precipitates were washed four times with 0.5 ml TBS buffer by centrifugation at 2500 g. After removing the final wash supernatant, 0.5 ml of elution buffer (mixture of 200 mM α-methyl mannoside and 200 mM α-methyl glucoside in TBS for LCA) was added before vortexing for 30 seconds. The supernatant was collected after centrifugation and the precipitate was eluted an additional time. The eluted solutions were combined and desalted with OASIS PRIME HLB C18 cartridges The samples were resuspended in 95% ACN/1% TFA and further enriched by OASIS MAX cartridges. For MAX enrichment, the cartridges were conditioned three times with solutions of ACN, 100 mM triethylammonium acetate, water and 95% ACN/1% TFA. The samples in 95% ACN/1% TFA were loaded to the cartridges and washed four times with 95% ACN/1% TFA. Fucosylated glycopeptides were eluted twice in 0.4 ml of 50% ACN/0.1% TFA and dried under nitrogen. The residue was then reconstituted in 30 µl of water ready for deglycosylation steps. The core-fucosylated N-glycopeptides were deglycosylated by a combination of endoglycosidases (endoF2, endoF3 and endoD). Specifically, the core fucosylated N-glycopeptides were dissolved in 1x GlycoBuffer and then treated with 5 µl of endoF2 and 5 µl endoF3  overnight at 37°C under agitation. The samples were dried under nitrogen and dissolved in 22 µl of water before adding 5 µl of endoD and Glycobuffer with an overnight incubation at 37°C under agitation. The samples were prepared for nano LC-MS/MS analysis by desalting procedures with StageTip C18 and finally dissolved in 20 µl 10% formic acid. For the unbound fraction derived from LCA enrichment, the samples were subjected to OASIS MAX, endoF2/F3 and endoD deglycosilation as previously reported. Finally, the peptides were desalted using OASIS PRIME HLB C18 and resuspended in 150µl of 10% formic acid. To identify and quantify core fucosylated (GlcNAcFuc), non-fucosylated (GlcNAc) and unmodified peptides of N-glycoproteins desalted samples (3 µl injected) were analyzed on Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source and a nUPLC Easy nLC 1000. Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75 µm i.d., 15 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9-µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ. A gradient of eluents A (water with 0.1% formic acid) and B (ACN with 0.1% formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300 nL/min flow rate), from 2% B to 40% B in 88 minutes. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option resolution set to 70,000 and mass range from m/z 300 to 2000. The experiments were performed in technical triplicates. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot v.2.6 engine to search the human proteome 20201007 (42,358 sequences and 24,316,585 residues). Searches were performed with the following settings: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 2 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminus-acetylation, methionine oxidation, GlcNAcFuc and GlcNAc as variable modifications; mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm and to 0.02 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. To quantify proteins and to identify the core fucosylated (GlcNAcFuc) and the non-fucosylated (GlcNAc) sites, the raw data were uploaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0. Label-free protein quantification was based on the intensities of precursors. The intensity of each GlcNAcFuc peptide was normalized to the intensity of the originating protein. Statistical analysis and hierarchical clustering were performed by MeV software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glioblastoma, Cancer stem cells, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Neural Stem Cell Biology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, Milan,Italy, 20132.
Ospedale San Raffaele

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Rossella Galli
Neural Stem Cell Biology Unit, Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Via Olgettina 58, Milan,Italy, 20132.


