### Accession
PXD041674

### Title
Determining DNA-protein binding affinities and specificities from crude lysates using a combined SILAC/TMT labeling strategy

### Description
Gene expression is driven by the binding of transcription factors to regulatory elements in the genome, such as enhancers and promoters. A powerful technique to study DNA-protein interactions is affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry. Classic affinity purifications coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry provide information about binding specificity. Binding of transcription factors to regulatory elements in vivo, however, also depends on binding affinity, so the strength of an interaction. To obtain this information, we recently developed a technique called PAQMAN that uses a series of DNA affinity purifications to quantify apparent binding affinities proteome-wide. Here, we expand our PAQMAN workflow to obtain information about binding specificity and affinity in a single experiment. To this end, we combine quantitation at the MS1 level with quantitation at the MS2 level, a strategy that is known as higher order multiplexing. This is, to our knowledge, the first time that higher order multiplexing is applied to affinity purification - mass spectrometry experiments. In the future, we anticipate that this new workflow will be a useful tool to investigate transcription factor biology.

### Sample Protocol
DNA oligonucleotides  were ordered from Integrated DNA Technologies with 5’-biotinylation of the forward strand. The forward strand was combined with 1.5X molar excess of the reverse strand in annealing buffer (10mM Tris (pH 8.0), 50mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA) and heated to 95 °C for 10 minutes followed by slowly cooling them to room temperature overnight. Standard DNA pulldowns  were performed as described previously by Makowski et al. 2016. In short, for each reaction 20μl Streptavidin-Sepharose bead slurry (GE Healthcare) was prepared by washing twice with 1ml DNA binding buffer (DBB; 1M NaCl, 10mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 0.05% NP-40). Next, 500pmol of annealed DNA oligonucleotides was immobilized on beads in a total volume of 600μl DBB. After 30 minutes rotating at 4C, beads were washed twice with DBB and once with Protein Incubation Buffer (PIB; 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.0, EDTA-free Complete Protease Inhibitor (CPI), 0.25% NP-40, 1mM DTT). Per pulldown, 500μg of nuclear extract was added in a total volume of 600μl PIB and rotated for 90 minutes at 4C. For Next, beads were washed thrice with 1ml PIB and twice with 1ml PBS. Samples were labelled using dimethyl labeling on StageTips and prepared for mass spectrometry as described by Makowski et al. 2016. PAQMAN was done as described by Makowski et al. 2018 and Gräwe et al. 2019. For each replicate, a dilution series was prepared consisting of ten DNA oligonucleotides concentrations (ranging from 0.15nM to 3M) in DBB. DNA pulldowns were performed on a 96-well filter plate (Millipore, MSBVS1210). The wells were first washed once with 70% ethanol and twice with DBB. Then, 20μl Streptavidin-Sepharose bead slurry per reaction was added and washed twice with DBB. Afterwards, 150μl oligonucleotides of each condition of the prepared dilution series was added to the beads and incubated overnight shaking at 4C. The next morning, every well was washed once with DBB and twice with PIB. Per pulldown, 100μg of nuclear extract or SILAC-labelled nuclear extract was added to the corresponding pulldowns and shaked for 2h at 4C. Then, wells were washed six times with washing buffer (150mM NaCl, 100mM TEAB). Beads were resuspended in 50μl elution buffer (20% methanol, 80mM TEAB, 10mM TCEP) and incubated shaking for 30 minutes at room temperature. Proteins were reduced with 50mM IAA for 10 minutes in the dark. On-bead digestion was performed by adding 0.25μg trypsin and incubating the samples shaking for 2 h at room temperature. Samples were collected into a collection plate by centrifugation and wells were flushed again with 50μl elution buffer. Proteins were digested further overnight. The next day, sample volume was reduced to 10μl by vacuum centrifugation. Each 0.8mg of TMT 10-plex labelling reagent (Thermo Scientific) was resuspended in 101μl anhydrous acetonitrile. To each sample, 10μl of the corresponding TMT label was added and incubated shaking for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Afterwards, labelling reactions were quenched by adding 10μl of 1M Tris pH 8.0 and incubating shaking for 30 minutes at room temperature. All ten pulldown samples of each PAQMAN replicate were combined. For SILAC-TMT samples, the respective light and heavy labelled PAQMAN pairs were combined as well.  Samples were StageTipped. For miniTurbo experiments, cells were treated with 50uM bioti n for 10 minutes. Cells were harvested 72h post transfection. For each pulldown, 2mg of whole cell lysate was combined with 20ul Streptavidin-Sepharose bead slurry, RIPA buffer and 2ul ethium bromide in a total volume of 600ul. The samples were incubated for 90 minutes rotating at 4 C. Afterwards, beads were washed thrice with RIPA buffer and twice with PBS. The experiment was done in triplicate. For mass spectrometry, beads were resuspended in 50μl elution buffer (2M urea, 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 10mM DTT) and incubated for 20 minutes shaking at room temperature. Proteins were alkylated using 50mM IAA followed by 10-minute incubation shaking in the dark. Next, proteins were digested on-bead by adding 0.25μg of trypsin and incubated shaking for 2 h at room temperature. Afterwards, samples were spun down and supernatant was collected. Beads were washed once more with 50 μl elution. Proteins were continued to be digested overnight with an additional 0.1μg of trypsin. The next day, samples were purified using StageTips.  Samples were eluted from StageTips with Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), concentrated to 5µl by SpeedVac centrifugation and resuspended to 12µl in Buffer A (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were separated on an reverse-phase EASY-nLC and analysed on an Orbitrap Exploris (Thermo) mass spectrometer with acquisition settings described in Santos-Barriopedro et al. 2021. PAQMAN samples were analysed on a Fusion Tribrid (Thermo) mass spectrometer with acquisition settings described in Gräwe et al. 2019.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry spectra were processed using ProteomeDiscoverer 3.0 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt curated human proteome database, released in June 2017. Identified proteins were filtered for common contaminants and only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide  were used for downstream analysis. All data visualization was done with Python . For label-free samples, the built in LFQ workflow was used with standard settings. Downstream analysis was performed with Perse us (version 2.0.6.0). Only proteins that were identified with at least 2 peptides, not marked as reverse hit or only identified by site  were considered for further analysis. Proteins had to be identified and quantified in 3/3 replicates in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution. A two sample t-test was performed to identify proteins that are significantly enriched.  For SILAC labelled samples, the built in SILAC quantification workflow was used with standard setting. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as variable modifications for samples that were labelled either light or heavy. For analysis of SILAC-TMT labelled samples, a new quantification method was added in ProteomeDiscoverer that is based on the built-in SILAC 2plex method. For the light labeled channel, TMT6plex was added as modification on lysines and N-termini. For the heavy labeled channel, Arg10  and K8-TMT6plex  (237.177 Da) were added as side chain modifications and TMT6plex was added on N-termini. Obtained results were exported and further analyzed using Python. Proteins that have no unique peptides or that could not be quantified in all four channels were filtered out. Outlier statistics was used to identify significant proteins. Proteins were considered significant with 1 inter-quartile  ranges for both forward and reverse experiments. PAQMAN data were essentially analyzed as described earlier by Makowski et al. 2018 and Gräwe et al. 2019. The built in TMT 10plex quantification workflow was used with standard settings. For heavy SILAC labelled peptides, a new quantification method was added that is based on the built-in TMT 10plex quantification method. K8-TMT6plex (237.177 Da) was added as residue modification and TMT6plex was kept as N-terminal modification. In addition, Arg10 was set as static modification in the processing workflow. Obtained results were exported and apparent binding affinities were determined by using an in-house Python script.

### Publication Abstract
In recent years, quantitative mass spectrometry-based interaction proteomics technology has proven very useful in identifying specific DNA-protein interactions using single pull-downs from crude lysates. Here, we applied a SILAC/TMT-based higher-order multiplexing approach to develop an interaction proteomics workflow called Protein-nucleic acid Affinity and Specificity quantification by MAss spectrometry in Nuclear extracts or PASMAN. In PASMAN, DNA pull-downs using a concentration range of specific and control DNA baits are performed in SILAC-labeled nuclear extracts. MS<sup>1</sup>-based quantification to determine specific DNA-protein interactions is then combined with sequential TMT-based quantification of fragmented SILAC peptides, allowing the generation of Hill-like curves and determination of apparent binding affinities. We benchmarked PASMAN using the SP/KLF motif and further applied it to gain insights into two CGCG-containing consensus DNA motifs. These motifs are recognized by two BEN domain-containing proteins, BANP and BEND3, which we find to interact with these motifs with distinct affinities. Finally, we profiled the BEND3 proximal proteome, revealing the NuRD complex as the major BEND3 proximal protein complex in vivo. In summary, PASMAN represents, to our knowledge, the first higher-order multiplexing-based interaction proteomics method that can be used to decipher specific DNA-protein interactions and their apparent affinities in various biological and pathological contexts.

### Keywords
Paqman, Dna pulldowns, Tmt, Silac

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life
Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Cathrin Graewe

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA Nijmegen, The Netherlands.


