### Accession
PXD023069

### Title
Integrated lipidomics and proteomics reveal cardiolipin remodelling by upregulation of HADHA and indirectly by ELOVL5 in pancreatic cancer stem cells

### Description
Pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) characterize the pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC) and play a key role in driving their poor outcomes and resistance to targeted therapies. Although advanced proteomics and lipidomics technology facilitates quantitation of intracellular proteins and lipids, little is known about the regulation of signalling and metabolic pathways in PCSCs. Here we shown that PCSCs, derived from different PDAC cell lines, have specific and common proteome and lipidome modulations. PCSCs displayed down-regulation of L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain (LDHA) and, more interestingly, upregulation of trifunctional enzyme subunit alpha (HADHA) which is involved in cardiolipin remodelling. The upregulated proteins of PCSCs were mainly involved in fatty acid (FA) elongation and biosynthesis of unsaturated FAs. Accordingly, lipidomics revealed a general increase of FAs 18:1, 20:2, 20:3, and 20:4, which are products of the catalytic activity of fatty acid elongase-5 (ELOVL5) predicted as common active gene of PCSCs. Moreover, in accordance with HADHA upregulation, lipidomics also showed the induction in PCSCs of molecular species of cardiolipin with mixed incorporation of 16:0, 18:1, and 18:2 acyl chains. Our data indicate a crucial role of fatty acid elongation and cardiolipin remodelling in PCSCs, which could therefore represent attractive targets to improve the therapeutic treatments of PDAC

### Sample Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteome modulation of four mutated (PaCa3, PaCa44, MiaPaCa2, and PC1J) P and CSCs cell lines was performed as previously reported 21. Briefly, cells were collected (three biological replicates for each mutated P and CSC cell lines), washed and lysed in 1X PBS with protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) and 0,1% SDS.  Acetone was used for protein precipitation/denaturation followed by resuspension in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Protein content was obtained by BCA Protein Assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). 30 µg of protein extract was subjected to reduction (with DTT from Sigma-Aldrich) and alkylation (with iodoacetamide form Sigma-Aldrich), prior to tryptic digestion at 37°C overnight.Tryptic peptides were analysed by label-free LC-MS/MS, performed by using a micro-LC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, USA) interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada). Samples were subjected first to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library, and then to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA), based on a 25-Da window, using three technical replicates of each sample

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired by Analyst TF v.1.7 (AB SCIEX); while PeakView v.1.2.0.3 and Protein Pilot v.4.2 (AB SCIEX) programs were used to generate the peak-list. Protein identification was obtained using either Protein Pilot v.4.2 (AB SCIEX) and Mascot search engines performing the database search in UniProt/Swissprot (v.2015.07.07, 42131 sequences entries). The obtained files from the DDA acquisitions were used for the library generation using a FDR threshold of 1%. Protein quantification was performed by PeakView v.2.0 and MarkerView v.1.2. (ABSCIEX) programs by extracting from SWATH files six peptides per protein with the highest MS1 intensity, and six transitions per peptide. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported, and up- and downregulated proteins were selected using p-value < 0.05 and fold change >1.5.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic cancer stem cells (PCSCs) play a key role in the aggressiveness of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (PDAC); however, little is known about their signaling and metabolic pathways. Here we show that PCSCs have specific and common proteome and lipidome modulations. PCSCs displayed downregulation of lactate dehydrogenase A chain, and upregulation of trifunctional enzyme subunit alpha. The upregulated proteins of PCSCs are mainly involved in fatty acid (FA) elongation and biosynthesis of unsaturated FAs. Accordingly, lipidomics reveals an increase in long and very long-chain unsaturated FAs, which are products of fatty acid elongase-5 predicted as a key gene. Moreover, lipidomics showed the induction in PCSCs of molecular species of cardiolipin with mixed incorporation of 16:0, 18:1, and 18:2 acyl chains. Our data indicate a crucial role of FA elongation and alteration in cardiolipin acyl chain composition in PCSCs, representing attractive therapeutic targets in PDAC.

### Keywords
Pdac, Pcscs, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale


