### Accession
PXD021321

### Title
Glycosyltransferase POMGnT1 deficiency affects N-cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesion

### Description
Deficiencies in the protein O-mannose β1,2-N-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 1 (POMGNT1), a glycosyltransferase involved in the elongation of classic O-mannosyl glycans, are mainly associated with muscle-eye-brain disease (MEB), a genetically heterogeneous congenital muscular dystrophy with brain and eye anomalies. Although occasional aberrant cell-cell adhesion has been observed in response to changes in POMGNT1 levels, direct molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. POMGNT1 knock-out HEK293T cells and fibroblasts derived from MEB patients were used to get deeper insight in POMGNT1 deficiency by the combination of biochemical, cell and molecular biological techniques with proteomics and glycan-profile.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome analysis of wild type and ΔPOMGnT1 cells was performed in five replicates. Cells were grown to 90% confluency in 15 cm dishes and lysed in 1 ml lysis buffer [PBS with 1% Triton X-100 (v/v), 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM benzamidine, 0.25 mM TLCK, 50 µg/ml TPCK, 20 µg/ml antipain, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 µg/ml pepstatin] for 30 min on ice. Supernatants of whole cell lysates were collected after centrifugation (20,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C), sonicated (Branson Sonifier 450 at 60% Duty Cycle, Level 6 Output Control) for 15 min and resolved on 10% SDS PAA gels. Gels were washed four times in ddH2O (200 ml, 30 min), stained in a colloidal Coomassie solution (5% aluminium sulphate hydrate (w/v), 10% ethanol (v/v), 0.02% Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (w/v), 2% phosphoric acid (v/v)) for 1-2 h and destained o/n in 500 ml ddH2O. Proteins were isolated from respective gel pieces, carbamidomethylated, subjected to tryptic digestion (1:50) and acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide analysis was performed on a liquid chromatography-mass spectrometer (LC-MS), therefore an UltiMate 3000 nanoRSLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) was used coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) [PMID: 19029910]  and Andromeda search engine [PMID: 21254760]  with standard settings except noted otherwise. The UniProt human database was used (downloaded on July 08/2019, reviewed database entries: 26468). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine/glutamine deamidation, protein N-terminus acetylation and serine/threonine mono hexosylation were set as variable modifications. A minimal peptide length of seven amino acids, and at maximum two miscleavages (trypsin/p) were allowed. The maximum protein, peptide and site false discovery rates were set to 0.05. “Re‐quantify” and “Match between runs (2 min)” was activated. LFQ-intensities of the proteins were used and analyzed in the program Perseus (label-free quantification).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mannosylation, Muscle-eye-brain disease, Muscular dystrophy-dystroglycanopathy, Meb, 2-n-acetylglucosaminyltransferase 1, Pmgt1, Pomgnt1, Protein o-linked-mannose beta-1

### Affiliations
Clinic for Heart Surgery
Martin-Luther-University Halle-Wittenberg
Ernst-Grube Str. 40
06120 Halle (Saale)
Phone: +49 (0) 345-557-7068
E-Mail: patrick.winterhalter@uk-halle.de
Centre for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 360 69120 Heidelberg Fon +49 6221 54-6286 Fax +49 6221 54-5859

### Submitter
Patrick Winterhalter

### Lab Head
Dr Sabine Strahl
Centre for Organismal Studies (COS) Heidelberg Im Neuenheimer Feld 360 69120 Heidelberg Fon +49 6221 54-6286 Fax +49 6221 54-5859


