### Accession
PXD039071

### Title
Type I interferon/STAT1 signaling negative feedback regulates UBE2M-mediated antiviral innate immunity

### Description
To identify potential proteins involved in RIG-I regulation, we pulled down RIG-I from HEK293T or NIH-3T3 cells overexpressing RIG-I, and the RIG-I-bound proteins were then analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS).

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with Flag-RIG-I or Flag-UBE2M plasmids,we pulled down RIG-I and UBE2M from these cells with by anti-FLAG® M2 magnetic beads, and the proteins attached to beads were then analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MASCOT2.3.0. Tandem mass spectra were searched against uniprot20160315. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 15 ppm for precursor ions and 20 mmu for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification, Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q) and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide ion score was set > 25.

### Publication Abstract
Type I interferon (IFN-I) signaling is central to inducing antiviral innate immunity. However, the mechanisms for IFN-I signaling self-regulation are still largely unknown. Here, we report that RNA virus-infected macrophages with UBE2M deficiency produced decreased IFN-I expression in a RIG-I-dependent manner, causing an aggravated viral infection. Mechanistically, UBE2M inhibits RIG-I degradation by preventing the interaction of RIG-I and E3 ligase STUB1, resulting in antiviral IFN-I signaling activation. Simultaneously, IFN-I signaling-activated STAT1 facilitates the transcription of Trim21, leading to increased UBE2M degradation and blunted antiviral immunity. Translationally, oral administration of milk-derived extracellular vesicles containing RING domain-truncated TRIM21 (TRIM21-&#x394;RING) lacking E3 ligase activity efficiently transfers TRIM21-&#x394;RING into macrophages. TRIM21-&#x394;RING suppresses UBE2M degradation by competitively binding to UBE2M with TRIM21, thereby enhancing antiviral immunity. Overall, we reveal a negative feedback loop of IFN-I signaling and develop a reagent to improve innate immunity against RNA viruses.

### Keywords
Hek293t nih-3t3 lc-msms rig-i ube2m

### Affiliations
18657148317
Institute of Immunology, and Department of Orthopedics of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China

### Submitter
Xianghui Kong

### Lab Head
Dr Zhijian Cai
Institute of Immunology, and Department of Orthopedics of the Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310009, China


