### Accession
PXD017679

### Title
Differential response to herbivory by Helicoverpa armigera in Cajanus cajan and Cajanus platycarpus

### Description
In synchrony with deciphering the transcriptomic basis of pod borer resistance in C. platycarpus, the aim of the present work was to corroborate and understand how the leaf proteome in these two contrasting cajanus species explain the differential responses to herbivory. To the best of our knowledge this is the first investigative analysis applying proteomics to understand plant herbivore interactions in cajanus species. The study is one of the best approaches to assess cellular alterations from a multi-level perception and to enhance our understanding of resistance traits in the wild relatives.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 1 g leaf tissue was pre-chilled with liquid N2 and ground into a fine powder. Each sample was dissolved in 10 ml of phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), kept overnight at -20 0C  and later centrifuged at 15000 rpm for 15 min at 4 0C. The pellet was re-suspended in  chilled acetone containing 0.07% β-mercaptoethanol (v/v), 2mM EDTA, EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (1 tablet/50 ml buffer). Protein samples were processed using a modified version of filter aided sample preparation (FASP; (Wisniewski et   al., 2009; PMID: 19377485). For this, each sample was dissolved in 30 µl denaturing buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, 0.1mM DTT). After vigorous vortexing, samples were placed in a vial-tweeter powered by UP200St ultrasonic processor (Hielscher Ultrasonics) for 1min (100% amplitude, 70% cycle). Protein concentration was determined using the Qbit-protein-kit (Invitrogen). Following quantification, 30 µg of protein was dissolved in 200 µl of freshly prepared buffered urea solution (8M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2) and was placed in a 0.5 ml Amicon 30000 MWCO concentrator (Millipore). Samples were centrifuged (14000 x g) until the volume was reduced completely. The filter was washed with 200 µl of the buffered urea solution and centrifuged as above.  For alkylation, the samples were incubated for 5 min in 100 µl urea solution containing 50 mM iodoacetamide. Further, samples were again centrifuged followed by sequential washing with 3 x 100µl buffered urea solution and 2 x 100µl 0.5M NaCl. After the washing steps, samples were incubated in 120 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) containing trypsin (Promega) overnight at room temperature in a wet chamber (trypsin to protein ratio was maintained at 1:50). After the incubation, peptides were collected in a fresh vial through centrifugation. The peptide containing solution was acidified with trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%. Sample cleanup was done on homemade stage tips (C18 reverse phase material) preconditioned with 3% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% TFA. Peptide containing samples were loaded onto the column and washed with 2 x 2ml 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA  followed by elution with 2 x 0.5ml 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The eluted peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 20 µl of 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA).

### Data Protocol
All the generated data was stored within the B-Fabric platform developed and maintained at FGCZ, ETH, Zurich. The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.4.1.2), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against the species specific transcriptome database (SSTDB) that contained 124134 entries, concatenated to its reverted decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label free quantification was enabled and a 2 minutes window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design, each file is kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values.  Protein fold changes were computed based on Intensity values reported in the proteinGroups.txt file. A set of functions implemented in the R package SRMService  was used to filter for proteins with 2 or more peptides allowing for a maximum of 4 missing values, and to normalize the data with a modified robust z-score transformation which preserves the dynamic range of the measurement. The p-values and fold changes were computed using the limma package.

### Publication Abstract
The pigeonpea wild relative Cajanus platycarpus is resistant to Helicoverpa armigera, one of the major pests responsible for yield losses in Cajanus cajan. Deciphering the molecular mechanism underlying host plant resistance is pertinent to identify proteins that aid in the mitigation of the insect pest. The present study adopted comparative proteomics as a tool to interpret the resistance mechanism(s) in C. platycarpus vis-&#xe0;-vis C. cajan during continued herbivory (up to 96 h). Over-representation analysis of the differentially expressed proteins implicated a multi-dimensional resistance response accomplished by both physical and chemical barriers in C. platycarpus. While the chemical basis for resistance was depicted by the upregulation of proteins playing a rate limiting role in the phenylpropanoid pathway, the physical basis was provided by the regulation of proteins involved in microtubule assembly and synthesis of lignins. Upregulation of proteins in the polyamine pathway indicated the role of metabolite conjugates to be negatively affecting herbivore growth. Reallocation of resources and diversion of metabolic flux to support the production of secondary metabolites could be the probable approach in the wild relative against herbivory. Our study provided deeper insights into the pod borer resistance mechanism in C. platycarpus for utility in crop improvement. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Pod borer resistance in Cajanus platycarpus is multi-dimensional. &#x2022; Pod borer resistance has been arbitrated to cell wall rigidity and secondary metabolites. &#x2022; Phenylpropanoid pathway derivatives apparently shaped the plant chemical defense against pod borer.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Response to pest attack, Cajanus cajan

### Affiliations
University of Zurich
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, India -110012

### Submitter
Bernd Roschitzki

### Lab Head
Dr Rohini Sreevathsa
ICAR-National Institute for Plant Biotechnology, Pusa Campus, New Delhi, India -110012


