### Accession
PXD006151

### Title
Definition of a high-confidence mitochondrial proteome at quantitative scale_pure versus crude mitochondria

### Description
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism and signaling and their malfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative, quantitative MS-based experimental approach to define the high confidence proteome of yeast mitochondria and to identify new mitochondrial proteins. The analysis includes protein abundance under fermentable and non-fermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein analysis and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified novel mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster as well as new mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high confidence source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast were grown in SILAC medium (0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 3% [v/v] glycerol, selected amino acids and nucleobases) containing either 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4) and lysine (13C6/15N2) or the respective 'light' amino acids. Four separate cultures were grown and differentially labeled using SILAC amino acids including label-switch. Cell lysates and subcellular fractions including crude mitochondrial fractions (cM) and gradient-purified mitochondria (pM) were prepared by differential centrifugation as described previously (Meisinger et al., Anal. Biochem. 287, 2000). To reveal differences in protein abundance between mitochondrial fractions of different purity, cM and pM from differentially SILAC-labeled cells were mixed in equal ratios based on protein concentration and analyzed by LC-MS following different protein and peptide fractionation methods including SDS-PAGE (according to standard protocols), strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX), and high pH reversed-phase chromatography (pH 10 RP). Cysteine residues were reduced (10 mM DTT/10 mM NH4HCO3, 30 min at 56°C) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM NH4HCO3; 30 min at RT in the dark) followed by proteolytic digestion of proteins using trypsin, chymotryptic, LysC, AspN, or GluC. SCX of tryptic, chymotryptic, AspN, LysC, and GluC digests (n=4), resuspended in 500 µl SCX buffer [10 mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 25% (v/v) ACN], were performed using cation exchange mini-columns (POROS™ 50 HS; AB Sciex) equilibrated with SCX buffer. Peptides were eluted step-wise with 35, 55, 75, 100, 125, 150, 200, 250 and 350 mM KCl in SCX buffer (500 µl each). pH 10 RP of tryptic peptides (n=4), resuspended in 99% solvent A (72 mM triethylamine, 52 mM acetic acid, pH 10) and 1% solvent B (72 mM triethylamine and 52 mM acetic acid in ACN), were performed using a Gemini-NX column (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) and an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) at a flow rate of 200 µl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. For peptide separation, a gradient of 1-55% B (starting after 5 min) in 55 min followed by 55-70% B in 2 min and 2 min at 70% B was used. Fractions were collected in 30 s intervals starting at minute 8.5 and ending at minute 56.5 and pooled into 30 non-contiguously concatenated fractions.  LC/MS analysis: Peptides, resuspended in 0.1% TFA, were analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on a PepMap C18 precolumn (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) and separated using an AcclaimPepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 2 µm) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40°C. For peptide elution, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA)/4% (v/v) DMSO (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/4% (v/v) DMSO/48% (v/v) methanol/30% (v/v) ACN (solvent B) were used. Tryptic peptides, analyzed without prefractionation, were eluted with a gradient of 5-25% solvent B in 115 min followed by 25-45% B in 110 min, 45-60% B in 50 min, 60-80% B in 20 min, 80-99% B in 10 min, and 5 min at 99% B. Peptides derived from tryptic in-gel digests were separated with 1-65% solvent B in 50 min, 65-95% B in 5 min and 5 min at 95% B. For the separation of peptides collected by pH 10 RP, a gradient ranging from 1-67.5% B in 50 min, 67.5-95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B was applied, and peptides of SCX samples were eluted with 1-40% B in 55 min followed by 40-70% B in 30 min, 70-99% B in 10 min, and 5 min at 99% B. The Orbitrap Elite was externally calibrated using standard compounds and operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 370-1,700 were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 400). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 10E6 ions and the maximum injection (IT) time to 200 ms. A TOP15 (samples fractionated by SDS-PAGE), TOP20 (samples fractionated by pH 10 RP), or TOP25 method (all other samples) was used for low energy collision-induced dissociation of multiply charged precursor peptides in the linear ion trap with a normalized collision energy of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E3, and a max. IT of 150 ms. Singly charged precursor peptides were generally rejected from fragmentation, except for the analysis of samples derived from SCX experiments, which were additionally analyzed allowing fragmentation of singly charged precursor peptides to increase the likelihood to identify small mitochondrial proteins. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursors was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide/protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.12) and its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against a custom-made protein database containing all entries of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org/, downloaded  02/04/2016; 6,726 entries) and 47 entries for putative small open reading frames reported by Smith et al. (Cell Reports 7, 2014). Data were also correlated with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da for fragment ions and the appropriate enzymatic specificity allowing two (AspN), three (trypsin/P, LysC), or four missed cleavages (chymotrypsin, GluC). The cleavage sites for chymotrypsin were defined as C-terminal to Tye, Phe, Trp, Leu, and Met. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of Met were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of Cys residues as fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. The options 'requantify', 'match between runs' (match from and to), and 'iBAQ' were enabled. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of six amino acids and a maximum mass of  6,000 Da. Lists of peptides and proteins identified by MaxQuant were filtered applying an FDR of 0.01. For SILAC-based protein quantification, at least one unique peptide and a minimum ratio count of one were required. Mean protein abundance ratios (n=4) were calculated from normalized peptide SILAC ratios determined by MaxQuant. For each replicate, the logarithmic pM/cM ratio (normalized) for a protein was computed as the median of log2 peptide ratios across values obtained for all different fractionation techniques. Ratios for two of the four replicates were inverted to account for the label switch. MaxQuant also reports non-normalized peptide ratios. In cases when the major population of proteins is assumed to remain unchanged, the normalization may compensate for slight differences in the mixing of differentially SILAC-labeled samples by shifting the values to a median logarithmic ratio of zero per experiment. However, the distribution of logarithmic ratios in this experiment is not unimodal and includes a major population reflecting proteins of higher abundance in cM compared to pM with log pM/cM ratios <0. Therfore, log pM/cM ratios based on normalized peptide ratios were subsequently shifted back by calculating the mean difference between normalized and non-normalized protein ratios for each replicate and subtracting the mean of that differences determined across all replicates. Proteins quantified with at least two different fractionation techniques in all four replicates (i.e., 3,365 proteins) were classified based on their pM/cM SILAC ratios (log2 values). To test for multimodal distribution of the data, the 'Hartigan’s dip test' was performed (using the 'bimodalitytest' package for R) and revealed two distributions with centers at mean log2 (pM/cM) of  -1.47 for distribution 1 (d1) and 0.31 for d2. The standard deviation was 0.83 for d1 and 0.08 for d2. For each distribution, 1,000,000 theoretical values were generated taking into account the respective standard deviations. We next determined for each protein present in the dataset to which of the two distributions it belongs using a two-sample two-sided equivalence test (R package 'equivalence') with a significance threshold (p-value) of <0.01. As a result, 544 proteins were assigned to d1 and 812 proteins to d2. The remaining proteins were classified based on a two-sample two-sided t-test (p-value <0.01; R package 'stats’). 34 of these proteins were determined to be outliers of d1 only and, thus, assigned to d2. Vice versa, 1,515 proteins were outliers of d2 only and assigned to d1. 460 proteins were outliers of both d1 and d2. These proteins were distributed at ratios < d1 (referred to as OL1), between d1 and d2 (OL2), and at ratios >d2 (OL3). Based on this classification, four distinct classes were defined for the pM/cM dataset: proteins of d2 and OL3 were combined to class 1 and proteins of OL2, d1, and OL3 were defined as class 2, class 3, and class 4, respectively. Proteins of class 1 were further filtered based on sequence coverage and standard deviation calculated for mean log2 (pM/cM) abundance ratios across all replicates, i.e. proteins with a sequence coverage of <20% and a standard deviation of >0.75 were removed. For each of the 4 classes, a Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed based on GO terms retrieved from the SGD using an in-house developed script and all proteins quantified in the dataset as background. The two-sided Fisher's exact test was used to calculate mid p-values. Raw mid p-values were corrected for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment and GO terms with a corrected mid p-value of <0.05 were considered enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling, and their dysfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome, and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative experimental approach to define the proteome&#xa0;of yeast mitochondria. We classified &gt; 3,300 proteins of mitochondria and mitochondria-associated fractions and defined 901 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, expanding the set of mitochondrial proteins by 82. Our analysis includes&#xa0;protein abundance under fermentable and nonfermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein&#xa0;experiments, and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS), and the coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster, as well as mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high-confidence&#xa0;source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Keywords
Silac, Organellar proteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


