### Accession
PXD001505

### Title
Leukaemic protein tyrosine kinase comparison in Ba/F3 cells

### Description
Taking a series of oncogenic protein tyrosine kinases and constitutively expressing them in Ba/F3 cells, proteomic analysis was utilised in order to identify common protein changes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed, trypsinised, iTRAQ labelled, high pH reverse phase fractionated, before analysis utilising QStar Elite or 5600 Triple ToF.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed and analysed by ProteinPilot version 3 software. The results were exported and annotated in order to identify changes.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML) arises after transformation of a haemopoietic stem cell (HSC) by the protein-tyrosine kinase BCR-ABL. Direct inhibition of BCR-ABL kinase has revolutionized disease management, but fails to eradicate leukaemic stem cells (LSCs), which maintain CML. LSCs are independent of BCR-ABL for survival, providing a rationale for identifying and targeting kinase-independent pathways. Here we show--using proteomics, transcriptomics and network analyses--that in human LSCs, aberrantly expressed proteins, in both imatinib-responder and non-responder patients, are modulated in concert with p53 (also known as TP53) and c-MYC regulation. Perturbation of both p53 and c-MYC, and not BCR-ABL itself, leads to synergistic cell kill, differentiation, and near elimination of transplantable human LSCs in mice, while sparing normal HSCs. This unbiased systems approach targeting connected nodes exemplifies a novel precision medicine strategy providing evidence that LSCs can be eradicated.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics, Itraq, Lymphoma, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
Thermo Fisher Scientific
Vice Dean, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences Section Lead, Infrastructure and Technology, Manchester    Academic Health Science Centre University of Manchester Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre Manchester M20 3LJ

### Submitter
Andrew Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Anthony David Whetton
Vice Dean, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences Section Lead, Infrastructure and Technology, Manchester    Academic Health Science Centre University of Manchester Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre Manchester M20 3LJ


