### Accession
PXD028086

### Title
Determination of allergen levels, isoforms and their hydroxyproline modifications among peanut genotypes by mass spectrometry

### Description
The recently published genome of peanut enables detailed molecular description of seed storage proteins, particularly allergens, which make up the peanut seed proteome. A detailed description of the allergenic proteome was produced using peanuts of different genetic backgrounds to increase the coverage of potentially expressed proteins and additionally allows for analysis of protein variability. Using relative quantification by mass spectrometry, minor variation of some allergenic proteins was observed but total levels of Ara h 1, 2, 3 and 6 were relatively consistent among genotypes. The isoform compositions of Ara h 1, 2 and 6 were similar. Three Ara h 3 isoforms were variable among genotypes and contributed to a large proportion of total Ara h 3 when present. The immunologically relevant amino acid modification hydroxyproline, previously thought to be present only on Ara h 2, was detected on Ara h 1 and 3 in consistent proportions given when the associated isoforms were present. The relevance of the data was evaluated in terms of food allergy regarding applications to reference materials, diagnostic and immunotherapeutic use, detection of peanuts in food, and risk assessment. The data can be used to design targeted mass spectrometry methods to permit analytical control of such materials.

### Sample Protocol
All reagents for protein preparation were of analytical reagent grade. All reagents for MS sample preparation and analyses were of MS grade. The same aqueous extracts of raw peanut protein from 20 different peanut genotypes representing 4 market types were used as described in Koppelman et al.[3] Briefly, aqueous extracts were generated from a 100 mg.mL-1 peanut kernel paste extraction in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.9, which were subsequently clarified a total of three times. RP-HPLC was performed and Ara h 1, 2, 3 and 6 quantified relative to external calibration curves of purified allergens.  Digestions were performed in duplicate in the following manner. Extract volumes corresponding to 10 µg were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a volume of 15 µL. Samples were reduced by adding 10.5 µL of water and 1.5 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol and incubating at 95 °C for 5 minutes. The samples were alkylated by adding 3 µL of 100 mM of iodoacetamide and incubating at room temperature in the dark for 20 minutes. The sample was digested by adding 1 µL of 100 ng.µL-1 Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS grade and incubated at 37 °C for 3 hours. A further 1 µL of 100 ng.µL-1 Trypsin was added and samples incubated at 30 °C overnight. The digested sample was applied and eluted from a Pierce C18 spin column according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were frozen at -80 °C prior to lyophilization by centrifugal evaporation and the dried samples were re-suspended in a mixture of 45 µL of 5% ACN/0.1% formic acid and 5 µL of 200 fmol.µL-1 rabbit glycogen phosphorylase (Waters, Manchester, UK). One-dimensional microscale liquid chromatography separation of tryptic peptides (5 µL injections equivalent to 1000 ng and 100 fmol glycogen phosphorylase on column) was performed in duplicate (2 technical replicates) with an UltiMate 3000 RSL® liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific™) equipped with a Javelin™ Direct-Connection Column Filter, 2.1 mm (Thermo Scientific™), a Hypersil Gold aQ C18 1.9 μm, 20 x 2.1 mm pre-column (Thermo Scientific™) and a Hypersil Gold C18 1.9 μm, 100 x 1 mm analytical reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific™). Mobile phase A consisted of water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, whilst mobile phase B was 100% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The sample was injected and peptides were eluted using a gradient of 2-40% mobile phase B over 60 minutes at a flow rate of 60 µL.min-1. The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35 °C. Mass spectrometric analysis utilized a Q Exactive Plus™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ MS (Thermo Scientific™) in the data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400, whereas the target value for the fragment ion spectra was set to resolution of 17500 at m/z 400. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge 2 to 4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 Thomsons and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 100 and 60 ms, respectively, and the ion target value for scan modes were set to 1E6 and 2E5, respectively. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS ver 8.5 software was used to process all data-dependent acquisition mass-spectral data.[9] Protein identifications were obtained by searching a database of peanut allergens listed in Marsh et al., 2020,[10] Supplementary S11 including the sequence for rabbit glycogen phosphorylase B (UniProt P00489). The following data analysis parameters were used: no mis-cleavages, carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and proline as a variable modification, parent mass error tolerance of 2 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da, FDR of 1 % and charge states between 2 and 4 were accepted. Quantities were normalized according to rabbit glycogen phosphorylase B. Data was analyzed using Excel 2013 (Microsoft) and Prism ver. 8.01 (GraphPad software). For allergen quantitation, two quantitation strategies were employed (Shared and Unique). In Shared quantitation, the most abundant peptides were manually chosen to cover the greatest number of isoforms. In Unique quantitation, the most abundant peptides were manually chosen to cover the fewest number of isoforms. For clarity relative to WHO/IUIS nomenclature: Ara h 1.0101 is Ara h 1.2, Ara h 2.0101 is Ara h 2.1, Ara h 2.0201 is Ara h 2.2, Ara h 3.0201 is Ara h 3.13, and Ara h 6.0101 is Ara h 6.2. For both strategies, allergens were assumed to form the bulk of protein in the peanut seed. Allergen quantities are presented as percentage protein and the standard error of the mean as determined by the ratio of an allergen (g) / total allergen (g). Allergen (g) was determined by converting normalized molar values per allergen according to assumed molecular weights (Da) (Ara h 1: 61900; Ara h 2: 17300; Ara h 3: 65000; Ara h 6: 14900; Ara h 7: 17300; Ara h 8: 16500; Ara h 9: 13000; Ara h 10: 18000 and Ara h 11: 14000). Total allergen (g) was found by summing all determined allergen weights. Proteins were segregated based on abundance into high-abundance (>2.5%), mid-abundance (2.5-0.5%) and low-abundance (<0.5%). For the LC-MS/MS vs RP-HPLC comparison, Ara h 1, 2, 3 and 6 was summed, as the RP-HPLC data only reported for these allergens.[3] Presumptive HyP sites on high-abundance allergens (Ara h 1, 2, 3 and 6) were reported if the relative abundance of the tryptic peptide with hydroxyproline was at least 10% of the abundance of the unmodified form. In the case of a peptide with multiple HyP sites, the abundances of these peptides were summed prior to comparison of the unmodified form.

### Publication Abstract
The recently published reference genome of peanuts enables a detailed molecular description of the allergenic proteins of the seed. We used LC-MS/MS to investigate peanuts of different genotypes to assess variability and to better describe naturally occurring allergens and isoforms. Using relative quantification by mass spectrometry, minor variation of some allergenic proteins was observed, but total levels of Ara h 1, 2, 3, and 6 were relatively consistent among 20 genotypes. Previously published RP-HPLC methodology was used for comparison. The abundance of three Ara h 3 isoforms were variable among the genotypes and contributed to a large proportion of total Ara h 3 where present. Previously unpublished hydroxyproline sites were identified in Ara h 1 and 3. Hydroxylation did not vary significantly where sites were present. Peanut allergen composition was largely stable, with only some isoforms displaying differences between genotypes. The resulting differences in allergenicity are of unknown clinical significance but are likely to be minor. The data presented herein allow for the design of targeted MS methodology to allow the quantitation and therefore control of peanut allergens of clinical relevance and observed variability.

### Keywords
Food allergy, Peanut, Hydroxyproline, Arachis hypogaea, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Assistant Professor Department of Food Science & Technology Food Allergy Research & Resource Program University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
Justin Marsh

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Johnson
Assistant Professor Department of Food Science & Technology Food Allergy Research & Resource Program University of Nebraska-Lincoln


