### Accession
PXD039590

### Title
A preclinical platform for assessing long-term drug efficacy exploiting mechanically tunable scaffolds colonized by a three-dimensional tumor microenvironment

### Description
Background: Long-term drug evaluation heavily relies upon rodent models. Drug discovery methods to reduce animal models in oncology may include three-dimensional (3D) cellular systems that take into account tumor microenvironment (TME) cell types and biomechanical properties.  Methods: In this study we reconstructed a 3D tumor using an elastic polymer (acrylate-endcapped urethane-based poly(ethylene glycol) (AUPPEG)) with clinical relevant stiffness. Single cell suspensions from low-grade serous ovarian cancer (LGSOC) patient-derived early passage cultures of cancer cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) embedded in a collagen gel were introduced to the AUPPEG scaffold.  After self-organization in to a 3D tumor, this model was evaluated by a long-term (>40 days) exposure to a drug combination of MEK and HSP90 inhibitors. The drug-response results from this long-term in vitro model are compared with drug responses in an orthotopic LGSOC xenograft mouse model. Results: The in vitro 3D scaffold LGSOC model mimics the growth ratio and spatial organization of the LGSOC. The AUPPEG scaffold approach allows to test new targeted treatments and monitor long-term drug responses. The results correlate with those of the orthotopic LGSOC xenograft mouse model. Conclusions: The mechanically-tunable scaffolds colonized by a three-dimensional LGSOC allow long-term drug evaluation and can be considered as a valid alternative to reduce, replace and refine animal models in drug discovery

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture – The primary cells were treated for 24 h with either DMSO (control), Trametinib, Luminespib or a combination of Trametinib and Luminespib. The cells were then detached, washed three times (PBS), pelleted and frozen (-80°C). Each cell pellet contains approximately 10 million cells. Cell lysis and Protein digestion – The cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 8 M urea, 0.4% NP-40) and lysed using a point sonicator (40 Hz amplitude, 3 x 3 s ON/OFF, repeat cycle twice). The cell debris (e.g. DNA, membrane fractions) were precipitated by centrifugation (16,000 x g, 15 min at RT). The supernatants were transferred and the protein concentration determined by Bradford assay. The cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated using 5 mM DTT (30 min at 55°C) and 10 mM IAA (15 min at RT in the dark). Apols was added to a final concentration of 1 mg/mL and the samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1%. After a 10 min incubation at RT, the proteins were precipitated by centrifugation (16,000 x g for 10 min at RT) and the supernatants were removed before resuspension in 500 µL 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0). the proteins were digested overnight with 2.0 µg trypsin (Promega, 1:100 ratio (w:w)) at 37°C.  Peptide clean-up and TMT-10plex labelling – The peptide mixture was acidified the next day with TFA to a final concentration of 1% (pH < 3). After 10 min at RT, Apols was precipitated by centrifugation (16,000 x g for 10 min at RT) and the supernatants was isolated after which app. 50 µg peptide material was isolated and labelled with their corresponding TMT 10plex label (1 h at RT, 600 rpm). The reaction was quenched with NH4OH, 0.25% final concentration, for 15 min at RT, 600 rpm. The different labelled fractions were then combined, completely dried, resuspended in loading solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and cleaned-up using MacroSpin columns (Harvard Apparatus) with each centrifugation step at 2,000 x g, 2 min, RT. In short, the column was wetted with 400µL 100% ACN, equilibrated with 3 x 400 µL loading solvent A after which the sample was loaded, washed twice with loading solvent A and the peptide material was eluted using 60% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The eluent was then dried completely. Pre-fractionation – Resuspended the sample in 300 µL loading solvent A (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA in dH2O) and determine the peptide concentration (app. 2 µg/µL). Load approximately 70 µg (35 µl) on an HPLC (Agilent 1100 series) equipped with a trapping column (5 µm C18, 250 µm I.D., 4 cm) and analytical column (3 µm, 250 µm I.D., 15 cm), produced in-house. Separation was performed with a 100 min linear gradient from 100% solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 9) in dH2O) to 100% solvent B (70% ACN, 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 9) in dH2O). After 16 min, fraction collection started and moved to the next vial every 1 min. 12 vials were used and the loop restarted at position 1 after completing one cycle until seven rounds were completed (time point 98 min). Each fraction was vacuum dried and stored in -20°C freezer. The chromatogram can be found in the addendum. LC-MS/MS Analysis – The samples were re-suspended in 30 µL loading solvent A only moments before analysis on Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in-line connected to a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm beads) using loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN, 98/2 (v/v)) and analyzed on a 200 cm long µPAC™ column (PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality. Separation of the peptide material was done using a 90 min non-linear gradient going from 2-55% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in water/ACN, 20/80 (v/v)), followed by a rapid increase to 99% solvent B. Column temperature was kept constant at 50°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the four most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 2E5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The number of MS/MS isolations was determined based on the accumulation time within a cycle time of 3 s. the minimum target value of 1E4 were isolated for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 1E5 for maximum 500 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 45,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Database search – Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant v1.6.3.4 (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on the PSM, peptide and protein level. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, thus with cleavage C-terminal of arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at Arg/Lys-Pro bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. The digests were searched against the sequences of the human proteins in the Swiss-Prot/UniProtKB database from June 2019, being 20,231 protein sequences (www.uniprot.org). Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-termini. In all database searches, the matching between runs and second peptide search options were turned off. Quantification type was set to reporter ion MS2 and the preset TMT 10-plex settings were selected. The PIF option was allowed with a threshold of 75%. Data analysis – After the database search was completed, the corresponding ProteinGroups.txt file was further processed in the Perseus software (v1.6.2.2) (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016) using the normalized intensities of the individual TMT channels. First, the reversed hits and proteins only identified by site were removed as well as the potential contaminants. Second, we grouped the different channels by treatment (DMSO, T1, L10 and T1 & L10) and log2 transformed the intensities from the reporter ions. We then removed protein IDs with less than 100% intensities in at least one group and normalized the intensities by subtracting the median from each column. Three individual comparisons were made with the student’s two-sample t-test using DMSO as the control: T1 vs DMSO; L10 vs DMSO; T1 & L10 vs DMSO. Each two-sample t-tests were performed with a permutation-based FDR correction of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1 for truncation with 1,000 randomizations. In addition, a two-way ANOVA analysis was performed and the cut-off was set to a p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3d cancer model; long-term; drug evaluation; pre-clinical; micro-environment; stiffness

### Affiliations
Department of Human Structure and Repair, Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Belgium3.  Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent University, Belgium
VIB-Ugent

### Submitter
Jarne Pauwels

### Lab Head
Dr Olivier De Wever
Department of Human Structure and Repair, Laboratory of Experimental Cancer Research, Ghent University, Belgium3.  Cancer Research Institute Ghent (CRIG), Ghent University, Belgium


