### Accession
PXD036013

### Title
Convergent evolution of plant pattern recognition receptors sensing cysteine-rich patterns from three microbial kingdoms

### Description
Plants deploy pattern recognition receptors to detect microbe- and damage-associated molecular patterns. Arabidopsis thaliana receptor-like protein RLP30 contributes to innate immunity to the necrotrophic fungus Sclerotinia sclerotiorum by recognizing SCLEROTINIA CULTURE FILTRATE ELICITOR 1 (SCFE1). Here we show that the S. sclerotiorum small cysteine-rich protein SCP1 accounts for elicitor activity of SCFE1. RLP30 recognizes SCP1 and its homologs from divergent fungi and oomycetes, as well as an SCP1-unrelated and conserved pattern from bacterial Pseudomonads. Stable expression of RLP30 in Nicotiana tabacum confers enhanced immunity to bacterial, fungal, and oomycete pathogens. Unlike Arabidopsis, which requires intact SCP1 for RLP30-mediated immunity, other Brassicaceae and Solanaceae respond to smaller immunogenic SCP1 epitopes. We conclude that Arabidopsis RLP30 recognizes immunogenic patterns from three microbial kingdoms and that mechanistically different SCP1 perception has evolved in other plant species, likely as a result of convergent evolution.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS sample preparation.  Five different SCFE1 fractions (proteins in 50 mM MES buffer pH 7.0 with varying concentration of KCl, depending on the elution time point) were selected for proteomics analysis (B9, B11, B12, B13 and B15). For each fraction a sample volume of 88 µl was used, which corresponded to a total protein concentration per fraction between 3.9 µg (B9) to 16.0 µg (B13), as determined using the BCA protein assay kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). All sample were reduced (10 mM DTT, 30 min, 30 °C) and carbamidomethylated (55 mM CAA, 30 min, room temperature). Digestion of proteins was carried out by addition of trypsin (proteomics grade, Roche) at a 1/50 enzyme/protein ratio (w/w) and incubation at 37 °C overnight. Digests were acidified by addition of 0.5% (v/v) formic acid (FA), and desalted using self-packed StageTips (three disks per micro-column, ø 1.5mm, C18 material, 3M Empore). The peptide eluates were dried to completeness and stored at -80°C. For LC-MS/MS analysis all samples were re-suspended in 11 µl 0.1% FA in HPLC grade water and 5 µl sample volume were injected into the mass spectrometer per measurement.  LC-MS/MS data acquisition.  LC-MS/MS measurements were performed on a nanoLC Ultra1D+ (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column (ReproSil-pur C18-AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch, 20 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) at a flow rate of 5 μl/min in 100% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in HPLC grade water). Subsequently, peptides were transferred to an analytical column (ReproSil Gold C18-AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch, 400 mm × 75 μm, self-packed) and separated using a 50 min linear gradient from 4% to 32% of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile and 5% (v/v) DMSO) at 300 nL/min flow rate. Both nanoLC solvents contained 5% (v/v) DMSO to boost the nanoESI response of peptides. The eluate from the analytical column was sprayed via a stainless steel emitter (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a source voltage of 2.2 kV into the mass spectrometer. The transfer capillary was heated to 275 °C. The Q-Exactive HF-X was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, automatically switching between MS1 and MS2 spectrum acquisition. MS1 spectra were acquired over a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 350–1400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 using a maximum injection time of 45 ms and an AGC target value of 3e6. Up to 18 peptide precursors were isolated (isolation window 1.3 m/z, maximum injection time 25 ms, AGC value 1e5), fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) using 26% normalized collision energy and analyzed at a resolution of 15,000 with a scan range from 200 to 2000 m/z. Precursor ions that were singly charged, unassigned, or with charge states > 6+ were excluded. The dynamic exclusion duration of fragmented precursor ions was 25 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis. Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30). MS2 spectra were searched against a Sclerotinia sclerotiorum protein database (assembly accession number PRJNA348385, 11130 protein sequence entries, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA348385/), supplemented with common contaminants (built-in option in MaxQuant). Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. The minimal peptide length was defined as 7 amino acids, the “match-between-run” function was enabled (default settings). To assess and quantitatively compare the concentrations of the detected proteins the “intensity based absolute quantification” (iBAQ) algorithm was employed. The detected proteins were further filtered and prioritized according to the following characteristics: 1) good correlation between the elicitor activity profile and the measured mass spectrometric protein intensity over the five investigated SCFE1 fractions; 2) presence of a predicted signal peptide sequence (using the SignalP v.6.0 server); 3) protein molecular weight in the range between 10 to 30 kDa; 4) high cysteine content relative to protein length; 5) detection of at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The Arabidopsis thaliana Receptor-Like Protein RLP30 contributes to immunity against the fungal pathogen Sclerotinia sclerotiorum. Here we identify the RLP30-ligand as a small cysteine-rich protein (SCP) that occurs in many fungi and oomycetes and is also recognized by the Nicotiana benthamiana RLP RE02. However, RLP30 and RE02 share little sequence similarity and respond to different parts of the native/folded protein. Moreover, some Brassicaceae other than Arabidopsis also respond to a linear SCP peptide instead of the folded protein, suggesting that SCP is an eminent immune target that led to the convergent evolution of distinct immune receptors in plants. Surprisingly, RLP30 shows a second ligand specificity for a SCP-nonhomologous protein secreted by bacterial Pseudomonads. RLP30 expression in N. tabacum results in quantitatively lower susceptibility to bacterial, fungal and oomycete pathogens, thus demonstrating that detection of immunogenic patterns by Arabidopsis RLP30 is involved in defense against pathogens from three microbial kingdoms.

### Keywords
Small cysteine-rich protein scp1, Receptor-like protein rlp30, Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, Lc-ms/ms, Elicitor activity, Untargeted proteomics, Necrotrophic fungus

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry (BayBioMS) Technische Universität München (TUM) Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


