### Accession
PXD009021

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Human Liver Reference Material

### Description
Recent advances in mass spectrometric (MS) instruments resulting in high mass resolution and high duty cycles have allowed of very deep coverage of proteomes. However, even with state of the art, high duty cycle instruments, the number of proteins identified with a conventional single liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC/MS/MS) analysis is typically limited and fractionating protein samples prior to LC/MS/MS analysis is crucial for increasing both the analytical dynamic range and proteome coverage.  In order to achieve near comprehensive identification of proteomes two-dimensional (2D) chromatography has been an invaluable tool.  This first dimension is typically performed with µL/min flow and relatively large column inner diameters, which allow efficient pre-fractionation but typically require peptide amounts in the milligram range while the second dimension is typically performed with nL/min flow rates and capillary columns with small inner diameters. Typically, reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) provides high peak resolution of peptides and achieves higher peak capacities than strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX) due to the faster chromatographic partitioning. Another advantage of RPLC is that the mobile phases used generate much cleaner samples for downstream analyses, while the incorporation of a desalting step for SCX in order to eliminated the high salt concentrations that can significantly decrease the analytical sensitivity of the MS analysis due to ionization problems. When operated at widely different pH values (e.g., 1st dimension pH 10 and 2nd dimension pH 3) 2D RPLC-RPLC provides separation orthogonality comparable to that of the combination of SCX-RPLC. The difference of separation selectivity between the low and high pH (HpH) RPLC comes from the changes in the charge distribution within peptide chains upon altering pH of the eluent.  Herein we describe a method in which tryptic peptides are separated in the first dimension by HpH-RPLC and fractions are collected every 90 s over an 80 min gradient. For the second dimension, each of these fractions is individually run by the standard low pH RPLC method. The implementation of the HpH pre-fractionation allows for short second dimension gradients for bottom up LC/MS/MS and yields very deep (e.g. thousands of identifications) protein coverage at reasonable measurement time.

### Sample Protocol
5 mg of Human Liver RM was subsampled and the proteins extracted using RapiGest (Waters, lot # 163011). Briefly, 150 µL 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added, resulting in a solution of 33 µg/µL tissue. The extraction mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 25 min at room temperature followed by removal of large debris using a benchtop microcentrifuge.  From this solution four separate 5 µL aliquots were removed and suspended in 35 µL of 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest (in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate), followed by the addition of 40 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  The samples were then reduced with 10 µL of 45 mM DTT (final concentration of 5 mM) and incubated in an incubating shaker at 60 °C for 30 min then allowed to cool to room temperature. The mixture was alkylated using 3.75 µL of 375 mM iodoacetamide (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA; final concentration of 15 mM) and incubated in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. Prior to addition of trypsin, 100 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. A 5 µL aliquot of trypsin (Pierce Scientific, MS-Grade; 1 µg/µl in 50 mM acetic acid) was added (1:50 trypsin:protein) to each sample and then incubated overnight at 37 °C.  The digestion was halted and RapiGest cleaved with the addition of 100 µL 3% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (1% final concentration) and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min before centrifugation and removal of the supernatant. Samples were processed using Pierce C18 spin columns (8 mg of C18 resin; Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was processed in duplicate yielding at maximum 60 µg peptides. These solutions were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge then the two samples were combined in 100 µL 95 % water 5 % acetonitrile for analysis by 1D LC/MS/MS and two samples were combined in 100 µL 95 % water 5 % acetonitrile for analysis by 2D LC/MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were processed and searched with Proteome Discoverer (2.0.0.802) using Mascot, Sequest HT, and MSPepSearch algorithms. Since some of the fractions following reverse phase high pH contained little to no peptides only fractions 2 through 42 were used for searching. For Mascot searches, the UniProtKB SwissProt and SwissProt varsplic database (2017_05 release) was used and Homo sapiens was specified in the search parameters. For Mascot searches the following search parameters were used: trypsin was specified as the enzyme allowing for two mis-cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) was fixed and acetylation (protein n-term), deamidated (NQ), pyro-Glu (n-term Q), and oxidation (M) were variable modifications; 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is creating new, economical, qualitative reference materials and data for proteomics comparisons, benchmarking and harmonization. Here we describe a large dataset from shotgun proteomic analysis of RM 8461 Human Liver for Proteomics, a reference material being developed. Consensus identifications using multiple search engines and sample preparations demonstrate a homogeneous and fit-for-purpose material that can be incorporated into automated or manual sample preparation workflows, with the resulting data used to directly assess complete sample-to-data workflows and provide harmonization and benchmarking between laboratories and techniques. Data are available via PRIDE with identifier PXD013608.

### Keywords
Human, Liver

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Chemical Sciences Division National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA

### Submitter
W. Clay Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Clay Davis, Ben Neely
Chemical Sciences Division National Institute of Standards and Technology, USA


