### Accession
PXD021681

### Title
Proteomic response to PhiX174 infection

### Description
Elucidating host-bacteriophage dynamics is an important approach to elucidating bacterial survival functions and responses to infection. The model bacteriophage φX174 endemically found amongst the human intestinal microbiota and has a long history of use in bacteriophage based research, however the common laboratory host’s response to infection lacks detailed investigation. In this study we have measured host Escherichia coli C122 proteomic and transcriptomic response to φX174 infection to fill this knowledge gap. We identify differentially expressed genes and proteins during phage induced lysis. We also use mass spectrometry to identify and quantify all φX174 proteins and over 1700 E. coli proteins enabling us to comprehensively map host pathways involved in φX174 infection. Most notably, in our dual omics investigation we observe significant host responses pertaining to membrane remodeling, cellular chaperone activity, and lipoprotein processing. We also highlight host small heat-shock proteins IbpA and IbpB as having fold-change inductions comparable to that of the phage proteins. Together, this study provides foundational and the first proteomic and transcriptomic data characterizing host response to Microviridae infection.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli C122 was grown to mid-log in 200 mL culture volume (37 °C, 250 RPM) in biological triplicate. The cultures were then split into two 100 mL volumes – one to be infected with φX174 at MOI = 5, and the other mock-infected with equal volume phage-LB with 10 % (v/v) glycerol (storage solution of φX174). Culture growth synchronization was performed with 10 mL of ice-cold HFB, and infection was initiated with 90 mL of warm phage-LB. At 0, 15, 30, 60, and 75-minutes post-infection initiation 12 mL was removed from each culture (without replacement) and placed on ice. At the conclusion of the time-course, intact cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 3,220 RCF for 8-minutes. The samples were then suspended in cold 1X phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and washed an additional two times, discarding the supernatant. Cell pellets were then stored overnight at -20 °C. Cell pellets were suspended in 500 µL of lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 % (v/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate, 8 M urea, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail solution (Roche, Switzerland). Reconstituted cells were lysed with an ultrasonic probe with 15-pulses at 30 % amplitude. Samples were then centrifuged at 6,000 RCF for 10-minutes and the supernatant was collected into a fresh tube. At room temperature, proteins were reduced for 1-hour with a final concentration of 10 mM dithiothreitol, followed by alkylation with 30 mM iodoacetamide whilst in the dark for 1-hour. Residual iodoacetamide was quenched with an equal molarity of dithiothreitol. Proteins were precipitated out of solution with addition of 2 mL of ice-cold methanol, 0.5 mL of chloroform, and 2 mL of water. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 5000 RCF and the resulting protein pellet was removed, washed with additional methanol, and dried. Protein pellets were solubilized with 100 mM Tris-HCl with 8 M urea. Solutions were then centrifuged at 12,000 RCF for 10-minutes and the clear supernatant was collected in a fresh tube. Samples were diluted to a urea concentration of 1.6 M through addition of 100 mM Tris-HCl and protein quantitation was performed with the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific).  150 µg of protein from each sample was digested overnight at 37 °C with 1.5 µg of trypsin (Promega), followed by addition of a further 1.5 µg of trypsin and digestion for an additional 4-hours. Peptides were acidified with formic acid until a concentration of 1 % (v/v) and then C18 stage-tip purified as described previously (105). Peptide sample were dried down using vacuum centrifugation, followed by resuspension in 200 mM HEPES buffer (pH 8.8, adjusted with NaOH). Peptides were quantified using the Micro BCATM Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Following this, 35 µg of peptide from each sample was supplemented to 140 µL using HEPES buffer. Normalization controls were produced through the pooling of mock-infected samples (3 µg of peptide per mock-infected sample) – designated N.C, and infected samples (3 µg of peptide per infected sample) – designated N.P. Chemical labelling of peptide samples was performed using TMT10PlexTM Isobaric Label Reagent Set (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). 0.2 mg of TMT tag was used to label each sample. Note: 128C tag was reserved for N.C. 11.25 µg of N.C was labelled per channel. Similarly, 131 tag was reserved for N.P. 5.375 µg of N.P was labelled per channel. After labelling, 8 µL of 5 % (v/v) hydroxylamine was added to each sample to quench residual tags. Lastly, samples were combined across channels, dried down using vacuum centrifugation, and then purified. Dried peptide samples (TMT channels 1-4) were suspended in high-pH buffer (5 mM NH4OH, pH 10.5). Samples were loaded onto an Agilent ZORBAX Extend-C18 column (3.5 µM bead size, 300 Å pore size, 2.1 mM x 150 mM). Samples were washed with 97 % buffer A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile) for 10-minutes, followed by elution with an increasing gradient of buffer C (5 mM NH4OH, 90 % (v/v) acetonitrile). The gradient of buffer C was 3 % to 30 % for 55-minutes then to 70 % for 10-minutes, and finally to 90 % for 5-minutes at a flow-rate of 300 µL/minute. Samples were collected every minute and pooled into 13 fractions, vacuum centrifuged, and then suspended in buffer A to a concentration of 0.1 µg/µL.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analysed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Peptide samples were injected onto the LC system using buffer A and were bound on a 75 µM x 100 mM C18 HALO column (2.7 µM bead size, 160 Å pore size). A flow rate of 300 nL/minute using an increasing linear gradient of buffer B (99.9 % (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid) was run from 1 % to 30 % for 110-minutes followed by 85 % buffer B for 10-minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in top-10 mode, with a full scan set at a resolution of 70000 (at 400 m/z) across the m/z range of 350-1850 (isolation window of 0.7 m/z), and an automatic gains control (AGC) target of 1e6 (or maximum fill time of 250 ms). Selected pre-cursor ions were transferred from the C-trap to the higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) cell for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 35 %. Precursor dynamic exclusion of 90-seconds was employed. MS/MS spectra was collected at a resolution of 70000 (at 200 m/z) with an AGC of 1e5, maximum injection time of 250 ms and a fixed first mass of 115.0 m/z. Raw files were exported to Proteome Discoverer v2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific) for processing. Precursors selected for fragmentation that had greater than 30 % interference were excluded from analysis. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal carbamylation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, N-terminal acetylation, N-terminal glutamic acid to N-pyro-glutamine, N-terminal glutamine to N-pyro-glutamine, and TMT10plex labelling of primary amines were selected as dynamic modifications. Cysteine carbamydomethylation was designated as a fixed modification.  Minimum peptide length was set at 5. Spectra were search against an in-house generated E.coli C122 database that included phage proteins, totalling 3799 entries. False discovery rates were fixed 1 % at the peptide and protein level. Runs were normalised by dividing by all channels (e.g. 126, 128N) by the pooled control (128C), log2 transformed and proteins further normalised by subtracting by the median of each sample group. Sample infected 601 was excluded from statistical tests due to phage proteins being designated as outliers. Student's t-test was performed on the log2 transformed data. Due to effects of ratio compression and to appropriately control for false-discovery in a (low-power) medium-scale experiment, significance was deemed with protein fold-change cut-of ≥ ±1.5, p-value <0.025.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Omics, Bacteriophage, E. coli

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Northern Clinical School, The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Bradley Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Mark P Molloy
Faculty of Medicine and Health, Northern Clinical School, The University of Sydney


