### Accession
PXD025019

### Title
Discovery and visualization of uncharacterized drug-protein adducts using mass spectrometry

### Description
Drugs are often metabolized to reactive intermediates that form protein adducts. Adducts can inhibit protein activity, elicit immune responses, and cause life threatening adverse drug reactions. The masses of reactive metabolites are frequently unknown, rendering traditional mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches incapable of adduct identification. Here, we present Magnum, an open-mass search algorithm optimized for adduct identification, and Limelight, a web-based data processing package for analysis and visualization of data from all existing algorithms. Limelight incorporates tools for sam-ple comparisons and xenobiotic-adduct discovery. We validate our tools with three drug/protein combinations and apply our label free workflow to identify novel xenobiotic-protein adducts in CYP3A4. Our new methods and software enable ac-curate identification of xenobiotic-protein adducts with no prior knowledge of adduct masses or protein targets. Magnum outperforms existing label free tools in xenobiotic-protein adduct discovery, while Limelight fulfills a major need in the rap-idly developing field of open-mass searching, which until now lacked comprehensive data visualization tools.

### Sample Protocol
Human serum albumin (HSA), flucloxacillin sodium, dicloxacillin sodium, and raloxifene were from Sigma. Rat P450 reductase was purified as described in DOI: 10.1021/bi2013454. For plasma experiments fresh blood was collected and left on ice for 1 h then centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 min at 4°C. 60 µL plasma was collected and flash-frozen. 60 µL was spiked with dicloxacillin (2 µL of 50 mM stock in water) and incubated at 37°C for 4 h before freezing. Human CYP3A4 and the liposome stock containing l-α-Dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DLPC), l- α -diloleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (DOPC), and l- α -dilauroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine (DLPS) (1:1:1, w/w/w per mL) was expressed and purified as described in DOI: 10.1021/acs.biochem.9b01001.  HSA (0.5 mg/mL) was incubated ± 100 µM antibiotics (flucloxacillin and dicloxacillin) in 100 mM potassium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) at 37°C for 16 h. Total volume was 200 µL. Control group had no antibiotics. After incubation unreacted antibiotics were removed by buffer exchange. Samples were flash-frozen.  Recombinant human CYP3A4 (3 µM) was incubated with 6 µM rat P450 reductase, 2 mM NADPH ± 200 µM raloxifene in buffer containing 20 µg/mL liposomes [DLPC, DOPC, DLPS (1:1:1, w/w/w per mL)], 0.1 mg/mL CHAPS, 3 mM glutathione, 30 MgCl2 and 50 mM Hepes-KOH (pH 7.4). The control group contained no raloxifene. Incubations were done in singlet at 37°C for 1 h in 200 µL and the reaction was started by adding NADPH. Samples were flash-frozen after the incubation. β-lactam antibiotics and HSA. 30 µL aliquots of control or drug treated HSA (0.5 mg/mL) were reduced by adding 10 mM DTT, final concentration, and incubating at 37oC for 30 min. The mixture was brought to a final concentration of 16 mM iodoacetamide alkylation was performed at RT for 20 min. Trypsin was added at enzyme:substrate 1:15 at 37oC for 6 h prior to acidification with 250 mM final concentration HCl.  Raloxifene and CYP3A4. 100 µL aliquots of control or drug treated CYP3A4 incubation reaction mixture (63 µg total protein) were reduced alkylated and digested as described above except samples were digested for 4 h. A second set of digests were performed (labeled “extra digest” in results): 100 µL aliquots were incubated at 75oC for 30 min. Samples were brought to 5.5 mM TCEP and reduced for 1 h at 60oC, cooled to RT, brought to 6 mM iodoacetamide and alkylated by incubating at RT in the dark for 30 min prior to a 16h trypsin digestion at 37oC. After digestion solid phase extraction was performed on all CYP3A4 samples using Oasis MCX cartridges (1 cc/30 mg cartridges, Waters corporation, product number 186000782). Resulting eluate was dried and reconstituted into 100 µL 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile in water. For human plasma samples untreated or dicloxacillin treated samples were diluted by adding 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Yeast enolase (528 ng) was added to 33 µg plasma protein. PPS Silent Surfactant was added to 0.1% final concentration and TCEP was used for reduction (1h at 60oC). Samples were alkylated by adding using iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin at a 1:15 (enzyme:substrate) for 6 h at 37oC and acidified with 250 mM HCl final concentration. 2 µL (~1 µg) sample digest was loaded by autosampler onto a 150 µm Kasil fritted trap packed with 2 cm of ReprosilPur C18AQ (3 µm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 2 µL per min. Desalting was with 8 µL of 0.1% formic acid plus 2% acetonitrile and the trap was then brought online with a Self-Packed PicoFrit Column (New Objective part number PF360-75-10-N-5, 75 µm i.d.) packed with 30 cm of ReprosilPur C18AQ (3 µm bead diameter, Dr. Maisch) mounted in an in-house constructed microspray source and placed in line with a Waters Nanoacquity binary UPLC pump plus autosampler. Peptides were eluted from the column at 0.25 µL/min using an acetonitrile gradient. All samples, except plasma, were run on a Thermo Fisher Scientific QExactive HF in DDA mode. A max of 20 MS/MS spectra were acquired per MS spectrum (scan range m/z 400–1,600). Resolution for MS and MS/MS was 60,000 and 15,000. AGC targets for MS and MS/MS were set to 3e6 and 2e5, respectively, and max fill times were 50 and 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired using an isolation width of 2.5 m/z and a NCE of 27. MS/MS acquisitions were prevented for +1, >+6 or undefined precursor charge states. Dynamic exclusion was 5 s. MS spectra were collected in profile mode and MS/MS spectra were centroided. For plasma DDA was on an Exploris 480 with a 3 sec cycle time between MS spectra. MS/MS spectra had a scan range of m/z 400–1,600. Resolution for MS and MS/MS was 60,000 and 15,000. Normalized AGC targets for MS and MS/MS were set to 300% and 100%, and max inject times were on auto. MS/MS isolation width was 2.5 m/z and NCE was 27. MS/MS acquisitions were prevented for +1, ≥+6 or undefined precursor charge states. Dynamic exclusion was 20 s. All spectra centroided.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were converted into mzML (used for all algorithms except MODa) or mzXML (for MODa) using ProteoWizard’s msconvert. Search databases consisted of all proteins detectable in the sample by searching spectra against whole-proteome databases using comet. PSMs were processed with Percolator and proteins identified by ≥ 3 PSMs with a Percolator assigned q-value ≤ 0.01 were included in a smaller protein database used for open modification searches. Algorithms that required pre-generated decoys sequences were additionally given the reversed sequence of each target sequence. All searches were performed requiring fully tryptic peptides allowing either 2 or 3 missed cleavages and defining variable modifications of oxidation (15.9949) of methionine and carbamidomethylation (57.021464) of cysteine except MODa which does not allow for defined variable modifications.  Comet closed searches were performed using Comet version 2019.01 rev. 0 configured with a 15 ppm precursor mass tolerance, a fragment bin tolerance of 0.03 and an isotope error of 3. Dicloxacillin or flucloxacillin adducts on lysine were present as defined variable modifications when specified (469.0266 or 453.0561, respectively). Percolator version 3.02.1 was used to assign q-values to comet generated PSMs. Comet 500 Da wide precursor searches were performed as for closed searches above, but with a 500 amu precursor mass tolerance and an isotope error of 1. Percolator version 3.02.1 was used to assign q-values to comet generated PSMs. Comet-PTM open searches were done using Comet version "PTM 2016.01 rev. 2". Precursor mass tolerance and delta_outer_tolerance were set to 500 amu, delta_inner_tolerance was 0.8 and fragment_bin_tol was 0.02. Magnum open searches were performed using Magnum version 1.0-dev.11 (except for human plasma which used version 1.0.0-alpha5) allowing open modifications of 60-500 Da on all amino acids (adduct_sites = ARNDCQEGHILKMFPOSUTWYV), K only (adduct_sites = K), C only (adduct_sites = C), CWY only (adduct_sites = CWY). Defined variable modifications were oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation of cysteine. E value depth was set to 10000. Precursor mass tolerance was 15 ppm and isotope error was set to 1. For penicillin/HSA searches reporter ions were defined as follows, using a reporter ion threshold of 5: 160.04; 311.00; 470.03; 295.03; 454.06. For plasma reporter ions were 160.04; 311.00; 470.03. Percolator version 3.05.0 was used to assign q-values to Magnum generated PSMs. MetaMorpheus open searches were performed using MetaMorpheus version 0.0.308. An initial calibrate task was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 25 ppm. Post calibration searches were performed using precursor and product mass tolerances of 5 and 20 ppm, respectively. The modern search option was specified, and open mass differences of -187 and up were allowed. MODa open searches were done using version 1.62 allowing open modifications of 60-500 Da with a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.03 Da. Variable modifications cannot be defined in MODa. A fixed modification for carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used during analysis of penicillin/HSA samples as this resulted in increased sensitivity in gold standard searches. For raloxifene searches the native mass of cysteine was used (no fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteine) as raloxifene is known to modify cysteine; instead, open modifications were allowed between 55-500 Da to incorporate the possibility of carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Blind mode was set to 1, allowing 1 open modification per peptide. Instrument was set to ESI-TRAP and high resolution was on. MSFragger open searches were performed using version 2.3 allowing open modifications between 60 and 500 Da. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm and calibrate mass was set to 2. Isotope error was 0/1 and localize delta mass was 1. MSFragger output was processed with PeptideProphet and PTMProphet (TPP v5.2.1-dev Flammagenitus, Build 202003241419-8041) for error rate estimation and open modification localization using the following options for PeptideProphetParser: ACCMASS DECOYPROBS DECOY=random NONPARAM MASSWIDTH=520 MINPROB=0. PTMProphetParser was run using MASSDIFFMODE MINPROB=0.  open-pFind multinotch searches were done using version EVA.3.0.11 with a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.03 Da. Mixture spectra was true, precursor score model was normal and a threshold of -0.5 was used. Peptide mass was between 600 and 6000 and length between 6 and 100. Open search was set to true.

### Publication Abstract
Drugs are often metabolized to reactive intermediates that form protein adducts. Adducts can inhibit protein activity, elicit immune responses, and cause life-threatening adverse drug reactions. The masses of reactive metabolites are frequently unknown, rendering traditional mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches incapable of adduct identification. Here, we present Magnum, an open-mass search algorithm optimized for adduct identification, and Limelight, a web-based data processing package for analysis and visualization of data from all existing algorithms. Limelight incorporates tools for sample comparisons and xenobiotic-adduct discovery. We validate our tools with three drug/protein combinations and apply our label-free workflow to identify novel xenobiotic-protein adducts in CYP3A4. Our new methods and software enable accurate identification of xenobiotic-protein adducts with no prior knowledge of adduct masses or protein targets. Magnum outperforms existing label-free tools in xenobiotic-protein adduct discovery, while Limelight fulfills a major need in the rapidly developing field of open-mass searching, which until now lacked comprehensive data visualization tools.

### Keywords
Plasma, Human serum albumin, Dicloxacillin, Flucloxacillin, Open-pfind, Open search, Comet-ptm, Limelight, Comet, Metamorpheus, Penicillin, Hsa, Reactive metabolite, Raloxifene, Msfragger, Moda, Cyp3a4, P450-reductase, Adduct, Xenobiotic, Magnum

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle

### Submitter
Alex Zelter

### Lab Head
Dr Michael MacCoss
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA


