### Accession
PXD040524

### Title
Pooled CRISPR Screening Identifies P-Bodies as Repressors of Cancer Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition

### Description
The overall description of the project: Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a fundamental cellular process frequently hijacked by cancer cells to promote tumor progression, especially metastasis formation. Molecularly, EMT is orchestrated by various molecular networks acting at different layers of gene regulation. Compared to transcriptional regulation that has been extensively studied in the context of EMT, post-transcriptional mechanisms remain relatively underexplored. Here, by taking advantage of pooled CRISPR screen, we analyzed the influence of 1547 RNA binding proteins (RBPs) on cell motility and identified multiple core P-body (PB) components as negative modulators of cancer cell migration. Further experiments demonstrated that depletion of the PB via silencing DDX6 or EDC4 could activate hallmarks of EMT thereby enhancing cell migration in vitro as well as metastasis formation in vivo. Integrative multi-omics analysis revealed that the PB could repress the translation of its target genes, including an EMT-driver gene, HMGA2. Furthermore, we demonstrated that endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is an intrinsic signal that can induce PB disassembly and translational derepression of HMGA2. Finally, we used mouse genetics to demonstrate that knockout of Ddx6 resulted in EMT-related defects in embryonic development. Taken together, our study has put forward a novel function of the PB as an EMT regulator in both pathological and physiological conditions.  The description of the MS part: Recent studies have suggested that the PB is mainly involved in translational regulation. Therefore, we performed mass spectrometry analysis on DDX6- and EDC4-KO clones and parental cells to measure changes at the protein level upon PB perturbation. After filtering and normalization, 3,762 and 3,000 peptides corresponding to 3,721 and 2,991 proteins were identified in DDX6- and EDC4-KO cells, respectively, and their abundance was then compared to parental HCT116 cells. A good correlation between two independent gene KO clones was observed in terms of protein level changes. In total, DDX6-KO induced up- and down-regulation of 230 and 291 proteins, respectively, while EDC4-KO induced up- and down-regulation of 73 and 22 proteins, respectively. To assess whether the PB mainly contributes to the RNA degradation or translational repression of its mRNA targets in HCT116 cells, we compared the RNA level and translation efficiency changes of DDX6-bound genes with other genes upon PB loss. As a result, both DDX6 and EDC4 KO led to a lower RNA, but higher translational efficiency of DDX6-bound genes compared to other unbound genes, suggesting PBs mainly function as a translational repressor of stored mRNAs in HCT116 cells.

### Sample Protocol
For proteome analysis, cells were washed with DPBS and incubated on ice with RIPA lysis for 15 min. Then, the lysates were centrifuged for 15 min (12000g, 4°C), and the supernatants were collected. Cold acetone was added into the supernatants and incubated overnight at -20°C. Acetone-precipitated protein samples were centrifuged for 5 min and washed with cold acetone again. When the samples were dried and re-dissolved in 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Protein digestion was performed by adding dithiothreitol, iodoacetamide, and trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted on C18 tips and redissolved with 0.1% formic acid for nano LC-MS/MS analysis on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrum raw data were first analyzed by MaxQuant v1.5.5.1 [14] for database searching against the UniProt Homo sapiens proteome sequence database downloaded on Sep 29, 2019, and quantified by MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm. Perseus v1.6.15.0 [15] software was used for downstream statistical analysis with the following procedures. First, LFQ intensities were loaded into Perseus and cleaned for contaminants, reverse hits, and identified only by the site. Second, filtering out proteins with unique peptides less than or equal to 1. Then, LFQ intensities were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution and log2-transformed. The significantly differential expression proteins were determined by the two-sided Student’s t-test, with a threshold FDR < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
P-body, Hct116, Cancer emt, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
Southern University of Science and Technology
Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, China

### Submitter
Mengran Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Chen
Department of Biology, Southern University of Science and Technology, China


