### Accession
PXD013115

### Title
Comparative membrane protein composition of Trichomonas gallinae clones with different virulence

### Description
This project compares the composition of proteins present in the cellular membrane and organelles membranes of two clones of Trichomonas gallinae that differed in virulence. The virulence was first tested in cell cultures. Two out of seven clones were selected according to their difference in virulence: the clone with the highest initial score of cytopatic effect (CPE) and the clone with the lowest initial score of CPE. The experiment was done using a label free approach.

### Sample Protocol
Both clones wer growth in culture medium (TYM) for 48 hours. Then, the cells were centrifuged and washed 3 times in PBS. A subcellular fraction kit was applied to both samples in order to obtain the different protein components of the subcellular location (Subcellular fractiooning kit, CALBIOCHEM). Only the fraction containing proteins of the membrane and organelles membranes were used for further identification and relative quantitafication of proteins by LC-MS/MS (nanoLc easy 1000 coupled Q-Exactive HF both from Thermo Scientific) analysis. Quantitative experiment included three biological and two thecnical replicates of each clon for label free analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using licensed version of search engine MACOT 2.3.0 through Proteome Discoverer TM 1.4. The non-redundant NCBI protein database with taxonomic restriction to family trichomonadidae was employed for further analysis. Protein relative quantification of the identified proteins was done with Progenesis Q software version 4.1.

### Publication Abstract
Oropharyngeal avian trichomonosis is mainly caused by Trichomonas gallinae, a protozoan parasite that affects the upper digestive tract of birds. Lesions of the disease are characterized by severe inflammation which may result in fatality by starvation. Two genotypes of T. gallinae were found to be widely distributed in different bird species all over the world. Differences in the host distribution and association with lesions of both genotypes have been reported. However, so far no distinct virulence factors of this parasite have been described and studies might suffer from possible co-infections of different genotypes. Therefore, in this paper, we analyzed the virulence capacity of seven clones of the parasite, established by micromanipulation, representing the two most frequent genotypes. Clones of both genotypes caused the maximum score of virulence at day 3 post-inoculation in LMH cells, although significant higher cytopathogenic score was found in ITS-OBT-Tg-1 genotype clones at days 1 and 2, as compared to clones with ITS-OBT-Tg-2. By using one representative clone of each genotype, a comparative proteomic analysis of the membrane proteins enriched fraction has been carried out by a label free approach (Data available via ProteomeXchange: PXD013115). The analysis resulted in 302 proteins of varying abundance. In the clone with the highest initial virulence, proteins related to cell adhesion, such as an immuno-dominant variable surface antigen, a GP63-like protein, an armadillo/beta-catenin-like repeat protein were found more abundant. Additionally, Ras superfamily proteins and calmodulins were more abundant, which might be related to an increased activity in the cytoskeleton re-organization. On the contrary, in the clone with the lowest initial virulence, larger numbers of the identified proteins were related to the carbohydrate metabolism. The results of the present work deliver substantial differences between both clones that could be related to feeding processes and morphological changes, similarly to the closely related pathogen Trichomonas vaginalis.

### Keywords
Trichomonas gallinae, Virulence, Genotype, Label free proteomics, Membrane proteins, Clone

### Affiliations
Department of Animal Health Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Complutense University of Madrid. Spain
Animal Health Department. Faculty of Veterinary Sciences. University Complutense of Madrid

### Submitter
María Teresa Gómez-Muñoz

### Lab Head
Dr María Teresa Gómez Muñoz
Department of Animal Health Faculty of Veterinary Medicine of Complutense University of Madrid. Spain


