### Accession
PXD006185

### Title
Hsp90-downregulation influences the heat-shock response, innate immune response and onset of oocyte development in nematodes.

### Description
Hsp90 is a molecular chaperone involved in the regulation and maturation of kinases and transcription factors. In C. elegans Hsp90 participates in the development of fertility, maintenance of muscle structure and the regulation of stress response and dauer state. To understand the consequences of Hsp90-depletion we studied Hsp90 RNAi-treated nematodes by DNA microarrays and mass spectrometry. We find that upon development of phenotypes the levels of chaperones and cofactors are increased, while specific proteins related to the innate immune response are specifically depleted. We further uncover Hsp90-dependent signatures of gonad development and larval development. Using reporter strains for the responsive genes skr-5, dod-24 and clec-60, we confirm an influence on the innate immune response in intestinal tissues, while alterations to development become evident in strains reporting on the presence of ZIP-8, CAV-1 and SEPA-1 in the gonad arms and very early embryos. These observations add molecular details to the Hsp90-dependent processes during development and stress responses and imply that multiple interactions of this chaperone system are relevant for the nematode’s life and development.

### Sample Protocol
Strains and Growth Nematodes were handled according to established protocols. For normal growth, nematodes were cultivated on NGM plates and fed with OP50 bacteria at 20 °C. For RNAi experiments nematodes were held on NGM plates supplemented with ampicillin, tetracyclin and 1 mM IPTG. HTT15(DE3) bacteria were transformed with plasmids L4440-control and, L4440-daf-21 and were cultivated in 5 ml LBAmp,Tet. At an OD600 of 0.6 they were induced with 1 mM IPTG for four hours. After that the dsRNA expressing bacteria were placed on RNAi plates and synchronized L1 nematodes – prepared by bleaching and hatched overnight in M9-buffer – were added into the bacterial suspension. RNAi experiments were performed at 20 °C until phenotypes became obvious after two to three days depending on the strength of the RNAi effect. Nematodes were then harvested for proteomic and transcriptomic analysis or imaging.  Mass spectrometric analysis For mass spectrometric analysis RNAi treatment was performed on plates made from bacterial M9-medium supplemented with ampicillin, tetracyclin and 1 mM IPTG. This bacterial growth medium contains 2 g/l glucose and 1 g/l NH4SO4 [17, 18]. For isotopic labelling of the nematodes with 15N, 1 g/l 15NH4SO4 (euriso-top GmbH, Saarbrücken, Germany) was used instead of the non-labelled 14NH4SO4. Nematode growth was not affected by the isotope-containing nitrogen source. Nematodes were harvested after 48-60 hours and washed off the plates with M9 buffer. Nematodes were separated from residual bacteria by gravity sedimentation in a 15 ml tube. The supernatant was removed and after three such washing steps the nematodes were lysed in a Retsch Mixer Mill MM400 in 1 ml of M9-buffer. The lysates of the two preparations were mixed after concentration determination to obtain equal amounts of each set and centrifuged to remove cell debris. The cleared supernatant was frozen and stored at -80 °C for mass spectrometric analysis.  After a tryptic digestion of proteins, 15 µl of the samples (peptides) were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an UltiMate® 3000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to an Q Exactive Hybrid-Quadropole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with electrospray ion source (ESI). Initially, the samples were desalted and concentrated on a 75 µm x 20 mm Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column with 5 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 30 µl min-1 using 95% of solvent A (0.1% TFA in A. dest.) and 5% of solvent B (0.1% TFA, 50% ACN in A. dest.) for 7 min. Peptides were subsequently loaded on a 75 µm x 50 cm Acclaim® PepMap100 RSLC C18 column with 2 µm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a mixture of 95% solvent C (0.1% formic acid (FA) in A. dest.) and 5% solvent D (0.1% FA, 84% ACN in A. dest.). The elution of peptides was performed at a constant flow rate of 400 nl min-1 using a linear gradient of 5% to 40% solvent D over 120 min. Mass spectrometry was performed in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with Full scan Fourier transform mass spectrometry (FTMS) acquired in a m/z range of 350 to 1400 with a resolution of 70.000. The ten most intense peptides (charge range ≥ +2) in the FTMS-scan were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with collision energy (NCE) of 27. The dynamic exclusion time was set on 30 s with a MS/MS resolution of 35.000 and a mass range of 300 to 2000.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was acquired with Mascot Distiller including a uniprot database of Caenorhabditis elegans (c_elegans.PRJNA13758.WS241.protein.fasta). Data analysis was accomplished as described in [Geillinger KE, Kuhlmann K, Eisenacher M, Meyer HE, Daniel H, Spanier B. Dynamic changes of the Caenorhabditis elegans proteome during ontogenesis assessed by quantitative analysis with 15N metabolic labeling. J Proteome Res. 2012;11:4594-604.]

### Publication Abstract
Hsp90 is a molecular chaperone involved in the regulation and maturation of kinases and transcription factors. In Caenorhabditis elegans, it contributes to the development of fertility, maintenance of muscle structure, the regulation of heat-shock response and dauer state. To understand the consequences of Hsp90-depletion, we studied Hsp90 RNAi-treated nematodes by DNA microarrays and mass spectrometry. We find that upon development of phenotypes the levels of chaperones and Hsp90 cofactors are increased, while specific proteins related to the innate immune response are depleted. In microarrays, we further find many differentially expressed genes related to gonad and larval development. These genes form an expression cluster that is regulated independently from the immune response implying separate pathways of Hsp90-involvement. Using fluorescent reporter strains for the differentially expressed immune response genes skr-5, dod-24 and clec-60 we observe that their activity in intestinal tissues is influenced by Hsp90-depletion. Instead, effects on the development are evident in both gonad arms. After Hsp90-depletion, changes can be observed in early embryos and adults containing fluorescence-tagged versions of SEPA-1, CAV-1 or PUD-1, all of which are downregulated after Hsp90-depletion. Our observations identify molecular events for Hsp90-RNAi induced phenotypes during development and immune responses, which may help to separately investigate independent Hsp90-influenced processes that are relevant during the nematode's life and development.

### Keywords
Hsp90, Lc/ms, Nematodes, Immune system

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr Universität Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Room 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Claudia Lindemann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Katrin Marcus
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Zentrum für klinische Forschung (ZKF) Room 1.055 Universitätsstraße 150 44801 Bochum, Germany


