### Accession
PXD009125

### Title
Association of proteomics changes with Al-sensitive root zones in switchgrass, part 2

### Description
In this project, we report on aluminum (Al)-induced root proteomic changes in switchgrass. After growth in a hydroponic culture system supplemented with 400μM of Al, plants began to show signs of physiological stress such as a reduction in photosynthetic rate. At this time, the basal 2‐cm long root tips were harvested and divided into two segments, each of 1‐cm in length, for protein extraction. Al-induced changes in proteomes were identified using tandem mass tags mass spectrometry (TMT-MS)-based quantitative proteomics analysis. A total of 216 proteins (approximately 3.6% of total proteins) showed significant differences between non-Al treated control and treated groups with significant fold change (twice the standard deviation; FDR adjusted p-value, q<0.05). The basal root tip tissues expressed more dramatic proteome changes (164 significantly changed proteins; 3.9% of total proteins quantified) compared to the elongation/maturation zones (52 significantly changed proteins, 1.1% of total proteins quantified). Significantly changed proteins from the basal-1cm root apex tissues were clustered into 25 biological pathways, three proteins in cell cycles were all at a reduced abundance level compared to the non-treated control group. In the root elongation and maturation zone tissues, the identified proteins were placed into 18 pathways, proteins in secondary cell wall formation (lignin biosynthesis) were identified. Several STRING protein interaction networks were developed for these Al-induced significantly changed proteins. This study has identified a large number of Al-responsive proteins, including transcription factors, which will be used for exploring new Al tolerance genes and mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, frozen tissues were ground to a fine powder and the powdered samples were washed in a series of solutions: 10% TCA in acetone, 80% methanol/0.1M ammonium acetate and 80% acetone; then between washes powdered tissue samples were centrifuged. Proteins were extracted from pellets using the dense SDS/phenol extraction method [22]. Proteins were precipitated in 0.1M ammonium acetate in methanol (1:6; v/v). Following washes in cold methanol and acetone, the air-dried pellets were solubilized in 500 mM TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate), 0.1% SDS, 8 M urea, and protease inhibitors (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA). Urea concentration in protein extracts was reduced to 1M, TEAB to 100 mM concentration with 50 mM TEAB buffer. Protein concentration was determined by using a Bradford Assay Kit (Bio-Rad). For each sample, 100 µg of protein was reduced by adding 10 μl of 50 mM TCEP followed by incubation at 37°C for 1 hour. Cysteine- groups were blocked at room temperature by adding 6 μl of 200 mM MMTS for 10 min. Samples were digested overnight at 32°C with 2.5 μg of modified sequence grade trypsin (Sigma, USA). The tryptic peptides were labelled with tags (Table 1) using TMT 10-plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by the addition of 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine followed by incubation at room temperature for 15 min.  The labeled samples were pooled and cleaned using the ZipTip (Millipore, USA) procedure before being used for label check. The remaining labeled samples were combined and subjected to reverse-phase (RP) solid-phase extraction (SPE) procedure to remove SDS and excess tags using cartridges (Sep-Pak C18 cartridge, 1-cm3, 50-mg) (Waters; Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted in 500 µL of 50% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried using a CentiVac Concentrator (labConco, Kansas City, MO, USA). Then, the multiplexed labeled peptide samples  were separated, in the first dimension,  using  high-pH an ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Aquity, Waters) coupled with a robotic fraction collector (Probot; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The separation was achieved on an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (1.7 µm, 2.1x100 mm, Waters, Milford, MA) equilibrated with 20 mM ammonium formate (NH4FA) pH 9.5 in water (eluent A) and a 12 minute gradient from 10-45% of eluent B (ACN/10% 20 mM NH4FA) at a flow rate 200 µL/min.Forty-eight fractions were collected at 15 second intervals and pooled into a total of 16 fractions based on the UV absorbance at 214 nm and with multiple fraction concatenation strategy. All of the fractions were dried and reconstituted in 20 µL of 2% ACN/0.5% FA for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The nanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer equipped with nano ion source using high energy collision dissociation (HCD) similar to previous reports [3]. The Orbitrap is coupled with the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  Each reconstituted fraction (5 L) was injected onto a PepMap C-18 RP nano trap column (3 µm, 75 µm ´ 20 mm, Dionex) with nanoViper Fittings at 20 L/min flow rate for on-line desalting and then separated on a PepMap C-18 RP nano column (3 µm, 75µm x 15cm), and eluted in a 120 min gradient of 5% to 38% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nL/min., followed by a 7-min ramping to 95% ACN-0.1% FA and a 7-min hold at 95% ACN-0.1% FA. The column was re-equilibrated with 2% ACN-0.1% FA for 20 min prior to the next run.  The Orbitrap Fusion is operated in positive ion mode with nano spray voltage set at 1.6 kV and source temperature at 275 °C. External calibration for FT, IT and quadrupole mass analyzers was performed. An internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 as the celebrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode using FT mass analyzer for one survey MS scan for selecting precursor ions followed by Top 3 second data-dependent HCD-MS/MS scans for precursor peptides with 2-7 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 10,000 with normalized collision energy of 37.5%.  MS survey scans at a resolving power of 120,000 (fwhm at m/z 200), for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 with AGC =3e5 and Max IT = 50 ms, and MS/MS scans at 30,000 resolution with AGC=1e5, Max IT = 120ms and with Q isolation window (m/z) at 1.6 for the mass range m/z 105-2000. Dynamic exclusion parameters were set at 1 within 50s exclusion duration with ±10 ppm exclusion mass width. All data are acquired under Xcalibur 3.0 operation software and Orbitrap Fusion Tune 2.0 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS raw spectra from each set of TMT10-plex experiments were processed and database searched using Sequest HT software within the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (PD 1.4, Thermo). The Pvirgatum_v1.1_273_protein database containing 125439 sequence entries was used for database searches. The default search settings used for 10-plex TMT quantitative processing and protein identification in PD1.4 searching software were: two mis-cleavages for full trypsin with fixed Methylthio modification of cysteine, fixed 10-plex TMT modifications on lysine and N-terminal amines and variable modifications of methionine oxidation and deamidation on asparagine and glutamine residues. The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance values were 10 ppm and 50 mDa, respectively. Identified peptides were filtered for maximum 1% FDR using the Percolator algorithm in PD 1.4 along with peptide confidence set to high. The TMT10-plex quantification method within PD 1.4 was used to calculate the reporter ratios with a mass tolerance ±10 ppm without applying isotopic correction factors. Only peptide spectra containing all reporter ions were designated as “quantifiable spectra” and used for peptide/protein quantitation. A protein ratio was expressed as a median value of the ratios for all quantifiable spectra of the unique peptides pertaining to that protein. For each relative ratio group, normalization on protein median was applied.

### Publication Abstract
In this paper, we report on aluminum (Al)-induced root proteomic changes in switchgrass. After growth in a hydroponic culture system supplemented with 400 &#x3bc;M of Al, plants began to show signs of physiological stress such as a reduction in photosynthetic rate. At this time, the basal 2-cm long root tips were harvested and divided into two segments, each of 1-cm in length, for protein extraction. Al-induced changes in proteomes were identified using tandem mass tags mass spectrometry (TMT-MS)-based quantitative proteomics analysis. A total of 216 proteins (approximately 3.6% of total proteins) showed significant differences between non-Al treated control and treated groups with significant fold change (twice the standard deviation; FDR adjusted <i>p</i>-value &lt; 0.05). The apical root tip tissues expressed more dramatic proteome changes (164 significantly changed proteins; 3.9% of total proteins quantified) compared to the elongation/maturation zones (52 significantly changed proteins, 1.1% of total proteins quantified). Significantly changed proteins from the apical 1-cm root apex tissues were clustered into 25 biological pathways; proteins involved in the cell cycle (rotamase FKBP 1 isoforms, and CDC48 protein) were all at a reduced abundance level compared to the non-treated control group. In the root elongation/maturation zone tissues, the identified proteins were placed into 18 pathways, among which proteins involved in secondary metabolism (lignin biosynthesis) were identified. Several STRING protein interaction networks were developed for these Al-induced significantly changed proteins. This study has identified a large number of Al-responsive proteins, including transcription factors, which will be used for exploring new Al tolerance genes and mechanisms. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD008882 and PXD009125.

### Keywords
Tmt-quantitative proteomics; protein sumoylation; protein folding

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Ted Thannhauser

### Lab Head
Dr Theodore Thannhauser
USDA-ARS


