### Accession
PXD022990

### Title
Synthetic Siglec-9 agonists inhibit neutrophil activation associated with COVID-19

### Description
Severe cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) are characterized by a hyperinflammatory immune response that leads to numerous complications. Production of proinflammatory neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) has been suggested to be a key factor in inducing a hyperinflammatory signaling cascade, allegedly causing both pulmonary tissue damage and peripheral inflammation. If true, finding ways to inhibit NET production could provide therapeutic strategies to prevent respiratory damage and death from SARS-CoV-2 related inflammation. Here, we demonstrate that synthetic glycopolymers that activate signaling of the neutrophil checkpoint receptor Siglec-9 suppress NETosis induced by agonists of viral TLR receptors and COVID-19 plasma. Thus, Siglec-9 represents an attractive therapeutic target to curb neutrophilic hyperinflammation in COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Primary neutrophils were treated in media containing the indicated compounds in IMDM [+] 0.5% hiFBS for the indicated time period, or in plasma from either healthy donors or COVID-19 patients, with or without pS9L (500 nM) for 15 min. Cell pellets were washed twice with cold PBS supplemented with 1 mM EDTA and were lysed in RIPA buffer (50 uL for each 1e6 cells) (Thermo Fisher, PI89900) supplemented with Benzonase (1:1000) (Sigma Aldrich, E1014), HALT phosphatase inhibitor (1:100) (Thermo Fisher, 78420), and HALT protease inhibitor (1:100) (Thermo Fisher, 87786) for 30 min at 4 °C. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 4 °C for 15 min at 16000 rcf. Protein concentration was quantified by Rapid Gold BCA (Thermo Fisher, A53226). Digestion was performed on 100 µg protein using a mini S-trap protocol provided by the manufacturer (Protifi). Here, proteins were brought to 5% SDS and reduced with 5 mM DTT for 10 minutes at 95 C. Cysteines were alkylated using 30 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes each at room temperature in the dark. The lysate was then acidified with phosphoric acid, brought to approximately 80-90% methanol with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, and loaded onto the S-trap column. Following washing with 100 mM TEAB in 90% methanol, trypsin (Promega) was added to the S-trap at a 20:1 protein:protease ratio for 90 minutes at 47 °C. Peptides from each lysate were labeled with 11-plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tags, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 2 hours at room temperature using recently published protocols. Labeling schemes for the stimulated study comparing R848 and PMA to no treatment (NT) were:  NT replicates in channels 126C (Donor 1), 127N (Donor 2), and 130C (Donor 3); PMA replicates in 127C (Donor 1), 128N (Donor 2) and 131N (Donor 3); R848 replicates in 128C (Donor 1), 129N (Donor 2) and 131C (Donor 3). For the polymer experiment, the labeling scheme was: vehicle replicates in channels 126C (Donor 1), 127N (Donor 2), and 130C (Donor 3); pS9L replicates in 127C (Donor 1), 128N (Donor 2) and 131N (Donor 3); pLac replicates in 128C (Donor 1), 129N (Donor 2) and 131C (Donor 3).  A test mix was run to confirm >99% labeling efficiency and even distribution of signal across all channels prior to quenching of the TMT labeling reaction (0.5 uL 50% hydroxylamine reacted for 15 min). Peptides from each channel were then combined prior to phosphopeptide enrichment, which was performed as previously described. Briefly, 100 µL magnetic titanium(IV) immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (Ti(IV)-IMAC, ReSyn Biosciences) beads were washed three times with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA (all washes were 1 mL).14 Peptides were dissolved in 1 mL 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA and gently vortexed with the TI(IV)-IMAC beads for 45 minutes.  Unbound peptides were kept as flow through for total protein analysis, followed by three 80% acetonitrile/6% TFA, one 80% acetonitrile, one 0.5 M glycolic acid/80% acetonitrile, and two 80% acetonitrile washes. Peptides were eluted with 500 µL 50% acetonitrile, 1% ammonium hydroxide. Both eluate and flow through were dried down in a speed vac and further cleaned up on Strata-X SPE cartridges (Phenomenex) by conditioning the cartridge with 1 mL ACN followed by 1 mL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% FA in water and then loaded on to the cartridge, followed by a 1 mL wash with 0.2% FA in water. Peptides were eluted with 400 uL of 0.2% FA in 80% ACN, were dried via lyophilization.

### Data Protocol
All data were searched with the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant using the entire human proteome downloaded from Uniprot (reviewed, 20428 entries). Each separate TMT experiment (resting, activated, and pLac control) was searched separately, with the flow through/total protein triplicate injections labeled as Group0 and False under “PTM” and phosphopeptide enriched triplicate injections labeled as Group1 and True under “PTM”. Group0 had cleavage specificity set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavage allowed and variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus with 4 maximum modifications per peptide. Group1 had cleavage specificity set to Trypsin/P with 3 missed cleavage allowed and variable modifications of phosphorylation on serine/threonine/tyrosine, oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of the protein N-terminus with 4 maximum modifications per peptide. The experiment type for both Group0 and Group1 was set to Reporter ion MS2 and only TMT channels used (as described above) were selected to be included. The reporter ion mass tolerance was set to 0.3 Da and the minimum reporter PIF score was set to 0.75. Defaults were used for the remaining settings, including PSM and protein FDR thresholds of 0.01 and 20 ppm, 4.5 ppm, and 20 ppm for first search MS1 tolerance, main search MS1 tolerance, and MS2 product ion tolerance, respectively. Match between runs was not enabled. Quantified phosphosites were then processed in Perseus. Contaminants and reverse hits were removed, results were filtered for phosphosites that had localization probabilities > 0.75, and signal in all relevant TMT channels was required. Significance testing was performed using a two-tailed pair-ed sample t-test calculated in Microsoft Excel, using one condition versus control (NT or vehicle for stimulated and polymer experiments, respectively) for pairwise comparisons.

### Publication Abstract
Severe cases of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by infection with SARS-Cov-2, are characterized by a hyperinflammatory immune response that leads to numerous complications. Production of proinflammatory neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) has been suggested to be a key factor in inducing a hyperinflammatory signaling cascade, allegedly causing both pulmonary tissue damage and peripheral inflammation. Accordingly, therapeutic blockage of neutrophil activation and NETosis, the cell death pathway accompanying NET formation, could limit respiratory damage and death from severe COVID-19. Here, we demonstrate that synthetic glycopolymers that activate the neutrophil checkpoint receptor Siglec-9 suppress NETosis induced by agonists of viral toll-like receptors (TLRs) and plasma from patients with severe COVID-19. Thus, Siglec-9 agonism is a promising therapeutic strategy to curb neutrophilic hyperinflammation in COVID-19.&lt;br&gt;.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Siglec, Covid-19, Neutrophil, Netosis

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University Stanford ChEM-H

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Department of Chemistry, Stanford University Stanford ChEM-H


