### Accession
PXD019802

### Title
Sulfide Regulates Autophagy by Reversible Persulfidation of the Cysteine Protease ATG4

### Description
Hydrogen sulfide is a signaling molecule that regulates essential processes for plant performance, such as autophagy. In Arabidopsis thaliana, hydrogen sulfide negatively regulates autophagy independently of reactive oxygen species, but the underlying mechanism remains to be understood. To determine whether persulfidation, an emergent posttranslational modification, has a main role in the control of autophagy by sulfide, we have used a proteomic approach targeting ATG4, a cysteine protease that plays a crucial role in autophagy progression. We showed that AtATG4a from A. thaliana, which is the predominant ATG4 protease in this plant species, contains a specific site for persulfidation, the residue Cys170, included in the characteristic catalytic triad Cys-His-Asp of cysteine proteases. We tested whether persulfidation regulates the activity of ATG4 by setting up a heterologous assay using the Chlamydomonas reinhardtii CrATG8 protein as a substrate. Our findings demonstrate that sulfide significantly inactivates AtATG4a cleavage activity in a reversible manner. The biological significance of the reversible inhibition of the ATG4 protease by sulfide is supported by our findings in Arabidopsis leaves under both basal and autophagy-inducing conditions. We also observed a significant increase in the overall ATG4 activity in Arabidopsis under nitrogen starvation and osmotic stress, which is inhibited by sulfide. Therefore, our data strongly suggest that the negative regulation of autophagy by sulfide is mediated, at least, by the specific persulfidation of the protease ATG4.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, Arabidopsis wild-type plants were grown in soil for 30 days, and then sprayed with water (control conditions), or 50 M ABA for 3 and 6 h.  Protein samples from three biological replicates of leaf tissues treated with ABA for 0 h (control sample), 3h and 6 h were isolated and 1 mg of protein per sample were submitted to the tag-switch labelling for persulfidation protein enrichment as described (Aroca et al, 2017). After elution from the streptavidin-beads proteins were precipitated by TCA/acetone procedure. Precipitated samples were resupendend in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.2 % Rapigest (Waters) for protein determination. 50 µg of protein were trypsin-digested as previously described (García et al., 2019; Vowinckel et al., 2014), and the SWATH-MS analyses were performed at the Proteomic Facility of the Institute of Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis, Seville, Spain. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using nano-LC-MS/MS was first performed to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library as described by García et al., (2019).  The peptide and protein identifications were performed using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm. The search was conducted against a Uniprot proteome (June 2017, release), and their corresponding reversed entries and common contaminants assembled in FASTA format using ProteinPilot software v5.0.1 (AB Sciex) with the Paragon™ algorithm. Samples were input as unlabeled samples with no special factors, trypsin digested and MSBT alkylation. The automatically generated report in ProteinPilot™ was manually inspected for FDR cut-off protein and only proteins identified at FDR (False discovery rate) ≤1% were considered for protein lists and further analysis. For relative quantitation using SWATH analysis, the same samples used to generate the spectral library were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Each sample (2 μL) was analyzed using the LC-MS equipment and LC gradient described above to build the spectral library but instead used the SWATH-MS acquisition method. The method consisted of repeating an acquisition cycle of TOF MS/MS scans (230 to 1500 m/z, 60 ms acquisition time) of 60 overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of variable width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1250 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. The total cycle time was 3.7 s.

### Data Protocol
SWATH MS spectra alignment was performed with the PeaKView 2.2 (Sciex) software with the microapp SWATH 2.0, using the reference spectral library generated above. Two DIA raw files for each biological replicate were loaded in unison using the following parameters: 10 peptides, 7 transitions and peptide confidence of >99%, and 1% FDR including shared peptides and XIC width set at 0.05 Da. After data processing, three distinct files were exported for further quantitation analysis. The processed mrkvw files containing protein information from PeakView were loaded into MarkerView (Version 1.2.1, AB Sciex) for normalization of protein intensity (peak area) for all runs using the built-in total ion intensity sum plug-in. Log2 transformation was performed prior to further statistical analysis. We plot the histogram to check the normality distribution of each technical replicate. Mean values of protein expression were used for calculation of fold change (FC). Proteins with adjusted p < 0.05 and FC ≥ 1.5 were regarded as differentially expressed proteins in this study.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen sulfide is a signaling molecule that regulates essential processes in plants, such as autophagy. In Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>), hydrogen sulfide negatively regulates autophagy independently of reactive oxygen species via an unknown mechanism. Comparative and quantitative proteomic analysis was used to detect abscisic acid-triggered persulfidation that reveals a main role in the control of autophagy mediated by the autophagy-related (ATG) Cys protease AtATG4a. This protease undergoes specific persulfidation of Cys170 that is a part of the characteristic catalytic Cys-His-Asp triad of Cys proteases. Regulation of the ATG4 activity by persulfidation was tested in a heterologous assay using the <i>Chlamydomonas reinhardtii</i> CrATG8 protein as a substrate. Sulfide significantly and reversibly inactivates AtATG4a. The biological significance of the reversible inhibition of the ATG4 by sulfide is supported by the results obtained in Arabidopsis leaves under basal and autophagy-activating conditions. A significant increase in the overall ATG4 proteolytic activity in Arabidopsis was detected under nitrogen starvation and osmotic stress and can be inhibited by sulfide. Therefore, the data strongly suggest that the negative regulation of autophagy by sulfide is mediated by specific persulfidation of the ATG4 protease.

### Keywords
Hydrogen sulfide, Persulfidation, Arabidopsis, Abscisic acid

### Affiliations
Instituto Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis-CSIC
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain

### Submitter
Luis C. Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C Romero
Instituto de Bioquímica Vegetal y Fotosíntesis, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas and Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain


