### Accession
PXD044269

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Diabetic Retinas

### Description
As a metabolic disease, diabetes often leads to health complications such as heart failure, nephropathy, neurological disorders, and vision loss. Diabetic retinopathy (DR) affects as many as 100 million people worldwide. The mechanism of DR is complex and known to impact both neural and vascular components in the retina. While recent advances in the field have identified major cellular signaling contributing to DR pathogenesis, little has been reported on the protein post-translational modifications (PTM) -known to define protein localization, function, and activity -in the diabetic retina overall. Protein glycosylation is the enzymatic addition of carbohydrates to proteins, which can influence many protein attributes including folding, stability, function, and subcellular localization. Olinked glycosylation is the addition of sugars to an oxygen atom in amino acids with a free oxygen atom in their side chain (i.e., threonine, serine). To date, more than 100 congenital disorders of glycosylation have been described. However, no studies have identified the retinal O-linked glycoproteome in health or disease. With a critical need to expedite the discovery of PTMomics in diabetic retinas, we identified both global changes in protein levels and the retinal O-glycoproteome of control and diabetic mice. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry-based glycoproteomics and high throughput screening identified proteins differentially glycosylated in the retinas of wildtype and diabetic mice. Here, we provide evidence that diabetes shifts O-glycosylation of metabolic and synaptic proteins in the retina.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation: Proteomics analysis was carried out as previously referenced with minor changes [(Ludwig et al., 2016, Proteomics, 16(3), 516-531.), within section 2.5 nLC-ESI-MS2 under Protein IDs for GeLC]. Mice were euthanized by CO2 asphyxiation, then retinas were harvested and proteins were extracted using T-PER™ Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 78510)  supplemented with HALT protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 78425), and benzonase nuclease (Sigma, E1014) following manufacturers instructions. Lysates were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 23227). Protein extracts were divided to carry out both “global” and “O-glycan enriched” proteomics analysis (proteoglycomics data were uploaded to PRIDE as a separate submission). The later preparation included overnight digestion of 300ug of protein with PNGase-F (Sigma, P7367) as per manufacturers recommendation. To detect O-glycosylation, the PNGase-F treated lysates were then processed to enrich O-linked glycosylated protein using a ConA glycoprotein isolation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat.# 89804). ConA is known to be useful for the separating Glycosylated from N-Glycosylation proteins removed by PNGase-F treatment in the first place. Therefore, the ConA bound fraction was released and analyzed further as per the global proteome workflow.  For global analysis 20ug of protein was separated half way on the gel, and for the O-glycan enriched proteins 1ug was run as a short stack into gel. In both cases, protein per sample was diluted to 25μL using NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (1x final conc., Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0007). Proteins were then reduced with DTT and denatured at 70°C for 10min prior to loading everything onto Novex NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris Protein gels (Invitrogen, Cat.# NP0315BOX) and separated appropriately (@400 200 constant V). The gels were stained overnight with Novex Colloidal Blue Staining kit (Invitrogen, Cat.# LC6025). Following de-staining, each entire lane was cut into multiple MW fractions (1-fraction for the O-glycan enriched, and 3 fractions for the global), and equilibrated in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBc), each gel plug was then digested overnight with Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, Cat.# V5280) following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptide extracts were reconstituted in 0.1% Formic Acid/ ddH2O at 0.1μg/μL. Mass Spectrometry: Peptide digests (8μL each) were injected onto a 1260 Infinity nHPLC stack (Agilent Technologies), and separated using a 75 micron I.D. x 15 cm pulled tip C-18 column (Jupiter C-18 300 Å, 5 micron, Phenomenex). This system runs in-line with a Thermo Q Exactive HFx mass spectrometer, equipped with a Nanospray FlexTM ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and all data were collected in CID mode. The nHPLC is configured with binary mobile phases that includes solvent A (0.1%FA in ddH2O), and solvent B (0.1%FA in 15% ddH2O / 85% ACN), programmed as follows; 10min @ 5%B (2μL/ min, load), 30min @ 5%-40%B (linear: 0.5nL/ min, analyze), 5min @ 70%B (2μL/ min, wash), 10min @ 0%B (2μL/ min, equilibrate). Following each parent ion scan (300-1200m/z @ 60k resolution), fragmentation data (MS2) were collected on the top most intense 18 ions @7.5K resolution. For data dependent scans, charge state screening and dynamic exclusion were enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, and exclusion duration of 90s.

### Data Protocol
MS Data Conversion and Searches: The XCalibur RAW files were collected in profile mode, centroided and converted to MzXML using ReAdW v. 3.5.1. The mgf files were created using MzXML2Search (included in TPP v. 3.5) for all scans. The data was searched using SEQUEST (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which is set for three maximum missed cleavages, a precursor mass window of 20ppm, trypsin digestion, variable modification C @ 57.0293, and M @ 15.9949 as a base setting. Searches were performed with the mus musculus species specific subset of the UniProtKB database. Peptide Filtering, Grouping, and Quantification: The list of peptide IDs generated based on SEQUEST search results were filtered using Scaffold (Protein Sciences, Portland Oregon). Scaffold filters and groups all peptides to generate and retain only high confidence IDs while also generating normalized spectral counts (N-SC’s) across all samples for the purpose of relative quantification. The filter cut-off values were set with minimum peptide length of >5 AA’s, with no MH+1 charge states, with peptide probabilities of >80% C.I., and with the number of peptides per protein ≥2. The protein probabilities will be set to a >99.0% C.I., and an FDR<1.0. Scaffold incorporates the two most common methods for statistical validation of large proteome datasets, the false discovery rate (FDR) and protein probability (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Weatherly). Relative quantification across experiments were then performed via spectral counting (Old, Liu), and when relevant, spectral count abundances will then be normalized between samples (Hyde). Statistical Analysis: For the proteomic data generated, two separate non-parametric-like statistical analyses were performed between each pair-wise comparison. These analyses included; 1) the calculation of weight values by significance analysis of microarray (SAM; cut off >|0.8| combined with, 2) T-Test (single tail, unequal variance, cut off of p < 0.05), which are then sorted according to the highest statistical relevance in each comparison. For SAM (Golub and Xu), whereby the weight value (W) is a statistically derived function that approaches significance as the distance between the means (μ1-μ2) for each group increases, and the SD (δ1-δ2) decreases using the formula, W=(μ1-μ2)/( δ1-δ2). For protein abundance ratios determined with N-SC’s, we set a 1.5-fold change as the threshold for significance, determined empirically by analyzing the inner-quartile data from the control experiments using ln-ln plots, where the Pierson’s correlation coefficient (R) is 0.98, and >99% of the normalized intensities fell between the set fold change. In each case, all three tests (SAM, Ttest, and fold change) have to pass in order to be considered significant. Systems Analysis: Gene ontology assignments and pathway analysis will be carried out using MetaCore (GeneGO Inc., St. Joseph, MI) and ShinyGo (Ge et al., 2020). Interactions identified within MetaCore are manually correlated using full text articles. Detailed algorithms have been described previously [Bhatia and Ekins]. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btz931.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Retina, Proteomics diabetes mellitus

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham
Director, UAB CCC Proteomics Facility; Professor, UAB Anesthesiology

### Submitter
james mobley

### Lab Head
Dr James A. Mobley
Director, UAB CCC Proteomics Facility; Professor, UAB Anesthesiology


