### Accession
PXD027109

### Title
Single cell RNA-seq analysis links respiratory dysfunction to an extracellular matrix-specific damage response

### Description
Energy metabolism and extracellular matrix function are closely connected to orchestrate and maintain tissue organization, but the crosstalk is poorly understood. Here, we used scRNA-seq analysis to uncover the importance of respiration for extracellular matrix homeostasis in mature cartilage. Genetic inhibition of respiration in cartilage results in the expansion of a central area of 1-month-old mouse femur head cartilage showing disorganized chondrocytes and increased deposition of extracellular matrix material. scRNA-seq analysis identified a cluster-specific decrease in mitochondrial DNA-encoded respiratory chain genes and a unique regulation of extracellular matrix-related genes in nonarticular chondrocyte clusters. These changes were associated with alterations in extracellular matrix composition, a shift in the collagen/non-collagen protein content and an increase of collagen crosslinking and ECM stiffness. The results demonstrate, based on findings of the scRNA-seq analysis, that respiration is a key factor contributing to ECM integrity and mechanostability in cartilage and presumably also in many other tissues.

### Sample Protocol
PFE cartilage of three animals was lyophyllized and then processed to powder using 2.8 mm ceramic beads (CK28 Hard tissue homogenizing tubes, Precellys tissue homogenizer; Bertin, Rockville; USA) at RT for 3x 20 sec at 6800 rpm with 30 sec pause in between. The powder was subsequently lysed in 200 µL pre-cooled lysis Buffer (4% (wt/vol) SDC and 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)), and then incubated at 95°C for 5 min and sonicated using a tip-probe sonicator (SONOPULS HD2070, Bandelin, Berlin, Germany) for three 30s-cycles of 1s on and 1s off at 80% output. Debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,100 g (Eppendorf 5430 R-Centrifuge, Hamburg, Germany) for 10 min at RT and protein concentration was determined by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Lysates were reduced and alkylated with 100mM TCEP (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) and 400mM 2-chloroacetamid (pH 7-8) (Sigma Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) for 5min at 45°C under constant movement (1,500 rpm, Eppendorf ThermoMixer C, Hamburg, Germany). After enzymatic digested with Lys-C (1mg/ml) (Wako, Neuss, Germany) and trypsin (1mg/ml) (Sigma Aldrich, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) using an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (wt/wt) oN at 37°C with constant shaking (1,500 rpm, Eppendorf ThermoMixer C, Hamburg, Germany) 10µg of the sample were transferred with 100µl loading buffer (1% TFA in Isopropanol) onto SDB-RPS stage tips (AttractSPE Disks SDB-RPS, Affinisep, Petite Couronne, France). Stage tips were washed and peptides were eluted with 0.25% NH4OH in 60% ACN. The eluate was concentrated under vacuum to dryness using a speed vac concentrator (Concentrator Plus, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), reconstituted with 10 µl resuspension buffer (5% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and measured by LC-MS/MS (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, USA) as described previously (Lang et al., 2018).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) and its implemented Andromeda search engine and LFQ algorithm. Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) was used to perform the two-sided students t-test and calculate permutation-based FDR (S0 = 0.1, number of randomizations = 500). The volcano plot was generated using Instant Clue software 0.5.2 (Nolte et al, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
Energy metabolism and extracellular matrix (ECM) function together orchestrate and maintain tissue organization, but crosstalk between these processes is poorly understood. Here, we used single-cell RNA-Seq (scRNA-Seq) analysis to uncover the importance of the mitochondrial respiratory chain for ECM homeostasis in mature cartilage. This tissue produces large amounts of a specialized ECM to promote skeletal growth during development and maintain mobility throughout life. A combined approach of high-resolution scRNA-Seq, mass spectrometry/matrisome analysis, and atomic force microscopy was applied to mutant mice with cartilage-specific inactivation of respiratory chain function. This genetic inhibition in cartilage results in the expansion of a central area of 1-month-old mouse femur head cartilage, showing disorganized chondrocytes and increased deposition of ECM material. scRNA-Seq analysis identified a cell cluster-specific decrease in mitochondrial DNA-encoded respiratory chain genes and a unique regulation of ECM-related genes in nonarticular chondrocytes. These changes were associated with alterations in ECM composition, a shift in collagen/noncollagen protein content, and an increase of collagen crosslinking and ECM stiffness. These results demonstrate that mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction is a key factor that can promote ECM integrity and mechanostability in cartilage and presumably also in many other tissues.

### Keywords
Cartilage, Respiration, Ecm

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Experimental Neonatology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Bent Brachvogel
Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Experimental Neonatology, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany and Center for Biochemistry, Medical Faculty, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


