### Accession
PXD016656

### Title
Embryo-like features in developing Bacillus subtilis biofilms

### Description
Correspondence between evolution and development has been discussed for more than two centuries. Recent work reveals that phylogeny-ontogeny correlations are indeed present in developmental transcriptomes of eukaryotic clades with complex multicellularity. Nevertheless, it has been largely ignored that the pervasive presence of phylogeny-ontogeny correlations is likely a hallmark of development in eukaryotes. This perspective opens a possibility to look for similar parallelisms in biological settings where developmental logic and multicellular complexity are more obscure. For instance, it has been increasingly recognized that multicellular behavior underlies biofilm formation in bacteria. However, it remains unclear whether bacterial biofilm growth shares some basic principles with development in complex eukaryotes. Here we show that ontogeny of growing Bacillus subtilis biofilms recapitulates phylogeny at the expression level. Using finely resolved transcriptome and proteome profiles, we found that biofilm ontogeny correlates with the evolutionary measures. Early-stage biofilms expressed older and more conserved genes, while later-stage biofilms progressively used evolutionary younger and more diverged genes. Molecular and morphological signatures also revealed that biofilm growth is highly regulated and organized into discrete ontogenetic stages, similar to those of eukaryotic embryos. In conjunction this suggests that biofilm formation in Bacillus is a bona fide developmental process comparable to organismal development in animals, plants and fungi. Given that most cells on Earth reside in the form of biofilms and that biofilms represent the oldest known fossils, we anticipate that the widely-adopted vision of the first life as a single-cell and free-living organism needs rethinking.

### Sample Protocol
Petri dishes containing MSgg agar were inoculated with four drops of LB culture. Biofilms were harvested at 12 hours and at 1, 2, and 7 days post-inoculation time. Cell lysis was carried out in a detergent based buffer and protein was extracted by chloroform/methanol precipitation. Samples were separated on a NuPage Bis-Tris 4–12% gradient gel according to manufacturer's protocol and in-gel digestion was carried out using the endoprotease Trypsin. Samples were analyzed on an QExactive HF mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system. The instrument was operated in data-dependent mode. Triplicate injections (technical replicates) were carried out for each of the sample fractions for label free quantitation (LFQ).

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS spectra were processed with the MaxQuant software suite V1.5.1.051,52 integrated with an Andromeda53 search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy database of Bs (NCBI Assembly accession: ASM205596v1; GCA_002055965.1) containing 4,333 protein entries, and including additional 245 commonly observed laboratory contaminant proteins. Endoprotease Trypsin/P was set as the protease with a maximum missed cleavage of two. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as a fixed modification. Label free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of two. A false discovery rate of 10% was applied at the peptide and protein level individually for filtering identifications. Initial mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Intensity based absolute quantitation (iBAQ) option was enabled, but with log fit turned off. All other parameters were maintained as in the default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Correspondence between evolution and development has been discussed for more than two centuries. Recent work reveals that phylogeny-ontogeny correlations are indeed present in developmental transcriptomes of eukaryotic clades with complex multicellularity. Nevertheless, it has been largely ignored that the pervasive presence of phylogeny-ontogeny correlations is a hallmark of development in eukaryotes. This perspective opens a possibility to look for similar parallelisms in biological settings where developmental logic and multicellular complexity are more obscure. For instance, it has been increasingly recognized that multicellular behavior underlies biofilm formation in bacteria. However, it remains unclear whether bacterial biofilm growth shares some basic principles with development in complex eukaryotes. Here we show that the ontogeny of growing Bacillus subtilis biofilms recapitulates phylogeny at the expression level. Using time-resolved transcriptome and proteome profiles, we found that biofilm ontogeny correlates with the evolutionary measures, in a way that evolutionary younger and more diverged genes were increasingly expressed toward later timepoints of biofilm growth. Molecular and morphological signatures also revealed that biofilm growth is highly regulated and organized into discrete ontogenetic stages, analogous to those of eukaryotic embryos. Together, this suggests that biofilm formation in Bacillus is a bona fide developmental process comparable to organismal development in animals, plants, and fungi. Given that most cells on Earth reside in the form of biofilms and that biofilms represent the oldest known fossils, we anticipate that the widely adopted vision of the first life as a single-cell and free-living organism needs rethinking.

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Phylostratigraphy, Biofilm

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička cesta 54, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia.

### Submitter
Vaishnavi Ravikumar

### Lab Head
Dr Tomislav Domazet-Lošo
Laboratory of Evolutionary Genetics, Ruđer Bošković Institute, Bijenička cesta 54, HR-10000 Zagreb, Croatia.


