### Accession
PXD028027

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis to Reveal Key Maize Low Nitrogen Responsive Genes

### Description
Two maize hybrid cultivars contrasting in low nitrogen tolerance (low nitrogen-tolerant XY335 and low nitrogen-sensitive HN178) were used in this study . The experiment was carried out at Xinji Experimental Station (43º31′N, 124º48′E) of Hebei Agricultural University. The top 0-20 cm of the soil used contained organic matter 17.79 g·kg-1, total nitrogen 1.21 g·kg-1, alkali hydrolyzed nitrogen 64.9 mg.kg-1, available phosphorus 23.8 mg·kg-1, and available potassium 120.6 mg·kg-1. The experiment adopted a split plot design, with varieties as the main plot and nitrogen fertilizer as the sub-plot. There were 2 varieties for testing: XY335 and HN138. Two levels of nitrogen supply: N0 (0 kg N ha-1) and N240 (240 kg N ha-1), replicated three times. Each plot had 6 rows, with the row length measuring 20 m, and the row spacing of 60 cm, giving the plot area of 72 m2. The planting density was 67,500 plants ha-1. Nitrogen fertilizer used was urea (46% N), and 50% was applied before sowing and at the flared stage, respectively. During the grain filling stage, leaf tissues of three biological replicates were collected from control and treatment conditions, and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen for subsequent proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Appropriate leaf samples were ground with liquid nitrogen, tert-butyl peroxypivalate (BPP) added in the ratio of 1:3, and incubated for 10 min at 4°C. The equal volume of tris-saturated phenol was added and incubated for 10 min at 4°C. The solution was centrifuged at 12000 g for 20 min at 4℃, and supernatant was collected. The equal volume of BPP was added and incubated for 10 min at 4°C. The solution was centrifuged at 12000 g for 20 min at 4℃ and the phenol phase was collected. Five volume of pre-cooled 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol was added and precipitated protein at -20°C overnight. The solution was centrifuged at 12000 g for 20 min at 4℃ and the supernatant was discarded. Then, the precipitate was washed twice with 90% pre-cooled acetone. The supernatant was discarded by centrifugation and precipitate air dried. The precipitate was re-suspended with lysis buffer (1% SDS, 8 M urea, cocktail), then sonicated on ice for 2 min. The lysates were centrifuged for 20 min at 12000 g at 4℃, and supernatants were collected to test the concentration of protein in all samples.Protein digestion was performed according to the standard procedure and the resulting peptide mixture was labeled using the 10-plex TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo fisher, Art.No.90111). For 10-plex labeling, each TMT reagent was dissolved in 50 µL acetonitrile fully. Then, the reagent was added to corresponding peptide mixture, respectively and allowed to react at room temperature for 2 h. Hydroxylamine was added and allowed to react for 15 min at room temperature. Finally all the mixtures were combined together and vacuum dried.Samples were fractionated using high pH reverse phase separation to increase proteomic depth. Experiments were performed on a Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer that was coupled with 9RKFSG2_NCS-3500RS (Thermo, USA). Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1800) were acquired with a mass resolution of 70K, followed by twenty sequential high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scans with a resolution of 35K.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using ProteinDiscovererTM Software 2.2 against maize database (131,585s) and the decoy database as the following parameters. The highest score for a given peptide mass (best match to that predicted in the database) was used to identify parent proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen is one of the essential nutrients for plant growth and development. However, large amounts of nitrogen fertilizer not only increase the production costs, but also lead to serious environmental problems. Therefore, it is particularly important to reduce the application of nitrogen fertilizer and develop maize varieties with low nitrogen tolerance. The aim of this study was to determine the phenotypic and proteomic alterations of maize affected by nitrogen deficiency and to elucidate the molecular and physiological mechanisms underpinning maize tolerance to low nitrogen. Two maize hybrids with contrasting low nitrogen tolerance were used as the experimental materials. Maize plants were grown under different nitrogen application levels (N0 and N240) and proteomic analysis performed to analyze leaf differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) under different nitrogen conditions. The results showed that under the nitrogen deficiency condition, the nitrogen content, leaf dry weight, leaf area, and leaf area index of XY335 decreased by 15.58%, 8.83%, 3.44%, and 3.44%, respectively. However, in the variety HN138, the same parameters decreased by 56.94%, 11.97%, 8.79%, and 8.79%, respectively. Through proteomic analysis, we found that the low nitrogen tolerance variety responded to low nitrogen stress through lignin biosynthesis, ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis, and stress defense proteins. Transmembrane transporters were differentially expressed in both hybrids after low nitrogen treatment, suggesting that this was a common response to low nitrogen stress. Using bioinformatics analysis, we selected the key candidate gene (<i>ZmTGA</i>) that was assumed to respond to low nitrogen stress, and its function was characterized by maize mutants. The results showed that when compared with normal nitrogen treatment, the root length of the mutants under low nitrogen treatment increased by 10.1%, while that of the wild-type increased by 14.8%; the root surface area of the wild type under low nitrogen treatment increased by 9.6%, while that of the mutants decreased by 5.2%; the root surface area of the wild type was higher than that of the mutant at both nitrogen levels; and the activities of glutathione and guaiacol peroxidase enzymes in the mutant were lower than those in the wild-type under low nitrogen treatment. In summary, the mutant was less adaptable to a low nitrogen environment than the wild type. Our results provide maize genetic resources and a new direction for a further understanding of maize response to low nitrogen stress.

### Keywords
Low nitrogen, Leaf, Maize

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding, China
Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding City, Hebei Province, China

### Submitter
Jiao Li

### Lab Head
Dr Huijun Duan
College of Agronomy, Hebei Agricultural University, Baoding, China


