### Accession
PXD022250

### Title
Adaptive Laboratory Evolution of microbial co-cultures for improved metabolite secretion

### Description
Small microbial mutualistic communities consisting of lactic acid bateria and S. cerevisiae evolved together for increased vitamin secretion from the lactic acid bacteria. Proteomics analysis of the parental and evolved bacteria to identify differences that occured during the prolonged co-evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were lysed with RapidGest, incubated with Benzonase and cysteines reduced with dithiolthreitol. Proteins were percipitated with TCA and washed with acetone and digested with LysC. TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent was added, C18 HPLC system used for reverse phase fractionation and the fragments were seperated with UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC fitted with a trapping system and an analytical column. The outlet of the column was directly coupled to a QExactive plus. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer and MS spectra with mass range 375-1200 m/z were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data was processed using IsobarQuant and Mascot, searched against Uniprot Lactobacillus plantarum (UP000000432) proteome database, with fixed modifications into the search parameters for Carbamidomethyl and TMT10, Acetyl, Oxidation and TMT10 (variable modification). For the full scan a mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and for MS/MS spectra of 0.02 Da was set. At least 2 unique peptides were required for a protein identification. The false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01. Raw data was cleaned for batch effect with limma and normalised with vsn.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lactic acid bacteria, Ale, Co-evolution, Vitamins

### Affiliations
EMBL

### Submitter
Frank Stein

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Raosaheb Patil
EMBL


