### Accession
PXD023396

### Title
Secretome Analysis of Anoxybacillus caldiproteolyticus 1A02591

### Description
When Anoxybacillus caldiproteolyticus 1A02591 was cultured with casein, 12 proteases were identified in the secretome, in which metalloproteases (6/12), and serine proteases (4/12) accounted for the majority and a thermolysin-like protease of the M4 family was the most abundant, suggesting that strain 1A02591 mainly secreted a thermophilic metalloprotease.

### Sample Protocol
Strain 1A02591 was cultured at 55째C for 12 h in the casein medium (0.3% casein, 0.2% yeast extract and artificial seawater, pH 7.5). Then, the culture was centrifuged (10,000 rpm for 20 min at 4째C) and the supernatant was collected. Proteins in the supernatant was precipitated by 50 mL acetone solution containing 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.1% dithiothreitol overnight at -20째C. The precipitates were harvested by centrifugation for 20 min at 8,000 rpm and 4째C, washed sequentially by 80% acetone solution and 100% acetone solution, and then were dried. Subsequently, the sample was denatured by a denaturation buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, 2.75 mM EDTA, 6 M Guanadine-HCl), reduced by 1 M dithiothreitol, alkylated by 1 M iodoacetamide and digested by trypsin. Peptides in the sample were trapped and desalted on the enrichment column (ZipTip C18, Millipore) using 50% acetonitrile/H2O containing 0.1% trifluoroethanoicacid as the eluent. MS spectra of the sample were automatically recorded by the mass spectrometer Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Thermo Scientific proteome discoverer software version 1.4

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular proteases, Anoxybacillus caldiproteolyticus, Secretome, Deep-sea hydrothermal ecosystem

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong University, China
Shandong University

### Submitter
Junhui Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong University, China


