### Accession
PXD000570

### Title
Substrate specificity divergence of granzyme tryptases.

### Description
Elucidating the true physiological functions of granzymes has been challenging since the origin of the granzyme studied, the use of non-physiological granzyme concentrations and the interspecies use of granzymes, with extrapolation of all these data to orthologous granzymes has led to inconsistencies. This is highly relevant for granzymes A and K where a debate is ongoing concerning their involvement in either cytotoxic or inflammatory processes, or in both. In order to tackle such contradictions, detailed knowledge of the substrate repertoires and substrate specificities of granzymes as well as their cleavage efficiencies may add in unraveling the primary signaling pathways these granzymes are involved in. Therefore, a degradome analysis using N-terminal COFRADIC was performed to unravel the substrate repertoires and subsite determinants for the closely related homologous human tryptases. We furthermore also profiled the uncharacterized mouse granzyme K in a comparative analysis with its human ortholog. Despite the subtle differences observed in the primary specificity profiles of these granzymes, for each granzyme distinguishing substrate subsite features could be elucidated.

### Sample Protocol
The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 μm I. D. × 150 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A′ (0.05% formic acid) to 55% solvent B′ (0.05% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by a wash reaching 100% solvent B′. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the six most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60 000. The six most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts.

### Data Protocol
From the MS/MS data in each LC run, Mascot Generic Files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3.2.0, Matrix Science). While these peak lists were generated, grouping of spectra was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 s, and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5 was used where possible. Grouping was done with 0.005 Da precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no deisotoping and the relative signal-to-noise limit was set at 2. These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.3, Matrix Science). Spectra were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (version 2012_10 of the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database containing 20 233 human sequence entries). Variable modifications were set to pyro-glutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine and acetylation or trideutero-acetylation of the N-terminus. Fixed modifications were set as trideutero-acetylation of lysine, carbamidomethylated cysteine, and methionine oxidation (to its sulfoxide derivative). Mass tolerance on precursor ion was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ion to 0.5 Da. The protease setting semi-ArgC/P (i.e., arginine-proline cleavage was allowed) was used, allowing for one missed cleavage. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. The false discovery rate values obtained by searching a reverse decoy database were found to lie between 0.8% and 0.95%.(25) All quantifications [SILAC (12C6 l-arginine versus 13C6 l-arginine, 12C6 l-arginine versus 13C615N4 l-arginine and 13C6 l-arginine versus 13C615N4 l-arginine)] were carried out using the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Toolbox (version 2.3.2). The quantification method details were as follows: constrain search: yes; protein ratio type: average; report detail: yes; minimum peptides: 1; protocol: precursor; allow mass time match: yes; allow elution shift: no; all charge states: yes; fixed modifications: mass values. The software tries to fit an ideal isotopic distribution on the experimental data based on the peptide average amino acid composition. This is followed by extraction of the XIC signal of all peptide components (light, medium and heavy) from the raw data, and ratios are calculated by comparing the XIC peak areas of all matched light versus medium, light versus heavy, and medium versus heavy peptides (integration method “trapezium”, integration source “survey”). To calculate this ratio value, a least-squares fit to the component intensities from the different scans in the XIC peak was created. MS scans used for this ratio calculation are situated in the elution peak of the precursor determined by the Distiller software (XIC threshold 0.3, XIC smooth 1, Max XIC width 250). To validate the calculated ratio, the standard error on the least-square fit has to be below 0.16, and correlation coefficient of the isotopic envelope should be above 0.97. The calculated ratios that were originally reported as FALSE were all verified by visual inspection of all highest scoring MS spectra. All protein N-termini were corrected according to the deviation of a 1:1:1 ratio of protein-N-termini in both analyses (observed overall protein N-termini ratios in the hGrA/hGrK analysis and hGrK/mGrK analysis were 1:0.87:0.86 and 1:0.84:0.88 respectively). All data management was done in ms-lims.(26)

### Publication Abstract
The physiological roles of the granzymes A and K have been debated, especially concerning their involvement in cytotoxic and inflammatory processes. By performing N-terminal COFRADIC assisted N-terminomics on the homologous human granzymes A and K, we here provide detailed data on their substrate repertoires, their specificities, and differences in efficiency by which they cleave their substrates, all of which may aid in elucidating their key substrates. In addition, the so far uncharacterized mouse granzyme K was profiled alongside its human orthologue. While the global primary specificity profiles of these granzymes appear quite similar as they revealed only subtle differences and pointed to substrate occupancies in the P1, P1', and P2' position as the main determinants for substrate recognition, differential analyses unveiled distinguishing substrate subsite features, some of which were confirmed by the more selective cleavage of specifically designed probes.

### Keywords
Protease, Proteomics, Granzyme, Specificity profile, N-terminal cofradic

### Affiliations
Ghent University, VIB
Biochemistry

### Submitter
Pieter-Jan De Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
Ghent University, VIB


