### Accession
PXD028374

### Title
Ets-2 propagates IL-6 trans-signaling mediated osteoclast-like changes in human rheumatoid arthritis synovial fibroblast

### Description
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) plays an important role in progressive bone loss in rheumatoid arthritis (RA). However, the molecular mechanisms through which IL-6 propels RA synovial fibroblasts (RASFs) to contribute to bone loss are not fully understood. In the present study, we investigated the effects of IL-6 and IL-6 receptor (IL-6/IL-6R induced trans-signaling in human RASFs.  Treatment of human RASFs with IL-6 and IL-6 receptor (IL-6/IL-6R, 100 ng/ml each) alone or in combination with M-CSF (2 ng/ml) and RANKL (10 ng/ml) for 12 days resulted in the phenotypic changes to osteoclast-like features as determined by increase in TRAP staining and enhanced pit formation by ~3-fold in bone resorption assay in vitro. IL-6/IL-6R induced a dose-dependent increase in the expression of transcription factor Ets2 and enhanced its nuclear translocation in human RASFs. Interestingly, the untargeted proteomics analysis of the conditioned media from IL6/IL6R activated RASFs using Mass-Spectrometry (MS) technique and Trans-Proteomic Pipeline tool showed the production of 113 analytes unique to IL-6/IL-6R stimulation. Further analysis of the proteomics data using STRING database for pathway analysis showed the impact of IL-6/IL-6R on immunometabolic reprogramming of human RASFs towards osteoclast-like phenotype, which was partly mediated through Ets2. These preliminary studies identified a novel role of IL-6/IL-6R-mediated trans signaling in the metabolic reprogramming in RASFs that could potentially be targeted by inhibiting Ets2 to limit their role in bone resorption in RA.

### Sample Protocol
For chronic exposure of cytokines ranging 12 days of exposure, 2ng/ml M-CSF+10ng/ml RANKL were used with or without a combination of 100ng/ml IL6 along with 100ng/ml IL6Rα. Supernatant were harvested and concentrated using 3KD cutoff amicon filters for further experiments. Two μl of the sample (~100 ng/μl protein) was injected into a 100 μm ID Integrafrit trap (New Objective) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 5 µm material to a bed length of 2.5 cm at a flow rate of 2 µL/min. After loading and desalting for 10 min with 0.1% formic acid plus 2% acetonitrile, the trap was brought in-line with a pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed with 35 cm of Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 5 µm. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient from 5-30% solvent B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) in 90 min at a flow rate of 300 L/min. The column temperature was maintained at a constant 50 °C during all experiments. Peptides were detected using the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. Survey scans of peptide precursors were performed in the Orbitrap mass analyzer from 375 to 1575 m/z at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 7 x e5 ion count target a maximum injection time of 50 ms. The instrument was set to run in full speed mode with a 3-sec cycle for the survey and the MS/MS scans. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was applied with a normalized collision energy of 30%. Resulting fragments were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at 30 K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1xe4 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s with a 20 ppm mass tolerance around the precursor and its isotopes.   Sample IDs are defined below:  20190429_All_2_DDA_09: 100 ng/ml IL6 +100ng/ml IL6Rα+2 ng/ml MCSF +10 ng/ml RANKL 20190429_ILGR_DDA_08: 100 ng/ml IL6 +100 ng/ml IL6Rα 20190429_NS_DDA_10: No stimulation (control) 20190429_MR_DDA_11: 2 ng/ml MCSF +10 ng/ml RANKL

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed converted to mzXML files for database searching and further analyzed by Trans-Proteomic Pipeline using PeptideProphet (Comet), iProphet, Protein Prophet, and StPeter. A target protein database was created by using the UniProt human database. All searches were configured to use a variable modification of methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The results were filtered to a less than 1% protein false discovery rate (FDR) with the requirement for a minimum of one signature peptide per reported protein. The parameters used include: i) minimum peptide length of 6 amino acid, ii) maximum FDR of 1% and protein identification probability more than 0.85, iii) minimum unique peptides per protein of 1, and modifications to cysteine or methionine were not considered distinct from the unmodified peptides and, iv) tryptic digestion with  maximum of two miscleavages allowed. STRING was used for pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interleukin 6, Synovial fibroblast, Rheumatoid arthritis, Osteoclast

### Affiliations
Washington State University

### Submitter
Anil Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Anil Kumar Singh
Washington State University


