### Accession
PXD022755

### Title
SCF-Fbxo42 promotes synaptonemal complex assembly by downregulating PP2A-B56

### Description
Meiosis creates genetic diversity by recombination and segregation of chromosomes.  The synaptonemal complex assembles during meiotic prophase I and assists faithful exchanges between homologous chromosomes, but how its assembly/disassembly is regulated remains to be understood.  Here we report how two major post-translational modifications, phosphorylation and ubiquitination, co-operate to promote synaptonemal complex assembly.  We found that the ubiquitin ligase complex SCF is important for assembly and maintenance of the synaptonemal complex in Drosophila female meiosis.  This function of SCF is mediated by two substrate-recognising F-box proteins, Slmb/βTrcp and Fbxo42.  SCF-Fbxo42 downregulates the phosphatase subunit PP2A-B56, which is important for synaptonemal complex assembly and maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila ovaries expressing GFP/GFP-SkpA/GFP-CG6758 were homogenised, and GFP immunoprecipitated withh GFP-MA trap beads (Chromotek). Beads were boiled in 2%SDS, reduced, alkylated, acetone precipitated, digested with trypsin, and desalted over C18. LCMS data was acquired by DDA on an Orbitrap Elite over a 2hr gradient.

### Data Protocol
LCMS data was processed with MaxQuant 1.6.2.6, with match-between-runs enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Meiosis creates genetic diversity by recombination and segregation of chromosomes. The synaptonemal complex assembles during meiotic prophase I and assists faithful exchanges between homologous chromosomes, but how its assembly/disassembly is regulated remains to be understood. Here, we report how two major posttranslational modifications, phosphorylation and ubiquitination, cooperate to promote synaptonemal complex assembly. We found that the ubiquitin ligase complex SCF is important for assembly and maintenance of the synaptonemal complex in Drosophila female meiosis. This function of SCF is mediated by two substrate-recognizing F-box proteins, Slmb/&#x3b2;Trcp and Fbxo42. SCF-Fbxo42 down-regulates the phosphatase subunit PP2A-B56, which is important for synaptonemal complex assembly and maintenance.

### Keywords
Drosophila

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Van Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr Tony Ly
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh


