### Accession
PXD019735

### Title
Plastoglobules BN-PAGE experiment (Arabidopsis PGs under unstress and high light conditions)

### Description
Proteome comparison of isolated plastoglobules (PGs) from Arabidopsis thaliana (Col-0 ecotype) under unstress (UNS) and high light (HL) stress conditions. For both conditions, PGs were isolated from three independent set of plants each (i.e. three for UNS and three for HL). PGs were isolated from the plants when they were 4 weeks old under long day photoperiod (16 hours of light and 8 darkness). The light stress was applied to the designated set of plants 5 days prior the completion of the 4 weeks by shifting the light intensity from 120 uE to 500 E. The PGs were solubilized with 1.1 % n-Dodecyl--D-Maltoside and separated in a Blue-Native gel. After the electrophoretic separation, gel lanes were cut and further divided into 10 independent slices corresponding to different molecular weights. These gel slices were subjeted to in-gel digestion with trypsin and the resulting peptides labeled with TMT reagents. Labeled peptides were mixed 1:1 and purified by solid phase extraction using c18 StageTips. Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 20 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 45000 resolution. Additionally, PG samples that were not separated in a Blue-native gel were trypsin digested and subjected for mass-spectrometry analysis as previously described.

### Sample Protocol
Plastoglobule isolation The method used in this study was based on the previously described in Espinoza-Corral et al. (2019). In brief, a number of 240 plants were used for each biological replicate grown for four weeks under normal or high light conditions. Plants rosettes were excised and grinded with Isolation buffer (13 mM Tris-HCl, 20 mM MOPS pH 7.6, 3 mM MgCl2, 0.1 % [w/v] BSA, 5 mM ascorbic acid, 5 mM reduced cysteine, 330 mM sorbit and a phosphatases inhibitors cocktail) followed by gauze filtration. Chloroplasts were pelleted with 5 minutes centrifugation at 1.500 g and 4ºC and washed twice with washing buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 5 mM ascorbic acid, 5 mM reduced cysteine, 330 mM sorbit and a phosphatases inhibitors cocktail). Washed chloroplasts were resuspended in osmotic stress buffer (10 mM Tricine pH 7.9, 1 mM EDTA, 0.6 M sucrose and a cocktail of proteases and phosphatases inhibitors) and incubated in darkness for 30 min in ice. The broken chloroplasts were centrifuged at 100.000 g for 1 hour and 4ºC to separate the stroma from membranes, which were then resuspended in 48 % (w/v) sucrose in HE buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 2 mM EDTA and a cocktail of proteases and phosphatases inhibitors) and sonicated with 4 pulses of 10 seconds and 20 % wattage. Sonicated chloroplast membranes were overlaid with 5 % (w/v) sucrose in HE buffer and centrifuged at 150.000 g for 1.5 hours and 4ºC. Plastoglobules were collected from the surface of the sucrose gradient where they formed a yellowish band.  Blue native gels Thylakoid membranes as wells as plastoglobules were solubilized in ACA buffer (50 mM Bis-Tris pH 7.0 and 750 mM aminocapronic acid) with n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (final concentration 1.1 % [w/v]). Blue native gel electrophoresis was performed as described by  Wittig et al. (2006). For better visualization, BN-gels were distained with Coomassie distaining solution and silver stained as described by Blum et al. (1987).  Sample preparation and in-Gel digestion BN-gels of separated plastoglobules proteins from HL and UNS conditions were sliced into 10 equal sized portions and subjected to in-gel digestion according to Shevchenko et al. (1996) with modifications. Briefly, gel bands were dehydrated using 100 % acetonitrile and incubated with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH~8, at 56 ºC for 45 minutes, dehydrated again and incubated in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 20 minutes.  Gel bands were then washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated again.  Sequencing grade modified trypsin was prepared to 0.01 ug/uL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and ~ 100uL of this was added to each gel band so that the gel was completely submerged.  Bands were then incubated at 37 ºC overnight.  Peptides were extracted from the gel by water bath sonication in a solution of 60 % Acetonitrile (ACN) and 1 % Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and vacuum dried. Peptide samples were then re-suspended in 100uL of 100mM TEAB and labeled with TMT reagents from Thermo Scientific (www.thermo.com) according to manufacturers’ instructions. Labeled peptides were mixed 1:1 and purified by solid phase extraction using c18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and eluted peptides dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20 ºC.  Purified peptides were re-suspended in 2 % acetonitrile and 0.1 %TFA.  LC/MS/MS Proteomics Sample injection was automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~ 5 minutes with buffer A (99.9 % water and 0.1 % formic acid). Bound peptides were then eluted over 45 minutes onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075 mm x 500 mm resolving column with a gradient of 5 % to 10 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid and 19.9 % water) in 5 minutes, 10 % to 40 % buffer B in 24 minutes, ramping to 90 % buffer B at 25min and held at 90% buffer B for the duration of the run at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50 oC using and integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 20 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 45000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data Analysis All LC-MS/MS raw files were processed with the MaxQuant software program, version 1.6.11.0 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Peak lists were searched with the embedded Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011) against a concatenated forward and reverse database comprising the ARAPORT11 full peptide dataset (48359 unique protein entries downloaded from ‘www.arabidopsis.org’) plus the common contaminant list appended by MaxQuant. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Digestion mode was Trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. MS/MS tolerance of the first search was 20 ppm, and main search was 4.5 ppm, with individualized peptide mass tolerance selected. False discovery rate (FDR) at peptide spectrum match and protein levels was set as 0.01. The BN-PAGE-MS/MS experiment and the 2D-PAGE experiment were processed in independent MaxQuant analyses. The BN-PAGE experiment used the “11plex TMT” function for relative quantification of proteins. The “primary gene model” for each protein group was identified as that with the highest number of Unique + Razor Peptide counts when compiled across all experiments. In the case of a tie, the lowest gene model number was selected, regardless of whether the protein group contained gene models from one or more gene loci. Filtering of resulting protein groups was performed manually at a fixed FDR of 0% by accepting protein IDs with the highest MaxQuant Scores until the first decoy protein ID was reached.

### Publication Abstract
Plants require rapid responses to adapt to environmental stresses. This includes dramatic changes in the size and number of plastoglobule lipid droplets within chloroplasts. Although the morphological changes of plastoglobules are well documented, little is known about the corresponding molecular changes. To address this gap, we have compared the quantitative proteome, oligomeric state, prenyl-lipid content and kinase activities of Arabidopsis thaliana plastoglobules under unstressed and 5-day light-stressed conditions. Our results show a specific recruitment of proteins related to leaf senescence and jasmonic acid biosynthesis under light stress, and identify nearly half of the plastoglobule proteins in high native molecular weight masses. Additionally, a specific increase in plastoglobule carotenoid abundance under the light stress was consistent with enhanced thylakoid disassembly and leaf senescence, supporting a specific role for plastoglobules in senescence and thylakoid remodeling as an intermediate storage site for photosynthetic pigments. In vitro kinase assays of isolated plastoglobules demonstrated kinase activity towards multiple target proteins, which was more pronounced in the plastoglobules of unstressed than light-stressed leaf tissue, and which was diminished in plastoglobules of the abc1k1/abc1k3 double-mutant. These results strongly suggest that plastoglobule-localized ABC1 kinases hold endogenous kinase activity, as these were the only known or putative kinases identified in the isolated plastoglobules by deep bottom-up proteomics. Collectively, our study reveals targeted changes to the protein and prenyl-lipid composition of plastoglobules under light stress that present strategies by which plastoglobules appear to facilitate stress adaptation within chloroplasts.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Plastoglobules, Light stress, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Plant & Soil Science Building 1066 Bogue St, Rm A494E East Lansing, MI 48824 Michigan State University, United States
MSU

### Submitter
Roberto Espinoza Corral

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Lundquist
Plant & Soil Science Building 1066 Bogue St, Rm A494E East Lansing, MI 48824 Michigan State University, United States


