### Accession
PXD026343

### Title
Tensin3 interaction with talin drives formation of fibronectin-associated fibrillar adhesions

### Description
The formation of healthy tissue involves continuous remodelling of the extracellular matrix (ECM).  Whilst it is known that this requires integrin-associated cell-ECM adhesion sites (CMAs) and actomyosin-mediated forces, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here we examine how tensin3 contributes to formation of fibrillar adhesions (FBs) and fibronectin fibrillogenesis. Using BioID mass spectrometry and a mitochondrial targeting assay, we establish that tensin3 associates with the mechanosensors talin and vinculin. We show that the talin R11 rod domain binds directly to a helical motif within the central intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of tensin3, whilst vinculin binds indirectly to tensin3 via talin. Using CRISPR knock-out cells in combination with defined tensin3 mutations, we show (i) that tensin3 is critical for formation of alpha5 beta1-integrin FBs and for fibronectin fibrillogenesis, and (ii) the talin/tensin3 interaction drives this process, with vinculin acting to potentiate it.

### Sample Protocol
Eluted proteins were run on a 10 % SDS-PAGE gel (1mm) and stained with colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue.The protein bands were excised using a gel spot cutter and gel pieces from each band were placed into a well of a 96-well perforated plate. In brief, the gel pieces were washed by incubation in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich) for 5 minutes, followed by two rounds of 10-minute-dehydration with acetonitrile (Merck). The proteins in the gel pieces were then reduced by incubation of the gel pieces in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma Aldrich) for 30 minutes at 56oC before another two rounds of dehydration.  Alkylation was performed with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma Aldrich) for 20 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The dehydration step was repeated 4 times prior to overnight trypsin (Promega) digestion at 37oC. The digested peptides were collected by centrifuging the perforated plate with a collection plate placed underneath. More peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by further subjecting the gel pieces to a hydration-dehydration step, consisting of hydration with 5% formic acid (Pierce) for 10 minutes, peptide collection, dehydration with acetonitrile for 10 minutes and peptide collection. This hydration-dehydration step is repeated to maximize peptide extraction. The extracted peptides were then vacuum-dried and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid prior to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.1 using default settings. Database searches of MS data used Uniprot human fasta (2020 Jan release, 96817 proteins) with tryptic specificity allowing maximum two missed cleavages, two labelled amino acids, and an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, and N-acetylation and oxidized methionine were searched as variable modifications. Maximum false discovery rates were set to 0.01 for both protein and peptide. Proteins were considered identified when supported by at least one unique peptide with a minimum length of seven amino acids.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of healthy tissue involves continuous remodeling of the extracellular matrix (ECM). Whilst it is known that this requires integrin-associated cell-ECM adhesion sites (CMAs) and actomyosin-mediated forces, the underlying mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we examine how tensin3 contributes to the formation of fibrillar adhesions (FBs) and fibronectin fibrillogenesis. Using BioID mass spectrometry and a mitochondrial targeting assay, we establish that tensin3 associates with the mechanosensors such as talin and vinculin. We show that the talin R11 rod domain binds directly to a helical motif within the central intrinsically disordered region (IDR) of tensin3, whilst vinculin binds indirectly to tensin3 via talin. Using CRISPR knock-out cells in combination with defined tensin3 mutations, we show (i) that tensin3 is critical for the formation of &#x3b1;5&#x3b2;1-integrin FBs and for fibronectin fibrillogenesis, and (ii) the talin/tensin3 interaction drives this process, with vinculin acting to potentiate it.

### Keywords
Tensin, Vinculin, Talin, Extracellular matrix, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, TBP Lab
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology (ASTAR)

### Submitter
Suat Peng Neo

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, TBP Lab


