### Accession
PXD024133

### Title
CRISPRi meets metabolomics: a platform for rapid functional annotation of compound libraries

### Description
Molecular profiling of small-molecules offers invaluable insights on compound functionality and allows for hypothesis generation of targets. However, current profiling methods are either limited in the number of measurable parameters or throughput. Here, we developed a multiplexed, unbiased framework that by linking genetic to drug-induced changes in nearly a thousand metabolites allows for high-throughput functional annotation of compound libraries in Escherichia Coli. First, we generated a reference map of metabolic changes from (CRISPR) interference with 352 genes in all major essential biological processes. Next, based on the comparison of essential gene knockdown metabolic profiles with 1342 drug-induced metabolic changes we demonstrated the ability to make de novo predictions of compound functionality and revealed drugs interfering with unconventional antibacterial targets. The same framework that combines dynamic gene silencing with metabolomics we implemented in E. coli can be adapted and applied as a general strategy for comprehensive high-throughput analysis of compound functionality, from bacteria to human cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples for limited proteolysis (LiP) analysis were collected from 200ml cell culture of a BW25113 E. coli strain grown in M9 glucose medium at exponential phase (OD600 of 1). For the LiP, cell pellets were resuspended in 200 µl of cold lysis buffer (100 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, pH 7.5), lysed in a FastPrep-24 5G instrument in presence of acid-washed glass beads. After centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C, the supernatants were collected and 50ug of protein extracts processed to LiP. For each sample, 1ul of the drug of interest (or DMSO used as mock treatment) was incubated with the 50 ul of protein extract for exactly 5 min at 25°C. Then 5ul containing 0.5ug of Proteinase K from Tritirachium album  was added to the LiP samples and incubated for 5 minutes at 25°C. Samples were then denatured by heating inactivation for 5 minutes at 99°C in a thermocycler followed by 5 minutes cooling on ice and addition of 56ul of 10% sodium deoxycholate. The samples were then reduced with 5 mM TCEP, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide, diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach a final concentration of 1% sodium deoxycholate and finally digested overnight with 0.5 ug LysC and 0.5 ug trypsin. The digests were acidified, passed through 0.2um PVDF filter plates, desalted on a 96-well MicroSpin plate loaded with 300Å C18 silica material and dried in a speedvac. The samples were resolubilized in 0.1 % formic acid, and transferred to MS vials for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LiP/proteomic data acquisition and analysis: LC-MSMS data were acquired either on a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 or on a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion sources and coupled to EASY-nLC 1200 nano HPLC systems. The peptides were separated on a 75-µm-diameter, 40cm-long new Objective emitter packed with 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur C18- AQ resin (Dr. Maisch) and eluted at 300nl/min with a linear gradient of 5-to-35% Buffer A for 120min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The data were acquired in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode using 41 variable windows with the following instrument settings: resolution of the Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120’000 for MS1 and 30’000 for and MS2 for the Eclipse and the Exploris; the AGC target was set to 200% in MS1, and 400% in MS2; maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for MS1 and 54 ms for MS2 (resp 264 and 66 for the Exploris); the mass range monitored in MS1 was 350-1400 m/z and in MS2 150-2000 m/z; MS2 acquisition was performed with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The raw files were searched for both dataset separately with Spectronaut 14 against a SwissProt-only e coli database (downloaded on 22.04.2020, containing 4389 entries) using the directDIA mode with the defaults parameters except the following ones: the peptide digest type was set to "semi-specific”; the identification machine learning was set to “across experiment”; the quantification was performed using “by precursor” as minor grouping; the differential abundance grouping during the post analysis was set to “minor group” and the “use all MS-Level quantities” was unselected to obtain quantification using the fragment levels only. The peptide precursor intensities reports were exported from Spectronaut 14 and further processed in R for data filtering, normalization, and statistical analysis for significant differential group testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Metabolomics, Escherichia coli, Proteomics, Limited proteolysis, Antibacterial drugs

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Mattia Zampieri
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


