### Accession
PXD009626

### Title
Synechocystis sp. proteome on differnt light conditions

### Description
Cyanobacteria are an integral part of the Earth’s biogeochemical cycles and a promising resource for the synthesis of renewable bioproducts from atmospheric CO2. Sustainable industrial applications, however, are still scarce and the true limits of phototrophic production remain unknown. One of the limitations of further progress is our insufficient understanding of the quantitative changes in photoautotrophic metabolism that occur during growth in dynamic environments. Uncovering principles of allocation of the key metabolites or proteins as a response to changing environment can provide significant advances in our understanding of phototrophic production limits. However, resolving such complex question requires multidisciplinary approach combining highly-controlled cyanobacteria cultivation coupled to quantitative analyses of specific cellular components. The following datase represents proteomic analysis of the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 that was cultivated in the well controlled environment of laboratory-scale photobioreactors in the quasi-continuous regime that allowed for maintaining the cells in the exponential growth phase. The sampels were taken under light-limited (25 - 220 µmol(photons) m-2 s-1), optimal (440 µmol(photons) m-2 s-1) and photoinhibited growth (1100 µmol(photons) m-2 s-1). Each culture was sampled in five biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Cyanobacterium samples were lysed, shortly separated in a gel, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were separated over 2 h by liquid chromatography (Ultimate 3000) and analysed using a Q Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer in positive data dependent mode (top 10 method).

### Data Protocol
Protein and peptide identification was carried out wiht MaxQuant. UP000001425 Synechocystis sp. strain PCC 6803 from UniProtKB was used as database. Carbamidomethylation at cysteines was selected as fixed and oxidation at methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. Match between runs was enabled as well as label-free quantification and iBAQ quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Phototrophic microorganisms are promising resources for green biotechnology. Compared to heterotrophic microorganisms, however, the cellular economy of phototrophic growth is still insufficiently understood. We provide a quantitative analysis of light-limited, light-saturated, and light-inhibited growth of the cyanobacterium <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 using a reproducible cultivation setup. We report key physiological parameters, including growth rate, cell size, and photosynthetic activity over a wide range of light intensities. Intracellular proteins were quantified to monitor proteome allocation as a function of growth rate. Among other physiological acclimations, we identify an upregulation of the translational machinery and downregulation of light harvesting components with increasing light intensity and growth rate. The resulting growth laws are discussed in the context of a coarse-grained model of phototrophic growth and available data obtained by a comprehensive literature search. Our insights into quantitative aspects of cyanobacterial acclimations to different growth rates have implications to understand and optimize photosynthetic productivity.

### Keywords
Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Photobioreactor, Cyanobacteria, Photorophic production, Lc-ms/ms, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Heinrich Heine Universität Düsseldorf
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf

### Submitter
Gereon Poschmann

### Lab Head
Dr Gereon Poschmann
Molecular Proteomics Laboratory (MPL) Biologisch-Medizinisches Forschungszentrum (BMFZ) Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf Universitätsstraße 1 40225 Düsseldorf


