### Accession
PXD007833

### Title
Candida albicans proyeomics_Planktonic DMSO control

### Description
LC-MS/MS approach was utilized to identify qualitative changes in protein expressed by planktonic and biofilm cells of C. albicans.

### Sample Protocol
The planktonic (cells dispersed from biofilm) and biofilm cells were stained with Trypan blue (Sigma, USA) at 1:1 ratio and counted using a haemacytometer. Approximately 2.7x108 (planktonic) and 1.7 x109 (biofilm) were used for extraction. Protein extraction was performed using the PROTEOSPIN detergent-free total protein isolation kit (Norgen, Canada). Briefly, the harvested cells were resuspended in 50µl lysis solution (provided in the kit), vortexed vigorously for 2 mins and centrifuged at 14, 000 x g for 2 mins. The samples were filtered through a column provided and protein eluted was treated with 10mM dithiothreitol (DTT; GE healthcare, UK) at 37 oC for 1 h and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA; GE healthcare, UK, UK). The proteins in the sample were digested with 1:50 (trypsin: protein) of MS grade porcine trypsin (Calbiochem, Germany) at 37 oC overnight. The samples were desalted using a Pierce C-18 spin column (Thermo Scientific) or Zip-Tip C-18 Cartridge column and completely dried in a refrigerated CentriVap centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Labconco, USA) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
De novo sequencing was conducted with PEAKS Studio 7.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) with default parameters, except that: i) parent mass error tolerance was 1.5 Da, ii) fragment mass error tolerance was 0.5 Da, iii) trypsin as digestion enzyme, iv) carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da, C) as fixed modification, v) oxidation (+15.99 Da, M) as variable modification, vi) maximum variable post-translation modification allowed per peptide was three. Sequence homology search tool (SPIDER) of the PEAKS (v 7.5) software was used to detect all proteins in Candida biofilm and planktonic forms. The list of proteins derived from SPIDER software stand higher chances of detection. SPIDER will search the database for homologous peptides, and attempt to merge these into protein hits as well.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya

### Submitter
Mun Fai Loke

### Lab Head
Dr Loke Mun Fai
Medical Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya


