### Accession
PXD013061

### Title
Asparaginase and GSK3A inhibitor treatment of CCRF-CEM cells

### Description
Resistance to asparaginase, an antileukemic enzyme that depletes asparagine, is a common clinical problem.  Using a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen, we found a synthetic lethal interaction between Wnt pathway activation and asparaginase in acute leukemias resistant to this enzyme.  Wnt pathway activation induced asparaginase sensitivity in distinct treatment-resistant subtypes of acute leukemia, but not in normal hematopoietic progenitors.  Sensitization to asparaginase was mediated by Wnt-dependent stabilization of proteins (Wnt/STOP), which inhibits GSK3-dependent protein ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, a catabolic source of asparagine.  Inhibiting the alpha isoform of GSK3 phenocopied this effect, and pharmacologic GSK3 inhibition profoundly sensitized drug-resistant leukemias to asparaginase.  Our findings provide a molecular rationale for activation of Wnt/STOP signaling to improve the therapeutic index of asparaginase.  To gain further insights into mechanisms of cytotoxicity of this combination, we applied unbiased mass spectrometry proteomics to CCRF-CEM cells, a human T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line, treated with vehicle, asparaginase alone, the GSK3 inhibitor BRD0705 (which phenocopies Wnt/STOP pathway activation), or the combination of asparaginase and BRD0705.

### Sample Protocol
CCRF-CEM cells were seeded in 1 ml of complete growth medium, containing a final concentration of 10 U/L asparaginase (ASP), 100 nM BRD0705 (BRD), both ASP and BRD in combination (combo), or vehicle control, in a 24-well format.  To each well, the caspase inhibitor Z-VAD-FMK (Promega) was added at a final concentration of 20 uM. After 48 hours of treatment, protein lysates were made using RIPA buffer (Merck Millipore) supplemented with cOmplete protease inhibitor (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche). Laemmli-sample buffer and β-mercaptoethanol were mixed with 20 g of protein lysate, and run on a 4–12% bis-tris polyacrylamide gel.  Electrophoresis was run at 140V and stopped after 30 minutes. The gel was stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (ThermoFisher) under constant agitation at room temperature for 1 hour. Subsequently, each lane of the polyacrylamide gel was cut into three slices. Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces, subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion (Shevchenko et al., 1996), washed and dehydrated in acetonitrile, dried in a speed-vac, and re-hydrated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution with 12.5 ng/ul of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI).  After 45 min, the excess trypsin was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by overnight incubation at 37oC.  Peptides were extracted into a solution of 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid and dried in a speedvac.  Samples were then reconstituted, subjected to reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 HPLC column, and analyzed by electrospray ionization mass spectrometry using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (Eng et al., 1994).  All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to <2% peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Resistance to asparaginase, an antileukemic enzyme that depletes asparagine, is a common clinical problem. Using a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 screen, we found a synthetic lethal interaction between Wnt pathway activation and asparaginase in acute leukemias resistant to this enzyme. Wnt pathway activation induced asparaginase sensitivity in distinct treatment-resistant subtypes of acute leukemia, but not in normal hematopoietic progenitors. Sensitization to asparaginase was mediated by Wnt-dependent stabilization of proteins (Wnt/STOP), which inhibits glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3)-dependent protein ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation, a catabolic source of asparagine. Inhibiting the alpha isoform of GSK3 phenocopied this effect, and pharmacologic GSK3&#x3b1; inhibition profoundly sensitized drug-resistant leukemias to asparaginase. Our findings provide a molecular rationale for activation of Wnt/STOP signaling to improve the therapeutic index of asparaginase.

### Keywords
Gsk3, Leukemia, Asparaginase

### Affiliations
Division of Hematology/Oncology Boston Children's Hospital Boston, MA, USA
Boston Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Alejandro Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Alejandro Gutierrez
Division of Hematology/Oncology Boston Children's Hospital Boston, MA, USA


