### Accession
PXD026407

### Title
Loss of full-length hnRNP R isoform impairs DNA damage response in motoneurons by inhibiting Yb1 recruitment to chromatin

### Description
Neurons critically rely on the functions of RNA-binding proteins to maintain their polarity and resistance to neurotoxic stresses. HnRNP R has a diverse range of post-transcriptional regulatory functions and is important for neuronal development by regulating axon growth. Hnrnpr pre-mRNA undergoes alternative splicing to produce transcripts encoding two isoforms: a full-length protein and a shorter form lacking the N-terminal acidic domain. While the neuronal defects produced by total hnRNP R depletion have been investigated before, the individual functions of each hnRNP R isoforms are unknown. We generated a Hnrnpr knockout mouse (Hnrnprtm1a/tm1a) showing selective loss of the full-length hnRNP R isoform. Motoneurons cultured from Hnrnprtm1a/tm1a mice did not show any axonal growth defects. However, they show an accumulation of double-strand breaks and an impaired DNA damage response. Proteomic analysis of the hnRNP R interactome revealed the multifunctional protein Yb1 as a top interactor. Yb1 depleted motoneurons also exhibit defects in DNA damage repair. We show that Yb1 is recruited to chromatin upon DNA damage, a mechanism that is dependent on full-length hnRNP R. Our findings thus suggest a novel role of hnRNP R in maintaining genomic integrity and highlight the function of its Nterminal acidic domain in this context.

### Sample Protocol
Primary mouse motoneurons were cultured for 7 DIV with a seeding density of 1,000,000 cells. The cultures were washed three times with PBS and cells were lysed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, and complete protease inhibitor cocktail). Beads crosslinked to anti-hnRNP R antibody or control IgG were added to the lysates and incubated for 5 h at 4°C. Following immunoprecipitation, beads were divided into two fractions of equal volume. One fraction was washed three times with wash buffer without Benzonase and the other three times with Benzonase-containing wash buffer for 10 min each at RT. This was followed by one washing of both fractions with wash buffer without Benzonase. The washed beads were eluted with elution buffer containing 0.1M glycine, pH 2.5. The eluted fraction was processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 8 M urea (20 mM HEPES pH 8), reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min followed by alkylation of cysteines with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min. 1 μg of LysC was added for initial proteolysis of proteins for 3 h at RT. Urea was diluted by a factor of five with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and the mixture was digested overnight with 1 μg trypsin. Peptides were desalted via SDB-RPS StageTips

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (v 1.6.0.15)  and Andromeda search engine (30) were employed to process MS raw data searching against the mouse fasta database with canonical and isoform sequences downloaded from UniProt in March 2018 using standard settings and the ‘match between runs’ feature. Protein intensities were normalized with MaxLFQ (32) and filtered for common contaminants, decoy hits and proteins only identified by site. For data analysis and visualization Perseus was used. MaxLFQ intensities were log2 transformed. Proteins were filtered by data completeness, only proteins with at least 3 quantifications (of four samples) in at least one experimental condition were kept; other proteins were removed. Remaining missing values were imputed with a normal distribution (width=0.3; shift=1.8). Significantly enriched proteins in pairwise interactome comparisons were determined by t-test statistics applying a permutation-based (250 permutations) false discovery rate of 5% and S0 of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yb1, Dna damage, Motoneuron, Hnrnp r

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry


