### Accession
PXD000998

### Title
Gastric cancer_iTRAQ -  Integrating transcriptomics and proteomics to show that tanshinone IIA suppresses cell growth by blocking glucose metabolism in gastric cancer cells

### Description
Using quantitative proteomics-isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ), we characterize the mechanism of TIIA regulation in gastric cancer cell line AGS.

### Sample Protocol
AGS cells were treated with 5.3 μM (IC50) TIIA or 0.1% DMSO control medium for 48 hr after 24 hr of seeding (8 x 104 cells/well in 6-well plates). Cells were harvested with trypsin/EDTA and then total proteins were extracted by using lysis buffer (1% SDS (Bioman), 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 6.8), 10% glycerol), and 1X protease inhibitor (Bioman) and sonication. Then each protein sample underwent reduction, alkylation, and gel-assisted trypsin digestion overnight to yield peptides, which were later extracted from the gels. Equal amounts of peptides from control and TIIA-treated samples were labeled by different iTRAQ reagents (AB SCIEX; control samples labeled by 114 or 115; TIIA-treated samples labeled by 116 or 117) and incubated at room temperature for 1 hr. Peptides were combined together and dried with a centrifugal evaporator (CVE-2000; EYELA). After iTRAQ-labeling, samples were desalted and analyzed by using a LC-ESI-Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Waters SYNAPT® G2 HDMS; Waters Corp.). Samples were injected into a 180 mm × 2 cm capillary trap column and separated by a 75 mm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY UPLC™ 1.7 mm Ethylene Bridged Hybrid C18 column using a nanoACQUITY Ultra Performance LC™ System (Waters Corp.). The mass spectrometer (MS) was operated in electrospray ionization sensitivity mode, and calibrated with a synthetic human [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (1 pmol/ml; Sigma-Aldrich) delivered through a NanoLockSprayTM source, which was used for accurate mass measurements. Data was acquired in the data directed analysis (DDA) mode, which included one full MS scan (m/z 350-1700, 1 s) and three sequential MS/MS scans (m/z 100-1990. 1.5 s for each scan) on the three most intense ions present in the full scan mass spectrum.

### Data Protocol
The peak list resulting from MS/MS spectra was exported to mgf format by Mascot Distiller v2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) with charge state set to 2+, 3+, 4+, 5+, and other default parameters. Data files were merged and searched against the combined sequence database (containing 36,774 sequence entries) of the Swiss-Prot human database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tanshinone iia, Itraq, Gastric cancer

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
ntu

### Submitter
Li-Ling Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.


