### Accession
PXD019868

### Title
study of protein-protein interaction by LC-MSMS

### Description
DSSO as linker, study of protein-protein interaction by LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
DSSO was added to protein complex, linked for 1h, qunched by tris. Cysteine residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 56℃ for 30 min and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, dark. Sample were digested by Chymotrypsin at 37 ℃, pH 8, overnight, peptides desalting with C18 column, LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
raw data was analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 Xlink (ThermoScientific), under DSSO MS2-MS3 mode

### Publication Abstract
Using T-cell chimeric antigen receptors (CAR-T) to activate and redirect T cells to tumors expressing the cognate antigen represents a powerful approach in cancer therapy. However, normal tissues with low expression of tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) can be mistargeted, resulting in severe side effects. An approach using a collection of T cells expressing a diverse, 10<sup>6</sup>-member combinatorial cellular library of CARs, in which members can be specifically enriched based on avidity for cell membrane antigens, is reported. Using CD38 as the target antigen, an efficient and effective selection of CARs specifically recognizing CD38<sup>+</sup> tumor cells is demonstrated. These selected CAR-T's produce cytokines known to be associated with T cell activation in a CD38 expression-dependent manner. This avidity-based selection endows the engineered T cells with minimal off-tumor effects, while retaining robust antitumor efficacy both in vitro and in vivo. The described method may facilitate the application of CAR-T therapy to TAAs previously considered undruggable.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Xlink, Dsso

### Affiliations
Shanghaitech University

### Submitter
Wenzhang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wenzhang Chen
Shanghaitech University


