### Accession
PXD026302

### Title
Evolution of enhanced innate immune evasion by the SARS-CoV-2 B.1.1.7 UK variant

### Description
Here we use unbiased abundance proteomics and phosphoproteomics to assess global changes to host and viral proteins in Calu-3 cells at 10 and 24 hours post infection with either the B.1.1.7 UK variant or early-lineage SARS-CoV-2 viruses VIC and IC19.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and digestion Following the infection time course, cells in 6-well plates were washed quickly three times in ice cold 1x PBS. Next, cells were lysed in 250uL/well of 6M guanidine hydrochloride (Sigma) in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and scraped with a cell spatula for complete collection of the sample. Samples were then boiled for 5 minutes at 95C to inactivate proteases, phosphatases, and virus. Samples were frozen at -80C and shipped to UCSF on dry ice. Upon arrival, samples were thawed, an additional 250uL/sample of 6M guanidine hydrochloride buffer was added, and samples were sonicated for 3x for 10 seconds at 20% amplitude. The entire sample (approximately 600ug of total protein) was subsequently processed for reduction and alkylation using a 1:10 sample volume of tris-(2-carboxyethyl) (TCEP) (10mM final) and 2-chloroacetamide (4.4mM final) for 5 minutes at 45C with shaking. Prior to protein digestion, the 6M Guanidine Hydrochloride was diluted 1:6 with 100mM Tris-HCl pH8 to enable the activity of trypsin and LysC proteolytic enzymes, which were subsequently added at a 1:75 (wt/wt) enzyme-substrate ratio and placed in a 37C water bath for 16-20 hours. Following digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to each sample to a final pH ∼2. Samples were desalted under vacuum using 50mg Sep Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters). Each cartridge was activated with 1 mL 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1% TFA, then equilibrated with 3 × 1 mL of 0.1% TFA. Following sample loading, cartridges were washed with 4 × 1 mL of 0.1% TFA, and samples were eluted with 2 × 0.4 mL 50% ACN/0.25% formic acid (FA). 60μg of each sample was kept for protein abundance measurements, and the remainder was used for phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation.  Phosphopeptide enrichment IMAC beads (Ni-NTA from Qiagen) were prepared by washing 3x with HPLC water, incubating for 30 minutes with 50mM EDTA pH 8.0 to strip the Ni, washing 3x with HPLC water, incubating with 50mM FeCl3 dissolved in 10% TFA for 30 minutes at room temperature with shaking, washing 3x with and resuspending in 0.1% TFA in 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using a King Flisher Flex. For a detailed protocol, please contact the authors. Phosphorylated peptides were found to make up more than 90% of every sample, indicating high quality enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data acquisition Digested samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometry system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC 1200 ultra-high pressure liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a Nanospray Flex nanoelectrospray source. For all analyses, samples were injected on a C18 reverse phase column (25 cm x 75 μm packed with ReprosilPur 1.9 μm particles). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% FA, and mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% FA/80% ACN. Peptides were separated by an organic gradient from 5% to 30% mobile phase B over 112 minutes followed by an increase to 58% B over 12 minutes, then held at 90% B for 16 minutes at a flow rate of 350 nL/minute. Analytical columns were equilibrated with 6 μL of mobile phase A. To build a spectral library, one sample from each set of biological replicates was acquired in a data dependent manner. Data dependent analysis (DDA) was performed by acquiring a full scan over a m/z range of 400-1000 in the Orbitrap at 60,000 resolving power (@200 m/z) with a normalized AGC target of 300%, an RF lens setting of 40%, and a maximum ion injection time of 60 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 seconds, with a 10 ppm exclusion width setting. Peptides with charge states 2-6 were selected for MS/MS interrogation using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD), with 20 MS/MS scans per cycle. For phosphopeptide enriched samples, MS/MS scans were analyzed in the Orbitrap using isolation width of 1.3 m/z, normalized HCD collision energy of 30%, normalized AGC of 200% at a resolving power of 30,000 with a 54 ms maximum ion injection time. Similar settings were used for data dependent analysis of samples used to determine protein abundance, with an MS/MS resolving power of 15,000 and a 22 ms maximum ion injection time. Data-independent analysis (DIA) was performed on all samples. An MS scan at 60,000 resolving power over a scan range of 390-1010 m/z, a normalized AGC target of 300%, an RF lens setting of 40%, and a maximum injection time of 60 ms was acquired, followed by DIA scans using 8 m/z isolation windows over 400-1000 m/z at a normalized HCD collision energy of 27%. Loop control was set to All. For phosphopeptide enriched samples, data were collected using a resolving power of 30,000 and a maximum ion injection time of 54 ms. Protein abundance samples were collected using a resolving power of 15,000 and a maximum ion injection time of 22 ms.  Spectral library generation and raw data processing Raw mass spectrometry data from each DDA dataset were used to build separate libraries for DIA searches using the Pulsar search engine integrated into Spectronaut version 13.12.200217.43655 (Bruderer et al., 2015) by searching against a database of Uniprot Homo sapiens sequences (19,136 proteins, downloaded April 3, 2020) and 29 SARS-CoV-2 protein sequences translated from genomic sequence downloaded from GISAID (accession EPI_ISL_406596, downloaded April 7, 2020) including mutated tryptic peptides corresponding to the variants assessed in this study. For protein abundance samples, data were searched using the default BGS settings, variable modification of methionine oxidation, static modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine, and filtering to a final 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide, peptide spectrum match (PSM), and protein level (Elias and Gygi, 2007). For phosphopeptide enriched samples, BGS settings were modified to include phosphorylation of S, T, and Y as a variable modification. The generated search libraries were used to search the DIA data. For protein abundance samples, default BGS settings were used, with no data normalization performed. For phosphopeptide enriched samples, the Significant PTM default settings were used, with no data normalization performed, and the DIA-specific PTM site localization score in Spectronaut was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of SARS-CoV-2 variants of concern suggests viral adaptation to enhance human-to-human transmission<sup>1,2</sup>. Although much effort has focused on the characterization of changes in the spike protein in variants of concern, mutations outside of spike are likely to contribute to adaptation. Here, using unbiased abundance proteomics, phosphoproteomics, RNA sequencing and viral replication assays, we show that isolates of the Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant<sup>3</sup> suppress innate immune responses in airway epithelial cells more effectively than first-wave isolates. We found that the Alpha variant has markedly increased subgenomic RNA and protein levels of the nucleocapsid protein (N), Orf9b and Orf6-all known innate immune antagonists. Expression of Orf9b alone suppressed the innate immune response through interaction with TOM70, a mitochondrial protein that is required for activation of the RNA-sensing adaptor MAVS. Moreover, the activity of Orf9b and its association with TOM70 was regulated by phosphorylation. We propose that more effective innate immune suppression, through enhanced expression of specific viral antagonist proteins, increases the likelihood of successful transmission of the Alpha variant, and may increase in vivo replication and duration of infection<sup>4</sup>. The importance of mutations outside the spike coding region in the adaptation of SARS-CoV-2 to humans is underscored by the observation that similar mutations exist in the N and Orf9b regulatory regions of the Delta and Omicron variants.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Virus, Variants, Systems biology

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF

### Submitter
Mehdi Bouhaddou

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J. Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, UCSF


