### Accession
PXD029534

### Title
A broad-specificity O-glycoprotease that enables improved analysis of glycoproteins and glycopeptides containing intact complex O-glycans

### Description
Analysis of mucin type O-glycans linked to serine/threonine of glycoproteins is technically challenging, in part, due to a lack of effective enzymatic tools that enable their analysis. Recently, several O-glycan-specific endoproteases that can cleave the protein adjacent to the appended glycan have been described. Despite significant progress in understanding the biochemistry of these en-zymes, known O-glycoproteases have specificity constrains, such as inefficient cleavage of glycoproteins bearing sialylated O-glycans, high selectivity for certain type of glycoproteins or protein sequence bias, that limit their analytical application. In this study, we examined the capabilities of an immunomodulating metalloprotease (IMPa) from Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The peptide substrate sequence selectivity and its impact on IMPa activity was interrogated using an array of synthetic peptides and their glycoforms. We show that IMPa has no specific P1 residue preference and can tolerate most amino acids at the P1 position, except aspartic acid. The enzyme does not cleave between two adjacent O-glycosites, indicating that O-glycosylated serine/threonine is not allowed at position P1. Glycopeptides with as few as two amino acids on either side of an O-glycosite were specifically cleaved by IMPa. Finally, IMPa efficiently cleaved peptides and proteins carrying sialylated and asialylated O-glycans of varying complexity. We present the use of IMPa in a one-step O-glycoproteomics workflow for glycoprofiling of individual purified glycoproteins granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) and receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase C (CD45) without the need for glycopeptide enrichment. In these examples, IMPa enabled identification of O-glycosites and the range of complex O-glycan structures at each site.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic digestion. Native glycoproteins (10 μg) were digested with 1 U of IMPa (O-Glycoprotease, New England Biolabs) in 50 μL 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 for 5 h at 37°C. After incubation, glycoprotein hydrolysates were passed through a Microcon-30kDa centrifugal filter unit (MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) and dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dried peptides were resuspended in water and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Nano LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were directly injected on a reversed phase 1.9 μm C18 fused silica column (I.D. 75 μm, O.D. 360 μm x 25 cm length) packed into an emitter tip (IonOpticks, Aus-tralia).  The column was placed in a column oven integrated into the mass spectrometer ion source (Sonation Column Oven). The flow rate for analysis was 400 nL/min with buffer A (water, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The gradient conditions were: 2 min at 2% B, 30 min to 40% B, 5 min to 70% B, 2 min at 70% B with 1 min return to 2% B and a total of 40 min analysis time. The temperature was set at 40C. The Easy-nLC 1000 was coupled with a QExactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The most abundant 10 ions were fragmented in the normalized collision energy NCE 27.

### Data Protocol
Glycopeptide MS/MS fragment spectra were searched against selected protein and glycan databases using Byonic software v4.0-53 x64 (Protein Metrics Inc.). Searches were performed using precursor ion mass tolerance of 6 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 30 ppm, specific or semi-specific cleavage at the N-terminus of Ser/Thr with up to 7 missed cleavages allowed. Variable modifications were used in searches: oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da), deamidation at Asn, Gln (+0.984 Da). An O-glycan structure database containing 13 common mammalian O-glycans was used. Up to two glycan modifications were allowed per peptide. Searches were performed against defined glycoproteins to narrow the search space. The searches were filtered using strict criteria (1% FDR, PEP 2D < 0.01). Validation of the identified glycopeptides using oxonium ions of m/z 204.087 (HexNAc), m/z 284.044 (sulfoHexNAc), m/z 274.092/292.103 (Neu5Ac), m/z 316.103/334.114 (acetylNeu5Ac), m/z 290.087/308.098 (Neu5Gc), m/z 407.166 (2HexNAc), m/z 569.219 (2HexNAcHex) in the MS2 spectrum was performed to ensure correct assignment of O-glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of mucin-type <i>O</i>-glycans linked to serine/threonine of glycoproteins is technically challenging, in part, due to a lack of effective enzymatic tools that enable their analysis. Recently, several <i>O</i>-glycan-specific endoproteases that can cleave the protein adjacent to the appended glycan have been described. Despite significant progress in understanding the biochemistry of these enzymes, known <i>O</i>-glycoproteases have specificity constraints, such as inefficient cleavage of glycoproteins bearing sialylated <i>O</i>-glycans, high selectivity for certain types of glycoproteins, or protein sequence bias. These factors limit their analytical application. In this study, we examined the capabilities of an immunomodulating metalloprotease (IMPa) from <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. Peptide sequence selectivity and its impact on IMPa activity were interrogated using an array of synthetic peptides and their glycoforms. We show that IMPa has no specific P1 residue preference and can tolerate most amino acids at the P1 position, except aspartic acid. The enzyme does not cleave between two adjacent <i>O</i>-glycosites, indicating that O-glycosylated serine/threonine is not allowed at position P1. Glycopeptides with as few as two amino acids on either side of an <i>O</i>-glycosite were cleaved by IMPa. Finally, IMPa efficiently cleaved peptides and proteins carrying sialylated and asialylated <i>O</i>-glycans of varying complexity. We present the use of IMPa in a one-step <i>O</i>-glycoproteomic workflow for glycoprofiling of the purified glycoproteins granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and receptor-type tyrosine-protein phosphatase C without the need for glycopeptide enrichment. In these examples, IMPa enabled both the identification of <i>O</i>-glycosites and the range of complex <i>O</i>-glycan structures at each site.

### Keywords
Cd45, G-csf

### Affiliations
New England Biolabs, 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
Saulius Vainauskas

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher H. Taron
New England Biolabs, 240 County Road, Ipswich, MA 01938, USA


