### Accession
PXD018760

### Title
TARGETED PROTEOMICS FOR THE DETECTION OF SARS-COV-2 PROTEINS

### Description
TARGETED PROTEOMICS FOR THE DETECTION OF SARS-COV-2 PROTEINS: SARS-CoV-2, COVID-19, proteomics, targeted mass spectrometry, LC-MS, parallel reaction monitoring (PRM), limit of detection

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixtures were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific, part # 164564) and separated on an in-house packed 50 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific), using a linear gradient of 0–32% acetonitrile (in 0.1 % formic acid) during 60 or 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of electrospray ionization (ESI).  For targeted proteomics, a parallel reaction monitoring regime (PRM) was used to select for a set of previously selected peptides on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operating in positive mode and running Tune version 3.3. Precursors were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with HCD using 30 % collision energy (CE). See Supplementary Table 2 for the isolation list. For global proteomics, data were recorded on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. All MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution in profile mode and with standard AGC target settings. The injection time mode was set to dynamic with a minimum of 9 points across the peak. The sequence of sampling was blanks first and then in order of increasing peptide input amounts to avoid any contamination of previous samples.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed using Mascot v 2.6.2 within the Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.3 framework or with MaxQuant v 1.6.10.43 (www.maxquant.org), all with standard settings (note: fragment tolerance set to 20 ppm). PRM data were analyzed with Skyline (skyline.ms). Spectra and chromatograms were visualized in PD 2.3, Skyline or the PDV proteomics viewer (pdv.zhang-lab.org). For global proteome analyses the UniprotKB SARS2 database (https://covid-19.uniprot.org/; 14 entries) was concatenated with the UniprotKB database, taxonomy Chlorocebus (African green monkey). The total number of protein sequence entries that were searched was 20,751.  All raw data will be uploaded to the PRIDE repository for open access.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Lc-ms, Limit of detection, Targeted mass spectrometry, Covid-19, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center


