### Accession
PXD015719

### Title
PKA-Independent Vasopressin Signaling in Renal Collecting Duct

### Description
Vasopressin regulates renal water excretion by binding to the Gs-coupled vasopressin receptor (V2R) in collecting duct cells, resulting in cyclic AMP-dependent increases in epithelial water permeability through regulation of the aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channel.  Our prior studies showed that CRISPR-mediated deletion of protein kinase A (PKA) in cultured mpkCCD cells largely eliminates these regulatory events.  These PKA-null cells provide a means of identifying PKA-independent signaling downstream from the V2 receptor. We carried out large-scale quantitative  protein mass spectrometry (SILAC) to identify PKA-independent phosphorylation changes in response to V2R-selective vasopressin analog, dDAVP.  The results show that V2R-mediated vasopressin signaling is predominantly, but not entirely, PKA-dependent.  Target motif analysis of the phosphopeptides increased in response to dDAVP in PKA-null cells indicates that the vasopressin activates of one or more members of the AMPK/SNF1 subfamily of basophilic protein kinases.  Among the upregulated phosphorylation sites were three known targets of SNF1-subfamily kinases, namely Lipe (S559), Crtc1 (S151) and Arhgef2 (S151).  One of the phosphorylation sites that increased in occupancy in PKA-null cells was Ser256 of AQP2, a site critical for vasopressin-mediated trafficking of AQP2 to the cell surface. Beyond this, PKA-independent active site phosphorylation changes were also seen for protein kinases Stk39 (SPAK) and Prkci (Protein kinase C iota). Cyclic AMP levels were ~10-fold higher in PKA-null than in PKA-intact cells in the presence of phosphodiesterase inhibitor IBMX, consistent with a marked acceleration of cAMP production in PKA-null cells. The findings are indicative of substantial PKA-independent signaling downstream from the Gs-coupled V2 receptor.

### Sample Protocol
The cells were labeled by growing in complete SILAC medium (Thermo Fisher) containing either heavy (13C6 15N4 arginine and 13C6 lysine) and light (12C6 14N4 arginine and 12C6 lysine) amino acids.  The cells were thawed on ice and treated with urea buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris·HCl, 75 mM NaCl, 1× Halt protease and phosphatase inhibitors), scraped and sonicated (duration: 2 min, pulse/pause: 2 sec/2 sec, output level = 1) to solubilize proteins.  Following measurement of protein concentration (BCA reagent), equal amounts of heavy- and light-labeled protein extracts were mixed (total, 2.5 ± 0.4 mg). The mixed samples were reduced with 20 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C, and then alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at 25 °C in the dark. The samples were diluted with 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) to 1 M urea, and then digested with trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) (1:20 wt/wt) overnight at 37 °C. The peptides were desalted using hydrophilic–lipophilic–balanced extraction cartridges (Oasis, 1 cc, 30 mg). The peptide sample was divided into three parts: total peptide analysis (4%), heretofore referred to as ‘Total’ and phosphopeptide enrichments (48% × 2) using Fe-NTA and TiO2 columns. The enrichment protocols were as described in the manufacturer’s instructions with minor modifications. The enriched peptides from Fe-NTA columns were desalted using graphite columns. All three samples (Total, TiO2, Fe-NTA) were fractionated in a 96-well plate with off-line high-pH reverse-phase chromatography (Agilent 1200 HPLC system, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using a XBridge BEH C18 column (Waters; 130Å, 5 µm, 2.1 mm X 30 mm). For each SILAC experiment, eluted samples were pooled to 24 (Total), 12 (TiO2) and 12 (Fe-NTA) fractions, vacuum-dried and stored at −80 °C. The dried peptides were reconstituted with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in LC-MS–grade water (J.T. Baker, Fisher Scientific) before mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (version 1.4.0.288) in conjunction with two search engines; Mascot and SequestHT. The protein database used for SequestHT was the mouse Swiss-Prot (downloaded on April 16, 2017). The Mascot search engine and database were maintained by NIH Mascot server (https://biospec.nih.gov). The search criteria for all HCD raw files were set as follows: 1) precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, 2) fragment mass tolerance = 0.02 Da, 3) enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C+57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were as follows: a) isotope labeling of lysine (K+6.020 Da) and arginine (R+10.008 Da), b) oxidation of methionine (M+15.995 Da), c) deamination on glutamine and asparagine (N, Q+0.984 Da), d) phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (S, T, Y+79.966 Da) and e) acetylation of protein N-terminal. The FDR was calculated by the target-decoy algorithm. The probabilities of the phosphorylation site localizations were calculated based on the given MS2 data using the PhosphoRS 3.0 module within Proteome Discoverer. The following data reduction filters was used; peptide confidence: high, peptide rank = 1. The FDR was calculated by the target decoy PSM validator. The FDR was set <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Vasopressin regulates renal water excretion by binding to a G<sub>&#x3b1;</sub> s-coupled receptor (V2R) in collecting duct cells, resulting in increased water permeability through regulation of the aquaporin-2 (AQP2) water channel.&#xa0;This action is widely accepted to be associated with cAMP-mediated activation of protein kinase A (PKA). Here, we use phosphoproteomics in collecting duct cells in which PKA has been deleted (CRISPR-Cas9) to identify PKA-independent responses to vasopressin. The results show that V2R-mediated vasopressin signaling is predominantly, but not entirely, PKA-dependent.&#xa0;Upregulated sites in PKA-null cells include Ser256 of AQP2, which is critical to regulation of AQP2 trafficking. In addition, phosphorylation changes in the protein kinases Stk39 (SPAK) and Prkci (an atypical PKC) are consistent with PKA-independent regulation of these protein kinases. Target motif analysis of the phosphopeptides increased in PKA-null cells indicates that vasopressin activates one or more members of the AMPK/SNF1-subfamily of basophilic protein kinases. In vitro phosphorylation assays using recombinant, purified SNF1-subfamily kinases confirmed postulated target specificities.&#xa0;Of interest, measured IBMX-dependent cAMP levels were an order of magnitude higher in PKA-null than in PKA-intact cells, indicative of a PKA-dependent feedback mechanism. Overall, the findings support the conclusion that V2-receptor mediated signaling in collecting duct cells is in part PKA-independent.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Prm-ms, Ampk, Silac, Mpkccd

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Principal Investigator Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 10 CENTER DR MSC-1603 Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda Maryland 20892-1603 U.S.A.

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Principal Investigator Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute 10 CENTER DR MSC-1603 Building 10, Room 6N307 Bethesda Maryland 20892-1603 U.S.A.


