### Accession
PXD020727

### Title
Affinity capture enrichment versus Affinity depletion: A comparison of strategies for increasing coverage of low abundant human plasma proteins

### Description
present study, we evaluated four small molecule affinity-based probes based on agarose-immobilized benzamidine (ABA), O-Phospho-L-Tyrosine (pTYR), 8-Amino-hexyl-cAMP (cAMP), or 8-Amino-hexyl-ATP (ATP) for their ability to remove high-abundant proteins such as serum albumin from plasma samples thereby enabling the detection of medium-to-low abundant proteins in plasma samples by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We compared their performance with the commonly used immunodepletion method, the Multi Affinity Removal System Human 14 (MARS14) targeting the top 14 most abundant plasma proteins and also the ProteoMiner protein equalization method by label-free quantitative LC-MSMS analysis. The affinity-based probes demonstrated high reproducibility for low abundant plasma proteins, down to picomol per ml levels, compared to the MARS14 and the Proteominer methods, and also demonstrated a superior removal of the majority of the high abundant plasma proteins. The ABA-based affinity probe and the Proteominer protein equalization method performed superior compared to all other methods in terms of the number of analyzed proteins. All the tested methods were highly reproducible for both high-abundant plasma proteins and low abundant proteins as measured by correlation analysis of six replicate experiments. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that small-molecule based affinity-based probes are excellent alternatives to the commonly used immune-depletion methods for proteomic biomarker discovery studies in plasma.

### Sample Protocol
High abundant protein immunodepletion, affinity-based enrichment and protein equalization  The depletion procedures using the MARS14 spin column was performed according the manufactures description. Briefly, for MARS14 depletion7 µl plasma was diluted and applied to the pre-equilibrated spin column. The collected flow-trough’s were concentrated with a 3 kDa spin filter and the concentrated protein samples were re-dissolved in 0.2 M tetraethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and collected for further processing as described below.  Protein equalization using the ProteoMiner Enrichment Kit was performed according to the manufacturer’s description with minor modifications. Briefly, plasma samples are applied to beads with different hexapeptide ligands with affinity for specific proteins. After incubation, proteins in excess are removed by washing and bound proteins are eluted by sequential incubation in 8 M urea, and desalted and transferred to a 0.2 M TEAB solution as described for the immunodepletion experiment. Affinity-based enrichment using the ABA-, p-TYR-, c-AMP, and ATP-agarose probes was performed by incubating 20 µl of the probe slurry with 1 ml of a 100 µl plasma sample diluted with 900 µl PBS with 0.1 % Tween80 on a rotating wheel for two hours where after beads with bound material were washed once in 1 ml PBS/0.1% Tween80 in 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes and then twice in 1 ml PBS. Affinity beads with bound proteins were re-dissolved in 0.2 M TEAB.   Protein sample processing for proteome analysis Beads with affinity-purified proteins were on-beads reduced (5 mM dithiotrethiol (DTT), 30 min at 50˚C), alkylated (15 mM iodoacetamide IAA at room temperature in the darkness) and trypsinated (2 µg trypsin, incubated overnight at 37˚C). Protein samples from the immunodepletion experiments and from the ProteoMiner protein equalization experiments were reduced, alkylated, and trypsinated (5 mM DTT, 30 min at 50˚C/15 mM IAA for 30 min at room temperature/2 µg trypsin, incubated overnight at 37 ˚C).

### Data Protocol
Data processing All data files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The MSPepSearch and Sequest HT processing nodes, both integrated with Proteome Discoverer, were used to search the data with the following cirteria – protein database: UniProt/SwissProt database (downloaded 30/09/2019, containing 42369 sequences) and restricted to human. The NIST Human Orbitrap spectral library available through Proteome Discoverer were used with MSPepSearch. Fixed search parameters included trypsin, one missed cleavage allowed and carbamidomethylation at cysteine, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal carbamylation and N-terminal acetylation were set as dynamic. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm for MSPepSearch and 8 ppm for Sequest HT. Fragment mass tolerance was set to 15 ppm for MSPepSearch and 0.05 Da for Sequest HT. FDR was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (FDR < 1%) were included. Label-free quantification were calculated by the Minora feature detector with default settings except only unique peptides were used for quantification. Correlation plots were created using the pairs.panels() function included in the ‘psych’ package, available through CRAN, and correlation coefficients was calculated using the cor() function included in the ‘stats’ package using RStudio (1.2.5001) and R (v. 4.0.0). Venn diagrams were constructed using a public available software tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/).

### Publication Abstract
In the present study, we evaluated four small molecule affinity-based probes based on agarose-immobilized benzamidine (ABA), O-Phospho-L-Tyrosine (pTYR), 8-Amino-hexyl-cAMP (cAMP), or 8-Amino-hexyl-ATP (ATP) for their ability to remove high-abundant proteins such as serum albumin from plasma samples thereby enabling the detection of medium-to-low abundant proteins in plasma samples by mass spectrometry-based proteomics. We compared their performance with the most commonly used immunodepletion method, the Multi Affinity Removal System Human 14 (MARS14) targeting the top 14 most abundant plasma proteins and also the ProteoMiner protein equalization method by label-free quantitative liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) analysis. The affinity-based probes demonstrated a high reproducibility for low-abundant plasma proteins, down to picomol per mL levels, compared to the Multi Affinity Removal System (MARS) 14 and the Proteominer methods, and also demonstrated superior removal of the majority of the high-abundant plasma proteins. The ABA-based affinity probe and the Proteominer protein equalization method performed better compared to all other methods in terms of the number of analyzed proteins. All the tested methods were highly reproducible for both high-abundant plasma proteins and low-abundant proteins as measured by correlation analyses of six replicate experiments. In conclusion, our results demonstrated that small-molecule based affinity-based probes are excellent alternatives to the commonly used immune-depletion methods for proteomic biomarker discovery studies in plasma. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020727.

### Keywords
Depletion, Human plasma, Affinity enrichment

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital, Odense, Denmark
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark

### Submitter
Hans Christian Beck

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Christian Beck
Centre for Clinical Proteomics, Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Odense University Hospital, Denmark


