### Accession
PXD023096

### Title
: The effects of chronic morphine on the endogenous cannabinoid system in the ventral tegmental area

### Description
The United States is currently facing a severe opioid epidemic, therefore addressing how opioids induce rewarding behaviors could be key to a solution for this medical and societal crisis. Recently, the endogenous cannabinoid system has emerged as a hot topic in the study of opioid reward but relatively little is known about how chronic opioid exposure may affect this system. In the present study, we investigated how chronic morphine may modulate the endogenous cannabinoid system in the ventral tegmental area (VTA), a critical region in the mesolimbic reward circuitry. Our studies found that the VTA expresses 32 different proteins or genes related to the endogenous cannabinoid system; 3 of these proteins or genes were significantly affected after chronic morphine exposure. We also investigated the effects of acute and chronic morphine treatment on the production of the primary endocannabinoids, 2-Arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and anandamide (AEA), and identified that acute, but not chronic, morphine treatment significantly reduced AEA production in the VTA; 2-AG levels were unchanged in either condition. Lastly, our studies exhibited a systemic enhancement of 2-AG tone via inhibition of monoacylglycerol lipase (MAGL)-mediated degradation and the pharmacological activation of cannabinoid receptor 2 (CB2R) significantly suppressed chronic morphine-induced conditioned place preference. Taken together, our studies offer a broad picture of chronic morphine-induced alterations of the VTA endogenous cannabinoid system, provide several uncharacterized targets that could be used to develop novel therapies, and identify how manipulation of the endocannabinoid system can mitigate opioid reward to directly address the ongoing opioid epidemic.

### Sample Protocol
Each VTA sample (3-4 mg VTA tissue from one rat) was lysed in 60 l chilled RIPA buffer (#89900, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) with protease inhibitor cocktail (1: 50 dilution, #B14002, Bimake, Houston, TX). Immediately after adding the lysis buffer, samples were homogenized via ultrasonication (3 short bursts) and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatant was transferred into a clean 1.5 ml tube, and the protein concentration in the tissue lysates were determined using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (#23225, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL). The protein concentration of each sample was ~2-3 g/l. 100 g boiled tissue lysate was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain (#1610786; Biorad, Hercules, CA). Each lane of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into seven slices. The gel slices were subjected to trypsin digestion and the resulting peptides were purified by C18-based desalting exactly as previously described (Kruse et al., 2017; Parker et al., 2019).

### Data Protocol
HPLC-ESI-MS/MS was performed in positive ion mode on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer fitted with an EASY-Spray Source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). NanoLC was performed as previously described (Kruse et al., 2017; Parker et al., 2019). Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 2.1.x msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were searched against the rattus SwissProt_2018 database (8068 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identifications were made using Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification. In brief, in an automated format, raw files were imported and converted into two-dimensional maps (y-axis = time, x-axis =m/z) followed by selection of a reference run for alignment purposes. An aggregate data set containing all peak information from all samples was created from the aligned runs, which was then further narrowed down by selecting only +2, +3, and +4 charged ions for further analysis. The samples were then grouped and a peak list of fragment ion spectra from only the top eight most intense precursors of a feature was exported in Mascot generic file (.mgf) format and searched against the rattus SwissProt_2018 database (8068 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4). The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine; 13C=1. The resulting Mascot .xml file was then imported into Progenesis, allowing for peptide/protein assignment, while peptides with a Mascot Ion Score of <25 were not considered for further analysis. Protein quantification was performed using only non-conflicting peptides and precursor ion-abundance values were normalized in a run to those in a reference run (not necessarily the same as the alignment reference run). Principal component analysis and unbiased hierarchal clustering analysis (heat map) was performed in Perseus (Tyanova and Cox, 2018; Tyanova et al., 2016) while Volcano plots were generated in Rstudio. Gene ontology and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis was performed with DAVID (Huang et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Opioid, Endogenous cannabinoid system, Reward, Ventral tegmental area, Endocannabinoids, Cannabinoid receptors

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine
University of Arizona

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Todd Vanderah
Department of Pharmacology, University of Arizona College of Medicine


