### Accession
PXD004053

### Title
Global profiling and inhibition of protein lipidation in vector and host stages of the sleeping sickness parasite Trypanosoma brucei via chemical proteomics

### Description
The enzyme N-myristoyltransferase (NMT) catalyses the essential fatty acylation of substrate proteins with myristic acid in eukaryotes and is a validated drug target in the parasite Trypanosoma brucei, the causative agent of African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness). N-Myristoylation typically mediates membrane localisation of proteins and is essential to the function of many. However, only a handful of proteins are experimentally validated as N-myristoylated in T. brucei. Here, we perform metabolic labelling with an alkyne-tagged myristic acid analogue (“YnMyr”), enabling the capture of lipidated proteins in insect (PCF) and host (BSF) life stages of T. brucei. We further compare this with a longer chain palmitate analogue (“YnPal”) to explore the chain length-specific incorporation of fatty acids into proteins. Finally, we combine the alkynyl-myristate analogue with NMT inhibitors (Cpds 1 and 2) and quantitative chemical proteomics to globally define N-myristoylated proteins in the clinically relevant bloodstream form parasites.

### Sample Protocol
T. brucei brucei strain Lister 427 (BSF) or T. brucei brucei procyclic strain 449 (PCF) were metabolically tagged with fatty acid analogues (YnMyr = alkynyl-myristate; YnPal = alkynyl-palmitate) or incubated with controls (Myr = myristic acid; Pal = palmitic acid). Cells were lysed, tagged proteins reacted via click chemistry with azido-biotin reagents (AzTB, AzRB or AzRTB) and enriched on avidin beads. Reagents AzRB and AzRTB contain trypsin-cleavable sites for facile release of the modified peptide from the beads during digest. Beads were washed and proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested on-bead with trypsin. Peptides were desalted on stage-tips and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive. Replicates (biological or independent sample processing from the lysate stage): BSF (n=4, B1-B4); PCF (n=6, P1-P6); Pal or YnPal (n=3, A-C). B4, P6 and Pal/YnPal C were prepared with reagent AzRB, P5 with AzRTB, and all other samples with non-cleavable reagent AzTB.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against TriTrypDB-25 T. brucei TREU927 database using the Andromeda search engine. The TriTrypDB sequence for the identified VSG variant Tb427.BES40.22 was appended to the FASTA file. Contaminants were included automatically by MaxQuant. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. “Unique and razor peptides” mode was selected to allow for protein grouping. LFQ experiments in MaxQuant were performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ). In BSF and PCF analyses “Match between runs” was enabled within parameter groups but not between them (parameter groups: Myr, YnMyr). For detection of modified peptides (samples where click chemistry was performed with AzRB or AzRTB reagents), MaxQuant searches were carried out as above with the following modifications: the minimum peptide length was reduced to 5; modification with YnMyr and the expected portion of AzRB or AzRTB was specified as a variable modification (AzRB: C25H42N8O5, +534.3278; AzRTB: C26H44N8O5, +548.3435). Data were elaborated using Perseus version 1.5.0.31.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
N-myristoylation, Protein lipidation, Target validation, Click chemistry, Human african trypanosomiasis, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Leeds
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London

### Submitter
Megan Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Edward William Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London


