### Accession
PXD016718

### Title
BRAWNIN: A sORF-encoded Peptide Essential for Vertebrate Mitochondrial Complex III

### Description
The emergence of small open reading frame (sORF)-encoded peptides (SEPs) is rapidly expanding the known proteome at the lower end of the size distribution. Here, we show that the mitochondrial proteome is enriched for proteins smaller than 100 a.a. (defined as SEPs). Using a prediction and validation pipeline for small open-reading-frame (sORF)-encoded peptides (SEPs), we report the discovery of 16 endogenous nuclear encoded, mitochondrial-localized SEPs (mito-SEPs). Through functional prediction, proteomics, metabolomics and metabolic flux modeling, we demonstrate that BRAWNIN (BR), a 71 amino acid peptide encoded by the C12orf73 gene, is essential for respiratory chain complex III (CIII) assembly. In human cells, BR is induced by the energy-sensing AMPK pathway, and its depletion impairs mitochondrial ATP production. In vivo, BR is enriched in muscle tissues and its maternal zygotic deletion in zebrafish causes complete CIII loss, resulting in severe growth retardation, lactic acidosis and early death. Our findings demonstrate that BR is essential for oxidative phosphorylation across vertebrate species. We propose that mito-SEPs are an untapped resource for essential regulators of oxidative metabolism. The dataset included in this entry is for the Zebrafish and MEF BR knockouts.

### Sample Protocol
Crude mitochondrial protein isolated from Zebrafish tissue or mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEF) was normalized using the Pierce Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Mitochondrial protein was solubilized in 1% (w/v) SDC, 100mM Tris pH 8.1, 40mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; BondBreaker, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 5 min at 99°C with 1500 rpm shaking followed by 15 minutes sonication in a water bath sonicator. Protein digestion was performed using trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio at 37°C overnight. The supernatant was transferred to Stagetips made in-house containing 3x14G plugs of 3M™Empore™ SDB-RPS substrate (Sigma) as described previously (PMIDs 24487582; 27626371) with modifications. Briefly, isopropanol (99% v/v) containing 1% (v/v) TFA was added to the tip and mixed with the lysate prior to centrifugation at 3000 g. Stagetips were then washed first with the same solution followed by an additional wash with 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were eluted in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% (w/v) NH4OH, and then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA prior to drying in a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco). Peptides reconstituted in 0.1% TFA were desalted on Pierce C-18 tips (Thermo Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions prior to drying under vacuum. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, ThermoFisher Scientific) and labelled with 6plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 8:1 label:protein ratio as per manufacturer instructions. Labels were pooled such that each multiplex set contained three replicates each of Br KO and control mitochondria. Pooled samples were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions for a TMT experiment. Individual fractions were dried under vacuum and reconstituted in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100., 75 μm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100., 75 μm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 2% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min applied before the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column. Peptides were eluted using 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v ACN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B) using a custom 128-minute non-linear gradient that included a step for equilibration of the column prior to injection of the next sample. The Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS)–MS3 based TMT method was used. In brief, a full MS1 spectra was acquired in positive mode at 120 000 resolution scanning from 380-1500 m/z. AGC target was at 4e5 and maximum injection time of 50ms. Precursors for MS2/MS3 analysis were selected based on a Top 3 second method. MS2 analysis consists of collision induced dissociation (CID) with isolation window of 0.7 in the quadrupole. CID was carried out with normalized collision energy of 35 and activation time of 10 ms with detection in the ion trap. Following acquisition of each MS2 spectrum, multiple MS2 fragment ions were captured in the MS3 precursor population using isolation waveforms frequency notches. The MS3 precursors were fragmented by high energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) and analyzed using the Orbitrap with scan range of 100-500 m/z, 60000 resolution, normalized collision energy of 60%, AGC target of 1e5 and maximum injection time of 120ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.10.43) (19029910) and searched against UniProt zebrafish reviewed and unreviewed or mouse reviewed database containing canonical and isoform sequences (November 2019) using default settings for a TMT 6plex experiment.

### Publication Abstract
The emergence of small open reading frame (sORF)-encoded peptides (SEPs) is rapidly expanding the known proteome at the lower end of the size distribution. Here, we show that the mitochondrial proteome, particularly the respiratory chain, is enriched for small proteins. Using a prediction and validation pipeline for SEPs, we report the discovery of 16 endogenous nuclear encoded, mitochondrial-localized SEPs (mito-SEPs). Through functional prediction, proteomics, metabolomics and metabolic flux modeling, we demonstrate that BRAWNIN, a 71 a.a. peptide encoded by C12orf73, is essential for respiratory chain complex III (CIII) assembly. In human cells, BRAWNIN is induced by the energy-sensing AMPK pathway, and its depletion impairs mitochondrial ATP production. In zebrafish, Brawnin deletion causes complete CIII loss, resulting in severe growth retardation, lactic acidosis and early death. Our findings demonstrate that BRAWNIN is essential for vertebrate oxidative phosphorylation. We propose that mito-SEPs are an untapped resource for essential regulators of oxidative metabolism.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Uorf, Sorf, Zebrafish, Oxphos

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute Third floor, room 368 The University of Melbourne Victoria 3010 Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute Third floor, room 368 The University of Melbourne Victoria 3010 Australia


