### Accession
PXD035741

### Title
Detailing the Structural and Dynamic Interactions Between WDR44 and Rab11

### Description
DR44 is a Rab11 effector protein that is thought to regulate ciliogenesis by competing with pro-ciliogenesis factors for Rab11 binding. The structure of WDR44 and the molecular mechanism of its interaction with Rab11 is unknown. To explore the interactions between these two proteins multiple WDR44 constructs were designed and pulled down with Rab11. Using the results of the pulldown assay as a guide we used protein complex prediction software, and hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) to identify the binding interface between WDR44 and Rab11. Mutagenesis was used to make specific mutations in the putative Rab11 binding region of WDR44.

### Sample Protocol
HDX reactions comparing phosphorylated and unphosphorylated WDR44, phosphorylated and unphosphorylated WDR44 Rab11 complex, and Rab11 were carried out in 20 µL reactions. Reactions contained either 1.25 µM (25 pmol) of phosphorylated or unphosphorylated WDR 44 or equivalent volume of WDR44 buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, 2 mM MgCl2) and 2.5 µM (50 pmol) Rab11 or equivalent volume of Rab11 buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.0, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, 2 mM MgCl2). Exchange reactions were initiated by the addition of 17.25 µL of D2O buffer (10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM NaCl, 97.09% D2O (V/V)) to 2.75 µL of protein mixture (final D2O concentration of 85.2%). The reactions proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000 seconds at room temperature or 0.3s (3s on ice), before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer resulting in a final concentration of 0.6 M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. HDX reactions comparing Rab11 Apo, the Rab11-WDR44 complex, and the Rab11-Fip3 complex, were carried out in 40 µL reactions. Reactions contained 0.5 µM (20 pmol) of Rab11, 0.75 µM (30 pmol) of WDR44 or WDR44 buffer (100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5), and 0.75 µM (30 pmol) of Fip3 or Fip3 buffer (100 mM NaCl, 20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 1 mM TCEP). Exchange reactions were initiated by the addition of 32 µL of D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 94.33% D2O (V/V)) to 8 µL of protein mixture (Final D2O concentration of 75.5%). The reactions proceeded for 3, 30, 300, or 3000 seconds at room temperature before being quenched with ice cold acidic quench buffer resulting in a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid post quench. All conditions and timepoints were created and run in triplicate. Samples were flash frozen immediately after quenching and stored at -80°C. Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled (2°C) chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The full details of the automated LC system are described in {PMID: 33877613}. Samples comparing phosphorylated and unphosphorylated WDR44 bound to Rab11 were run over one immobilized pepsin column (Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 µL/min for 3 minutes at 8°C. Samples comparing Rab11 apo, the Rab11-WDR44 complex, and the Rab11-Fip3 complex were run over a different immobilized pepsin column (Waters Enzymate BEH pepsin column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX 186007233). The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with an ACQUITY 1.7 μm particle, 100 × 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column (Waters), using a gradient of 3-35% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 11 minutes immediately followed by a gradient of 35-80% over 5 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from non-deuterated samples of WDR44 or Rab11 using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery-based approach, with a threshold set to 0.1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.2 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 39.8 and 34.7 for WDR44 and Rab11 respectively, and a -10logP score of 25.7 for Rab11 apo. HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. Results are presented as relative levels of deuterium incorporation and the only control for back exchange was the level of deuterium present in the buffer (85.2% or 75.5%). Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria:  ≥4.5% change in exchange, ≥0.45 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test.

### Publication Abstract
The formation of complexes between Rab11 and its effectors regulates multiple aspects of membrane trafficking, including recycling and ciliogenesis. WD repeat-containing protein 44 (WDR44) is a structurally uncharacterized Rab11 effector that regulates ciliogenesis by competing with prociliogenesis factors for Rab11 binding. Here, we present a detailed biochemical and biophysical characterization of the WDR44-Rab11 complex and define specific residues mediating binding. Using AlphaFold2 modeling and hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we generated a molecular model of the Rab11-WDR44 complex. The Rab11-binding domain of WDR44 interacts with switch I, switch II, and the interswitch region of Rab11. Extensive mutagenesis of evolutionarily conserved residues in WDR44 at the interface identified numerous complex-disrupting mutations. Using hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, we found that the dynamics of the WDR44-Rab11 interface are distinct from the Rab11 effector FIP3, with WDR44 forming a more extensive interface with the switch II helix of Rab11 compared with FIP3. The WDR44 interaction was specific to Rab11 over evolutionarily similar Rabs, with mutations defining the molecular basis of Rab11 specificity. Finally, WDR44 can be phosphorylated by Sgk3, with this leading to reorganization of the Rab11-binding surface on WDR44. Overall, our results provide molecular detail on how WDR44 interacts with Rab11 and how Rab11 can form distinct effector complexes that regulate membrane trafficking events.

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Rab11, Wdr44

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E. Burke
University of Victoria


