### Accession
PXD020669

### Title
Improved sensitivity of ultra-low flow LC-MS-based proteomic profiling of limited samples using monolithic capillary columns and FAIMS technology

### Description
In this work, we pioneered a combination of ultra-low flow (ULF) high-efficiency ultra-narrow bore monolithic LC columns coupled to MS via a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) interface to evaluate the potential applicability for high sensitivity, robust and reproducible proteomic profiling of low ng-level complex biological samples.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa protein digest standard (P/N 88328, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) was prepared according to the manufacturer's instructions. Human monocyte U937 myeloid leukemia cell culture was maintained following the ATCC recommendations. U937 myeloid leukemia cells were processed as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS. All raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific). MaxQuant (v. 1.6.14.0) was used to perform label-free quantification (LFQ) and LC-MS feature detection using matched parameters from the Proteome Discoverer searches wherever possible.

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we pioneered a combination of ultralow flow (ULF) high-efficiency ultranarrow bore monolithic LC columns coupled to MS via a high-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) interface to evaluate the potential applicability for high sensitivity, robust, and reproducible proteomic profiling of low nanogram-level complex biological samples. As a result, ULF LC-FAIMS-MS brought unprecedented sensitivity levels and high reproducibility in bottom-up proteomic profiling. In addition, FAIMS improved the dynamic range, signal-to-noise ratios, and detection limits in ULF LC-MS-based measurements by significantly reducing chemical noise in comparison to the conventional nanoESI interface used with the same ULF LC-MS setup. Two, three, or four compensation voltages separated by at least 15 V were tested within a single LC-MS run using the FAIMS interface. The optimized ULF LC-ESI-FAIMS-MS/MS conditions resulted in identification of 2,348 &#xb1; 42 protein groups, 10,062 &#xb1; 285 peptide groups, and 15,734 &#xb1; 350 peptide-spectrum matches for 1 ng of a HeLa digest, using a 1 h gradient at the flow rate of 12 nL/min, which represents an increase by 38%, 91%, and 131% in respective identifications, as compared to the control experiment (without FAIMS). To evaluate the practical utility of the ULF LC-ESI-FAIMS-MS platform in proteomic profiling of limited samples, approximately 100, 1,000, and 10,000 U937 myeloid leukemia cells were processed, and a one-tenth of each sample was analyzed. Using the optimized conditions, we were able to reliably identify 251 &#xb1; 54, 1,135 &#xb1; 80, and 2,234 &#xb1; 25 protein groups from injected aliquots corresponding to &#x223c;10, 100, and 1,000 processed cells.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Monolithic column, Proteomic analysis, Faims, Ultra-low flow lc

### Affiliations
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Michal Gregus

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States


