### Accession
PXD025093

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis revealed the differential responses to novel duck reovirus infection in the bursa of Fabricius of Cairna moschata

### Description
Duck reovirus (DRV) is well-studied aquatic bird virus belonging to the Orthoreovirus genus of the Reoviridae family. The bursa of Fabricius is an immunologically organ against virus invasion. However, the responses of the bursa of Fabricius of Cairna moschata to DRV infection are largely unknown. To investigate the immune responses, the proteomes from the control and two DRV strain infected samples (NH and DJ) were compared. In total, 7075 protein were identified, of which 5625 protein were quantified. A number of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs), including 210 DEPs under the HN10 infection and 55 DEPs under the JD10 infection, were identified. Protein network analysis showed that the DEPs enriched in the serine protease system and the innate immune response clusters. For the serine protease systems, coagulation factor IX, three chains of fibrinogen, and complement C8, C5, and C2s were significantly up-regulated, suggesting that the serine protease-mediated immune might be involved in the responses to the HN10 infection. For the innate and adaptive immune system, RIG-I, MDA5, MAPK20, and IRF3 were significantly up-regulated, indicating their important role in the reorganization of invaded virus. Furthermore, the DEPs among different visceral organs (liver, spleen, and the bursa of Fabricius) were compared. coagulation factor IX was significantly up-regulated in the bursa of fabricius, not in the liver and spleen samples, suggesting an important role of the bursa of fabricius in antivirus. Our data may give a comprehensive resource for investigating the regulation mechanism involved in the responses of the bursa of Fabricius of duck to the DRV infections.

### Sample Protocol
Ethics statement and sample information   All experiments were performed in the Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences (IAHV), Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences (ZAAS). All animal samples were treated in accordance with the Regulations of the Administration of Affairs Concerning Experimental Animals approved by the State Council of China. The bird protocol used in this study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee of ZAAS (permit number: ZAAS2020016). One-day-old healthy Muscovy ducklings were used for the virus infection experiment.   Sampling and protein pretreatment   Nine healthy Muscovy duckling were selected and divided into three random groups. One group (three ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 500 μL of DRV HN10 strain at a titer of 105.19 median tissue culture infective dose (TCID50) per mL; another group (three ducklings) was inoculated intramuscular with 500 μL of DRV JD10 strain at a titer of 106.4 TCID50 per mL; the last group (three ducklings) was treated with sterile DMEM in the same condition. The bursa of Fabricius samples of ducklings of each group were harvested at 72 hours post infection (hpi) and frozen in liquid nitrogen until used.

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic analysis   The MS/MS data were searched against the unip_Anas_8839 database on Thermo Proteome Discoverer v.2.1.0.81. All parameters in the Thermo Proteome Discoverer were set to default values.    Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of each identified protein was analyzed by searching against the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). The proteomic IDs of all the identified proteins were converted into the UniProt IDs and then were mapped onto the GO category maps. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation of each identified proteins was analyzed by searching against the KEGG database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/). All proteins with KEGG description were mapped onto different metabolic and biological pathways using a KEGG online service program (KEGG mapper). PSORT/PSORT II was used to predict the subcellular localization of each identified protein (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html). Protein domain annotation of each identified protein was analyzed by InterProScan software ((http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) with protein sequence alignment method.

### Publication Abstract
The bursa of Fabricius is an immunologically organ against the invasion of duck reovirus (DRV), which is a fatal bird virus belonging to the Reoviridae family. However, responses of the bursa of Fabricius of Cairna moschata to novel DRV (NDRV) infection are largely unknown. Transcriptomes and proteomes of the samples from control and two NDRV strain (HN10 and JDm10) with different virulence were analyzed. Differentially expressed genes and differential accumulated proteins were enriched in the serine protease system and innate immune response clusters. Most of the immune-related genes were up-regulated under both JDm10/HN10 infections. However, the immune-related proteins were only accumulated under HN10 infection. For the serine protease system, coagulation factor IX, three chains of fibrinogen, and complements C8, C5, and C2s were significantly up-regulated by the HN10 infection, suggesting that the serine protease-mediated immune system might be involved in the resistance to NDRV infection. For the innate and adaptive immune system, RIG-I, MDA5, MAPK20, and IRF3 were significantly up-regulated, indicating their important roles against invaded virus. TLR-3 and IKBKB were only up-regulated in the liver cells, MAPK20 was only up-regulated in the bursa of Fabricius cells, and IRAK2 was only up-regulated in the spleen samples. Coagulation factor IX was increased in the bursa of Fabricius, not in the liver and spleen samples. The data provides a detailed resource for studying the proteins participating in the resistances of the bursa of Fabricius of duck to NDRV infections.

### Keywords
Cairna moschata; differential accumulated protein; reovirus; proteomic analysis; the bursa of fabricius

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Tao Yun

### Lab Head
Dr Tao Yun
Institute of Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Sciences, Zhejiang Academy of Agricultural Sciences


