### Accession
PXD025894

### Title
Human skull base chordoma LC-MSMS

### Description
The prognostic factors of skull base chordoma associated with outcomes of patients after surgical resection remain poorly defined. This project aimed to identify a novel prognostic factor for patients with skull base chordoma. Using a proteomics approach, we screened tumor biomarkersthat upregulated in the rapid-recurrence group of chordoma, narrowed down by bioinformatics analysis, and finally potential biomarker was chosen for validation by immunohistochemistry using tissue microarray.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 9 cases of chordoma with short recurrence-free survival and 8 cases of chordoma with long recurrence-free survival frozen tissue samples. Then trypsin digestion was performed, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, the peptide was desalted by Strata XC18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum dried. The Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 hours at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for a full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as a cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in the First search and 5 ppm in the Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and the minimum score for peptides was set > 40. For enhancement of protein coverage, two replicates were performed on LC-MS/MS, and quantified proteins were subsequently filtered with manually selected filter exclusion parameters (at least 2 peptides, p < 0.05 and expression level differed at least 1.25- or 0.8-fold in the rapid-recurrence group compared to the slow-recurrence group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Skull base chordoma

### Affiliations
Beijing Neurosurgical Institute
Cell Biology Laboratory, Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, China

### Submitter
Yutao Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Yazhuo Zhang
Cell Biology Laboratory, Beijing Neurosurgical Institute, China


