### Accession
PXD027000

### Title
CGG repeat RNA binding protein capture identifies SRSF protein kinase 1 as a modulator of RAN translation and suppressor of repeat toxicity

### Description
Transcribed CGG repeat expansions cause the neurodegenerative disorder Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). CGG repeat RNAs sequester RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) into nuclear foci and undergo repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN) translation into toxic peptides in the cytoplasm. To identify proteins involved in these processes, we employed a CGG repeat RNA-tagging system to capture repeat associated RBPs by mass spectrometry in mammalian cells. We identified several SR (serine/arginine-rich domain) proteins that interact selectively with CGG repeats basally and under cellular stress. These same proteins modify toxicity in a Drosophila model of FXTAS. Genetic or pharmacological targeting of serine/arginine protein kinases (SRPKs) inhibits RAN translation in cells and toxicity in both FXTAS and C9orf72 ALS/FTD model flies. Furthermore, SRPK inhibitors suppressed CGG repeat toxicity in rodent neurons. These findings demonstrate roles for CGG repeat RNA binding proteins in repeat toxicity and support further evaluation of SRPK inhibitors in modulating RAN translation associated with repeat expansion disorders.

### Sample Protocol
the beads were resuspended in 50 l of 0.1M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8).  Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 l of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45 C for 30 min. An overnight digestion with 1 ug sequencing grade, modified trypsin was carried out at 37 C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer. Samples were completely dried using vacufuge.  Resulting peptides were dissolved in 8 l of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution and 2 ls of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 min (2-22% buffer B in 110 min, 22-40% in 25 min, 40-90% in 5 min followed by holding at 90% buffer B for 5 min and requilibration with Buffer A for 25 min).  Eluent was directly introduced into Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) using an EasySpray source.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against H Sapien (UniProt; 20,145 reviewed entries; downloaded on 08-02-2017) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, Thermo Scientific). Light, Medium, and Heavy lysine/arginine were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Transcribed CGG repeat expansions cause neurodegeneration in Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS). CGG repeat RNAs sequester RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) into nuclear foci and undergo repeat-associated non-AUG (RAN) translation into toxic peptides. To identify proteins involved in these processes, we employed a CGG repeat RNA-tagging system to capture repeat-associated RBPs by mass spectrometry in mammalian cells. We identified several SR (serine/arginine-rich) proteins that interact selectively with CGG repeats basally and under cellular stress. These proteins modify toxicity in a Drosophila model of FXTAS. Pharmacologic inhibition of serine/arginine protein kinases (SRPKs), which alter SRSF protein phosphorylation, localization, and activity, directly inhibits RAN translation of CGG and GGGGCC repeats (associated with C9orf72 ALS/FTD) and triggers repeat RNA retention in the nucleus. Lowering SRPK expression suppressed toxicity in both FXTAS and C9orf72 ALS/FTD model flies, and SRPK inhibitors suppressed CGG repeat toxicity in rodent neurons. Together, these findings demonstrate roles for CGG repeat RNA binding proteins in RAN translation and repeat toxicity and support further evaluation of SRPK inhibitors in modulating RAN translation associated with repeat expansion disorders.

### Keywords
Repeat rna, Ran translation

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN
Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
INDRANIL MALIK

### Lab Head
Dr Peter K. Todd
Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


