### Accession
PXD000989

### Title
A Deg-protease family protein in marine Synechococcus is involved in outer membrane protein organization

### Description
In this study we inactivated SYNW2176 and characterized the stress response and outer membrane protein composition of the mutant in order to better understand the overlap between envelope stress and copper stress in marine Synechococcus.

### Sample Protocol
OMP fraction LC-MS-MS Sample preparation (Guttman et al., 2009): Protein samples were diluted in TNE (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) buffer. RapiGest SF reagent (Waters Corp.) was added to the mix to a final concentration of 0.1% and samples were boiled for 5 min. TCEP (Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) was added to 1 mM (final concentration) and the samples were incubated at 37C for 30 min. Subsequently, the samples were carboxymethylated with 0.5 mg/ml of iodoacetamide for 30 min at 37C followed by neutralization with 2 mM TCEP (final concentration).  Proteins samples prepared as above were digested with trypsin (trypsin:protein ratio - 1:50) overnight at 37C. RapiGest was degraded and removed by treating the samples with 250 mM HCl at 37C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 14000 rpm for 30 min at 4C. The soluble fraction was then added to a new tube and the peptides were extracted and desalted using Aspire RP30 desalting columns (Thermo Scientific).  LC-MS-MS: Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) coupled with tandem mass spectroscopy (LC-MS/MS) using nano-spray ionization (McCormack et al., 1997). The nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a TripleTof 5600 hybrid mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX) interfaced with nano-scale reversed-phase HPLC (Tempo) using a 10 cm-100 micron ID glass capillary packed with 5-µm C18 ZorbaxTM beads (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA).  Peptides were eluted from the C18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient (5–60%) of ACN (Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 μl/min for 1h. The buffers used to create the ACN gradient were: Buffer A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA) and Buffer B (100% ACN, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA). MS/MS data were acquired in a data-dependent manner in which the MS1 data was acquired for 250 ms at m/z of 400 to 1250 Da and the MS/MS data was acquired from m/z of 50 to 2,000 Da. For Independent data acquisition (IDA) parameters MS1-TOF 250 milliseconds, followed by 50 MS2 events of 25 milliseconds each. The IDA criteria, over 200 counts threshold, charge state +2-4 with 4 seconds exclusion. Finally, the collected data were analyzed using MASCOT® (Matrix Sciences) and Protein Pilot 4.0 (ABSCIEX) for peptide identifications. Spectral count analysis: Analysis of spectra was done using a spectral counting statistical method.  Briefly, ProteinPilot software v.4.0 (Applied Biosystems, MDS-Sciex) was used to identify and quantify proteins and generate confidence numbers for each spectra with the Paragon search algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007).  All protein spectra with less than 95% confidence to a Synechococcus WH8102 protein were discarded.  All the remaining hits in each sample were summed for a total number of spectral counts per sample.  Raw spectral counts ranged between 397 and 760 in the insoluble fraction (HSP) and 869 and 1655 in the soluble fraction (HSS).

### Data Protocol
Spectral count analysis: Analysis of spectra was done using a spectral counting statistical method.  Briefly, ProteinPilot software v.4.0 (Applied Biosystems, MDS-Sciex) was used to identify and quantify proteins and generate confidence numbers for each spectra with the Paragon search algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007).  All protein spectra with less than 95% confidence to a Synechococcus WH8102 protein were discarded.  All the remaining hits in each sample were summed for a total number of spectral counts per sample.  Raw spectral counts ranged between 397 and 760 in the insoluble fraction (HSP) and 869 and 1655 in the soluble fraction (HSS).  Then the number of hits per protein were summed and divided through by the total to give a percentage of total spectral counts for each protein in order to compare protein levels between samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine synechococcus membrane cupper

### Affiliations
, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0202
Scientist

### Submitter
Majid Ghassemian

### Lab Head
Dr Brian Palenik
, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0202


