### Accession
PXD045696

### Title
ANP32B is a  macroh2A histone chaperone

### Description
Interaction proteomics in cell extracts on tagged macroH2A, either expressed in cells or using recombinant dimers with H2B.

### Sample Protocol
Ni-NTA was incubated with recombinant His-macroH2A1.2-H2B dimers in binding buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 8.3, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) for 1 hour while rotating, followed by 3 washes. CNBr-activated Sepharose (Cytiva) was washed with 1 mM HCl after which macroH2A1.2-H2B dimers were coupled to the beads in 2M NaCl, 40% glycerol, 50 mM Hepes pH 8.0. After coupling, beads were quenched with 0.1 M Tris pH8.0, 0.5 M NaCl. For pull downs, HeLa cells were lysed in IP buffer (25 mM Hepes pH 8.3, 130 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 0.5 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, cOmplete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) for 10 min on ice. Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 16.000g and supernatant was added to the Ni or CNBr beads. Samples were incubated for 2 hours at 4oC while rotating, followed by three washes in IP buffer (Ni-beads were washed in IP buffer with 20mM imidazole) and 3 washes in 50 mM Tris pH8. HeLa cells expressing Flag-HA-macroH2A1.2 were washed in PBS, lysed in IP buffer and treated with benzonase for 1h while rotating at 4oC. Lysates were cleared by spinning for 15 min at 13.000g and supernatant was incubated with anti-FLAG-M2 affinity gel (Sigma) for 2 hours at 4oC while rotating. Beads were washed 3 times in IP buffer and 3 times with 50 mM Tris pH8. Beads were washed three times with 50mM NH4HCO3 and incubated with 10 ng/µL trypsin in 1 M urea 50mM NH4HCO3 for 30 minutes, washed with 50mM NH4HCO3 and the supernatant digested overnight (ON) in presence of 1mM DTT. Digested peptides were alkylated and desalted prior to LC-MS analysis. For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid or in a 25-cm analytical column (75µm ID, 1.6µm C18, IonOpticks) with a 50-min gradient from 2 to 37% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a Qexactive HF (Thermo) or into a Orbitrap Exploris-480 (Thermo) operated in data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition.  For Qexactive HF measurements parameters were as follows: survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 375–1600) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 5 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts. For Orbitrap Exploris-480 measurements parameters were as follows: survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350–1200) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). The 10 most intense peptide ions with charge states between 2 and 6 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 1x105, and fragmented at 30% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275ºC; ion selection threshold, 33.000 counts.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant45 2.1.0.0 was used to identify proteins and quantify by iBAQ with the following parameters: Database, Uniprot_UP000005640_Hsapiens_20210521; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 20ppm Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 7; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2. Identified proteins were considered if at least 2 peptides were identified with razor + unique peptides >1.

### Publication Abstract
All vertebrate genomes encode for three large histone H2A variants that have an additional metabolite-binding globular macrodomain module, macroH2A. MacroH2A variants impact heterochromatin organization and transcription regulation and establish a barrier for cellular reprogramming. However, the mechanisms of how macroH2A is incorporated into chromatin and the identity of any chaperones required for histone deposition remain elusive. Here, we develop a split-GFP-based assay for chromatin incorporation and use it to conduct a genome-wide mutagenesis screen in haploid human cells to identify proteins that regulate macroH2A dynamics. We show that the histone chaperone ANP32B is a regulator of macroH2A deposition. ANP32B associates with macroH2A in cells and in&#xa0;vitro binds to histones with low nanomolar affinity. In&#xa0;vitro nucleosome assembly assays show that ANP32B stimulates deposition of macroH2A-H2B and not of H2A-H2B onto tetrasomes. In cells, depletion of ANP32B strongly affects global macroH2A chromatin incorporation, revealing ANP32B as a macroH2A histone chaperone.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Human, Macroh2a, Anp32b

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center (BMC), Department of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.
Hubrecht Institute

### Submitter
Imke Mandemaker

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Ladurner
Biomedical Center (BMC), Department of Physiological Chemistry, Faculty of Medicine, LMU Munich, 82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany.


