### Accession
PXD037720

### Title
BAL proteomic signature of lung adenocarcinoma in IPF patients and its transposition in serum samples for less invasive diagnostic procedures

### Description
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a form of chronic and irreversible fibrosing interstitial pneumonia of unknown aetiology, with an average survival time of 3-5 years after diagnosis. Emerging evidence suggests that IPF increases the risk of lung carcinogenesis. Both diseases show similarities in terms of risk factors, such as history of smoking, concomitant emphysema, and viral infections, besides sharing similar pathogenic pathways. Lung cancer diagnosis is often difficult in IPF patients because of the diffuse lung injuries and abnormalities due to the underlying fibrosis. This is reflected in the lack of optimal therapeutic strategies for patients with both diseases. For this purpose, we performed a proteomic study on bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) samples from IPF, LC associated with IPF (LC-IPF) patients, and healthy controls (CTRL). Molecular pathways involved in inflammation, immune response, lipid metabolism and cell adhesion were found for the dysregulated proteins in LC-IPF, of which TTHY, APOA1, S10A9, RET4, GDRI1 and PROF1. The correlation test revealed a relationship between inflammation-related proteins and proteins associated with lipid metabolism. Also, the up-regulation of PROF1 in LC-IPF BAL and S10A9 in LC-IPF serum was validated. While APOA1 and APOE were validated as highly abundant in IPF BAL and low abundant in IPF serum. We evaluated nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase levels in serum highlighting its down-regulation in LC-IPF. Our retrospective analyses on BAL of IPF and LC-IPF patients extrapolate some potential biomarkers whose further evaluation at the serum level, permits the measurement of these potential biomarkers with a less invasive procedure.

### Sample Protocol
Differential electrophoretic spots were manually excised from MS-preparative gels. Spots were destained in a solution of 30 mM potassium ferricyanure and 100 mM sodium tiosulphate anhydrous and then, in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The destained spots were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile (ACN). Overnight rehydration in trypsin solution at 37°C of spots was performed to digest proteins. The obtained peptide solution was spotted on the MALDI target (0.75µl), dried, and covered with 1µl of matrix solution of 5mg/ml α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (CHCA) in 50% v/v ACN and 5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and dried again.MS analysis was performed with UltrafleXtreme™ MALDI-ToF/ToF instrument (Bruker Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA)

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass lists were filtered for contaminant removal: mass matrix-related ions, trypsin auto-lysis and keratin peaks. Peptide Mass Fingerprinting (PMF) search was performed using MASCOT (Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK, http://www.matrixscience.com). Search parameters were Swiss- Prot/TrEMBL and NCBInr as databases, Homo sapiens as taxonomy, 100 ppm as mass tolerance, one missed cleavage site as acceptable, carbamidomethylation (iodoacetamide alkylation) of cysteine as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as a possible modification.

### Publication Abstract
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a form of chronic and irreversible fibrosing interstitial pneumonia of unknown etiology. Although antifibrotic treatments have shown a reduction of lung function decline and a slow disease progression, IPF is characterize by a very high mortality. Emerging evidence suggests that IPF increases the risk of lung carcinogenesis. Both diseases show similarities in terms of risk factors, such as history of smoking, concomitant emphysema, and viral infections, besides sharing similar pathogenic pathways. Lung cancer (LC) diagnosis is often difficult in IPF patients because of the diffuse lung injuries and abnormalities due to the underlying fibrosis. This is reflected in the lack of optimal therapeutic strategies for patients with both diseases. For this purpose, we performed a proteomic study on bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) samples from IPF, LC associated with IPF (LC-IPF) patients, and healthy controls (CTRL). Molecular pathways involved in inflammation, immune response, lipid metabolism, and cell adhesion were found for the dysregulated proteins in LC-IPF, such as TTHY, APOA1, S10A9, RET4, GDIR1, and PROF1. The correlation test revealed a relationship between inflammation- and lipid metabolism-related proteins. PROF1 and S10A9, related to inflammation, were up-regulated in LC-IPF BAL and serum, while APOA1 and APOE linked to lipid metabolism, were highly abundant in IPF BAL and low abundant in IPF serum. Given the properties of cytokine/adipokine of the nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase, we also evaluated its serum abundance, highlighting its down-regulation in LC-IPF. Our retrospective analyses of BAL samples extrapolated some potential biomarkers of LC-IPF useful to improve the management of these contemporary pathologies. Their differential abundance in serum samples permits the measurement of these potential biomarkers with a less invasive procedure.

### Keywords
Apolipoprotein a1, Calgranulin b, Apolipoprotein e, Lung cancer, Nampt, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Profilin 1, Bal, Ipf

### Affiliations
Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena Via Aldo Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy
university of siena

### Submitter
Lorenza Vantaggiato

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Bini
Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena Via Aldo Moro 2, 53100 Siena, Italy


