### Accession
PXD003340

### Title
human follicular fluid lc-ms/ms

### Description
This study aimed to reveal if peptide profiling of individual human follicular fluid could become a new non-invasive predictive biomarker for oocyte quality, and attempted to discover candidate biomarkers for fertilization. In biomarker studies, because of normal clinical or biological variabil-ity, candidate biomarkers need to be validated across a large number of samples. To ensure that the discovered biomarkers are truly associated with oocytes quality and fertilization rather than the result of variability, three independent experiments were designed with a large population. In the present study, we investigated the peptide profile of human follicular fluid with fertilized and non-fertilized oocytes from patients undergoing in vitro fertilization using proteomic analysis with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. We additionally determined the protein identi-ties of the discovered peptide biomarkers as a first step toward understanding the pathways in which they may function.

### Sample Protocol
Follicular fluid samples were transferred to extraction tubes (2 ml, Eppendorf) with 0.5 ml lysis buffer containing 30mM Tris (SIGMA, St. Louis, USA), 8M urea (Acros Organics, New Jersey, USA), 5mM Dithiothreitol DTT, Applichem, Darmstadt, Germany) vortexed briefly and centri-fuged at 13000 rpm for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was then transferred to a 3K Da filter Microcon YM-30 filters (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA), the filter devices were sub-sequently centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min and the flow through was collected. 0.150M iodoa-cetamide (IAA, SIGMA, St. Louis, USA) was added to a final concentration of 0.015M and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in dark. Then 1% (trifluoroacetic acid) TFA was added to a final concentration of 0.1%. The mixture was then cleaned via solid phase extraction (SPE) using Pepclean C18 spin column (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufactuer’s instructions and eluted in a final volume of 40 µL. Subsequently, the samples were dried in a vacuum operator. The dried sample was kept at -20°C until analysis. The peptides were dissolved in 10 µl of 0.1 % formic acid (FA) and 5 % acetonitrile (ACN)

### Data Protocol
Five microliter from each sample were was injected and separated on an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC-nano system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific, Netherlands) equipped with a Thermo Scientific™ Ac-claim™ PepMap™ RSLC Nano-Trap Column with nanoViper™ Fittings, 3µm Particle Size. The samples were separated using a buffer A (water/0.1% FA) and buffer B (water 20%/ACN 80%/FA 0.08 %) and a Thermo Scientific™ EASY-Spray™ column PepMap™ RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, 50 µm x 150 mm using a gradient of 4% to 10% B in 12 min followed by a gradient of 10% to 35% B in  20 minutes, a gradient 35% to 65% B in 5 min and then a final elution and re-equilibration step at 95% and 5% buffer B respectively for 9 min. The flow-rate was set at 0.300 µL/min. The hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer, Q Exactive (Thermo Scien-tific), was operated in positive ion mode with a nanospray voltage of 1.5 kV and a source temper-ature of 250 °C. ProteoMass LTQ/FT-Hybrid ESI Pos. Mode CalMix (MSCAL5-1EA SUPEL-CO, Sigma-Aldrich) was used as an external calibrant and the lock mass 445.12003 as an internal calibrant. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a survey MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 for the mass range of m/z 400-1600 for precursor ions, fol-lowed by MS/MS scans of the top 10 most intense peaks with +2, +3, +4 and +5 charged ions above a threshold ion count of 16,000 at 17500 resolution using normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25eV with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z, an apex trigger 5-15 sec and a dynamic ex-clusion of 10 s. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms/ms, Follicular fluid

### Affiliations
Leuven University Fertility Center
Leuven University Fertility Centre, UZ Leuven Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium.

### Submitter
Fang Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Carl Spiessens
Leuven University Fertility Centre, UZ Leuven Campus Gasthuisberg, Herestraat 49, Leuven, Belgium.


