### Accession
PXD027189

### Title
Sequence specific recognition of U1 snRNP stem-loop 4 by the ubiquitin-like domain of U2 snRNP protein SF3A1 and its RGG motif

### Description
Cross-linking of isotope-labelled RNA coupled with mass spectrometry (CLIR-MS) was used to study the interaction between the ubiquitin-like domain (UBL) of the protein SF3A1, a component of the U2 snRNP, with stem-loop 4 RNA (SL4) from the U1 snRNP. The complex was cross-linked and analysed both in isolation, and in broader context with components of the U1 snRNP. Cross-linking was performed using irradiation under 254 nm light, relying on the inherent reactivity of ribonucleotides.

### Sample Protocol
For samples containing the SF3A1 UBL and SL4 in isolation (U1-SL4 sample), SF3A1-UBL and SL4 RNA were combined at 1:1.1 molar ratio to U1-SL4, with concentration of 50 µM (25 nmol, with 10 nmol used for each replicate). For the study in the context of the U1 snRNP (U1 snRNP sample), SF3A1-UBL and U1-C were added in 1:1.5 molar ratio in 10 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 1 mM TCEP. Samples were cross-linked at 0.8 J/cm2 irradiation in a CL-1000 Ultraviolet Crosslinker, at concentrations of 50 µM (U1-SL4 sample) and 0.75 µM (0.12 mg/mL, 5 nmol, U1 snRNP sample), respectively. Protease and RNase digestion of the U1-SL4 sample was undertaken as described previously (Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017)). For the U1 snRNP sample, the complex was denatured by heating with guanidine hydrochloride, and digested with LysC, trypsin, and RNAses T1, A and benzonase. Enrichment for protein-RNA cross-links was carried out in a similar fashion to the reference above, by metal oxide affinity chromatography with titanium dioxide, except the U1 snRNP sample was split in 4 for these steps, and recombined prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Enriched samples were analysed by data-dependent LC-MS/MS using a Thermo easy-nLC 1200 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using xQuest (Walzthoeni et al., Nat. Methods, 2012), version 2.1.5, against the sequence of the SF3A1 construct, or a database containing this construct plus 10 U1 snRNP protein components, depending on the sample. All possible nucleotide adducts from the U1 SL4 RNA (1-4 residues in length) were specified as “mono-link” mass shifts, and their corresponding mass shifts between unlabeled and labeled RNA were considered (according to the 13C15N labelling scheme described in Dorn, G. et al., Nat Methods 14, 487–490 (2017)). Additional search settings were as follows: Enzyme = trypsin, maximum number of missed cleavages = 2, MS mass tolerance = 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance = 0.2 Da for “common”-type fragment ions and 0.3 Da for “xlink”-type fragment ions. Resulting were further refined by ld.score and mass accuracy, and plotted using Python scripts.   Cross-link identifications for each data set in the corresponding publication are compiled in a spreadsheet file in csv format. A separate spreadsheet explains which files correspond to each experiment and replicate.   Further experimental details are provided in the accompanying publication.

### Publication Abstract
In mammals, the structural basis for the interaction between U1 and U2 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (snRNPs) during the early steps of splicing is still elusive. The binding of the ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain of SF3A1 to the stem-loop 4 of U1 snRNP (U1-SL4) contributes to this interaction. Here, we determined the 3D structure of the complex between the UBL of SF3A1 and U1-SL4 RNA. Our crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, and cross-linking mass spectrometry data show that SF3A1-UBL recognizes, sequence specifically, the GCG/CGC RNA stem and the apical UUCG tetraloop of U1-SL4. In vitro and in&#xa0;vivo mutational analyses support the observed intermolecular contacts and demonstrate that the carboxyl-terminal arginine-glycine-glycine-arginine (RGGR) motif of SF3A1-UBL binds sequence specifically by inserting into the RNA major groove. Thus, the characterization of the SF3A1-UBL/U1-SL4 complex expands the repertoire of RNA binding domains and reveals the capacity of RGG/RG motifs to bind RNA in a sequence-specific manner.

### Keywords
Uv cross-linking; sf3a1; u1; u2; snrnp; splicing; spliceosome; structural proteomics; protein-rna; rna-protein; protein-rna complex; rna-protein complex; clir-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zürich
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology

### Submitter
Christopher Sarnowski

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Leitner
ETH Zurich, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


