### Accession
PXD027344

### Title
Comparative analysis of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 and Ad26.COV2.S SARS-CoV-2 vector vaccines

### Description
Vector-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines such as AstraZeneca's ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 have been associated with vaccine-induced thrombosis (TTS/VITT). We studied ChAdOx1 nCov-19 (AstraZeneca) and Ad26.COV2.S (Johnson & Johnson) and compared the vaccines using proteomics with mass spectrometric measurements. We could demonstrate that ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 contained significant amounts of human proteins in addition to adenoviral proteins. This was not the case for Ad26.COV2.S. Among the detected human proteins, proteasome subunits beta 1/delta and beta 5/MB1 were identified.  In summary, both studied SARS-CoV-2 vaccines are markedly different concerning their content of contaminating proteins, which is most likely a determining factor for different frequencies of TTS/VITT after their application.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Vaccines were precipitated using a quantitative salt-acetone precipitation and the precipitate was resuspended in one fifth of the initial volume using 20 mM HEPES buffer pH8 containing 1% (w/v) SDS. Determination of protein concentrations was performed using a microBCA assay according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce Thermo Fisher, Bonn, Germany). 2 μg of protein was reduced (2.5 mM DTT ultrapure, Invitrogen/Thermo Fisher, Bonn, Germany) for 30 minutes at 37°C and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide for 15 minutes at 37°C, Sigma Aldrich, Munich, Germany). Subsequently, protein was digested with trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio of 1:25) on SP3 beads as described by Blankenburg et al.  LC‐MS/MS and data analysis. LC‐MS/MS experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Exploris TM 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate TM 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Dionex/ Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Chromatographic separation of tryptic peptides was achieved by a 60 min linear gradient using a binary buffer system that consisted of: 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in HPLC-grade water; 100% ACN in 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid with increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (7-25% (v/v) in 0.1% (w/v) acetic acid) on a reverse phase column (Accucore 150-C18, 25 cm x 75 μm, 2.6 μm C18, 150 Å), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 40 °C. The MS scans were carried out in a m/z range of 350 to 1200 m/z.  For data acquisition in data independent mode (DIA), precursor scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 and fragments at a resolution of 30.000 in 66 windows with 13 m/z and a window overlap of 2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed with Spectronaut version 14.10.201222.47784 (Biognosis, Zurich, Switzerland) in directDIA mode using the human Uniprot database (version 01/2021) with added SARS CoV2 spike protein (YP_009724390.1) sequence and protein sequences of ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 vector 9 consisting of chimpanzee adenovirus Y25 10 (NC_017825) with exchanged regions (E4ORF4, E4ORF6, E4ORF6/7) from human adenovirus 5 (AC_000008) for the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 analysis. For the Ad26.COV2.S analysis we used a database comprised of human Uniprot database (version 01/2021) with added SARS CoV2 spike protein (YP_009724390. 1) sequence and protein sequences of hAd26 (Uniprot taxon identifier ID46928) with exchanged regions (E4ORF6/7) from human adenovirus 5 (AC_000008). Identifications were based on a precursor Q-value cut-off of 0.001 and a FDR protein of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Vector-based SARS-CoV-2 vaccines have been associated with vaccine- induced thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (VITT/TTS), but the causative factors are still unresolved. We comprehensively analyzed the ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 (AstraZeneca) and Ad26.COV2.S (Johnson and Johnson) vaccines. ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 contains significant amounts of host cell protein impurities, including functionally active proteasomes, and adenoviral proteins. A much smaller amount of impurities was found in Ad26.COV2.S. Platelet factor 4 formed complexes with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 constituents, but not with purified virions from ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 or with Ad26.COV2.S. Vascular hyperpermeability was induced by ChAdOx nCoV-19 but not by Ad26.COV2.S. These differences in impurities together with EDTAinduced capillary leakage might contribute to the higher incidence rate of VITT associated with ChAdOx1 nCoV-19 compared to Ad26.COV2.S.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ad26.cov2.s, Vector vaccines, Chadox1

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald, Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Functional Genomics

### Submitter
Christian Hentschker

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald, Interfaculty Institute of Genetics and Functional Genomics, Department of Functional Genomics


