### Accession
PXD032337

### Title
Proximity labelling of FLAG-TurboID-tagged UPF3B wild type and interaction-deficient mutant proteins followed by proteomics analysis

### Description
UPF3A and UPF3B are paralogous genes in human cells that are involved in the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway. NMD is a cellular quality control mechanism that monitors mRNAs during translation. Aberrant translation due to features such as the presence of a premature stop codon downstream on an exon-exon junction activates NMD and leads to the degradation of the mRNA. To investigate the role of UPF3B in NMD, we have generated FLAG-TurboID-UPF3B wild type or mutant expressing human Flp-In T-Rex 293 UPF3B knockout cells using the PiggyBac transposon system. We generated proteomic data from the proximity labeled interactome of these UPF3B variants.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 equipped with FAIMS Pro via a Nanospray Flex source (all Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a precolumn cartridge (Acclaim PepMap 100) for two minutes with a loading pump flow of 15 µl/min. Afterwards, peptides were separated on the following gradient running 0.1 % FA (buffer A) against 80 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % FA (buffer B) on a self-packed 40 cm pulled tip column (75 µm ID, filled with Poroshell 120, Agilent): initial 5 % B, up to 30 % B in 107 min, up to 50 % B in 20 min, up to 95 % B in 1 min, followed by washing at 95 % B and reequilibration to initial conditions. Peptides eluted from the column were analyzed in data-dependent mode using three different FAIMS compensation voltages (CVs). On each CV, a survey scan was performed with a resolution of 60k and an injection time of 25 ms in the range of 350 – 1400 m/z. Adjusted TopN cycles were used for each CV as followed: -45 CV, Top14; -60 CV, Top12; -75 CV, Top10. All MS2 isolation were performed in a 1.4 Th window, fragmentations were performed with a collision energy of 30 % and MS2 scans were all recorded with a resolution of 15k with a maximum injection time of 22 ms.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were split by CV to be analyzed in MaxQuant 2.0.3.0 using standard parameters. Samples stemming from one MS run were named identically in MaxQuant to facilitate proper quantifications following Hebert et al.(10.1021/acs.analchem.8b02233). Spectra were searched against the human Uniprot reference proteome (UP5640) including isoforms. Match between run option was used over samples from each group. Afterwards, results were used to perform MS1 extraction in Skyline 21.0 (10.1002/mas.21540). Suitable quantifier peptides for relative quantification were chosen for UPF3A and UPF3B as well as two additional qualifier peptides. Chosen quantifiers were only observed on a single CV in all samples to ease ratio calculations. The same process was performed for actin (P60709) and tubulin (P68366) used as “loading controls” to normalize quantifier intensities of UPF3A and UPF3B prior to ratio calculation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Upf3, Nonsense-mediated mrna decay, Gene paralogs, Mrna turnover

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany


