### Accession
PXD041280

### Title
A conserved tryptophan in the acylated segment controls β2- integrin-independent cell penetration of RTX toxins

### Description
The post-translationally acylated Repeats in ToXins (RTX) leukotoxins, such as the adenylate cyclase (CyaA) or α-hemolysin (HlyA), bind β2-integrins of leukocytes, but also penetrate cells lacking these receptors. We show that the indole of conserved tryptophans within the acylated segments, e.g. W876 in CyaA and W579 in HlyA, is crucial for β2-integrin-independent membrane penetration of toxins. Substitutions of W876 by aliphatic or aromatic residues did not affect acylation, folding or activities of CyaA W876L/F/Y toxin variants on CR3-expressing cells. In contrast, toxin activity of CyaA W876L/F/Y on cells lacking CR3 was strongly impaired. Similarly, a W579L substitution selectively reduced HlyA W579L cytotoxicity towards cells lacking β2-integrins. Intriguingly, the W876L/F/Y substitutions increased the thermal stability (Tm) of CyaA by 4 to 8 °C. In addition, the hydrogen-deuterium exchange revealed structural changes in the acylated segment of the CyaA W876F variant, compared to intact CyaA. The substitution of W876 with a polar glutamine (W876Q), not increasing the Tm, or combining of the W876F substitution with a cavity-filling V822M substitution, decreasing the Tm of CyaA W876F+V822M to a value closer to that of CyaA, yielded a milder defect of toxin activity on erythrocytes lacking CR3. Furthermore, the activity of CyaA was selectively impaired on erythrocytes when the interaction of the pyrrolidine of P848 with the indole of W876 was ablated. These results suggest that the bulky indole of the W876 of CyaA, or W579 of HlyA, rules the local structural flexibility of the acylated segment. This may facilitate adoption of a membrane-penetrating conformation of the toxins in the absence of β2-integrin-mediated positioning of the toxin towards the cell membrane.

### Sample Protocol
The MS analysis was performed using a solariX XR FTMS instrument equipped with a 15 T superconducting magnet and a Dual II ESI/MALDI ion source (Bruker Daltonics, Billerica, USA), as described earlier (Lepesheva et al. 2021).

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed using the Data Analysis 4.4 software package (Bruker Daltonics) and the extracted data were searched either against the FASTA of an intact toxin molecule (CyaA, UniProtKB P0DKX7; HlyA, UniProtKB: P08715) or its sequence modified in accordance with corresponding mutation using Linx software (RRID:SCR_018657). The acylation status of lysines was determined by comparing the relative intensity ratios between acylated peptide ions and their unmodified counterparts.

### Publication Abstract
The acylated Repeats in ToXins (RTX) leukotoxins, the adenylate cyclase toxin (CyaA) or &#x3b1;-hemolysin (HlyA), bind &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins of leukocytes but also penetrate cells lacking these receptors. We show that the indoles of conserved tryptophans in the acylated segments, W876 of CyaA and W579 of HlyA, are crucial for &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin-independent membrane penetration. Substitutions of W876 by aliphatic or aromatic residues did not affect acylation, folding, or the activities of CyaA W876L/F/Y variants on cells expressing high amounts of the &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrin CR3. However, toxin activity of CyaA W876L/F/Y on cells lacking CR3 was strongly impaired. Similarly, a W579L substitution selectively reduced HlyA W579L cytotoxicity towards cells lacking &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins. Intriguingly, the W876L/F/Y substitutions increased the thermal stability (T<sub>m</sub>) of CyaA by 4 to 8 &#xb0;C but locally enhanced the accessibility to deuteration of the hydrophobic segment and of the interface of the two acylated loops. W876Q substitution (showing no increase in T<sub>m</sub>), or combination of W876F with a cavity-filling V822M substitution (this combination decreasing the T<sub>m</sub> closer to that of CyaA), yielded a milder defect of toxin activity on erythrocytes lacking CR3. Furthermore, the activity of CyaA on erythrocytes was also selectively impaired when the interaction of the pyrrolidine of P848 with the indole of W876 was ablated. Hence, the bulky indoles of residues W876 of CyaA, or W579 of HlyA, rule the local positioning of the acylated loops and enable a membrane-penetrating conformation in the absence of RTX toxin docking onto the cell membrane by &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> integrins.

### Keywords
Trp-pro interaction, Β2-integrins, Acylated segment, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Rtx toxin, Cytotoxicity, Tryptophan residue, Α-hemolysin, Adenylate cyclase toxin, Thermal stability

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.
Institute of Microbiology, Czech Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
David Jurnečka

### Lab Head
Dr prof. Peter Sebo
Institute of Microbiology of the CAS, v. v. i.


