### Accession
PXD033808

### Title
SerpinB2/TPPII regulates senescence

### Description
Tripeptidyl peptidase II (TPPII) degrades N-terminal tripeptides from proteins and peptides. Studies in both human and mice have shown that TPPII deficiency is linked to cellular immune-senescence, lifespan regulation, and the aging process. However, the mechanism of how TPPII participates in these processes is less clear. In this study, we established a chemical probe-based assay and found that while the mRNA and protein levels of TPPII were not altered during senescence, its enzymatic activity was reduced in senescent human fibroblasts. We also showed that elevation of serine protease inhibitor serpinB2 reduced TPPII activity in senescent cells. Moreover, suppression of TPPII led to elevation of lysosomal contents as well as TPPI and -galactosidase activities, suggesting that the lysosome biogenesis is induced to compensate for the reduction of TPPII activity in senescent cells. Together this study discloses a critical role of the serpinB2/TPPII signaling pathway in proteostasis during senescence. Since serpinB2 level can be increased by a variety of cellular stresses, reduction of TPPII activity through activation of serpinB2 might represent a common pathway for cells to respond to different stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates of young and senescent IMR90 cells were labeled with 50 M of probe 1 for 1 hour at 25oC. Unbound free probes were removed by PD-10 column and the probe 1-labeled proteins were then pulled down by streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (GE Healthcare). The labeled proteins were then eluted with 2% SDS and heated at 95oC for 5 min. The eluted proteins were performed by gel-assisted digestion (Han et al., 2008). In brief, the proteins were reduced by 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37oC for 30 min and alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at 37oC for 1 hour in the dark. To incorporate proteins into a gel directly in the eppendorf vial, the volume ratio (14:5:0.7:0.3) of sample:acrylamide/bisacrylamide solution (40%, v/v, 29:1): 10% (w/v) APS: 100% TEMED was then added and stand at room temperature. The gel was cut into small pieces and washed several times with 1 ml of 20 mM TEABC containing 50% (v/v) CH3CN. The gel samples were further dehydrated with 100% CH3CN and then completely dried by SpeedVac. The gel was resuspended in 25 mM TEABC and then incubated with trypsin (protein/trypsin = 10/1, g/g) at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were further extracted from the gel using 5% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in 50% CH3CN twice and 100% CH3CN. The peptides were combined, concentrated in a SpeedVac, and desalted by C18 Ziptip (Millipore). The peptides were analyzed by Orbitrap Velos MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (PD2.1; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and peptide identification was performed by Mascot search engine (version 2.3.2) and SEQUEST search engine against the Swiss-Prot database (v2015_12, total 20,193 sequences from human) with a percolator (strict false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 and a relaxed FDR of 0.05). The protease was specified as trypsin with 2 maximum missing cleavage sites. Mass tolerance for precursor ion mass was 10 ppm with the fragment ion tolerance as 0.1 Da. Oxidation at methionine, carbamidomethyl at cysteine, and deamidation at asparagine or glutamine, were selected as variable modifications. Peptides were considered to be identified if their individual ion score was higher than the identity score (p < 0.05). To evaluate the false discovery rate (< 1%) in protein identification, a decoy database search against a randomized decoy database created by PD2.1 using identical search parameters and validation criteria was also performed. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) with at least high confidence and a strict maximum parsimony principle (target FDR <0.01) were applied for the protein level. For label-free quantitation, the peak area (i.e. area under the curve) of each precursor ion was calculated from extracted ion chromatogram during data processing by using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node with mass precision 2 ppm. The abundance of identified protein was calculated from top 3 of all unique and razor peptides in Peptide and Protein Quantifier node. The relative quantitation was further compared with the protein abundance from young and senescent samples.

### Publication Abstract
Tripeptidyl peptidase II (TPPII or TPP2) degrades N-terminal tripeptides from proteins and peptides. Studies in both humans and mice have shown that TPPII deficiency is linked to cellular immune-senescence, lifespan regulation and the aging process. However, the mechanism of how TPPII participates in these processes is less clear. In this study, we established a chemical probe-based assay and found that although the mRNA and protein levels of TPPII were not altered during senescence, its enzymatic activity was reduced in senescent human fibroblasts. We also showed that elevation of the levels of the serine protease inhibitor serpinB2 reduced TPPII activity in senescent cells. Moreover, suppression of TPPII led to elevation in the amount of lysosomal contents as in well as TPPI (TPP1) and &#x3b2;-galactosidase activities, suggesting that lysosome biogenesis is induced to compensate for the reduction of TPPII activity in senescent cells. Together, this study discloses a critical role of the serpinB2-TPPII signaling pathway in proteostasis during senescence. Since serpinB2 levels can be increased by a variety of cellular stresses, reduction of TPPII activity through activation of serpinB2 might represent a common pathway for cells to respond to different stress conditions. This article has an associated First Person interview with the first author of the paper.

### Keywords
Activity-based probe; serine hydrolase; tpp; senescence; benzylphosphonofluoridate

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


