### Accession
PXD014163

### Title
ALS/FTD-causing mutation in cyclin F causes the dysregulation of SFPQ

### Description
Recently, we identified missense mutations in CCNF that are causative of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). CCNF encodes for cyclin F, a substrate recognition component of an E3-ubiquitin ligase. Mutations in CCNF directly implicates disruption in the ubiquitin-proteasome system in the pathogenesis of ALS/FTD. In this study we used an unbiased proteomic screening workflow using the proximity-based ligation method, BioID, to identify putative interaction partners of cyclin F. In doing so, we found over 100 putative interaction partners of cyclin F. Notably, we demonstrated that cyclin F closely associates with a number of essential paraspeckle proteins, which are stress-responsive proteins that have recently been implicated in ALS pathogenesis. We further demonstrate that SCFcyclin F mediates the direct ubiquitylation and subsequent proteasomal degradation of RBM14, a core component of the paraspeckle complex. This degradation is defective when cyclin F carries an ALS/FTD-causing mutation, leading to RBM14 accumulation in primary neurons upon proteasome inhibition. Additionally, analysis of ALS patient post-mortem tissue revealed that RBM14 levels were significantly reduced in post-mortem ALS patient motor cortex and significantly reduced in the neurons of spinal cord tissue. Together, our data indicate that defects in RBM14 homeostasis, which can be due to defects in cyclin F-mediated degradation, may be a common factor underlying ALS/FTD disease pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to mass spectrometry, lyophilised peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and bath sonicated for 20 minutes. The resuspended peptides were then centrifuged at 14, 000 xg for 15 minutes to remove any insoluble debris, and the clarified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. The peptide fractions were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), making use of a 60 minutes gradient (2–95% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) running at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. Peptides eluted from the nano LC column were subsequently ionized into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray source was fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 1.5 kV electrospray voltage. The temperature of the capillary was set to 250°C. Precursor ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FT-FT acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. FT-MS analysis on the Q Exactive Plus was carried out at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS. MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x104 ions. Maximum injection times were set to 30 and 50 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) incorporating the Sequest search algorithm employing the Homo sapiens Uniprot FASTA databases. Peptide identifications were determined taking into account a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance and 0.1 Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation respectively. Peptide modifications were also considered whereby cysteine carbamidomethylation was considered a static modification. Variable modifications included methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, lysine biotinylation, and acetylated N-terminal residues. Trypsin was set as the enzyme of use, allowing for three missed cleavages at the most. Data was also processed using a label-free quantitation (LFQ) workflow employing the Minora Feature node, making use of a Protein FDR validator node which estimates the false discovery rates at the protein level as well as a percolator node to estimate the FDR at the PSM level. Results were adjusted so that the final global FDR was less than 1% at the protein and peptide level. A q-value of 0.01 was required to validate protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we identified missense mutations in CCNF that are causative of familial and sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Hallmark features of these diseases include the build-up of insoluble protein aggregates as well as the mislocalization of proteins such as transactive response DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43). In recent years, the dysregulation of SFPQ (splicing factor proline and glutamine rich) has also emerged as a pathological hallmark of ALS/FTD. CCNF encodes for the protein cyclin F, a substrate recognition component of an E3 ubiquitin ligase. We have previously shown that ALS/FTD-linked mutations in CCNF cause disruptions to overall protein homeostasis that leads to a build-up of K48-linked ubiquitylated proteins as well as defects in autophagic machinery. To investigate further processes that may be affected by cyclin F, we used a protein-proximity ligation method, known as Biotin Identification (BioID), standard immunoprecipitations and mass spectrometry to identify novel interaction partners of cyclin F and infer further process that may be affected by the ALS/FTD-causing mutation. Results demonstrate that cyclin F closely associates with proteins involved with RNA metabolism as well as a number of RNA-binding proteins previously linked to ALS/FTD, including SFPQ. Notably, the overexpression of cyclin F(S621G) led to the aggregation and altered subcellular distribution of SFPQ in human embryonic kidney (HEK293) cells, while leading to altered degradation in primary neurons. Overall, our data links ALS/FTD-causing mutations in CCNF to converging pathological features of ALS/FTD and provides a link between defective protein degradation systems and the pathological accumulation of a protein involved in RNA processing and metabolism.

### Keywords
Bioid, Rbm14, Ubiquitylation, Proteomics, Paraspeckles, Homeostasis, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Cyclin f, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW 2109


