### Accession
PXD027097

### Title
Genome survey sequencing of Gossypium robinsonii to investigate the molecular responses of wild cotton pollen to extreme heat

### Description
Wild species are valuable resources for developing resilient crops to environmental stresses. We used Gossypium robinsonii, Australian wild cotton, to investigate the molecular signatures contributing to the tolerance of this plant to harsh environments. Three stages of pollen development, including tetrads (TE; 5-5.5mm), uninucleate microspores (UN; 7-10mm) and binucleate microspores (BN; 13-24mm) were exposed to 36/25 °C (moderate heat) or 40/30 °C (extreme heat) for 5 days, and the corresponding mature pollen grains were collected for SWATH-MS analysis. The genome of G. robinsonii assembled in the present study was used for proteome reference.

### Sample Protocol
About 20 mg of pollen grains were ground into fine powder following a phenol-based protocol. Proteins from each sample were digested in-solution, and the resulting peptides were desalted using 47-mm SDB-RPS disks (SDB-RPS, 3M, Saint Paul). For library preparation, a small fraction of all samples were pooled and fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose). Nanoflow LC-MS/MS was performed using a Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, USA) equipped with an Eksigent nanoLC 400 liquid chromatography system (Sciex, USA) and nanoflex cHiPLC module (Sciex, USA).

### Data Protocol
In brief, the data obtained in the DDA mode was processed in ProteinPilot ver 5.0.1 (Sciex, USA) using Paragon algorithm with default parameters. The obtained library was then imported into PeakView (version 2.2, Sciex, USA) and used as a spectral library, following SWATH-MS quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Heat stress specifically affects fertility by impairing pollen viability but cotton wild relatives successfully reproduce in hot savannas where they evolved. An Australian arid-zone cotton (Gossypium robinsonii) was exposed to heat events during pollen development then mature pollen was subjected to deep proteomic analysis using 57&#x2009;023 predicted genes from a genomic database we assembled for the same species. Three stages of pollen development, including tetrads (TEs), uninucleate microspores (UNs) and binucleate microspores (BNs) were exposed to 36&#xb0;C or 40&#xb0;C for 5 days and the resulting mature pollen was collected at anthesis (p-TE, p-UN and p-BN, respectively). Using the sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra proteomic analysis, 2704 proteins were identified and quantified across all pollen samples analysed. Proteins predominantly decreased in abundance at all stages in response to heat, particularly after exposure of TEs to 40&#xb0;C. Functional enrichment analyses demonstrated that extreme heat increased the abundance of proteins that contributed to increased messenger RNA splicing via spliceosome, initiation of cytoplasmic translation and protein refolding in p-TE40. However, other functional categories that contributed to intercellular transport were inhibited in p-TE40, linked potentially to Rab proteins. We ascribe the resilience of reproductive processes in G. robinsonii at temperatures up to 40&#xb0;C, relative to commercial cotton, to a targeted reduction in protein transport.

### Keywords
Genome sequencing, Wild cotton, Pollen, Heat stress, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Farhad Masoomi-Aladizgeh

### Lab Head
Dr Brian J Atwell
Department of Biological Sciences at Macquarie University


