### Accession
PXD009657

### Title
In-situ Click Reaction Coupled with Quantitative Proteomics for Identification of Protein Targets of Catechol Estrogens

### Description
Catechol estrogens (CEs) are metabolic electrophiles that actively undergo covalent interaction with cellular proteins, influencing molecular function. There is no feasible method to identify their binders in a living system. Herein, we developed a click chemistry-based approach using ethinylestradiol(EE2) as the precursor probe coupled with quantitative proteomics to identify protein targets of CEs and classify their binding strengths.

### Sample Protocol
A major endogenous estrogen, ethynyl estradiol (EE2), was used directly as the precursor probe to capture interacting proteins of CEs via in-situ metabolic conversion and click reaction in liver microsomes. The purified CEs-protein complex was cleaved from streptavidin beads and digested by trypsin in one step, followed by stable isotope dimethyl labeling. The labeled samples were fractionated by hydrophilicInteraction Chromatography (HILIC). Each fraction was analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra acquired from each HILIC fraction were converted to peak lists (in msm format) using an in-house Mascot Distiller program (version 2.3, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK) with default settings for Orbitrap to search against a database composed of SwissProt 20110921 protein database for Rattus (532146sequences; 188719038 residues) and the control proteins, HSA and Forteo.For a standard search, a mass tolerance of ± 10 ppm of precursor ions and ± 0.8 Da of product ions, two allowable miss-cleavage, and a Mascot probability score (P<0.05) were used. Carbamidomethyl (C) ( + 57.0214 Da), deamidated (NQ) ( + 0.984 Da), oxidation (M) ( + 15.995 Da), dimethyl (K) ( + 28.0313 Da), dimethyl (N-term) ( + 28.0313 Da), dimethyl:CHD2 (K) ( + 32.0564 Da), dimethyl:CHD2 (N-term) ( + 32.0564 Da) were chosen as variable modifications. The “rank 1” sequence was chosen for the assignment of each MS-MS spectrum and unique peptides (bold red) were used for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Catechol estrogens (CEs) are metabolic electrophiles that actively undergo covalent interaction with cellular proteins, influencing molecular function. There is no feasible method to identify their binders in a living system. Herein, we developed a click chemistry-based approach using ethinylestradiol (EE2) as the precursor probe coupled with quantitative proteomics to identify protein targets of CEs and classify their binding strengths. Using in situ metabolic conversion and click reaction in liver microsomes, CEs-protein complex was captured by the probe, digested by trypsin, stable isotope labeled via reductive amination, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS). A total of 334 liver proteins were repeatedly identified ( n &#x2265; 2); 274 identified proteins were classified as strong binders based on precursor mass mapping. The binding strength was further scaled by D/H ratio (activity probe/solvent): 259 strong binders had D/H &gt; 5.25; 46 weak binders had 5.25 &gt; D/H &gt; 1; 5 nonspecific binders (keratins) had D/H &lt; 1. These results were confirmed using spiked covalent control (strong binder) and noncovalent control (weak binder), as well as in vitro testing of cytochrome c (D/H = 5.9), which showed covalent conjugation with CEs. Many identified strong binders, such as glutathione transferase, catechol-O-methyl transferase, superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and cytochrome c, are involved in cellular redox processes or detoxification activities. CE conjugation was shown to suppress the superoxide oxidase activity of cytochrome c, suggesting that CEs modification may alter the redox action of cellular proteins. Due to structural similarity and inert alkyne group, EE2 probe is very likely to capture protein targets of CEs in general. Thus, this strategy can be adopted to explore the biological impact of CEs modification in living systems.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Lc/ms, Metabolites, Catechol estrogens, Proteomics, Redox modification, Click chemistry, Electrophiles, Dimethyl labeling, Post translational modification

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry,Department of Life Sciences,National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan
Department of Chemistry, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan 

### Submitter
Yi-Chen Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chen, Shu-Hui
Department of Chemistry,Department of Life Sciences,National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan


