### Accession
PXD017958

### Title
Cell autonomous requirement of Neurofibrimin (Nf1) for postnatal muscle hypertrophic growth and metabolic homeostasis

### Description
Background Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) is a multi-organ disease caused by mutations in Neurofibromin (NF1). Amongst other features, NF1 patients frequently show reduced muscle mass and strength, impairing patients’ mobility and increasing the risk of fall. The role of Nf1 in muscle and the cause for the NF1-associated myopathy is mostly unknown.   Methods To dissect the function of Nf1 in muscle, we created muscle-specific knockout mouse models for Nf1, inactivating Nf1 in the prenatal myogenic lineage either under the Lbx1 promoter or under the Myf5 promoter. Mice were analyzed during pre-and postnatal myogenesis and muscle growth.   Results Nf1Lbx1 and Nf1Myf5 animals showed only mild defects in prenatal myogenesis. Nf1Lbx1 animals were perinatally lethal, while Nf1Myf5 animals survived up to approx. 25 weeks. Nf1Myf5 animals showed decreased postnatal growth, reduced muscle size, and fast fiber atrophy. Proteome and transcriptome analysis of muscle tissue indicated decreased protein synthesis and increased proteasomal degradation, and decreased glycolytic and increased oxidative activity in muscle tissue. Real-time respirometry demonstrated enhanced oxidative metabolism in Nf1Myf5 muscles concomitant to a fiber type shift from type 2B to type 2A and type 1. Nf1Myf5 muscles showed hallmarks of mild oxidative stress and increased activation of AMPK indicating an energy deficit, increased expression of atrogenes and decreased activation of mTORC1. Proteome and transcriptome analysis indicated that oxidative fibers mainly relied on fatty acid catabolism. Inline, Nf1Myf5 animals showed a drastic reduction of white, but not brown, adipose tissue.   Conclusions Our results demonstrate a cell-autonomous role for Nf1 in myogenic cells during postnatal muscle growth required for metabolic and proteostatic homeostasis. Furthermore, Nf1 deficiency in muscle leads to cross-tissue communication and mobilization of lipid reserves.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation Three biological replicates of Nf1Myf5 and control (Nf1flox/+;Myf5Cre and Nf1+/+;Myf5Cre) TA muscles from p21 mice were used for proteome profiling. Proteomics sample preparation was done according to a published protocol with minor modifications 25. In brief, about 10 mg frozen tissue per sample were homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep (2 times for 60 s, 4 m x s-1) in 1 mL of a buffer containing 6 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. Lysates were boiled at 95°C for 15 min in a thermal shaker, followed by sonication for 15 min and centrifuged at 15,000 g for 5 min. The supernatant was transferred into new protein low binding tubes (Eppendorf, Germany). 100 µg protein per sample were diluted to 1 M GdmCl by adding 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris, 8.5 pH, followed by a Lys C digestion (1:50) at 37°C for 2 hours. This was followed by another dilution to 0.5 M GdmCl and a tryptic digestion (1:50) at 37°C overnight. Subsequently, peptides were desalted with C18 columns and reconstituted in 1% formic acid in water and further separated into five fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT). Eluates were first dried in a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano-LC-MS/MS. Five µg of each SCX fraction and a non-fractioned sample were used for proteome profiling and analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS instrument settings for shotgun proteome profiling with Label-FreeQuantification (LFQ) and data analysis.  LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously 26. Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 38% solvent B in solvent A over 120 min at 266 nL per minute flow rate. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5 × 105) with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV. In order to avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were sequenced.  Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB (UP000000589) with 54,416 entries, released in March 2016. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, a first search mass tolerance for peptides of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm, implemented in MaxQuant, was used for data normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Muscle atrophy, Neurofibromatosis, Muscle metabolism, Muscle fiber type, Myopathy

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Musculoskeletal Development and Regeneration Group, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Sigmar Stricker
Musculoskeletal Development and Regeneration Group, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany


