### Accession
PXD024914

### Title
Global Profiling of Lysine Accessibility to Evaluate Protein Structure Changes in Alzheimer’s Disease

### Description
The linear sequence of amino acids in a protein folds into a 3D structure to execute protein activity and function, but it is still challenging to profile the 3D structure at the proteome scale. Here, we present a method of native protein tandem mass tag (TMT) profiling of Lys accessibility and its application to investigate structural alterations in human brain specimens of Alzheimer’s disease (AD).

### Sample Protocol
Human brain tissues were extracted by vortexing in the presence of the glass beads with native lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, and 0.05% sodium deoxycholate) that is compatible with TMT reaction. Proteins were individually labeled with the 11-plex TMT reagents. The labeled samples were equally pooled, denatured, and digested, followed by C18 desalting. The desalted TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated by offline basic pH reversed-phase LC (XBridge C18 column (3.5 μm particle size, 4.6 mm × 25 cm, Waters), buffer A (10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0), buffer B (95% acetonitrile, 10 mM ammonium formate, pH 8.0)) with a 200 min gradient of 15–50% buffer B. Four hundred fractions were collected every half minute and concatenated to 100 fractions. Each fraction was analyzed with acidic pH reversed-phase LC–MS/MS with a self-packed column (75 μm × 15 cm with 1.9 μm C18 resin from Dr. Maisch GmbH, heated at 68 °C to reduce back pressure) coupled with a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were eluted with a gradient of buffer A (0.2% formic acid, 5% DMSO) and buffer B (buffer A plus 65% acetonitrile) within 90 min: 5–15% buffer B in 1 min, 15–20% in 10 min, 20–45% in 60 min, 45–95% in 1 min and maintained for 3 min and rapidly returned to 5% for equilibrium in 15 min. MS settings included MS1 scans (60000 resolution, 410–1600 m/z, 3 × 106 automatic gain control (AGC) and 50 ms maximal ion time) and 20 data-dependent MS2 scans (60000 resolution, starting from 120 m/z, 1 × 105 AGC, 105 ms maximal ion time, higher energy collision dissociation (HCD), 35% normalized collision energy, and 15 s dynamic exclusion).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was processed by our in-house developed JUMP search engine with improved sensitivity and specificity. A composite target/decoy (reversed) database was created to evaluate the false discover rate (FDR). The protein database was generated by combining Swiss-prot, TrEMBL, and UCSC databases and removing redundancy (human: 83955 entries; mouse: 59423 entries). Major parameters included 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor and product ion, full trypticity, two maximal missed cleavages, and three maximal modification sites of fixed Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.02146), dynamic TMT modification of Lys and N-termini (+229.16293), and oxidation of Met (+15.99491). The resulting peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) were filtered by mass accuracy and then grouped by precursor ion charge state followed by the cutoffs of JUMP-based matching scores (Jscore and ΔJn) to reduce FDR below 1% for peptides. When the same peptide was derived from numerous homologous proteins, the peptide was matched to the protein with the top PSM number, according to the rule of parsimony. The TMT quantification was performed by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house JUMP software.

### Publication Abstract
The linear sequence of amino acids in a protein folds into a 3D structure to execute protein activity and function, but it is still challenging to profile the 3D structure at the proteome scale. Here, we present a method of native protein tandem mass tag (TMT) profiling of Lys accessibility and its application to investigate structural alterations in human brain specimens of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In this method, proteins are extracted under a native condition, labeled by TMT reagents, followed by trypsin digestion and peptide analysis using two-dimensional liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC/LC-MS/MS). The method quantifies Lys labeling efficiency to evaluate its accessibility on the protein surface, which may be affected by protein conformations, protein modifications, and/or other molecular interactions. We systematically optimized the amount of TMT reagents, reaction time, and temperature and then analyzed protein samples under multiple conditions, including different labeling time (5 and 30 min), heat treatment, AD and normal human cases. The experiment profiled 15370 TMT-labeled peptides in 4475 proteins. As expected, the heat treatment led to extensive changes in protein conformations, with 17% of the detected proteome displaying differential labeling. Compared to the normal controls, AD brain showed different Lys accessibility of tau and RNA splicing complexes, which are the hallmarks of AD pathology, as well as proteins involved in transcription, mitochondrial, and synaptic functions. To eliminate the possibility that the observed differential Lys labeling was caused by protein level change, the whole proteome was quantified with standard TMT-LC/LC-MS/MS for normalization. Thus, this native protein TMT method enables the proteome-wide measurement of Lys accessibility, representing a straightforward strategy to explore protein structure in any biological system.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, And tau, Tandem mass tag, Proteomics, Structuromics, Structural mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
St Jude Children's Hospital
Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA

### Submitter
Kaiwen Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105, USA


