### Accession
PXD003112

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of CELF1-silenced human melanoma cell lines

### Description
CELF1 was silenced in two human melanoma cell lines (SKMEL-103 and UACC-62, indicated as 9M and 17M, respectively) using short hairpin RNA (tag 114). As control scrambled non targeting shControl transduced cell were used (tag 115).

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets obtained from two CELF1 -silenced and control melanoma cell lines were extracted and proteins were digested using the FASP protocol. Peptides were labeled with 4-plex iTRAQ reagents and samples were pooled. Then, the complex mixture was subjected to IEF fractionation. The resulting fractions were separated by on-line nano-LC and analyzed by electrospray MS/MS using a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software suite (Thermo Scientific). The fragmentation spectra were searched against the UniProtKB / Swiss-Prot human database (December 2013, 20,584 sequences plus a list of common contaminants) using Sequest-HT as the search engine with the precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 25 ppm and 0.025 Da, respectively, and with up to two missed cleavages. Lysine and peptide N-termini labelling with iTRAQ-4plex reagent as well as carbamidomethylation of cysteine were considered as fixed modifications, while oxidation of methionine was chosen as variable modification for database searching. Peptide identification was validated with Percolator and filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using the target-decoy strategy. Further filters included: rank 1 peptides and ≥ 6 amino acids length. The PSM table was exported as .csv and imported into Isobar for statistical analysis. Proteins with a p-value of less than 0.05 and with a log2 ratio at least > 0.3 or < - 0.3 were classified as up- or down- regulated, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Melanomas are well-known for their altered mRNA expression profiles. Yet, the specific contribution of mRNA binding proteins (mRBPs) to melanoma development remains unclear. Here we identify a cluster of melanoma-enriched genes under the control of CUGBP Elav-like family member 1 (CELF1). CELF1 was discovered with a distinct prognostic value in melanoma after mining the genomic landscape of the 692 known mRBPs across different cancer types. Genome-wide transcriptomic, proteomic, and RNA-immunoprecipitation studies, together with loss-of-function analyses in cell lines, and histopathological evaluation in clinical biopsies, revealed an intricate repertoire of CELF1-RNA interactors with minimal overlap with other malignancies. This systems approach uncovered the oncogene DEK as an unexpected target and downstream effector of CELF1. Importantly, CELF1 and DEK were found to represent early-induced melanoma genes and adverse indicators of overall patient survival. These results underscore novel roles of CELF1 in melanoma, illustrating tumor type-restricted functions of RBPs in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Melanoma, Lc-ms/ms, Velos orbitrap, Celf1, Itraq

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, CNIO, Spain
Proteomics Group

### Submitter
Pilar Ximenez-Embun

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Proteomics Unit, CNIO, Spain


