### Accession
PXD002511

### Title
Proteome profiling of GC1-spg cells over-expressing Autoimmune Regulator (AIRE)

### Description
This project was aimed at evaluating the influence of Autoimmune Regulator in gene expression in GC1-spg cells.

### Sample Protocol
GC1-spg cells were transfected with pEGFPN1-AIRE (test) or pEGFPN1 (control). The  cells were harvested 24 hrs after transfection and  the proteins were extracted using Rapigest following the recommendations of the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired ion mobility enhanced MSE spectra was analysed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER™ v2.5.3 (PLGS, Waters, Manchester, UK) for protein identification as well as for the label-free relative protein quantification. Data processing included lock mass correction post acquisition. Processing parameters for PLGS were set as follows: noise reduction thresholds for low energy scan ion – 150 counts, high energy scan ion - 50 counts and peptide intensity - 500 counts (as suggested by manufacturer). The protein identifications were obtained by searching against the mouse database downloaded from NCBI. During database search, the protein false positive rate was set to 4 %. The parameters for protein identification was made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least 1 fragment ion match, a protein was required to have at least 3 fragment ion matches and a protein was required to have at least 1 peptide match for identification. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme used with a specificity of 1 missed cleavage. Data sets were normalized using the ‘auto-normalization' function of PLGS and label-free quantitative analyses was performed by comparing the normalized peak area/intensity of identified peptides between the samples. Thus, we obtained parameters such as score, sequence coverage and number of peptides identified for each protein. The protein data set was filtered by considering only those identified proteins which have at least 2 peptides. Furthermore only a fold change higher than 50% difference (ratio of either <0.50 or >1.5) was considered to be indicative of significantly altered levels of expression.

### Publication Abstract
Autoimmune regulator (AIRE) is a gene associated with autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-candidiasis-ectodermal dystrophy (APECED). AIRE is expressed heavily in the thymic epithelial cells and is involved in maintaining self-tolerance through regulating the expression of tissue-specific antigens. The testes are the most predominant extrathymic location where a heavy expression of AIRE is reported. Homozygous Aire-deficient male mice were infertile, possibly due to impaired spermatogenesis, deregulated germ cell apoptosis, or autoimmunity. We report that AIRE is expressed in the testes of neonatal, adolescent, and adult mice. AIRE expression was detected in glial cell derived neurotrophic factor receptor alpha (GFR&#x3b1;)(+) (spermatogonia), GFR&#x3b1;(-)/synaptonemal complex protein (SCP3)(+) (meiotic), and GFR&#x3b1;(-)/Phosphoglycerate kinase 2 (PGK2)(+) (postmeiotic) germ cells in mouse testes. GC1-spg, a germ-cell-derived cell line, did not express AIRE. Retinoic acid induced AIRE expression in GC1-spg cells. Ectopic expression of AIRE in GC1-spg cells using label-free LC-MS/MS identified a total of 371 proteins that were differentially expressed. 100 proteins were up-regulated, and 271 proteins were down-regulated. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002511. Functional analysis of the differentially expressed proteins showed increased levels of various nucleic-acid-binding proteins and transcription factors and a decreased level of various cytoskeletal and structural proteins in the AIRE overexpressing cells as compared with the empty vector-transfected controls. The transcripts of a select set of the up-regulated proteins were also elevated. However, there was no corresponding decrease in the mRNA levels of the down-regulated set of proteins. Molecular function network analysis indicated that AIRE influenced gene expression in GC1-spg cells by acting at multiple levels, including transcription, translation, RNA processing, protein transport, protein localization, and protein degradation, thus setting the foundation in understanding the functional role of AIRE in germ cell biology.

### Keywords
Testis, Gc1-spg, Spermatogonia, Autoimmune regulator

### Affiliations
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Thycaud PO, Poojappura Trivandrum 695 014, Kerala, India
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thycaud PO, Poojappura, Thiruvananthapuram 695014, Kerala, India

### Submitter
Pradeep Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pradeep G. Kumar
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Thycaud PO, Poojappura Trivandrum 695 014, Kerala, India


