### Accession
PXD023996

### Title
The non-radioactive SUnSET assay to measure glucose-induced protein synthesis in human β-cells

### Description
Glucose regulates the expression of a limited number of genes in human pancreatic β-cells at the transcriptional level. Here, we asked whether glucose intervenes at post-transcriptional steps and regulates protein translation in human β-cell lines. First, we showed the involvement of the m-TOR pathway in glucose-related signaling. We next used the Surface SEnsing of Translation (SUnSET) technique that is based on puromycin incorporation into newly-translated proteins to show that glucose treatment increased protein translation. Among the list of glucose-induced proteins, we selected the proconvertase PCSK1 as a promising target whose translation was induced within minutes following glucose treatment. We finally performed global proteomic analysis by mass spectrometry to characterize newly-translated proteins upon glucose treatment. We identified many proteins involved in translation, glycolysis, TCA metabolism and insulin secretion. Taken together, our study demonstrates that while glucose poorly modulates gene expression in human β-cells, it plays major role at the translational level.

### Sample Protocol
S-TrapTM micro spin column (Protifi, Hutington, USA) digestion was performed on IP eluates in laemmli buffer according to manufacturer’s protocol, using 4 washing steps for thorough SDS elimination. Samples were digested with 2 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 47°C for 1h30. After elution, peptides were vacuum dried and resuspended in 35 µL of 10% ACN, 0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water prior MS analysis. For each run, 5 µL were injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000) (Thermo Scientific,Waltham MA, USA). Peptides were loaded onto a µ-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, cartridge, 300 µm i.d.×5 mm, 5 µm) (Thermo Scientific), and were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (0.075 mm ID, Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, 2 µm) (Thermo Scientific). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 minutes), 40% to 80% (1 minutes). At 121 minutes, the gradient stayed at 80% for 5 minutes and, at 126 minutes, it returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 20 minutes before the next injection. One blank was run between each sample to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Peptides were fragmented using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with maximum injection time set to 200 ms, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with maximum injection time set to 120 ms. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer software version 2.4.0.305 and searched using Mascot search engine against the database of Homo sapiens from swissprot 04/2019 (20415 entries). To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass tolerance of 5 ppm and 0.05 Da respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 6 aminoacids.  Semi-trypsin cleavage was set, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met), N-term acetylation and puromycin (C-term) were set as variable modifications. Six samples were analyzed in two independent experiments. Proteins were identified in each condition of IP eluates, protein lists were compared. Proteins identified in negative controls performed in the absence of puromycin (-puro) were excluded from the analysis; Subsequently, the ratio for the most important sample (+puro at 20 mM) was calculated compared to the control (+puro 5.6 mM) for each experiment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sunset, Glucose regulation, M-tor pathway, Puromycin

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France


