### Accession
PXD029765

### Title
Carbon metabolism and ROS scavenge participate in Nostoc flagelliforme’s adaptive response to drought condition through protein acetylation

### Description
In this study, a quantitative LysAc Kac approach (acetylome) on the strains of Nostoc ﬂagelliforme exposed to different dehydration treatments was conducted. We first found that biomass and starch values were inhibited and accumulated, respectively due to dehydration treatments. We identiﬁed 2474 acetylpeptides and 1060 acetylproteins based on acetylome analysis. The acetylome and non-targeted metabolism integrative analysis show that many overlapped KEGG terms were overlapped for both omics analysis, including transporter activity and carbon metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Nostoc flagelliforme strain was collected from the Helan Mountain in the east region of Ningxia, China. Samples were cultured in an incubator at 25°C with continuous illumination at 40 μmol photon m−2·s−1 for 6−7 h, which was long enough for the photosynthetic activity to fully recover. Then the samples were exposed to air at 25°C to ensure fast water loss and were sampled at intervals of 1 h to assess water loss of 0, 30, 75, and 100%.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were incubated with Anti-Ac-K antibody beads (PTMScan Acetyl-Lysine Motif Kit, Cell Signal Technology), to enrich the acetylated peptides. The enriched peptides were analyzed by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with an easy nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nostoc ﬂagelliforme; protein acetylation; dehydration treatments; carbon metabolism; ros scavenge

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia

### Submitter
Lingxia   Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyu Liang
School of Life Sciences, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia


