### Accession
PXD039762

### Title
Structural dynamics in the evolution of SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein: HDX-MS analysis of the spike of alpha, beta, delta and omicron variants - in apo state and in complex with the ACE2 receptor

### Description
The spike glycoprotein of the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) mediates binding to the ACE2 receptor and subsequent membrane fusion. It exists in a range of conformations, including a closed state unable to bind the ACE2 receptor, and an open state that does so but displays more exposed antigenic surface. Spikes of variants of concern (VOCs) acquired amino acid changes linked to different opening probabilities, increased SARS-CoV-2 virulence and immune evasion. Here, using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), we analyzed the spike of the original Wuhan isolate, G614 mutant, spike of alpha, beta, delta and omicron VOCs and the isolated ancestral receptor binding domain (RBD) - in apo state and in complex with the ACE2 receptor. We identified changes in spike dynamics that we associated with the transition from closed to open conformation, to ACE2 binding, and to specific mutations in VOCs. We show that the RBD-associated subdomain plays a role in spike opening, whereas the NTD acts as a hotspot of conformational divergence of VOC spikes driving immune evasion. Alpha, beta and delta spikes assume predominantly open conformations and a strong ACE2 binding increases the dynamics of their core helices, priming spikes for fusion. Conversely, substitutions in omicron spike lead to predominantly binding-incompetent closed conformations, presumably enabling it to escape antibodies. At the same time, its core helices show characteristics of being pre-primed for fusion even in the absence of ACE2. These data inform on SARS-CoV-2 evolution and omicron variant emergence.

### Sample Protocol
MS/MS analysis for peptide identification. Prior to conducting HDX-MS experiments, peptides were identified by digesting undeuterated spikes and ACE2 using the same protocol and identical liquid chromatographic (LC) gradient as detailed below and performing MSE analysis with a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters), applying collision energy ramping from 20-30 kV. Sodium iodide was used for calibration and Leucine Enkephalin was applied for mass accuracy correction. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange (HDX). Spikes and ACE2 were incubated alone and together at ratio 1:2 spike trimer: ACE2 for one hour at the labelling temperature. After equilibration, deuterium labelling was performed for several time points and under three different temperatures (for 4 s and 20 s on ice; 15 s, 1 min, 10 min and 100 min at 23 °C; 6 h at 28 °C) to expand the dynamic and time window studied. The exchange times on ice (~0 °C) can be converted into approximately 0.36 and 1.78 s at 23 °C and the exchange time at 28 °C can be converted into approximately 585 min (~10 h) at 23 °C76. The exchange reactions were initiated by 6.25-fold dilution into deuterated PBS buffer (pHread 7.35), yielding to 84% of final deuterium content in the reaction mixture, and quenched by 1:1 dilution into ice-cold 100 mM phosphate buffer containing 4 M Urea and 0.5 M TCEP (final pHread 2.3). Samples were held on ice for 30 s and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Triplicates were performed for time points 20 s on ice and 10 min at 23 °C; duplicates were performed for time point 4 s on ice. For delta spike, the HDX at fewer time points was sampled. In the apo state, we performed 4 s (duplicates) and 20 s on ice (duplicates); 10 min at 23 °C (duplicates) and 360 min at 28 °C (duplicates). For the ACE2-delta spike, we performed 20 s on ice (triplicates); 10 min at 23 °C (singlet) and 360 min at 28 °C (singlet). For omicron spike, the time point of 20 s on ice (both states) was measured in duplicates instead of triplicates. Maximally labelled samples were produced by labelling spikes and ACE2 in 6 M deuterated Urea in D2O and 20 mM TCEP, resulting in a final deuterium content as for the other labelled samples. The maximally labelled controls (MaxD) were quenched after 6 hours by 1:1 dilution with ice-cold 100 mM phosphate buffer (final pHread 2.3), held for 30 s on ice and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The isolated ancestral RBD of Wuhan spike and ACE2 were incubated alone and together at ratio 3:2 RBD: ACE2, simulating the binding stoichiometry of spikes: ACE2 complexes. After equilibration, deuterium labelling was performed with a 6.25-fold dilution into deuterated PBS buffer and the reactions quenched after 20 s on ice (triplicates), 10 min at 23 °C (triplicates) and 360 min at 28 °C (duplicates). Samples were held on ice for 30 s and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The labelled samples were kept at -80 °C until LC-MS analysis.   Protein Digestion and LC-MS. Frozen protein samples were quickly thawed and injected into an Acquity UPLC M-Class System with HDX Technology (Waters). Proteins were on-line digested at 20 °C into a dual protease column (Pepsin-Type XIII 1:1, NovaBioAssays) and trapped/desalted with solvent A (0.23% formic acid in MilliQ water, pH 2.5) for 3 min at 200 μL/min and at 0 °C through an Acquity BEH C18 VanGuard pre-column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm x 5 mm, Waters). Peptides were eluted into an Acquity UPLC BEH C18 analytical column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm x 50 mm, Waters) with a linear gradient raising from 8 to 40% of solvent B (0.23% formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 40 μL/min and at 0 °C. Then, peptides went through electrospray ionization in positive mode and underwent MS analysis with ion mobility separation. To eliminate peptide carryover, the protease column was washed between each run of deuterated samples using 1.5 M Gu-HCl in 100 mM phosphate buffer (pH 2.5) and a run with a saw-tooth gradient was carried out for washing the chromatographic segments.

### Data Protocol
MSE runs were analysed with ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS) 3.0 (Waters) and peptides identified in 3 out of 4 or 2 out of 3 runs, with at least 0.2 fragments per amino acid (at least 2 fragments in total) and mass error below 10 ppm were selected in DynamX 3.0 (Waters). The MS traces of peptides were further visually inspected to exclude those of insufficient quality or false identifications. False identifications were also discarded by cross-matching peptides containing residue changes among spike variants. To note, post-quenching de-glycosylation was not performed and no attempt to identify glycosylated peptides was made, causing partial sequence coverage in proximity to glycan sites. Coverage in 6 out 23 glycosylation sites (N282, T323, S325, N1158, N1173, N1194) arose from non-glycosylated peptides of spike molecules of incomplete glycan occupancy. The deuterium uptake at the peptide level was calculated with DynamX 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2 spike glycoprotein mediates receptor binding and subsequent membrane fusion. It exists in a range of conformations, including a closed state unable to bind the ACE2 receptor, and an open state that does so but displays more exposed antigenic surface. Spikes of variants of concern (VOCs) acquired amino acid changes linked to increased virulence and immune evasion. Here, using HDX-MS, we identified changes in spike dynamics that we associate with the transition from closed to open conformations, to ACE2 binding, and to specific mutations in VOCs. We show that the RBD-associated subdomain plays a role in spike opening, whereas the NTD acts as a hotspot of conformational divergence of VOC spikes driving immune evasion. Alpha, beta and delta spikes assume predominantly open conformations and ACE2 binding increases the dynamics of their core helices, priming spikes for fusion. Conversely, substitutions in omicron spike lead to predominantly closed conformations, presumably enabling it to escape antibodies. At the same time, its core helices show characteristics of being pre-primed for fusion even in the absence of ACE2. These data inform on SARS-CoV-2 evolution and omicron variant emergence.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Hdx-ms, Spike glycoprotein

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, King’s College London, SE1 1DB, London, UK Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Manchester, M13 9PT, Manchester, UK Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, M1 7DN, Manchester, UK
King's College London

### Submitter
Valeria Calvaresi

### Lab Head
Dr Argyris Politis
Department of Chemistry, King’s College London, SE1 1DB, London, UK Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Manchester, M13 9PT, Manchester, UK Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, The University of Manchester, M1 7DN, Manchester, UK


