### Accession
PXD015359

### Title
Cell-surface proteomics identifies differences in signalling and adhesion protein expression  between naive and primed human pluripotent stem cells

### Description
Naive and primed human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) provide valuable models to study cellular and molecular developmental processes. The lack of detailed information about cell-surface protein expression in these two pluripotent cell types prevents an understanding of how the cells communicate and interact with their microenvironments. Here, we used plasma membrane profiling to directly measure cell-surface protein expression in naive and primed hPSC. This unbiased approach quantified over 1700 plasma membrane proteins including those involved in cell adhesion, signalling and cell interactions. Notably, multiple cytokine receptors upstream of JAK-STAT signalling were more abundant in naive hPSC. In addition, functional experiments showed that FOLR1 and SUSD2 proteins are highly expressed at the cell surface in naive hPSC but are not required to establish human naive pluripotency. This study provides a comprehensive stem cell proteomic resource that uncovers differences in signalling pathway activity and has identified new markers to define human pluripotent states.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profilling (PMP) was performed as described previously (Weekes et al., 2012). Briefly, 1x106 cells per condition were harvested with Accutase or 0.5mM EDTA and washed with PBS. Cell pellets were resuspended in biotinylation buffer (62μM aminoxybiotin, 1mM sodium periodate, 0.093% aniline in PBS pH 6.7) and incubated for 30min at 4°C in the dark. Labelling was quenched with 1mM glycerol, cells were washed with PBS ph 7.4 and stored at -80°C until further use. Cell pellets were thawed on ice, resuspended in lysis buffer (10mM Tris-HCl, 150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 with cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail from Roche/Sigma) and incubated for 30min at 4°C with rotation. Lysates were cleared by two rounds of centrifugation at 13,000g for 10min, and supernatants were transferred to fresh LoBind tubes and mixed with pre-equilibrated streptavidin beads (~3h at 4°C with rotation). After discarding the supernatant, beads were washed with 8ml of lysis buffer followed by 4ml wash with 0.5% SDS in 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Proteins bound to the beads were reduced with 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 30min at room temperature (RT) with shaking in the dark. Beads were washed with further 4ml of SDS buffer, 8ml of urea buffer (6M urea in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5), 2ml of 50mM  TEAB and transferred to Eppendorf tubes for overnight trypsin digestion at 37°C with shaking. Samples were centrifuged to pellet the beads and supernatants containing the peptides were transferred to fresh tubes and lyophilised in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were resuspended in 50μl 50mM TEAB before addition of TMT tags (20μl in acetonitrile, ACN). Samples were labelled for 1h at RT with shaking and excess TMT was quenched with 0.3% hydroxylamine for a further 20min. TMT-labelled samples were then pooled together and lyophilised as before. Lyophilised samples were resuspended in 16µl 0.2% NH3 for high pH reverse phase fractionation on UltiMate 3000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific). In-house made microcolumn (0.53 x 200mm packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin, 3µm particle size (dr. Maisch) was used for peptide separation at 20µl/min using linear gradient 0-40% ACN over 30min. Eluted peptides were manually collected into 1min fractions and analysed in nLC MSMS mode using UltiMate 3000 liquid chromatography system (ThermoFisher Scientific) interfaced via EASY-Spray™ Source onto Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). 50% of each fraction was used and samples were loaded onto pre-column (Acclaim PepMap100, 100μM inner diameter, 2cm long, packed with 5μM C18 particles) in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of  8μl/min. Peptides were eluted from the precolumn and separated over analytical column (EASY-Spray, PepMap RSLC 75μM ID, 50cm long, packed with 2μM C18 particles) using a linear gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA), from 2 to 45% B at 300nl/min over 90min at 40°C. Eluted peptides were ionised using 2.1kV voltage and introduced to mass spectrometer as gas-phase ions. MS1 scans were triggered when threshold of 4E5 ions or 50 ms was reached and were acquired in Orbitrap with 120000 resolution at 375-1800 m/z range. The most intense ions from each MS1 spectrum were isolated in the quadrupole using 0.7 m/z window and fragmented using CID with 35% collision energy. MS2 scans of fragment ions were triggered when threshold of 1E4 ions or 150ms (75ms for more abundant fractions) was reached and were acquired in Ion Trap starting at 120 m/z. Fragmented precursors were excluded from repeated analysis for max 30s (per 120min gradient). Top 10 fragment ions were isolated in Ion Trap using 2 m/z isolation window and fragmented using HCD with 65% collision energy. MS3 scans were triggered when threshold of 1E5 ions or 105ms was reached and were acquired in Orbitrap with 50000 resolution and scan range 100-500 m/z. MS1-3 spectra were recorded in Xcalibur 3.0.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Firstly, raw data from all the fractions were combined and searched against human reference proteome (71579 entries, October 2017) and GPM database of common contaminants (57 entries) using Mascot server (Matrix Science). Trypsin was used as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 20mmu. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines and TMT modification of peptide N-terminus and lysines were used as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionines was used as variable modification. Only high confidence peptides were used (0.01 target peptide FDR) and minimum of one unique peptide was considered for successful protein identification. Reporter ion intensities were extracted from MS3 spectra using average reporter signal to noise threshold of 10 and isolation interference lower than 50%. Only unique peptides were used to calculate protein abundances using RRollup function within InfernoRDN v1.1.6452.22004 (Polpitiya et al., 2008). The final list of protein abundances was used for statistical analysis with an in-house R script for LIMMA and Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing.

### Publication Abstract
Naive and primed human pluripotent stem cells (hPSC) provide valuable models to study cellular and molecular developmental processes. The lack of detailed information about cell-surface protein expression in these two pluripotent cell types prevents an understanding of how the cells communicate and interact with their microenvironments. Here, we used plasma membrane profiling to directly measure cell-surface protein expression in naive and primed hPSC. This unbiased approach quantified over 1,700 plasma membrane proteins, including those involved in cell adhesion, signaling, and cell interactions. Notably, multiple cytokine receptors upstream of JAK-STAT signaling were more abundant in naive hPSC. In addition, functional experiments showed that FOLR1 and SUSD2 proteins are highly expressed at the cell surface in naive hPSC but are not required to establish human naive pluripotency. This study provides a comprehensive stem cell proteomic resource that uncovers differences in signaling pathway activity and has identified new markers to define human pluripotent states.

### Keywords
Plasma membrane profilling, Naive and primed human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge and the Babraham Institute
Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK and Wellcome Trust - MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Katarzyna Wojdyla

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Rugg-Gunn
Epigenetics Programme, The Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK and Wellcome Trust - MRC Cambridge Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, UK


