### Accession
PXD009567

### Title
In-depth proteomic analyses of Haliotis laevigata (greenlip abalone) nacre and prismatic organic shell matrix

### Description
Background: The shells of various Haliotis species have served as models of invertebrate biomineralization and physical shell properties for more than 20 years. A focus of this research has been the nacreous inner layer of the shell with its conspicuous arrangement of aragonite platelets, resembling in cross-section a brick-and-mortar wall. In comparison, the outer, less stable, calcitic prismatic layer has received much less attention. One of the first molluscan shell proteins to be characterized at the molecular level was Lustrin A, a component of the nacreous organic matrix of Haliotis rufescens. This was soon followed by the C-type lectin perlucin and the growth factor-binding perlustrin, both isolated from H. laevigata nacre, and the crystal growth-modulating AP7 and AP24, isolated from H. rufescens nacre. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics was subsequently applied to to Haliotis biomineralization research with the analysis of the H. asinina shell matrix and yielded 14 different shell-associated proteins. That study was the most comprehensive for a Haliotis species to date.  Methods: The shell proteomes of nacre and prismatic layer of the marine gastropod Haliotis laevigata were analyzed combining mass spectrometry-based proteomics and next generation sequencing. Results: We identified 297 proteins from the nacreous shell layer and 350 proteins from the prismatic shell layer from the green lip abalone H. laevigata. Considering the overlap between the two sets we identified a total of 448 proteins. Fifty-one nacre proteins and 43 prismatic layer proteins were defined as major proteins based on their abundance at more than 0.2% of the total. The remaining proteins occurred at low abundance and may not play any significant role in shell fabrication. The overlap of major proteins between the two shell layers was 17, amounting to a total of 77 major proteins.  Conclusions: The H. laevigata shell proteome shares moderate sequence similarity at the protein level with other gastropod, bivalve and more distantly related invertebrate biomineralising proteomes. Features conserved in H. laevigata and other molluscan shell proteomes include short repetitive sequences of low complexity predicted to lack intrinsic three-dimensional structure, and domains such as tyrosinase, chitin-binding, and carbonic anhydrase. This catalogue of H. laevigata shell proteins represents the most comprehensive for a haliotid and should support future efforts to elucidate the molecular mechanisms of shell assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of matrix and peptides Haliotis laevigata shells of lengths of 15-18cm and weights of 150-200g were treated with a final concentration of 4% sodium hypochlorite solution (Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) for 2h without (method A) or with (method B) a 5min ultrasound treatment at the start of each hour. Shells were then washed extensively with deionized water and dried. Alternatively, the nacreous layer of a shell not washed with hypochlorite before was sand-blasted from each side to remove possible contaminants (method C). Nacre matrix was prepared as described previously [26]. For prismatic shell layer preparation the surface of shells was cleaned mechanically to remove mineralized worm tubes and other material not belonging to the shell. Shells were then washed with hypochlorite as before (methods A and B) and the prismatic shell layer was filed off and collected for demineralization. Calcite powder and nacre pieces were dissolved in 12% acetic acid and the suspension was dialyzed and stored in 3% acetic acid at 4°C for 13 days until centrifugation. Acid-soluble and acid-insoluble matrix components were separated by ultracentrifugation (Optima LE 80K, 45Ti rotor, Beckman Coulter, Krefeld, Germany) at 4°C and 146900 x g for 60 min. The fractions were then lyophilized for concentration and storage. Matrix proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE in pre-cast 4–12% Novex Bis-Tris gels using the MES buffer system with reagents and protocols supplied by the manufacturer (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) except for the reducing agent, which was β-mercaptoethanol added to a final concentration of 2%. The sample buffer contained lithium dodecyl sulphate (LDS, final concentration 1%) while pre-cast gels and running buffer contained SDS (0.1%). Samples were suspended in 30μl sample buffer/200μg of organic matrix, boiled for 5 min, and centrifuged at 13000rpm for 5min in an Eppendorf bench-top centrifuge before SDS-PAGE analysis. Separated proteins were stained with colloidal Coomassie blue (Invitrogen). Gels containing acid-soluble nacre matrix 8 and acid-insoluble prismatic layer matrix were cut into 12 slices and identical slices of three lanes were used for in-gel digestion with trypsin [27]. All slices were treated equally irrespective of staining intensity or presence of visible bands. The eluted peptides were cleaned with C18 Stage Tips before MS analysis [28]. The acid-soluble fraction of the prismatic layer and the acid-insoluble matrix of nacre, PAGE analysis of which showed no or only few and week protein bands, respectively, were cleaved using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method [29,30] modified as follows. Matrix components were dissolved in 0.1M Tris buffer, pH 8, containing 6M guanidine and 0.01M dithiothreitol (DTT) and heated to 56oC for 60min. Aliquots containing 200, 400 and 800μg of matrix were then loaded onto Microcon YM-30 centrifugal filter devices (Millipore) and DTT was removed by centrifugation at 13000rpm in a Eppendorf bench top centrifuge model 5415D for 10min and washing with 2 x 1vol of the same buffer. Carbamidomethylation was performed in the device using Tris-guanidine buffer containing 0.05mM iodoacetamide and incubation for 45min in the dark. Carbamidomethylated proteins were washed with 0.05M ammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer, pH8, containing 2M urea, and centrifugation as before. Trypsin (2μg, Sequencing grade, modified; Promega, Madison, USA) was added in 40μl of the same buffer and the devices were incubated at 37oC for 16h. Peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filters were washed twice with 40μl of buffer. The peptide solution was acidified to pH 1-2 with trifluoroacetic acid and peptides were cleaned and concentrated using C18 Stage Tips [28].

### Data Protocol
LC-MS and MS data analysis and transcriptomics Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) with 20cm capillary columns of an 9 internal diameter of 75μm and filled with 1.8μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Column temperature was 30oC. The gradient consisted of 5-30% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) for 85min, 30-60% buffer B for 12min and 60-80% buffer B for 7min at a flow rate of 250nl/min. The eluate was electrosprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. The Orbitrap Velos and Orbitrap Elite were operated in a HCD top 10 mode essentially as described [31(Velos),32 (Elite)]. Survey full scan spectra (from m/z 300-1750) were acquired at a resolution of 30,000 (Velos) and 120,000 (Elite) at m/z 400. Dynamic exclusion time was 90sec. Raw files were processed using version 1.5.1.6 of MaxQuant [33-36] a computational proteomics platform based on the Andromeda search engine (http://www.biochem.mpg.de/5111795/maxquant) [37]. The protein databases used for protein identification were derived from H. laevigata hemolymph and epipodial tentacle tissue [38] and mantle tissue (see below). The hemolymph and tentatacle database was kindly provided by Dr. Shiel (Department of Genetics, La Trobe Institute for Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne) in the form of a nucleotide database that we translated into protein sequences using the EMBOSS Transeq program (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/st/emboss_transeq/) [39] with six reading frame translation, trim option and the standard code. Because this transcriptomic database has not yet been deposited in a publicly accessible database, we have compiled accessions confirmed by peptide MS/MS sequences in Additional file 1. This file contains the sequence with the most peptide matches occurring in the respective MaxQuant output table protein group. In addition we generated a new mantle tissue transcriptome for what turned out in retrospect to apparently be a hybrid species between H. laevigata and H. rubra. Briefly, the mantle tissue from an animal collected from Ocean Wave Seafoods (Lara, Victoria, Australia) was dissected and total RNA extracted using TriReagent according to the manufacturer’s 10 instructions. Total RNA was used for Illumina library preparation and 100 bp paired end stranded sequencing on the HiSeq2000 platform. We collected more than 137 million reads which have been deposited in GenBank under SRP126753. Trimmomatic [40] was used to remove low quality reads and adapter sequences. Reads were assembled de novo using our recently developed assembly pipeline [41]. Briefly, we employed three assembly packages with unique assembly strategies: Trinity V2.0.3 [42], the commercial CLC Genomics Workbench and IDBA-tran V1.1.1 [43]. This transcriptome assembly was complemented by a Haliotis sequence subset of the UniProt protein sequence database (release 1015-06; 1404 entries with Haliotis as organism). Databases were combined with the reversed sequences and sequences of widespread contaminants, such as human keratins. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation, N-acetyl (protein), pyro-Glu/Gln (N-term) and phosphorylation (S,T,Y). Maximal peptide mass tolerance was set to 20ppm and 6ppm for first search and main search, respectively. MS/MS mass tolerance was set to a maximal value of 20ppm. Two missed cleavages were allowed and the minimal length required for a peptide was seven amino acids. Maximal FDR for peptide spectral match, proteins and site was set to 0.01. The minimal score for modified and unmodified peptides was 60. Identifications with only two sequence-unique peptides were routinely validated with the help of the MaxQuant Expert System software of MaxQuant [44] considering the assignment of major peaks, occurrence of uninterrupted y- or b-ion series of at least four consecutive amino acids, preferred cleavages N-terminal to proline bonds, the possible presence of a2/b2 ion pairs, immonium ions and mass accuracy. Only identifications with at least two peptides in a preparation and occurring in at least two preparations of the same shell layer were accepted. Identifications with only one sequence-unique peptide or only in one fraction were exceptionally accepted if only one measurable peptide was predicted under regular cleavage conditions or if it shared peptides with other 11 proteins. The iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) [36] option of MaxQuant was used to calculate, based on the sum of peak intensities, the approximate share of each protein in the total proteome, including identifications that were not accepted finally.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Biomineralization, Proteome, Prismatic layer, Nacre, Mantle transcriptome, Shell organic matrix

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie Abt. Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr karlheinz mann
Max-Planck-Institut für Biochemie Abt. Proteomics und Signaltransduktion Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried


