### Accession
PXD031221

### Title
Widespread hydroxylation of unstructured lysine-rich protein domains by JMJD6

### Description
The Jumonji domaining-containing protein JMJD6 is a 2-oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenase that has been implicated in a broad range of biological functions. Cellular studies have implicated the enzyme in chromatin biology, transcription, DNA repair, mRNA splicing and co-transcriptional processing. Although not all studies agree, JMJD6 has been reported to catalyse both hydroxylation of lysine residues and demethylation of arginine residues. However, despite extensive study and the indirect implication of JMJD6 catalysis in many cellular processes, direct assignment of JMJD6 catalytic substrates has been limited. Examination of a site of reported prolyl hydroxylation within a lysine-rich region of the bromodomain protein BRD4 led us to conclude that hydroxylation was in fact on lysine and catalysed by Jmjd6. This prompted a wider search for JMJD6-catalysed protein modifications deploying mass spectrometric methods designed to identify novel substrate associations and facilitate analysis of lysine-rich regions by LC-MSMS. Using derivatization of lysine with propionic anhydride to improve the analysis of tryptic peptides and a pharmacological inhibitor of JMJD6 to stabilise enzyme/substrate associations, we report over 100 sites of JMJD6-catalysed lysyl hydroxylation on 48 protein substrates including 19 sites of hydroxylation on BRD4. Most hydroxylations were within lysine-rich regions that are predicted to be unstructured; in some multiple modifications were observed on adjacent lysine residues. Almost all of the JMJD6 substrates defined in this study have been associated with membraneless organelle formation. Taken together with findings implicating lysine-rich regions in subcellular partitioning by liquid-liquid phase separation, our findings raise the possibility that JMJD6 may play a role in regulating such processes in response to stresses, including hypoxia. This deposition contains all hydroxylysine assignment data.

### Sample Protocol
Lysine derivatisation with propionic anhydride (Merck) was performed by combining standard in-gel trypsinolysis workflows and histone derivatisation methods. In brief, acrylamide gel pieces were destained by addition of 50% methanol/ 5% acetic acid solution and either reduced and alkylated by addition of 10 mM DTT and 50 mM iodocaetamide or derivatised without prior reduction/alkylation (FLAG-JMJD6 and JMJD6(81-96) peptide experiments). Gel pieces were dehydrated by addition of 100% acetonitrile (MeCN) prior to two rounds of propionylation, which was performed in small batches to enable precise timing of the reaction. Gel pieces were rehydrated by addition of 4 volumes of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate directly followed by 1 volume of propionylation reagent (propionic anhydride and anhydrous MeCN in a 1:3 v/v ratio). Samples were mixed and the pH was immediately adjusted to pH 8 by addition of ammonium hydroxide. The reaction was incubated at 51 °C for 20 min with constant mixing. A second round of derivatisation was performed prior to 2 exchanges (dehydration and rehydration) in 100% MeCN and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to remove residual propionylation reagent prior to in-gel digestion with trypsin . For the JMJD6 interactome experiments, FLAG-affinity eluates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and resuspended in urea buffer (6M urea, 100 mM Tris pH7.8) prior to reduction/alkylation and trypsinolysis, which was performed in-solution under denaturing (1M urea) conditions. Where appropriate, peptide preparations were desalted by solid-phase extraction (Oasis HLB sorbent; Waters Corporation) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and resuspended in aqueous 2% (v/v) MeCN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis.  Data dependent acquisitions (DDA) were typically acquired on a nano UPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano; Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Reverse phase separation was performed at a flow rate of 250 nL/min on an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 column (75 μm x 500 mm, 2 μm particle size; Thermo Scientific) over a 1 hr gradient of 2% to 40% MeCN in 5% DMSO/0.1% Formic Acid. MS1 spectra were typically acquired with a resolution of 120k and an AGC target of 4e5. MSMS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 30k for up to 54 ms and an AGC target of 5e4 with a cycle time of 3 s and a normalised collision energy of 32% in the HCD cell. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and excluded for 60 s for repeated selection. Note, detailed instrument settings for DDA runs are documented in the MS data (RAW) files.

### Data Protocol
Overview DDA data were first analysed by PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions). Subsequent analyses were performed using R (4.0.0) with the following packages (data.table (1.12.8), dplyr (1.0.0), stringr (1.4.0), magrittr (1.5), and Biostrings (2.56.0)); The computational analysis pipeline used for this study is available from (https://github.com/YoichiroSugimoto/20211110_JMJD6_K_hydroxylation). The data were visualised using either Microsoft Excel, Graphpad Prism (9.3),  pheatmap (1.0.12), ComplexHeatmap (2.4.3) and ggplot2 (3.3.1). Database analyses of DDA data  Processing of “in-house” DDA data used PEAKS Studio (v10.5 and 10.6). The following parameters were applied to non-derivatised tryptic data acquired by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD): 15 ppm mass error tolerance for precursor ions and 0.02 Da tolerance for fragment ion masses; trypsin cleavage rules were specific with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as a fixed modification and variable modifications (up to 3 permitted) were: deamidation (N,Q), acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation (M,W,K) and dioxidation (M,W). Data were matched against the appropriate species-specific (human/mouse) reference Uniprot database (retrieved 8th February 2021) with a list of common contaminants appended (cRAP database; http://crapome.org). Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% using a target-decoy method and PTM site determination was informed by a probability-based ambiguity score (Ascore; -10lgP). The number of variable modifications was increased to 5 for Asp-N digestion (cleavage before D, E) in order to monitor hydroxylation of lysine-rich sequences. To analyse data from propionylated samples, the DDA workflow was adapted for processing incompletely derivatised tryptic peptides. It was not possible to modify the in-silico specificity of trypsin toward propionylated lysine within the PEAKS DB search engine. Thus, a large number (n=5) number of missed cleavage occurrences was specified in order to detect derivatised lysine-rich polypeptides. A maximum number of 5 variable modifications were considered, specifically: deamidation (N,Q), acetylation of protein N-termini, oxidation (M,W,K), propionylation (K) and oxidised propionylation (K); note, carbamidomethylation (C) was considered a fixed modification only in preparations that were treated with iodoacetamide. To reduce prohibitively long search times, precursor mass error tolerance was reduced from 15 ppm to 7.5 ppm and, where appropriate, custom databases curated from DDA searches of non-derivatised experiments were specifically interrogated (e.g., JQ1 PD and FLAG-JMJD6 interactome PD). Peptides meeting the significance filter (-10lgP >15) and MS2 ion intensity filter (>1%) were exported as “protein-peptides.csv” files. For the calculation of site-specific PTM stoichiometry, analyses were restricted to JQ1 and JMJD6 peptide pulldown datasets to enable direct comparison between wild type and JMJD6-defective HeLa cells. PEAKS export files were filtered to remove peptides that were not uniquely assigned to a protein and peptides with an AUC (area under the curve, LC-MS/MS data) of 0. Peptides that were unlikely to be products of trypsinolysis were also filtered out. For this purpose, we assumed that trypsin cleaves C-terminal to lysine, hydroxylysine, arginine, and mono-methylated arginine, but not propionylated lysine, propionylated hydroxylysine, and di-methylated arginine. Thus, peptides with a modified C-terminal amino acid incompatible with cleavage by trypsin were excluded. In addition, peptides that had more than one “genuine” missed tryptic cleavage site were filtered out; we did not consider lysine or arginine followed by a proline a tryptic cleavage site. We only considered PTMs that passed the PEAKS MS2 ion intensity filter (>1%). Based on the filtered data, the stoichiometry of a PTM at a specific residue of a protein was calculated using the following formula: (∑(AUC of all the peptides with the PTM at the residue)/[(∑(AUC of all the peptides without the PTM at the residue)+ ∑(AUC of all the peptides with the PTM at the residue)]. Filtered data comparing peptide identifications between wild-type and JMJD6-defective preparations were used to shortlist JMJD6-dependent hydroxylations that were verified by manual inspection of MSMS spectra.

### Publication Abstract
The Jumonji domain-containing protein JMJD6 is a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase associated with a broad range of biological functions. Cellular studies have implicated the enzyme in chromatin biology, transcription, DNA repair, mRNA splicing, and cotranscriptional processing. Although not all studies agree, JMJD6 has been reported to catalyze both hydroxylation of lysine residues and demethylation of arginine residues. However, despite extensive study and indirect evidence for JMJD6 catalysis in many cellular processes, direct assignment of JMJD6 catalytic substrates has been limited. Examination of a reported site of proline hydroxylation within a lysine-rich region of the tandem bromodomain protein BRD4 led us to conclude that hydroxylation was in fact on lysine and catalyzed by JMJD6. This prompted a wider search for JMJD6-catalyzed protein modifications deploying mass spectrometric methods designed to improve the analysis of such lysine-rich regions. Using lysine derivatization with propionic anhydride to improve the analysis of tryptic peptides and nontryptic proteolysis, we report 150 sites of JMJD6-catalyzed lysine hydroxylation on 48 protein substrates, including 19 sites of hydroxylation on BRD4. Most hydroxylations were within lysine-rich regions that are predicted to be unstructured; in some, multiple modifications were observed on adjacent lysine residues. Almost all of the JMJD6 substrates defined in these studies have been associated with membraneless organelle formation. Given the reported roles of lysine-rich regions in subcellular partitioning by liquid-liquid phase separation, our findings raise the possibility that JMJD6 may play a role in regulating such processes in response to stresses, including hypoxia.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Hydroxylation, Lysine derivatisation, Jmjd6

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT
Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Cockman

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Ratcliffe
Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


