### Accession
PXD008276

### Title
Cancer Associated Fibroblast-FAK regulates malignant cell metabolism

### Description
Breast and pancreatic cancers are characterised by profound metabolic changes1,2. Until recently, these changes have been ascribed to their intrinsic genetic profiles2-4. However, the contribution of cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) to cell metabolism has not been fully investigated5. Here, we provide clinical evidence that reduction in stromal Focal Adhesion Kinase (FAK) correlates with reduced overall survival in human breast and pancreatic cancer patients. To model this, we developed FSP-Cre+;FAKfl/fl mice where FAK was deleted in a subpopulation of CAFs. We establish that loss of CAF-FAK is sufficient to enhance tumour growth without affecting desmoplasia in orthotopically injected breast and pancreatic carcinomas. Additionally, deletion of CAF-FAK enhances disease progression in the MMTV-PyMT spontaneous model of breast cancer. Furthermore, despite this pro-tumourigenic effect, a significant reduction in tumour angiogenesis was observed in late-stage tumours, but not early-stage, size-matched tumours in FSP-Cre+;FAKfl/fl mice. This indicates that loss of CAF-FAK is sufficient to reduce malignant cell dependency on blood vessel support suggesting acquired metabolic alterations in cancer cells. Indeed, 18F-FDG-PET imaging and glucose flux analysis revealed enhanced glucose catabolism in early-stage, size-matched tumours in FSP-Cre+;FAKfl/fl mice in vivo. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that conditioned medium from FAK-null CAFs enhances glycolysis and glycolytic capacity in malignant cells. Proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis reveal enriched cytokine-mediated signalling pathways in FAK-null CAFs and subsequent enrichment of associated phosphopeptides in malignant cells, respectively. Overall, our data uncover a novel mechanism by which cytokines, regulated by CAF-FAK, can promote cancer growth and progression, and identify a new set of CAF-derived targets to interfere with cancer metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics and phosphoproteomics studies, cell lysis and trypsin digestion was performed as previously described30. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 (GL Sciences)30. For phosphoproteomics, dried peptide pellets were resuspended in 9 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase digest in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5.0 µL were loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system consisting of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC directly coupled to an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For proteomics, pellets were resuspended in reconstitution buffer (0.5 µg/µL) and 2 µL were injected. The LC system used mobile phases A (3% ACN: 0.1% FA) and B (100% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were trapped in a µ-pre-column and separated in a nanoflow analytical column. The following parameters were used: 3% to 28% B gradient for 120 min and a flow rate of 0.25 µL/min. Eluting peptides were analysed in a QExactive Plus system with scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) was followed by, datadependent acquisition of the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200-2,000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A 30 s dynamic exclusion period was enabled with 10 ppm mass window. Peptide identification and quantification was carried out from the MS/MS and

### Data Protocol
MS data using the Mascot search engine as described before. Kinase substrate enrichment analysis (KSEA) was carried out by grouping peptides into substrate sets known to be phosphorylated by a specific kinase23. Gene ontology enrichment analysis of proteins differentially phosphorylated between conditions (at p < 0.05) was carried out using the hypergeometric test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fak, Metabolism, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Centre for Haemato-oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, EC1M6BQ, UK

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Centre for Haemato-oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, London, EC1M6BQ, UK


