### Accession
PXD000915

### Title
Effect of Chronic Methamphetamine Exposure on the Neuroproteomics of Rat Brain Tissues

### Description
Nowadays, drug abuse and addiction are serious public health problems in the USA. Methamphetamine (METH) is one of the most abused drugs, which is known to cause brain damage from repeated exposure on human. Herein, a proteomic study was applied to evaluate METH-induced brain protein dynamics following a two-week chronic regimen of escalating dose of METH exposure. Proteins were extracted from rat brain hippocampal and olfactory bulb tissues and subjected to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Both shotgun and targeted proteomic analysis were performed. Protein quantitation was initially based on comparing the spectral counts between METH exposed animals and their control counterparts. Quantitative differences were further confirmed through multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) LC-MS/MS experiments. According to the quantitative results, the expression of 18 proteins (11 in hippocampal proteome, 7 in olfactory bulb proteome) were shown a significant alteration as a result of exposure of rats to METH. 13 of these proteins were up-regulated after METH exposure while 5 of were down-regulated. The altered proteins belonging to different structural and functional families were involved in processes such as cell death, inflammation, oxidation, and apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Chronic model of METH abuse was designed in male Sprague-Dawley rats over a period of 14 days. The concentration and frequency of drug administration was altered to fit a chronic escalating dose of METH exposure. All experiments were performed using male Sprague-Dawley rats that were aged 60 days and weighed between 250 and 275 g. Pharmacologic agent (+/-) methamphetamine hydrochloride was dissolved in 0.9% saline. 5 rats were intraperitoneally injected with 0.5 mg/kg of METH on day 1 and ending with 8 mg/kg at the end of the second week. Also, 5 rats received physiological saline injections. After 2 weeks post-intraperitoneal injection, treated animals and control animals were briefly anaesthetized with 3-4% isoflurane and were sacrificed by decapitation. METH and saline hippocampal samples were rapidly dissected and washed with saline solution, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C for further processing. Frozen rat brain hippocampal and olfactory bulb tissues were homogenized using VWR® Disposable Pellet Mixers (VWR International, Radnor, PA) in 500-μL extraction buffer (5M urea, 40mM Tris, 0.2%w/v CHAPS). Next, the sample was sonicated for 1 hour at 4°C prior to centrifugation for 45 min at 14,800 rpm with the centrifuge held at 4°C. The supernatant was then collected in separate containers. The buffer of the extracted protein was exchanged into 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate using 5kDa MWCO spin concentrators (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). This buffer is needed for efficient tryptic digestion.  A 10-μg aliquot of each sample, determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific/Pierce, Rockford, IL), was diluted to 20-μL by 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Thermal denaturation was performed at 65o C for 10 min. A 0.75-μL aliquot of 200mM DTT was added to reduce the sample at 60o C for 45 min. A 3-μL aliquot of 200mM IAA was added to alkylate the sample at 37.5o C for 45 min in the dark. Excess IAA was consumed by the addition of another 0.75-μL aliquot of 200mM DTT and incubation at 37.5o C for 30 min. The tryptic digestion was performed at 37.5o C for 18 hours followed by microwave digestion at 45o C and 50W for 30min. A 0.5-μL aliquot of neat formic acid was added to quench the digestion. Finally, a 3-μL aliquot of 5 ng/μL reduced and permethylated dextran was added to each sample as internal standard to offset any potential injection variance.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was acquired using Dionex 3000 Ultimate nano-LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced to LTQ Orbitrap Velos and TSQ Vantage mass spectrometers (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with nano-ESI source.  The separation was attained using Acclaim PepMap RSLC columns (75 µm I.D. x 15 cm, 2 µm particle sizes, 100 Å pore sizes) (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. The column compartment was maintained at 29.5 o C. The LC elution gradient of solvent B used in both LC-MS/MS analysis was: 5% over 10 min, 5%-20% over 55 min, 20-30% over 25 min, 30-50% over 20 min, 50%-80% over 1 min, 80% over 4 min, 80%-5% over 1 min and 5% over 4 min. Solvent B consisted of 100% ACN with 0.1% formic acid while solvent A composed of 2% ACN with 0.1% formic acid.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with the ESI voltage set to 1500V. Data dependent acquisition mode was employed to achieve two scan events. The first scan event was a full MS scan of 380-2000 m/z at a mass resolution of 15,000. The second scan event was CID MS/MS of parent ions selected from the first scan event with an isolation width of 3.0 m/z, at a normalized collision energy (CE) of 35%, and an activation Q value of 0.250. The CID MS/MS scans were performed on the 30 most intense ions observed in the MS scan event. The dynamic exclusion was set to have repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, exclusion list size 200 and exclusion duration of 90s. The TSQ Vantage mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode with an ESI voltage of 1800V. Data independent acquisition mode was used for MRM experiment. Predefined precursor and transition ions were monitored to select specifically targeted peptides corresponding to each candidate protein with 10.0 sec chromatogram filter peak width. The MRM experiments were performed at a cycle time of 2.000 sec and a Q1 peak width of 0.70 min for 400-1500 m/z mass range. The normalized collision energy value was 30% with a collision gas pressure of 1.5 mTorr in Q2.  LC-ESI-MS/MS data was used to generate mascot generic format file (*.mgf) by Proteome Discover version 1.2 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) then searched using SwissProt database (Rattus) in MASCOT version 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, MA). Iodoacetamide modification of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. An m/z tolerance of 5 ppm was set for the identification of peptides with maximum 2 missed cleavages. Also, tandem MS ion tolerance was set within 0.8 Da with label-free quantification. Scaffold Q+ (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) was employed for spectral counts quantitation. Proteins shown significant difference (p<0.05, unpaired student t-test) in spectral counts quantitation results were confirmed by MRM LC-MS/MS experiment. Each sample was injected three times to make a technical triplicate of MRM experiment. The most intense 1 or 2 peptides corresponding to each candidate protein were selected as target peptides. The three transitions of each target peptide were suggested by Pinpoint (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The MRM experiment results were investigated using Pinpoint. Peak area of each target peptide was normalized by the peak area of the glycan with 4 glucose units (m/z= 896.507). The normalized intensity of target peptides corresponding to each candidate protein were summed up to represent the abundance of the certain protein. A one-way ANOVA test (α=0.05) was performed to evaluated the statistical significance. Finally, a systems biology analysis was performed on the proteins exhibiting significant up- or down- regulations, using PANTHER (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships) system and Pathway Studio 8.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays, drug abuse and addiction are serious public health problems in the USA. Methamphetamine (METH) is one of the most abused drugs and is known to cause brain damage after repeated exposure. In this paper, we conducted a neuroproteomic study to evaluate METH-induced brain protein dynamics, following a two-week chronic regimen of an escalating dose of METH exposure. Proteins were extracted from rat brain hippocampal and olfactory bulb tissues and subjected to liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis. Both shotgun and targeted proteomic analysis were performed. Protein quantification was initially based on comparing the spectral counts between METH exposed animals and their control counterparts. Quantitative differences were further confirmed through multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) LC-MS/MS experiments. According to the quantitative results, the expression of 18 proteins (11 in the hippocampus and 7 in the olfactory bulb) underwent a significant alteration as a result of exposing rats to METH. 13 of these proteins were up-regulated after METH exposure while 5 were down-regulated. The altered proteins belonging to different structural and functional families were involved in processes such as cell death, inflammation, oxidation, and apoptosis.

### Keywords
Drug abuse, Neuroproteomics, Systems biology, Chronic administration, Proteomics, Methamphetamine, Escalating dose

### Affiliations
Texas Tech University

### Submitter
Rui Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Yehia Mechref
Texas Tech University


