### Accession
PXD027436

### Title
Interactome analyses reveal profound proteasome structural and functional rearrangements throughout mammalian spermatogenesis

### Description
Bottom-up, top-down proteomics and HDX-MS analysis of spermatoproteasome immunopurified from bovin testes and/or rat germ cells.

### Sample Protocol
Bottom-up: Analysis was performed on a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a precolumn, washed with 2% acetonitrile (ACN),0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and separated at 300 nL/min, on a C18 column (75µm ID x 50cm, in-house packed with Reprosil C18, 3µm phase), with a gradient initiated by 100% A (0.2% formic acid (FA)) for 3min, 10-30% B (80% ACN, 0.2% FA) for 50min, 30-45% B for 10min and 45-80% B for 1min. 80% B was maintained for 10min to wash the column, followed by re-equilibration with 100% A for 15min. The nano-ion source was at 1.9kV, with ion transfer tube temperature at 275°C. MS scans were done in the Orbitrap at 60k resolution, between 350 and 1400 m/z, with RF lens at 60%, AGC target at 4e5, max injection time (IT) at 50 ms, with 1 µscan in profile mode. MSMS was done in DDA mode, in the Orbitrap at 15k resolution (first mass at 100 m/z). Monoisotopic peak determination was set for peptides, intensity threshold of 2.5e4 was used and only charge states 2-6 were used as precursors. Dynamic exclusion was used to exclude the ions during 30sec with a mass tolerance of ±10 ppm. Ion isolation was done in the quadrupole (isolation window of 1.7 Th). HCD activation was done with 28% nCE. AGC was set to 5e4, ions were injected for all available parallelizable time, with maximum IT of 22ms. 1 µscan per cycle was used in centroid mode.  Top-down: Nano-LC-MS was performed on a nanoRS UHPLC system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. 5μL of sample at 0.5μM were loaded on a C4-precolumn (300μm id × 5mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 20μL/min in 2% ACN and 0.2% FA. After 5min of desalting, the precolumn was switched online with an analytical C4 column (75μm ID × 15 cm, in-house packed with C4 Reprosil) equilibrated in 95% A (5% ACN, 0.2% FA) and 5% B (0.2% FA in ACN). Proteins were eluted using a gradient from 5% to 40% B (5min) and then 40% to 99% B (33min) at 300nL/min. The Fusion was operated in single MS acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 1.9kV, the ion transfer tube temperature to 350°C, the RF lens to 60%. The MS scans were acquired between 700-2000 m/z with 15k resolution and 10 μscans for averaging. For MSMS acquisition, 3 sec cycles were aquired between 1000-2000 m/z in the Orbitrap at 7,5k resolution, with 10 µscans. HCD activation was done with 25% nCE, with spectra acquisition in the Orbitrap  at 60k resolution. The AGC target was set to 1e6. Dynamic exclusion for 600s was used within 60s (selection tolerance: ±10ppm) and improve the number of identified proteins. The spray voltage was set 1.9kV, and the RF lens to 60%. The MSMS analysis of the degraded 20S proteasome used the same parameters, except for the activation method, whereby EThcD was used instead of HCD: ETD activation time of 5ms, ETD reagent target intensity set at 7e5, max ETD reagent IT set at 200ms, with supplemental EThcD activation at 25% nCE.   HDX-MS: HDX-MS experiments were performed on a Synapt-G2Si (Waters Scientific) coupled to a Twin HTS PAL dispensing and labelling robot (Trajan Scientific) via a NanoAcquity system with HDX technology. Data were collected with MassLynX v.4.1 (Waters Scientific) and the robot was controlled via HDX Director v.1.0.3.9 (LEAP Technologies). 5.7µL of bovin 20S proteasome at 2.3µM were aspirated and 5.2µL were diluted in 98.8µL of protonated (peptide mapping) or deuterated buffer (20mM Tris pH/pD 7.4, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT) and incubated at 20°C for 0, 0.5, 1, 5, 10, and 30min. 99µL were then transferred to vials containing 11µL of precooled quenching solution (500mM glycine at pH 2.3). After 30s of quenching, 105µL were injected into a 100µL loop. Proteins were digested online at 15°C, with a 2.1×30mm Poros Immobilized Pepsin column (Life Technologies/Applied Biosystems). Peptides were desalted for 3min on a C18 pre-column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7µm, VANGUARD) and separated at 4°C on a C18 column (Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7µm, 1.0×100mm) by the following gradient: 5–35% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.2% FA) for 12min, 35–40% for 1min, 40–95% for 1min, 2min at 95% followed by 2 cycles of 5–95% for 2min and a final equilibration at 5% buffer A (5% ACN, 0.2% FA) for 2min. Total runtime was 25min. Experiments were run in triplicates and protonated buffer was injected between each triplicate to wash the column and avoid cross-over contamination. Acquisitions were performed in positive and resolution mode between 50–2000 m/z. Sample cone and capillary voltages were set at 30V and 3kV, respectively. Analysis cycles alternated between a 0.3s low energy scan (Trap and Transfer collision energies at 4V and 2V, respectively), a 0.3s high energy scan (Ramp Trap and Transfer collision energies set to 18 to 40V and 2 to 2V, respectively) and a 0.3s lockspray scan (0.1µM Glu-Fibrinopeptide in 50% ACN, 50% water and 0.2% FA at 10µL/min).

### Data Protocol
Bottom-up: The identification was done with Mascot search engine, using following search parameters: Peptide mass tolerance : 10 ppm; Peptide charge : 2+ and 3+; Cleavage enzyme: Trypsin/P; Max. missed cleavages : 2; Decoy : true; Mass : Monoisotopic; Fixed modifications : Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modifications : Acetyl (Protein N-term),Oxidation (M); MS/MS IONS SEARCH : true; Error tolerant : false; MS/MS tolerance : 20 mmu; Data format : Mascot generic; Quantitation : None; Instrument : ESI FTMS HCD. The UniProt entries (SwissProt & TrEMBL) for Bos Taurus were used as a protein entry database, including isoforms. In the case of rat germ cells, the search was performed with Rattus norvegicus Uniprot database, including isoforms. The result files were then imported into Proline, using following parameters: Peaklist software: Proline; Generate intermediate mzIdentML file: false; Instrument configuration: ORBITRAP FUSION (A1=FTMS F=HCD A2=FTMS); Decoy strategy: Concatenated Decoy Database; Protein match decoy rule: SearchGUI REVERSED; Ion score cutoff: None; Subset threshold: None; Replace peptide matches scores by PEP values (Posterior Error Probabilities): false; Automatically associate raw files to identification results (DAT, OMX): true. Validation of the peptide IDs in Proline was done using following parameters: PSM filters: Pretty Rank: 1.0, Peptide Seq Length: 7.0; PSM validation: expecting FDR of 1.0% on Mascot Adjusted E-Value; Validation of the protein sets was done using the following parameters: Min. specific peptide count: 1; Enable protein FDR (false discovery rate) filter: true; Min protein set FDR (%): 1.0; Peptide set scoring method: Mascot Modified MudPIT; Dataset merging mode: After validation (merge identification summaries). Label-free quantitation was done using following parameters:  Quantitation type: label_free; Quantitation method: Label free based on the extraction of feature abundance; Extraction m/z tolerance: 5 ppm; Mapping m/z tolerance: 5 ppm; Min. peakel duration: 15 sec; Alignment computation method: (Iterative; Max number of iterations: 3; m/z tolerance: 5 ppm; Time tolerance: 5 sec); Alignment smoothing: (Method: Landmark Range; Number of landmarks: 50; Sliding window overlap: 50); Features cross assignment: (Mapping m/z tolerance: 5 ppm; Time tolerance: 60 sec; Normalization method: None; Master feature filter type: Intensity; Intensity threshold: 0). Normalization and statistics were done using the following parameters: Global options: (Apply profile clustering: false (method: QUANT_PROFILE); Use only specific peptides: true; Discard miscleaved peptides: false (method: KEEP_MOST_ABUNDANT_FORM); Discard oxidized peptides: false (method: KEEP_MOST_ABUNDANT_FORM); Abundance summarizer method: LFQ based on QUANT_PEPTIDE_IONS); Protein options: (Apply normalization: true; Apply missing values inference: false; Apply variance correction: false; Apply T-test: true (p-value: 0.01); Apply Z-test: true (p-value: 0.4)); Peptide options: ( Apply normalization: true; Apply missing values inference: false; Apply variance correction: false; Apply T-test: true (p-value: 0.01); Apply Z-test: true (p-value: 0.4)). The p-value for a non-paired, one-sided T-test and fold change were calculated between the experimental IP groups and the control IP groups (IP with the OX8 antibody). Proteins enriched over 2-fold with a p-value below 0.05 were considered significantly enriched.  Top-down:  LC-MS .raw files were automatically deconvoluted with the rolling window deconvolution software RoWinPro and the proteoform footprints were visualized with VisioProt-MS v2.0. Spectra identification was done in Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) v.2.3, using an Absolute Mass Search with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance - 1000 Da, fragment mass tolerance - 15ppm. Mutations and truncations of the proteoforms were then manually curated. The search database was generated from the ensemble of the available Swiss-Prot entries for bovin 20S proteasome, bovin proteasome regulators (19S, PA28 subunits, and PA200) and their isoforms.  HDX-MS: Peptide identification was performed with ProteinLynx Global SERVER v.3.0.2 (PLGS, Waters, Manchester, UK) based on the MSE data acquired on the nondeuterated samples. The MSMS spectra were searched against a home-made database containing sequences of the 18 c20S, i20S and s20S subunits, all the 19S subunits, the entries for PA28ɑꞵ, PA28γ and PA200 regulators and pepsin from Sus scrofa. Peptides were filtered in DynamX v.3.0 from Waters Scientific (Manchester, UK) with the following parameters: peptides identified in at least two replicates, 0.2 fragments per amino-acid, intensity threshold 1000. The RDUs were not corrected for back exchange. These data were then used for structural data mining with HDX-Viewer.

### Publication Abstract
During spermatogenesis, spermatogonia undergo a series of mitotic and meiotic divisions on their path to spermatozoa. To achieve this, a succession of processes requiring high proteolytic activity are in part orchestrated by the proteasome. The spermatoproteasome (s20S) is specific to the developing gametes, in which the gamete-specific &#x3b1;4s subunit replaces the &#x3b1;4 isoform found in the constitutive proteasome (c20S). Although the s20S is conserved across species and was shown to be crucial for germ cell development, its mechanism, function, and structure remain incompletely characterized. Here, we used advanced mass spectrometry (MS) methods to map the composition of proteasome complexes and their interactomes throughout spermatogenesis. We observed that the s20S becomes highly activated as germ cells enter meiosis, mainly through a particularly extensive 19S activation and, to a lesser extent, PA200 binding. Additionally, the proteasome population shifts from c20S (98%) to s20S (&gt;82 to 92%) during differentiation, presumably due to the shift from &#x3b1;4 to &#x3b1;4s expression. We demonstrated that s20S, but not c20S, interacts with components of the meiotic synaptonemal complex, where it may localize via association with the PI31 adaptor protein. In vitro, s20S preferentially binds to 19S and displays higher trypsin- and chymotrypsin-like activities, both with and without PA200 activation. Moreover, using MS methods to monitor protein dynamics, we identified significant differences in domain flexibility between &#x3b1;4 and &#x3b1;4s. We propose that these differences induced by &#x3b1;4s incorporation result in significant changes in the way the s20S interacts with its partners and dictate its role in germ cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Spermatoproteasome, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Top-down proteomics, Bottom-up proteomics, Proteasome

### Affiliations
IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology (IPBS), CNRS, Toulouse


