### Accession
PXD033738

### Title
De novo mapping of the apicomplexan Ca2+-responsive phosphoproteome

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca2+ signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the transition between the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle. Despite the presence of conserved Ca2+-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca2+-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan T. gondii via time-resolved phosphoproteomics. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca2+ release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific molecular targets in these pathways. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca2+-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca2+ store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca2+ uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca2+-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite harvest and treatment T. gondii tachyzoites from the RH strain were infected onto confluent HFF monolayers in 4–8 15-cm dishes. After the parasites had completely lysed the host cell monolayer (40-48 hours post-infection), extracellular parasites were passed through 5 µm filters into 50 ml conical vials. The samples were spun at 1000 x g for 7 minutes. The supernatant was decanted, and the parasite pellet was resuspended in 1 ml FluoroBrite DMEM lacking serum and transferred to a 1.5 ml protein low-bind tube. The sample was spun in a mini centrifuge at 1000 x g for 7 minutes. The supernatant was aspirated, and the parasite pellet was resuspended in 800 µl FluoroBrite DMEM. The sample was split into aliquots of 300 and 500 µl, which were spun at 1000 x g for 7 minutes followed by aspiration of the supernatant. The pellet containing ⅝ of the parasite harvest was resuspended in 250 µl 500 µM zaprinast in FluoroBrite DMEM. Aliquots of 50 µl were removed and combined with 50 µl 2X lysis buffer (10% SDS, 4 mM MgCl2, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.55 with 2X Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors and 500 U/ml benzonase) at 0, 5, 10, 30, and 60 seconds post-stimulation. The final composition of the lysate was 5% SDS, 2 mM MgCl2, 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 with 1X Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitors and 250 U/ml benzonase. The pellet containing ⅜ of the parasite harvest was resuspended in 150 µl 0.5% DMSO in FluoroBrite DMEM. Aliquots of 50 µl were removed and combined with 50 µl 2X lysis buffer at 0, 10, and 30 seconds post-stimulation.   Protein cleanup and digestion Proteins were cleaned up and digested using a modified version of the S-trap protocol (Protifi). Proteins in the lysates were reduced with the addition of 5 mM TCEP and heating at 55°C for 20 minutes. Alkylation was performed for 10 minutes at room temperature with 20 mM MMTS. The lysates were acidified to a final concentration of 2.5% v/v phosphoric acid. A 6X volume of S-trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB pH 7.55) was added to each sample to precipitate proteins. The solution was loaded onto S-trap mini columns (Protifi) and spun at 4,000 x g until all of the solution had been passed over the column. The columns were washed four times with 150 µl S-trap binding buffer, followed by a 30 second spin at 4,000 x g. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 20 µl of 50 mM TEAB pH 8.5 containing 2 µg of trypsin/LysC mix (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted in three 40 µl washes with 50 mM TEAB,  0.2% formic acid, and 50% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid. The eluted peptides snap-frozen and lyophilized.  TMTpro labeling The dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 100 mM TEAB 8.5. The peptide concentrations of 1/50 dilutions of the samples were quantified using the Pierce Fluorometric Peptide Assay according to manufacturer’s instructions. Sample abundances were normalized to 50 µg peptides in 50 µl 100 mM TEAB pH 8.5. Each sample was combined with TMTpro reagents at a 5:1 label:peptide weight/weight ratio. Labeling reactions proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking at 350 rpm. Unreacted TMT reagent was quenched with 0.2% hydroxylamine. The samples were pooled, acidified to 3% with formic acid, and were loaded onto an EasyPep Maxi Sample Prep column. The samples were washed and eluted according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 5% by volume of the elution was reserved as an unenriched proteome sample. The eluted peptides were snap-frozen and lyophilized until dry.  Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptides were enriched using the SMOAC protocol (Tsai et al., 2014). Resuspended TMTpro-labeled samples were enriched with the High-Select™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific A32993) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The flow-through and the eluate containing phosphopeptides were immediately snap-frozen and lyophilized. The flow-through was resuspended and enriched with the High-Select™ Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific A32992) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted phosphopeptides were immediately snap-frozen and lyophilized.   Fractionation Unenriched and enriched proteome samples were fractionated with the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions for TMT-labeled peptides. The phosphopeptides enriched with the TiO2 and Fe-NTA kits were combined prior to fractionation.

### Data Protocol
MS data acquisition The fractions were lyophilized and resuspended in 10-20 µl of 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis and were analyzed on an Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro source(Bekker-Jensen et al., 2020) connected to an EASY-nLC chromatography system as described above. Peptides were separated at 300 nl/min on a gradient of 5–20% B for 110 minutes, 20–28% B for 10 minutes, 28–95% B for 10 minutes, 95% B for 10 minutes, and a seesaw gradient of 95–2% B for 2 minutes, 2% B for 2 minutes, 2–98% B for 2 minutes, 98% B for 2 minutes, 98–2% B for 2 minutes, and 2% B for 2 minutes. The orbitrap and FAIMS were operated in positive ion mode with a positive ion voltage of 1800V; with an ion transfer tube temperature of 270°C; using standard FAIMS resolution and compensation voltages of -50 and -65V, an inner electrode temperature of 100°C, and outer electrode temperature of 80°C with 4.6 ml/min carrier gas. Full scan spectra were acquired in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 400-1400 m/z, automatically determined maximum fill time, 300% AGC target, intensity threshold of 5 × 104, 2-5 charge state, and dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds with a cycle time of 1.5 seconds between master scans. MS2 spectra were generated with a HCD collision energy of 32 at a resolution of 45,000 using TurboTMT settings with a first mass at 110 m/z, an isolation window of 0.7 m/z, 200% AGC target, and 120 ms injection time.  Phosphoproteomics time course analysis Raw files were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to generate peak lists and protein and peptide IDs using Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the ToxoDB release49 GT1 protein database. The unenriched sample search included the following post-translational modifications: dynamic oxidation (+15.995 Da; M), dynamic acetylation (+42.011 Da; N-Terminus), static TMTpro (+304.207 Da; any N-Terminus), static TMTpro (+304.207 Da; K), and static methylthio (+45.988 Da; C). The enriched sample search included the same post-translational modifications, but with the addition of dynamic phosphorylation (+79.966 Da; S, T, Y).  PP1-AID phosphoproteomics Samples were prepared as described above, with the following modifications. PP1-AID parasites were infected onto confluent HFF monolayers. IAA or vehicle (PBS) was added to the cell culture media 29 hours post-infection. At 32 hours post-infection, the monolayers were scraped, and parasites were mechanically released from host cells by passage through a 27-gauge needle. The parasites were harvested and concentrated as described above. The time-course was initiated when the parasite pellet was resuspended in 250 µl of 500 µM zaprinast solution. Aliquots of 50 µl were removed and combined with 2X lysis buffer at 0, 10, 30, and 60 seconds post-stimulation. The experiment was performed in biological duplicate, with vehicle- and IAA-treated parasites, for a total of 16 samples. The samples were prepared for mass spectrometry, labeled with TMTpro reagents, and enriched as described above.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites cause persistent mortality and morbidity worldwide through diseases including malaria, toxoplasmosis, and cryptosporidiosis. Ca<sup>2+</sup> signaling pathways have been repurposed in these eukaryotic pathogens to regulate parasite-specific cellular processes governing the replicative and lytic phases of the infectious cycle, as well as the transition between them. Despite the presence of conserved Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, little is known about how specific signaling elements interact to impact pathogenesis. We mapped the Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteome of the model apicomplexan <i>Taxoplasma gondii</i> via time-resolved phosphoproteomics and thermal proteome profiling. The waves of phosphoregulation following PKG activation and stimulated Ca<sup>2+</sup> release corroborate known physiological changes but identify specific proteins operating in these pathways. Thermal profiling of parasite extracts identified many expected Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins, such as parasite Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein kinases. Our approach also identified numerous Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive proteins that are not predicted to bind Ca<sup>2+</sup>, yet are critical components of the parasite signaling network. We characterized protein phosphatase 1 (PP1) as a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-responsive enzyme that relocalized to the parasite apex upon Ca<sup>2+</sup> store release. Conditional depletion of PP1 revealed that the phosphatase regulates Ca<sup>2+</sup> uptake to promote parasite motility. PP1 may thus be partly responsible for Ca<sup>2+</sup>-regulated serine/threonine phosphatase activity in apicomplexan parasites.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Quantitative proteomics, Phosphoproteomics, Systems biology, Parasite, Tmt16plex, Tmtpro

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA, USA 02142
Department of Biology, Massachusetts Insitute of Technology

### Submitter
Alice Herneisen

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Associate Professor, Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology and Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research


