### Accession
PXD038527

### Title
Systematic analysis to analyze the Drs2-I(S/R)TTK motif: comparative analysis bertween the interactome of Drs2 vs. drs2-5A by CS-MS.

### Description
The aim of the project was to systematically analyze the mechanism mediated by the Drs2 ISTTK motif in yeast, located in the N-terminal tail of the protein. Upon a GFP-specific pulldown, we carried-out a comparative analysis between the interactome of Drs2-GFP and drs2-5A-GFP (ISTTK>AAAAA) to identify proteins whose binding required to recognize directly, or in the near vicinity, the ISTTK motif of Drs2.

### Sample Protocol
Lysis of 600 OD600 units of yeast cells was performed using Freezer/Mill Cryogenic Grinder. DSSO was used as CL to a final concentration of 2.5mM for 20 minutes. 0.5M glycine was added to stop the reaction and the mix was incubated for 5 min. The suspension was incubated with rotation for 1h at 4ºC before removing the insoluble components. For the immunoprecipitation, the samples were incubated with previously equilibrated Bab agarose beads for 1h at 4ºC and then with GFP-Trap_Agarose beads overnight at 4ºC. The resin was washed 4 times with 8M urea, 2M NaCl and 1% TX-100 in PBS, and 4 more times with PBS. The resin used in immunoprecipitation was cleaned 3 times with 200mM ammonium bicarbonate and 60ul 6M urea/200mM ammonium bicarbonate was added. Samples were reduced with dithiotheritol, alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide and diluted to 1M urea with 200mM ammonium bicarbonate for trypsin digestion. After, peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted prior to LC-MS analysis.  Samples were analylzed using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000. Peptides were loaded onto the 2cm Nano Trap columns with an inner diameter of 100um packed with C18 particles of 5um particle size and separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25cm column with an inner diameter of 75um, packed with 1.9um C18 particles. Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 60 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.1 kV and source temperature at 300°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation.  Fragment ion spectra were produced via collision-induced dissociation at normalized collision energy of 35% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, an activation time of 10 ms and a maximum injection time of 100 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2. Digested bovine serum albumin was analyzed between each sample to avoid sample carryover and to assure stability of the instrument and QCloud has been used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.6, Matrix Science). The data were searched against a SGD (as in November 2019, 6080 entries) plus a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. PSM were normalized by the median of Drs2 PSM. SAINTexpress algorithm was used to score protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drs2-5a, Yeast, 23ºc, Drs2

### Affiliations
UPF

### Submitter
Irene Pazos Capell

### Lab Head
Dr Oriol Gallego
UPF


