### Accession
PXD022728

### Title
Insulin response in mouse liver

### Description
Proteomics of mouse liver over a period of four hours after insulin administration. It is part of a larger project that contains multi-omic datasets.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from mouse liver were separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel digestion with lysyl endopeptidase. The resulting peptides were then analyzed via LC-MS/MS on LTQ-Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using MaxQuant and filtered at 1% FDR via the target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
An effective combination of multi-omic datasets can enhance our understanding of complex biological phenomena. To build a context-dependent network with multiple omic layers, i.e., a trans-omic network, we perform phosphoproteomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics of murine liver for 4&#xa0;h after insulin administration and integrate the resulting time series. Structural characteristics and dynamic nature of the network are analyzed to elucidate the impact of insulin. Early and prominent changes in protein phosphorylation and persistent and asynchronous changes in mRNA and protein levels through non-transcriptional mechanisms indicate enhanced crosstalk between phosphorylation-mediated signaling and protein expression regulation. Metabolic response shows different temporal regulation with transient increases at early time points across categories and enhanced response in the amino acid and nucleotide categories at later time points as a result of process convergence. This extensive and dynamic view of the trans-omic network elucidates prominent regulatory mechanisms that drive insulin responses through intricate interlayer coordination.

### Keywords
Mouse, Liver, Insulin

### Affiliations
Kyushu University

### Submitter
Fumiko Matsuzaki

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroyuki Kubota
Kyushu University


