### Accession
PXD028965

### Title
Getting more out of FLAG-Tag co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry experiments using FAIMS.

### Description
Co-immunoprecipitation of proteins coupled to mass spectrometry is critical for the understanding of protein interaction networks. In instances where a suitable antibody is not available, it is common to graft synthetic tags onto target protein sequences and allowing the use of commercially available antibodies for affinity purification. A common approach is through FLAG-Tag co-immunoprecipitation. To allow the selective elution of protein complexes, competitive displacement using a large molar excess of the tag peptides is often carried out. Yet, this creates downstream challenges for the mass spectrometry analysis due to the presence of large quantities of these peptides. Here, we demonstrate that Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS), a gas phase ion separation device prior to mass spectrometry analysis can be applied to FLAG-Tag co-immunoprecipitation experiment to increase the depth of protein coverage. By excluding these abundant tag peptides, we were able to observe deeper coverage of interacting proteins and as a result, deeper biological insights, without the need for additional sample handling or altering sample preparation protocols.

### Sample Protocol
LC MS/MS was carried out using the Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometers with the FAIMS Pro interface (Thermo Fisher, USA) and as described previously [26]. The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). Tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) in water and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-35 min, 3-22% B; (iii) 35-40 min, 22-40% B; (iv) 45-50 min, 40-80% B; (v) 50-55 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 55-56 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. Tune version 3.3.2782.32 was used. For non-FAIMS experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode at 60000 resolution. The ‘top speed’ acquisition mode with 3 s cycle time on the most intense precursor ion was used, whereby ions with charge states of 2 to 7 were selected. Automated gain control (AGC) target was set to standard with auto maximum injection mode. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by CID with collision energy of 35 %, activation time of 10 ms and activation Q of 0.25. Analysis of fragment ions was carried out in the ion trap using the ‘Turbo’ speed scanning mode. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s. For FAIMS-enabled experiments, the mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode scanning from m/z 300-1600 at 60000 resolution. FAIMS separations were performed with the following settings: inner electrode temperature = 100 °C, outer electrode temperature = 100 °C, FAIMS carrier gas flow = 0 L/min. The FAIMS carrier gas was N2. Cycle time using the ‘top speed acquisition’ mode for single CV experiment were 3 s and, for experiments wherin two CVs (-40 and-60) were applied and cycle time was 1.5 s each. MS/MS analyses were performed by 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, fragmented by CID with collision energy of 35 %, activation time of 10 ms and activation Q of 0.25. Analysis of fragment ions was carried out in the ion trap using the ‘Turbo’ speed scanning mode. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searches was carried out using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4) with the SequestHT search engine or the Maxquant proteomics software package (version 2.0.1.0) against a Homo Sapiens database (SwissProt Taxonomy ID 9606, updated Feb 2021). The SequestHT search parameters are Trypsin as the cleavage enzyme and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. The default instrument specific search parameters were used in the Maxquant specific searches. For both search engines, carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminus were considered as variable modifications. Protein and peptides groups were set to a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of < 0.01 as determined by the Percolator or Maxquant algorithm [34, 35]. Peak area determination was carried out using the Skyline software [36].

### Publication Abstract
Co-immunoprecipitation of proteins coupled to mass spectrometry is critical for the understanding of protein interaction networks. In instances where a suitable antibody is not available, it is common to graft synthetic tags onto a target protein sequence thereby allowing the use of commercially available antibodies for affinity purification. A common approach is through FLAG-Tag co-immunoprecipitation. To allow the selective elution of protein complexes, competitive displacement using a large molar excess of the tag peptides is often carried out. Yet, this creates downstream challenges for the mass spectrometry analysis due to the presence of large quantities of these peptides. Here, we demonstrate that Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMS), a gas phase ion separation device prior to mass spectrometry analysis can be applied to FLAG-Tag co-immunoprecipitation experiments to increase the depth of protein coverage. By excluding these abundant tag peptides, we were able to observe deeper coverage of interacting proteins and as a result, deeper biological insights, without the need for additional sample handling or altering sample preparation protocols. SIGNIFICANCE: We have shown that application of FAIMS separation in the gas phase can increase the proteome coverage of Flag-Tagged co-immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry experiments versus one without FAIMS. We were able to observe deeper coverage of interacting proteins and as a result, deeper biological insights, without additional sample handling, fractionation, machine run time or modifying the sample preparation protocol.

### Keywords
Co-ip mass spectrometry, Flag tag, Ion mobility, Proteomics, Faims

### Affiliations
Bio21 Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Ching-Seng Ang

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas A. Williamson
Bio21 Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia


