### Accession
PXD033036

### Title
Photo-ANA enables profiling of host–bacteria protein interactions during infection

### Description
Bacterial pathogens rapidly change and adapt their proteome to cope with the environment in host cells and secret effector proteins to hijack host targets to ensure their survival and proliferation during infection. Excessive host proteins make it difficult to profile pathogens’ proteome dynamics by conventional proteomics. It is even more challenging to map pathogen-host protein-protein interactions in real time, given the low abundance of bacterial effectors and weak and transient interactions they may be involved. Here, we report a method for selectively labeling of bacterial proteome using a bifunctional amino acid, photo-ANA, equipped with a bioorthogonal handle and a photoreactive warhead, which enables simultaneous analysis of bacterial proteome reprogramming and pathogen-host protein interactions of Salmonella Typhimurium during infection. Using photo-ANA, we discovered temporal and distinct protein synthesis changes inside host cells and identified FLOT1/2 as the novel host interactors of Salmonella Typhimurium effector PipB2 in late stage of infection.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Peptides were resuspended in 0.5% formic acid for analysis. Samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive PLUS mass spectrometer equipped with Ultimate 300 RSLCnano system using PepMap 100 C18 trapping cartridge (5 M, 300m × 5 mm) and PepMap RSLC C18 microcapillary column (2M, 75 m × 25 cm) as analytical column. Peptides were separated with 4-40% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 90 minutes at flowrate of 300 nl/min. Electrospray ionization was performed by applying a voltage of 2,100 V through PEEK junction at the inlet of the microcapillary column. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in data-dependent mode. For SILAC samples, the survey scan was performed in the Orbitrap within the range of 300-1,800 m/z using the resolving power of 70,000, then 20 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation using a precursor isolation width window of 1.5 m/z and a resolution of 17,500. The automatic gain control for survey and MS2 scans was set to 1 × 106 ions and 5 × 104 ions, respectively. Maximum ion accumulation times for survey and MS2 scans were 30 ms and 50 ms, respectively. Normalized collision energy for HCD-MS2 was 27%. Ions with single charge, over 8 charges or unassigned charge states were excluded from MS2 analysis. For samples with TMT labeling, the survey scan was performed in the Orbitrap within the range of 375-1,400 m/z using the resolving power of 70,000, then 15 most intense peaks were selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation using a precursor isolation width window of 1.2 m/z and a resolution of 35,000 with the fix first mass 100 m/z. The automatic gain control for survey and MS2 scans was set to 3 × 106 ions and 1 × 105 ions, respectively. Maximum ion accumulation times for survey and MS2 scans were 50 ms and 100 ms, respectively. Normalized collision energy for HCD-MS2 was 32%. Ions with single charge, 8 charge and over 8 charge or unassigned charge states were excluded from MS2 analysis.

### Data Protocol
For estimation of incorporation rate of photo-ANA in PipB2, raw data were searched against Uniprot Salmonella Typhimurium LT2 database (UP000001014) with common contaminants using MaxQuant (1.6.10). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fix modification, and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications. Photo-ANA incorporation was set as variable modification on methionine with a mass shift of 46.0497 Da (the possible loss of N2 was set as neutral loss of 28.0061 Da). Mass error tolerance was set as 4.5 ppm for MS1 spectra and 20 ppm for MS2 spectra, and maximum missed cleavages were set to two. The false discovery rate (fdr) for peptide and protein was set to 0.01. For other proteomic experiment, Proteome Discoverer (ver. 2.5) was used to search raw data against Uniprot Salmonella Typhimurium (strain LT2) database (UP000001014; for estimation of incorporation rate of photo-ANA in proteome), or Uniprot Salmonella Typhimurium (strain 14028s) database (UP000002695; for proteome adaptation profiling), or Uniprot Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640) combined with UP000002695 (for PipB2-interactors profiling). The following modifications were included: cysteine carbamidomethylation and lysine TMT10plex labeling (only for TMT-based quantification) as fix modifications, methionine oxidation, protein N-terminus acetylation and methionine loss, peptide N-terminal TMT10plex labeling (only for TMT-based quantification), 13C615N4-arginine and 13C615N2-lysine (only for SILAC-based quantification) as variable modifications. Mass error tolerance was set as 20 ppm for MS1 spectra and 0.05 Da for MS2 spectra, and maximum missed cleavages were set to two. The false discovery rate (fdr) for peptide and protein was set to 0.01. The miss values were imputed using low abundance sampling method. For TMT-based quantification, hypothesis tests were performed as analysis of variance (ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial pathogens rapidly change and adapt their proteome to cope with the environment in host cells and secrete effector proteins to hijack host targets and ensure their survival and proliferation during infection. Excessive host proteins make it difficult to profile pathogens' proteome dynamics by conventional proteomics. It is even more challenging to map pathogen-host protein-protein interactions in real time, given the low abundance of bacterial effectors and weak and transient interactions in which they may be involved. Here we report a method for selectively labeling bacterial proteomes using a bifunctional amino acid, photo-ANA, equipped with a bio-orthogonal handle and a photoreactive warhead, which enables simultaneous analysis of bacterial proteome reprogramming and pathogen-host protein interactions of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium (S. Typhimurium) during infection. Using photo-ANA, we identified FLOT1/2 as host interactors of S. Typhimurium effector PipB2 in late-stage infection and globally profiled the extensive interactions between host proteins and pathogens during infection.

### Keywords
Salmonella

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Xiaomeng Li

### Lab Head
Dr XIANG DAVID LI
The University of Hong Kong


