### Accession
PXD006177

### Title
Establishment of dimethyl labeling-based quantitative acetylproteomics in Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein acetylation, one of many types of post-translational modifications (PTMs), is involved in a variety of biological and cellular processes. In the present study, we applied both CsCl density gradient (CDG) centrifugation-based protein fractionation and a dimethyl-labelling-based 4C quantitative PTM proteomics workflow in the study of dynamic acetylproteomic changes in Arabidopsis. This workflow integrates the dimethyl chemical labelling with chromatography-based acetylpeptide separation and enrichment followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) quantitation-based computational analysis of mass spectrometry data to measure dynamic changes of acetylpeptide level using an in-house software program, named Stable isotope-based Quantitation-Dimethyl labelling (SQUA-D), and finally the confirmation of ethylene hormone-regulated acetylation using immunoblot analysis. Eventually, using this proteomic approach, 7,456 unambiguous acetylation sites were found from 2,638 different acetylproteins, and 5,250 acetylation sites, including 5,233 sites on lysine side chain and 17 sites on protein N-terminus, were identified repetitively. Out of these repetitively discovered acetylation sites, 4,228 sites on lysine side chain (i.e., 80.5%) are novel. These acetylproteins are exemplified by the histone superfamily, ribosomal and heat shock proteins, and proteins related to stress/stimulus responses and energy metabolism. The novel acetylproteins enriched by the CDG centrifugation fractionation contain many cellular trafficking proteins, membrane-bound receptors, and receptor-like kinases, which are mostly involved in brassinosteroid, light, gravity, and development signalling. In addition, we identified 12 highly conserved acetylation site motifs within histones, P-glycoproteins, actin depolymerizing factors, ATPases, transcription factors, and receptor-like kinases. Using SQUA-D software, we have quantified 33 ethylene hormone-enhanced and 31 hormone-suppressed acetylpeptide groups or called unique PTM peptide arrays (UPAs) that share the identical unique PTM site pattern (UPSP). This CDG centrifugation protein fractionation in combination with dimethyl labelling-based quantitative PTM proteomics, and SQUA-D may be applied in the quantitation of any PTM proteins in any model eukaryotes and agricultural crops as well as tissue samples of animals and human beings.

### Sample Protocol
CsCl density gradient centrifugation-based protein fractionation   The total cellular protein was extracted individually from both control and the treated plants using detergent-free CsCl density gradient (CDG) buffer for centrifugation fractionation, which contains 3 M CsCl and a modified urea protein extraction buffer (UEB, (88)). The frozen plant tissues were ground into fine powder and mixed with CDG buffer at a ratio of 1 : 4 (w/v). After centrifugation at 218,000 × g for 2 hours at 10 °C, the top (t), middle (m), and bottom (b) protein fractions were obtained. The highly membrane-concentrated t and b fractions were re-dissolved using 5 volumes of membrane-solubilizing and protein-denaturing buffer (MSPD), which contains 20 mM Tris-HCl, PH 7.8, 8 M urea, 10 mM EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid), 10 mM EGTA (ethylene glycol tetraacetic acid), 50 mM NaF, 2% Glycerol, *1% Glycerol-2-Phosphate disodium salt hydrate, *1 mM PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluorid), 1% SDS (sodium dodecyl sulfate), and 1.2% Triton-X100. Proteins from each one of three fractions were precipitated and quantitated according to the previously described (89).  By the CDG centrifugation fractionation, the total cellular protein isolated either from control or the treated plant tissue was separated into three protein fractions (t, m, and b).   Tryptic digestion of proteins and dimethyl labelling of peptides Protein samples from both control and the ethylene-treated plants were dissolved into preheated (37 °C) trypsin digestion buffer (40mM Tris-HCl, PH 8.0) with protease trypsin (100:1, w:w). The final concentration of urea should be lower than 1 M. The in-solution digestion was performed for 12 hours at 37 °C. The digested peptides were desalted and enriched by C18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters Corporation, United Kingdom). The peptides prepared either from control or the ethylene-treated plants were re-suspended in 100 mM sodium acetate (pH5.5) solution and were then divided into two parts equally. The two parts of peptides were labelled separately with light isotope-coded chemicals (12CH2O and NaBH3CN) and heavy isotope-coded dimethyl chemicals (13CD2O and NaBH3CN) (2). The mixing of an equal amount of heavy isotope-labelled peptides from the treated plants with light isotope-labelled peptides from control plants was defined as the Forward mixing experiment (F), and vice versa defined as the Reciprocal mixing experiment (R). Both F and R mixing samples were considered to be independent experimental replicates rather than different biological replicates. Each biological replicate thus produces six mixings, three from F mixings (i.e., tF1, mF1, and bF1) and another three from R (tR1, mR1, bR1). These six mixing replicates are considered to be six different batches of peptide samples.   HPLC fractionation and acetyl-affinity enrichment of acetylated peptides Each of the mixed peptide samples was further fractionated into 3 sub-fractions on HPLC equipped with a 200 × 9.4 mm strong cation exchange (SCX) column (PolySULFOETHYL ATM, 5 μm, 200 Å, 209SE0502, PolyLCINC, Columbia, MD, USA) at a flow rate of 2.5 mL/min. Ultraviolet absorption was measured at 214 nm to monitor the peptide elutes. The resulting SCX-HPLC-fractionated peptide samples were suspended in a NETN buffer, which contains 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with the beads conjugated with anti-acetyllysine antibody (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shakings. The resulting mixture solutions were washed 4 times with NETN buffer and 2 times with ddH2O, followed by the final elution with 0.1% TFA. The acetylpeptide eluates were subsequently desalted using C18 ZipTip column (ZTC18S960, Millipore, MA, USA) and were finally subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.   Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis The LC-MS/MS analysis of acetylpeptides was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense, Denmark) coupled with a Q ExactiveTM Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The resulting acetylpeptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 pre-column (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) and separated in an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min on a gradient of 0–24 min 6–22% B, 24–32 min 22–40% B, 32–37 min 40–80% B, 37–40 min 80% B, where B is (0.1% FA in 98% ACN). Mass resolution was set at 70,000 for intact peptides (MS1) and at 17,500 for ion fragments (MS2) under a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30. The data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode was adopted for the top 20 precursor ions, all of which exceed a threshold ion count of 5E3 with 15s dynamic exclusion. To generate MS/MS spectra, about 5E4 ions were accumulated while automatic gain control (AGC) was used to avoid overfilling the Orbitrap. The precursor m/z scan range was set between 350 to 1800.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis The raw MS data files generated by the Thermo Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer were converted into the mzXML and MGF format using ProteoWizard (version: 3.0.11133 64-bit) (90). The FDR was estimated using the target-decoy strategy (91). Thus, we searched the data files against both target and decoy databases. The target database which was the TAIR10 (35,387 proteins, https://www.arabidopsis.org/download_files/Sequences/TAIR10_blastsets/TAIR10_pep_20101214_updated) while the decoy database was generated by random shuffling the target peptide sequences. We applied Mascot (Version 2.5.1, Matrix Science) for peptide identification as described previously (92). Trypsin was used as the protease to digest acetylproteins. The mass tolerance was ±10 ppm for mass spectra and 0.02 Da for tandem mass spectra. The maximum missed cleavage was six. The fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (57.021464 Da) on Cysteine. The variable modifications were oxidation (15.994915 Da) on Methionine, light dimethyl labeling (C2H4, 28.031300 Da) on lysine residue and N-terminus of a peptide, heavy dimethyl labeling (13C2D4, 34.063117) on Lysine residue and N-terminus of a peptide, acetylation (C2H2O, 42.010565) on lysine residue and N-terminus of a peptide. MascotPercolator (Version 3.1) (93) was used to estimate the FDR. MascotPercolator converts the original FDR into the q-value. We refer the q-value as FDR. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) cut-off threshold was set at a FDR ≤ 0.01.   Quantification of acetylpeptides In-solution protease digestion of acetylproteins may produce the peptides with missed cleavages. In order to quantitate the acetylpeptides with the common acetylation site(s), both completely digested and partially digested acetylpeptides sharing the identical unique PTM site pattern (UPSP) were combined into a peptide group or called the unique PTM peptide array (UPA). For example, “n(34.063)GGK(42.011)GLGK(42.011)GGAK(34.063)Rc” and “n(34.063)GGK(42.011)GLGK(42.011)GGAK(34.063)c”, where “n” stands for peptide N-terminus, “c” for peptide C-terminus, “34.063” for heavy dimethyl labelling, and “42.011” for acetylation. These two peptides share the same UPSP. A new computer program, named SQUA-D (Stable isotope-based Quantitation-Dimethyl labelling, Version 1.0), was developed to perform the quality control, quantification analysis, and statistical evaluation. The quality control of the quantifiable PTM peptides was based on the following criteria: 1) the number of the PSMs of the light dimethyl-coded acetylpeptide is larger than or equal to one; 2) the number of the PSMs of the heavy dimethyl-coded acetylpeptide is larger than or equal to one; 3) the acetylpeptide must be identified in at least five out of all six experiment replicates (F1, F2, F3, R1, R2, and R3); 4) The number of the identified PSMs from the F mixing experiments divided by the total number of PSM number is larger than or equal to 0.15; 5) The number of the identified PSMs from the R mixing experiments divided by the total number of PSM is larger than or equal to 0.15;  After selection of quantifiable PTM peptides, SQUA-D extracted ion chromatograms of both differentially labelled isotopic peptides, paired light- and heavy-labelled ion chromatograms, and calculated the log-ratios using the maximum intensities (76) of the smoothed ion chromatograms. In order to make the most use of the data, SQUA-D also paired the unidentified yet highly confident ion chromatogram with the identified one. For example, if SQUA-D detected that the identified light-labelled peptide does not pair with a heavy-labelled corresponding peptide, it would calculate the theoretical m/z value and the isotopic pattern of the deduced heavy-labelled peptide. Then, SQUA-D finds the highly possible ion satisfying three criteria: (1) the m/z value equals the theoretical m/z value with a predefined tolerance; (2) the Pearson correlation of the theoretical isotopic pattern and the observed isotopic pattern is larger than or equal to 0.7 (94); and (3) there is overlap between two retention time ranges from the light- and heavy-labelled ion chromatograms. Finally, SQUA-D pairs these two ion chromatograms and calculates a log-ratio. SQUA-D also uses half of the minimum value among all extracted intensities as a replacement for the zero intensities of certain peptides. After calculating the log-ratios for the peptides from the UPAs, each log-ratio is adjusted with the median value of all the log-ratios from the same replicate to circumvent the inevitable mixing error. Finally, SQUA-D is capable of adjusting the batch effects and performing the statistical evaluation of the log-ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Protein acetylation, one of many types of post-translational modifications (PTMs), is involved in a variety of biological and cellular processes. In the present study, we applied both <i>C</i>sCl <i>d</i>ensity <i>g</i>radient (CDG) centrifugation-based protein fractionation and a dimethyl-labeling-based 4C quantitative PTM proteomics workflow in the study of dynamic acetylproteomic changes in Arabidopsis. This workflow integrates the dimethyl <i>c</i>hemical labeling with <i>c</i>hromatography-based acetylpeptide separation and enrichment followed by mass spectrometry (MS) analysis, the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) quantitation-based <i>c</i>omputational analysis of mass spectrometry data to measure dynamic changes of acetylpeptide level using an in-house software program, named <i>S</i>table isotope-based <i>Qua</i>ntitation-<i>D</i>imethyl labeling (SQUA-D), and finally the <i>c</i>onfirmation of ethylene hormone-regulated acetylation using immunoblot analysis. Eventually, using this proteomic approach, 7456 unambiguous acetylation sites were found from 2638 different acetylproteins, and 5250 acetylation sites, including 5233 sites on lysine side chain and 17 sites on protein N termini, were identified repetitively. Out of these repetitively discovered acetylation sites, 4228 sites on lysine side chain (<i>i.e.</i> 80.5%) are novel. These acetylproteins are exemplified by the histone superfamily, ribosomal and heat shock proteins, and proteins related to stress/stimulus responses and energy metabolism. The novel acetylproteins enriched by the CDG centrifugation fractionation contain many cellular trafficking proteins, membrane-bound receptors, and receptor-like kinases, which are mostly involved in brassinosteroid, light, gravity, and development signaling. In addition, we identified 12 highly conserved acetylation site motifs within histones, P-glycoproteins, actin depolymerizing factors, ATPases, transcription factors, and receptor-like kinases. Using SQUA-D software, we have quantified 33 ethylene hormone-enhanced and 31 hormone-suppressed acetylpeptide groups or called <i>u</i>nique <i>P</i>TM peptide <i>a</i>rrays (UPAs) that share the identical <i>u</i>nique <i>P</i>TM <i>s</i>ite <i>p</i>attern (UPSP). This CDG centrifugation protein fractionation in combination with dimethyl labeling-based quantitative PTM proteomics, and SQUA-D may be applied in the quantitation of any PTM proteins in any model eukaryotes and agricultural crops as well as tissue samples of animals and human beings.

### Keywords
Squa-d, 4c proteomic workflow, Cscl density gradient (cdg) centrifugation, Arabidopsis, Stable isotope dimethyl labelling, Quantitative ptm proteomics, Acetylproteomics

### Affiliations
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Division of Life Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Fengchao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Li
Division of Life Science, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology


