### Accession
PXD017586

### Title
Discovery of a NAPE-PLD inhibitor that modulates emotional behavior in mice

### Description
N‑acylethanolamines (NAEs), which include the endocannabinoid anandamide, represent an important family of signaling lipids in the brain. The lack of chemical probes that modulate NAE biosynthesis in living systems hamper the understanding of the biological role of these lipids. Using a high-throughput screen, chemical proteomics and targeted lipidomics, we report here the discovery and characterization of LEI-401 as the first CNS-active N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD) inhibitor. LEI-401 reduced NAE levels in neuroblastoma cells and in the brain of freely moving mice, but not in NAPE-PLD KO cells and mice, respectively. LEI-401 activated the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and impaired fear extinction, thereby emulating the effect of a cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist, which could be reversed by a fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor. Our findings highlight the distinctive role of NAPE-PLD in NAE biosynthesis in the brain and suggest the presence of an endogenous NAE tone controlling emotional behavior.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were measured as described previously for the NanoACQUITY UPLC System coupled to SYNAPT G2-Si high definition mass spectrometer (Van Rooden et al, Nat. Prot. 2018). A trap-elute protocol, where 5 mL of the digest is loaded on a trap column (C18 100 Å, 5 mM, 180 mM x 20 mm, Waters) followed by elution and separation on the analytical column (HSS-T3 C18 1.8 mM, 75 mM x 250 mm, Waters). The sample is brought onto this column at a flow rate of 10 mL/min with 99.5% solvent A for 2 min before switching to the analytical column. Peptide separation is achieved using a multistep concave gradient based on gradients previously described (Distler et al., Nat. Prot. 2016). The column is re-equilibrated to initial conditions after washing with 90% solvent B. The rear seals of the pump are flushed every 30 min with 10% (v/v) acetonitrile. [Glu1]-fibrinopeptide B (GluFib) is used as a lock mass compound. The auxiliary pump of the LC system is used to deliver this peptide to the reference sprayer (0.2 mL/min). A UDMSe method is set up as previously described (Distler et al., Nat. Prot. 2016). Briefly, the mass range is set from 50 to 2,000 Da with a scan time of 0.6 seconds in positive, resolution mode. The collision energy is set to 4 V in the trap cell for low-energy MS mode. For the elevated energy scan, the transfer cell collision energy is ramped using drift-time specific collision energies. The lock mass is sampled every 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
For raw data processing, PLGS (v3.0.3) was used. The MSE identification workflow was performed with the parameters summarized in ISOQuant_analysis_proteomics_data.xlsx to search the human proteome from Uniprot (uniprot-homo-sapiens-trypsin-reviewed-2016_08_29.fasta). Protein quantification was performed using ISOQuant (v1.5). The parameter settings used are summarized in ISOQuant_analysis_proteomics_data.xlsx.

### Publication Abstract
N-acylethanolamines (NAEs), which include the endocannabinoid anandamide, represent an important family of signaling lipids in the brain. The lack of chemical probes that modulate NAE biosynthesis in living systems hamper the understanding of the biological role of these lipids. Using a high-throughput screen, chemical proteomics and targeted lipidomics, we report here the discovery and characterization of LEI-401 as a CNS-active N-acylphosphatidylethanolamine phospholipase D (NAPE-PLD) inhibitor. LEI-401 reduced NAE levels in neuroblastoma cells and in the brain of freely moving mice, but not in NAPE-PLD KO cells and mice, respectively. LEI-401 activated the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis and impaired fear extinction, thereby emulating the effect of a cannabinoid CB<sub>1</sub> receptor antagonist, which could be reversed by a fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitor. Our findings highlight the distinctive role of NAPE-PLD in NAE biosynthesis in the brain and suggest the presence of an endogenous NAE tone controlling emotional behavior.

### Keywords
Chemical biology, Lipids, Drug discovery, Endocannabinoids

### Affiliations
Leiden Institute for Chemistry
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden University

### Submitter
Bogdan Florea

### Lab Head
Dr Mario van der Stelt
Department of Molecular Physiology, Leiden University


