### Accession
PXD007841

### Title
Comparative analysis of mRNA degradation and protein degradation in 68 pairs of adjacent prostate tissue samples indicates high stability of proteins

### Description
Here we investigated the degradation of mRNA and protein in 68 pairs of adjacent prostate tissue samples using RNA-seq and pressure cycling technology (PCT) coupled with SWATH mass spectrometry and developed a score, the Proteome Integrity Number (PIN), to quantify the extent of protein degradation in the samples.

### Sample Protocol
68 prostate tissue samples of 24 patients were collected within the ProCOC study. From each patient, a malignant punch and a benign punch were collected from low grade prostate tumors, while two malignant punches and one benign punch were sampled from intermediate and high grade tumors. For each tissue region, two adjacent punches (inner diameter 1mm) were generated and analyzed using RNA-seq and PCT-SWATH, respectively.  PCT-SWATH analyses were performed as described previously (Guo, et al., 2015). After washing away O.C.T., each tissue punch was lysed and digested using PCT and the PCT-MicroPestle system (Pressure Biosciences Inc., South Easton, MA), followed by C18 cleanup. One microgram of total peptide mass from each sample, as measured by NanoDrop A280, was analyzed in duplicate by SWATH-MS on a 5600 TripleTOF mass spectrometer (Sciex) coupled with a 1D+ Nano LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA). A two-hour gradient and 32 fixed SWATH window scheme were applied.

### Data Protocol
A SWATH assay library was compiled from 79 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) MS analyses of prostate tissues in a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer. These DDA tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were searched by Comet and X!Tandem using the default settings with the enzyme set “semi-tryptic”, to enable the identification of potential degradation products. The search results were validated by PeptideProphet and combined by iProphet, and further filtered at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % at the peptide level (iProphet probability: 0.7777). The identified spectra were imported into a redundant spectral library by SpectraST. A consensus tandem mass spectral library was then constructed by SpectraST. The generated library was further converted to TraML using the tool ConvertTSVToTraML, with decoy assays appended using the OpenSwathDecoyGenerator.  The SWATH wiff files were first converted into profile mzXML using msconvert. Through the iPortal workflow manager, the resulting 136 SWATH-MS mzXML files were analyzed by OpenSWATH as previously described, except that the following parameters were modified: m/z extraction window = 0.05 Thomson; RT extraction window = 600 seconds. After the targeted extraction of fragment ion chromatograms, pyprophet was used to calculate a single discriminant score from a subset of the scores (library_corr yseries_score xcorr_coelution_weighted massdev_score norm_rt_score library_rmsd bseries_score intensity_score xcorr_coelution log_sn_score isotope_overlap_score massdev_score_weighted xcorr_shape_weighted isotope_correlation_score xcorr_shape) and to estimate the q-value to facilitate FDR control. TRIC was then run on the pyprophet results to perform the feature alignment to re-rank peak groups obtained in the original targeted extraction stage with the following parameters (realign_method: spline, dscore_cutoff: 1, target_fdr: 0.01, max_rt_diff: auto_3medianstdev, method: global_best_overall).

### Publication Abstract
Deterioration of biomolecules in clinical tissues is an inevitable pre-analytical process, which affects molecular measurements and thus potentially confounds conclusions from cohort analyses. Here, we investigate the degradation of mRNA and protein in 68 pairs of adjacent prostate tissue samples using RNA-Seq and SWATH mass spectrometry, respectively. To objectively quantify the extent of protein degradation, we develop a numerical score, the Proteome Integrity Number (PIN), that faithfully measures the degree of protein degradation. Our results indicate that protein degradation only affects 5.9% of the samples tested and shows negligible correlation with mRNA degradation in the adjacent samples. These findings are confirmed by independent analyses on additional clinical sample cohorts and across different mass spectrometric methods. Overall, the data show that the majority of samples tested are not compromised by protein degradation, and establish the PIN score as a generic and accurate indicator of sample quality for proteomic analyses.

### Keywords
Dia/swath; clinical tissues; protein stability

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Wenguang Shao

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH, Zurich, Switzerland


