### Accession
PXD005222

### Title
Tapered-tip Capillary Electrophoresis Nano-electrospray Ionization Mass Spectrometry for Ultrasensitive Proteomics: The Mouse Cortex

### Description
We have enabled ultrasensitive proteomics of limited protein digests by developing a tapered-tip nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) interface for microanalytical capillary electrophoresis (CE) high resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS). CE-nanoESI-HRMS allowed us to detect 260 zmol angiotensin II (lower limit of detection) and identify 1 pg of bovine serum albumin and cytochrome c. A 1 ng protein digest from the mouse posterior cortex yielded 217 nonredundant protein groups, including many gene products that are used as classical neuronal markers.

### Sample Protocol
The mouse posterior cortex was processed using a standard bottom-up proteomic workflow. The issue was isolated, lysed, reduced, alkylated, purified (acetone precipitation), and trypsin-digested. The resulting peptides were lyophilized and reconstituted in 50% acetonitrile (0.05% acetic acid). The protein concentration was determined using the standard bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). A 1 nL (containing 1 ng) protein digest was loaded into our CE-nanoESI-HRMS platform. Peptides were electrophoretically separated and ionized by the CE-nanoESI interface operated in the cone-jet regime. Peptide ions were sequenced using an orthogonal acceleration time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Impact HD, Bruker).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MSMS/MS data were processed in MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 executing Andromeda 1.5.3.8 search engine against the SwissProt mouse (Mus musculus) proteome database downloaded from UniProt. Peptides and proteins were filtered at <1% false discovery rate (FDR), grouped based on the principle of parsimony (sequence similarity), and reported as protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain, Mouse, Capillary electrophoresis, Liquid chromatography, Impact hd, Mass spectrometry, Nanoelectrospray ionization, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
The George Washington University

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
The George Washington University


