### Accession
PXD017613

### Title
Conditioned media from human pancreatic cancer cells reduces oleic acid oxidation in human myotubes

### Description
In the present study we wanted to metabolically compare healthy primary human pancreas epithelial cells (hPEC) to a pancreatic cancer cell line (PANC-1) and to explore the effect of exposing conditioned medium from the hPEC and PANC-1 cells on the energy metabolism in primary human myotubes. We studied differences in metabolism of glucose, oleic acid and lactic acid, as well as lactic acid production in the two pancreatic cell lines. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics was used to study global protein secretion from the two cell types and pathway analyses were performed.  We observed that the PANC-1 cells did not exhibit a typical Warburg effect. Though they tended to have higher uptake of glucose and higher production of lactic acid, they also displayed a higher oxidation of glucose compared to hPEC cells. Interestingly, the PANC-1 cells had higher uptake but lower oxidation of oleic acid, and the mitochondrial reserve capacity from oleic acid was also lower in the PANC-1 cells. These changes in energy metabolism were reflected by differences in gene expressions, and differential expression of different pathways. Furthermore, conditioned media from the PANC-1 cells reduced the oleic acid oxidation in primary human skeletal muscle cells, but further studies will have to be conducted to reveal the mediator of this effect. Although this study is comparing a cancer cell line with a non-cancer cell line, we do not in any way imply that this represent cancer. This study merely represents the differences between the two different cell types studied.

### Sample Protocol
PANC-1 (~1×106 cells/flask) and hPEC cells (~2×106 cells/flask) were cultured in respective mediums in 75 cm2 flasks for 24 h. Thereafter, the cells were washed and both cells types were given DMEM medium, high glucose (PANC-1 medium without FBS). After 48 h culturing the media were collected and spun down at 1000 rpm at 4°C for 15 min before the supernatants were collected and frozen at -80°C.   The proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested into peptides with trypsin. The resulting peptides were desalted and concentrated before mass spectrometry by the STAGE-TIP method using a C18 resin disc. Each peptide mixture was analyzed by a nEASY-LC coupled to QExactive Plus (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) with EASY Spray PepMap® RSLC column (C18, 2 µl, 100Å, 75 µm x 25 cm) using 60 min LC separation gradient.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS raw files were submitted to the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 for protein identification and label-free quantification. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and acetyl (protein N-term), carbamyl (N-term) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. First search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search error 4.5 ppm were used. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. The minimal unique+razor peptides number was set to 1, and the allowed FDR was 0.01 (1 %) for peptide and protein identification. Label-free quantitation was employed with default settings. The UniProt database with ‘human’ entries (September 2018) was used for the database searches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic cell models, Energy metabolism, Myotubes, Proteomics, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Head of Proteomics

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head
Dr Tuula Nyman
Head of Proteomics


