### Accession
PXD010227

### Title
iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis reveals proteomic changes in leaves of mulberry in response to drought stress

### Description
Mulberry (Morus alba) is a fast-growing perennial woody plant with a long cultivation history in China and a distribution throughout the country. To date, the molecular mechanism of mulberry response to abiotic stress is little known. In the present study, proteomics data were collected from the leaves of the mulberry cultivar Neo-Ichinose (Japan) under drought stress and analyzed. In total, 2871 proteins were quantified, among which 267 proteins were differentially expressed. A Gene Ontology enrichment analysis indicated that the molecular functions of the up-regulated proteins were mainly related to glutathione peroxidase activity, hydrolase activity, oxidoreductase activity, peroxidase activity and antioxidant activity. Protein domain enrichment analysis showed that the most important protein domains were associated with glutathione peroxidase, glycoside hydrolase, and chaperones. Additionally, a functional enrichment analysis demonstrated that the main metabolic pathways of mulberry seedlings in response to drought stress were arachidonic acid metabolism and glutathione metabolism, which were up-regulated, and chlorophyll and porphyrin metabolism and glycerol metabolism, which were down-regulated. Additionally, many proteins related to osmotic adjustment and stress signal transduction were evoked by drought. Taken together, these results suggested that redox control and osmotic adjustment mediated by multiple signaling pathways dominated the drought response of mulberry and that antioxidant proteins and enzymes, especially glutathione peroxidase, played vital roles in the redox rebalance of mulberry under stress.

### Sample Protocol
One-year-old grafted seedlings of mulberry (Neo-Ichinose, Japan) were transplanted into plastic pots (diameter=45 cm, height=30 cm) for 2 weeks. One plant was planted in each pot with 15 kg of soil. All plants were grown in a greenhouse with a 12-h-sunlight (32 °C)/12-h-dark (26 °C) cycle and 50-70% relative humidity. To create drought stress, seedlings were treated by withholding water for 11 days, while the control plants were irrigated with 1 L water for each pot every two days. To estimate the drought degree, the contents of malondialdehyde (MDA), free proline, soluble sugar, total chlorophyll and relative water content were determined as previously described [17,18]. For iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics analysis, the second and third leaves from the tops of the treated or control plants were collected and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. Experiments were performed with 3 replicates per treatment, one pot was sampled as one replicate. Protein extraction and trypsin digestion The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, CT, USA). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 20% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000 g 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit () according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Protein identification and database search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Morus notabilis database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for peptides was set > 40.  The functions and features of the quantified proteins were annotated in several different categories including Gene Ontology (GO), Domain, Pathway and Subcellular Localization. Then, we classified the functions of the differentially expressed proteins and analyzed the significance of the functional enrichment, including GO (biological process, cellular component, molecular function), domain, and KEGG pathway.

### Publication Abstract
Mulberry (<i>Morus alba</i> L.) has been an economically important food crop for the domesticated silkworm, <i>Bombyx mori</i>, in China for more than 5000 years. However, little is known about the mechanism underlying mulberry response to environmental stress. In this study, quantitative proteomics was applied to elucidate the molecular mechanism of drought response in mulberry. A total of 604 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified via LC-MS/MS. The proteomic profiles associated with antioxidant enzymes, especially five glutathione peroxidase (GPX) isoforms, as a scavenger of reactive oxygen species (ROS), were systematically increased in the drought-stressed mulberry. This was further confirmed by gene expression and enzymatic activity. Furthermore, overexpression of the GPX isoforms led to enhancements in both antioxidant system and ROS-scavenging capacity, and greater tolerance to drought stress in transgenic plants. Taken together, these results indicated that GPX-based antioxidant enzymes play an important role in modulating mulberry response to drought stress, and higher levels of GPX can improve drought tolerance through enhancing the capacity of the antioxidant system for ROS scavenging.

### Keywords
Drought stress; proteome; itraq

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China
PTM

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Hua Qian
College of Animal Science and Technology, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China


