### Accession
PXD006928

### Title
Human Mitochondrial NFS1-FXN XL LS-MS/MS

### Description
Frataxin (FXN) is involved in mitochondrial iron-sulfur (Fe-S) cluster biogenesis and serves to accelerate Fe-S cluster formation. FXN deficiency is associated with Friedreich ataxia, a neurodegenerative disease. Using chemical cross-linking (XL) accompanied with LC-MS/MS, we studied the the interaction between the core complexes Acp-ISD11-NFS1 (AIN) and AIN-ISCU (AINU)  with FXN.

### Sample Protocol
The chemical cross-linking reaction was started by mixing 1 mg/mL purified FXN in PBS buffer with 20-fold Sulfo-SMCC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The reaction was incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The excess cross-linker was removed by using a Zeba Spin desalting column. 1 mg/ml of AIN or AINU in PBS buffer was added to the Sulfo-SMCC labeled FXN solution. After the reactions were incubated at room temperature for 30 min, the cross-linked products were analyzed by SDS-PAGE. Bands from the SDS–PAGE gel corresponding to cross-linked complexes were excised, and the proteins were reduced/alkylated and digested by addition of trypsin following standard protocols. Digested peptides were extracted with 50 µL Millipore water containing 1% TFA by vortexing 10 min at room temperature. An additional extraction was performed with 80 µL of 70% acetonitrile/25% H2O/5% TFA (v/v/v). Peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted with 20 µL H2O containing 0.1% TFA. LC-MS/MS analyses of the peptides were carried out at the University of Wisconsin-Madison Mass Spectrometry/Proteomics Facility using an Applied Biosystems 3200 Q TRAP LC/MS/MS System.

### Data Protocol
The StavroX 3.5.1 software tool was used to identify the cross-linked peptides. The mgf and mzid files are generated with Scaffold Q+S. The mztab files are generated with Pride Inspector Toolkit.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine desulfurase plays a central role in mitochondrial iron-sulfur cluster biogenesis by generating sulfur through the conversion of L-cysteine to L-alanine and by serving as the platform for assembling other components of the biosynthetic machinery, including ISCU, frataxin, and ferredoxin. The human mitochondrial cysteine desulfurase complex consists of two copies each of NFS1, ISD11, and acyl carrier protein. We describe results from chemical crosslinking coupled with tandem mass spectrometry and small-angle X-ray scattering studies that are consistent with a closed NFS1 dimer rather than an open one for both the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU and cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-frataxin complexes. We present a structural model for the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-frataxin complex derived from chemical crosslinking restraints in conjunction with the recent crystal structure of the cysteine desulfurase-ISCU-zinc complex and distance constraints from nuclear magnetic resonance.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Xl, Lc-ms/ms, Iron-sulfur cluster

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Kai Cai

### Lab Head
Dr John L. Markley
University of Wisconsin-Madison


