### Accession
PXD022230

### Title
Intestinal epithelial cells display molecular memory weeks post bacterial infection clearance

### Description
Studies of mucosal infections have mainly focused on the acute phase at single timepoints, whilst little is known about the host recovery phase. We characterised temporal changes to colonic epithelial cells during the late steady-state, clearance and recovery phases of Citrobacter rodentium infection in C57BL/6 mice. Changes to immuno-metabolism and innate immunity peaked at 10-13 days post infection (DPI) and recovered from 17 DPI. Multiple DNA sensing receptors (ZBP1, STING), pyroptotic (Caspase-1 and -8, GSDMD) and necroptotic (RIPK3, MLKL) proteins were enriched; Ripk3, but not Mlkl, knockout mice presented exacerbated diarrhoea and pathology at 10 DPI. We defined a new “host recovery” phase, characterised by IFN responses and manifested by high abundance of the immunoproteasome and MHC class II subunits, which is unresolved 4 weeks following pathogen clearance. These findings represent a paradigm shift in our understanding of mucosal surfaces recovery from infection.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and TMT labelling:  IEC pellets isolated from 4-5 mice per condition per biological replicate were individually solubilised using probe sonication in lysis buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 10% isopropanol, 50 mM NaCl) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific), boiled for 5 min at 90 °C, and sonicated once more. Protein concentration was determined with Coomasie Plus assay (Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s protocol. Equal amounts of protein from each individual mouse from each group were combined. 100 µg of protein per group were reduced with 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetymide (IAA) for 30 min, then digested by adding trypsin (Pierce) at final concentration 75 ng/µl to each sample and incubating the samples for 18 h at room temperature. Peptides were labelled with tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplex reagent (Thermo Scientific) for 1h, before quenching with a final volume of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min (Sigma). TMT-labelled peptides were combined at equal amounts and SDC was precipitated with formic acid (FA) at final concentration of 2% (v/v) and centrifugation for 5 min at 10,000 rpm. Supernatant containing TMT-labelled peptides was dried with a centrifugal vacuum concentrator.   High-pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation:  TMT-labelled peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and fractionated using  high-pH reversed-phase (RP) Waters XBridge C18 column (2.1 × 150 mm, 3.5 μm) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% ammonium hydroxide and mobile phase B was 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% ammonium hydroxide. A gradient elution at 200 µl/min was used to separate the peptides in following steps: isocratic for 5 min at 5% phase B, gradient for 40 min to 35% phase B, gradient to 80% phase B in 5 min, isocratic for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to 5% phase B. A total of 65 fractions were collected every 42s into 96-well plate, dried and concatenated into 28 fractions upon reconstitution in 0.1% formic acid.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Analysis:  All data was acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system. Mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid (A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (B).  Samples were loaded onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 μm × 2 cm, 5 μm, 100 Å) at a 10 μl/min flow rate, followed by low-pH gradient elution on a nanocapillary reversed phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å) at 45°C. Flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied to separate the peptides over 90 min gradient from 5% to 38% phase B followed by 10 min up to 95% phase B, isocratic for 5 min at 95% B, re-equilibrated to 5% phase B in 5 min, and isocratic for 10 min at 5% phase B. The instrument method included Orbitrap MS1 scans (automatic gain control (AGC) of 4 × 105, max injection time 50 ms, resolution of 120,000), ion trap MS2 scans (Top Speed mode (3s); collision-induced dissociation energy of 35% with quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 Th; AGC target 1 × 104; max injection time of 50 ms), and MS3 scans of the top 7 most abundant CID fragments isolated with synchronous precursor selection (resolution of 50,000; mass range 100-500 m/z; higher-dissociation collision energy of 65%; AGC target 1 × 105; injection time of 105 ms).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and TMT-based quantification:  Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Scientific) using the SEQUEST-HT algorithm was employed to search MS/MS spectra against UniProt annotated reference proteomes of Mus musculus and Citrobacter rodentium.  Searches were performed with a 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.5 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, and trypsin digestion with up to 2 missed cleavages. The static modifications were specified as carbamidomethylation of Cys residues (+57.02146) and TMT modification of peptide N-term and Lys residues (+229.16293), while dynamic modifications were specified as oxidation of Met (+15.99491) and deamidation of Asp and Glu residues. Confidence of peptide discovery was estimated at 1% FDR with percolator node based on the q value and decoy database search. The reporter ion quantifier node included a TMT-10-plex quantification method with an integration window tolerance of 15 ppm and integration method based on the most confident centroid peak at MS3 level. Protein groups with only unique peptides were used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Tmt, Citrobacter

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


