### Accession
PXD028524

### Title
Drosophila female reproductive glands contribute to mating plug composition and the timing of sperm ejection

### Description
Reproductive traits that influence female remating and competitive fertilization rapidly evolve in response to sexual selection and sexual conflict. One such trait, observed across diverse animal taxa, is the formation of a structural plug inside the female reproductive tract, either during or shortly after mating. In Drosophila melanogaster, male seminal fluid forms a mating plug inside the female bursa, which has been demonstrated to influence sperm entry into storage and latency of female remating. Processing of the plug, including its eventual ejection from the female's reproductive tract, influences the competitive fertilization success of her mates and is mediated by female × male genotypic interactions. However, female contributions to plug formation and processing have received limited attention. Using developmental mutants that lack glandular female reproductive tract tissues, we reveal that these glandular tissues are essential for the mating plug to be ejected. We further use proteomics to demonstrate that female glandular proteins, and especially proteolytic enzymes, contribute to mating plug composition and that the absence of glands has a widespread impact of plug formation and composition. Together, these phenotypic and molecular data resolve molecular mechanisms of important postmating, intersexual interactions and cryptic female choice.

### Sample Protocol
Vials of 10 – 15 wild type or gland-less females were respectively combined with an excess of LHM males in vials. Approximately one hour after the majority of females were observed in copula, females were removed and stored at -80ºC. The lower FRT of females was then dissected and the mating plug isolated as previously described (Avila et al. 2015). The anterior region of the plug, which primarily contained sperm, was separated and discarded, and the posterior two-thirds of each plug were rinsed and transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube with PBS. Approximately 50 plugs were collected for each sample, which were then washed three times with PBS, combined with 50 µl detergent (1M HEPES with 2% SDS and 5% beta-mercaptoethanol), and solubilized through alternate rounds of heating at 95ºC and mechanical disruption with a pellet pestle homogenizer. Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was conducted by Cambridge Proteomics following standard protocols. In brief, apx. 30 ug of each sample was reduced, alkylated, trypsin digested and labeled with 6-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific). Plugs from wild type females were labeled with 126, 127, 128 tags and plugs from gland-less females were labeled with 129, 130, 131 tags. Labeled peptides were combined, cleaned and separated for 60 min by high pH reverse-phase chromatography on a C18 column (Acquity UPLC) and combined into 15 fractions. Peptides within fractions were separated by liquid chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 rapid separation nanoUPLC system (Thermo Scientific) with an Acclaim 100 C18 pre-column (PepMap) and reverse-phase nano EASY-spray column (PepMap) and then sprayed into the Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer v 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and Mascot v 2.6 with reference to a database of the longest isoform of the D. melanogaster genome (r6.21), excluding common contaminant proteins (cRAP v 1.0; thegpm.org), and allowing for a MS tolerance of ± 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of ± 0.8 Da, and up to two missed tryptic cleavages. Search parameters accounted for fixed protein modification of carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and allowed for variable modifications of oxidation (methionine) and deamidation (glutamine and arginine). Proteins were quantified for each sample as the sum of the centroid TMT tag receptor ions (± 2 millimass unit window) correcting for isotopic label purity. Protein intensities for each sample were log transformed and median normalized in MSnbase and significant differential abundance was calculated with empirical Bayes moderated t-tests (Benjamini-Hochburg correction for multiple comparisons) using LIMMA.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parovaria, Ejaculate-female interactions, Female reproductive tract, Spermatheca, Sperm ejection, Mating plug

### Affiliations
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University
Syracuse University

### Submitter
Caitlin McDonough-Goldstein

### Lab Head
Dr Steve Dorus
Center for Reproductive Evolution, Biology Department, Syracuse University


