### Accession
PXD013598

### Title
Comparison of proteomic responses to individual and combinatorial copper and iron deficiencies in Arabidopsis thaliana rosettes.

### Description
Purpose: plants exposed to multiple simultaneous adverse growth conditions trigger molecular responses that differ from the sum of those to individual stressors. Copper and iron are fundamental elements required for proper photosynthesis, energy production, DNA metabolism and hormone sensing, among all. Therefore, copper and iron deprivation limits plant yield. In natural environments, simultaneous deficiency to copper and iron can occur. As part of a multiple high-throughput study to identify combinatorial responses to both copper and iron deficiency, proteomic profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana rosette leaves exposed to copper and/or iron deficiencies have been conducted.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plants were grown on soil for 12 days before been transferred to hydroponic systems and cultivated for 10 days under 1/10 Hoagland as in Hermans and Verbruggen (2005; J Exp Botany) with modifications for copper (CuSO4 1 µM). After 10 days of adaptation, plants were kept under the same (control) conditions or under copper deficiency  (no CuSO4 and Bathocuproinedisulfonic acid disodium salt 10 µM), iron deficiency (no FeEDTA) or both deficiencies for 10 additional days. Rosette leaves were then flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Total protein extracts from whole rosette leaves (4 independent plants per treatment) were prepared in Extraction Buffer (Hepes 100mM pH7.5, NaCl 150mM, DTT 10mM, SDS 1% (w/v), 1x Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablet) and sonicated. Supernatants were collected after 30 min centrifugation at 10 000 g at 4°C and purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation. Pellets were resuspended in a small volume of NaOH 100 mM, which was then diluted ten times with Hepes 10 mM pH 7.5. Protein amounts were quantified using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). 200 µg of proteins were reduced in DTT 10 mM (30 min, 37° C) and alkylated in iodoacetamide 50 mM (30 min, RT, dark). Subsequently, proteins were digested in trypsin at 37° C overnight. Peptide mixtures were desalted using home-made C18 stage-tip.  The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo) coupled to a Bruker Impact II Q-TOF mass spectrometer. For each sample, estimated 1.0 µg of desalted peptides were seprated on a 50 cm analytical column using a 150 min linear gradient run at 250 µl/min from 5 % to 45% Buffer B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by a 10 min wash at 95% Buffer B. Data was acquired with a mass range from m/z 200 to 2000 at 4 Hz, with the Top 18 most intense peaks selected for MS/MS analysis using an intensity-dependent spectra acquisition time between 4 and 16 Hz.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.13) and peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis thaliana Uniprot database (version February 2017) using the Andromeda search engine with default settings. Proteins were quantified across samples using the label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics., Abiotic stress, Systems biology, Combinatorial stress, Iron, Copper

### Affiliations
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU)
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Antoni Garcia-Molina

### Lab Head
Dr Dario Leister
Ludwig-Maximilians-University Munich (LMU), Department Biology I, Großhaderner Str. 2, D-82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


