### Accession
PXD017241

### Title
Definition of the fibroblast adhesome using multiplexed proximity biotinylation

### Description
Integrin adhesion complexes (IACs) bridge the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton and transduce signals in response to both chemical and mechanical cues. The composition, interactions, stoichiometry and topological organisation of proteins within IACs are not fully understood. To address this gap, we used multiplexed proximity biotinylation (BioID) to generate an in situ, proximity-dependent adhesome. Integration of the interactomes of 16 IAC-associated baits revealed a network of 147 proteins with 361 proximity interactions. Candidates with underappreciated roles in adhesion were identified, in addition to established IAC components. Bioinformatic analysis revealed five clusters of IAC baits that link to common groups of prey, and which therefore may represent functional modules. The five clusters, and their spatial associations, are consistent with current models of IAC interaction networks and stratification. This study provides a resource to examine proximal relationships within IACs on a global level.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse pancreatic fibroblasts (im-PSC-C2) were XXX. HEK 293 cells and im-PSC-C2 cells were cultured in D5796 Dulbecco’s-modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS; Life Technologies, Carlsbad, USA) and 2 mM L-glutamine. Cells were maintained at 37°C in a humidified atmosphere with 5% (v/v) CO2.  Full length ORFs of target adhesome proteins were amplified by polymerase chain reaction, and cloned into the pCDH-TagBFP-T2A-myc-BirA* vector using Gibson assembly (vinculin, ponsin and p130Cas), HiFi DNA assembly (FAK, kindlin-2, β-Pix, palladin, α-parvin, PINCH, PDLIM5 and zyxin), or restriction enzymes (BirA*-paxillin, BirA*-LPP, BirA*-TRIP6; BspEI and SalI-HF, ILK; XhoI and SalI-HF. During PCR amplification, two different annealing temperatures were used to promote efficient primer annealing first to the plasmid template (10 cycles) then PCR product template (25 cycles). All constructs included a five amino acid linker (LERPL) between BirA* and the protein of interest. Primers for Gibson assembly and HiFi assembly were designed using SnapGene (GSL Biotech LLC), and primers were manufactured by Integrated DNA Technologies. ORF sequences were confirmed by sequencing.  Lentiviruses containing BirA* constructs were produced by transient co-transfection of HEK 293 cells with pCDH-TagBFP-T2A-myc-BirA* plasmids and packaging vectors (psPAX2 and pM2G) using polyethylenimine (PEI)-mediated transfection. 250 μl DNA mix containing 6 μg pCDH-TagBFP-T2A-myc-BirA* plasmid, 4.5 μg psPAX2 and 3 μg pM2G in Opti-MEM reduced serum media (Thermo Fisher) was added to 250 μl PEI mix (44.4 μM PEI, 1.5 mM NaCl in Opti-MEM) and incubated at RT for 20min. HEK 293 cells (T75 flask, ~60% confluency) were incubated with 5 ml Opti-MEM and PEI/DNA mix for 6 hrs before medium replaced with fresh medium. Three days post-transfection, filter-sterilised viral medium was added to im-PSC-c2 cells for 24 hrs before being replaced with fresh medium, and cells passaged 24 to 48 hrs later. Cells expressing blue fluorescent protein were selected using fluorescence activated cell sorting, and sorted into high, medium, and low-expressing populations. Western blotting and immunofluorescence microscopy were used to confirm expression of full-length constructs and select appropriate cell populations with clear subcellular targeting of bait proteins (and biotinylated proteins) to IACs with minimal background localisation and biotinylation for use in subsequent experiments. Cells expressing BirA* constructs were seeded onto plastic tissue culture plates for 8 hrs to allow for robust IAC formation, then incubated in medium with 50 μM biotin for 24 hrs. Biotinylated proteins were affinity purified following a protocol adapted from Roux et al., 2016. Proteins were eluted in 100 μl 2X RSB with 100 μM biotin for 10min at 70°C. The presence of biotinylated proteins was confirmed using western blotting, and samples analysed using liquid chromatography tandem MS (LC-MS/MS).  Eluted proteins were briefly subjected to SDS-PAGE (3min at 200 V), and stained with InstantBlueTM Coomassie protein stain before being washed with ddH2O overnight at 4°C. Bands were excised and transferred to a perforated 96-well plate and centrifuged for 2min at 1500 rpm. Gel pieces were washed three times for 15min at RT with 50 μl 50% acetonitrile (ACN) and 50% 25 mM NH4HCO3, and twice with 50 μl 100% ACN. Washes were removed using centrifugation, as above. Gel pieces were dried using a vacuum centrifuge for 30min. Proteins were reduced with 50 μl 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hr at 56°C. Samples were then incubated with 50 μl 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45min, protected from the light. Samples were washed with 50 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 5min, followed by 50 μl ACN and 50 μl 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 2min each. A final wash step of 50 μl ACN for 2min was performed before the gel pieces were dried for 30min using a vacuum centrifuge. Proteins were digested with 50 μl 1.25 ng/μl trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected into a 96-well collection plate, and extracted further with 50 μl 99.8% ACN, 0.2% formic acid (FA), followed by 50 μl 50% ACN, 0.1% FA, each for 30min at RT. Peptide solutions were dried completely using a vacuum centrifuge, before being resuspended in 50 μl ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were desalted using 1 mg POROS Oligo R3 beads (Thermo Fisher). Beads were washed with 50 μl 0.1% FA before the peptide solution was added. Beads were washed twice with 100 μl 0.1% FA, and peptides eluted with 50 μl 50% ACN, 0.1% FA, twice. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 11 μl 5% ACN, 0.1% FA. Peptides were analysed using LC-MS/MS using a Thermo Q ExactiveTM HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant (v1.6.2.10). All experiments using mouse BioID baits were searched against the mouse proteome obtained from Uniprot (August 2018). Experiments involving non-mouse BioID baits were run individually against the same mouse proteome with the relevant non-mouse BioID bait protein sequence appended. Default parameters were used in MaxQuant, with the addition of biotinylation of lysine as a variable modification, match between runs turned on, LFQ quantification selected and unique peptides only for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin adhesion complexes (IACs) bridge the extracellular matrix to the actin cytoskeleton and transduce signals in response to both chemical and mechanical cues. The composition, interactions, stoichiometry, and topological organization of proteins within IACs are not fully understood. To address this gap, we used multiplexed proximity biotinylation (BioID) to generate an in situ, proximity-dependent adhesome in mouse pancreatic fibroblasts. Integration of the interactomes of 16 IAC-associated baits revealed a network of 147 proteins with 361 proximity interactions. Candidates with underappreciated roles in adhesion were identified, in addition to established IAC components. Bioinformatic analysis revealed five clusters of IAC baits that link to common groups of prey, and which therefore may represent functional modules. The five clusters, and their spatial associations, are consistent with current models of IAC interaction networks and stratification. This study provides a resource to examine proximal relationships within IACs at a global level.

### Keywords
Bioid, Adhesome, Fibroblast

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, United Kingdom (lab head)

### Submitter
Craig Lawless

### Lab Head
Dr Martin J Humphries
Professor of Biochemistry, Faculty of Biology, Medicine & Health, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell-Matrix Research, University of Manchester, United Kingdom (lab head)


