### Accession
PXD027973

### Title
Expression, purification and characterization of bovine leukemia virus-like particles produced in Drosophila S2 cells

### Description
Identification of Gag and Env proteins in bovine leukemia virus-like particles produced in Drosophila S2 cells

### Sample Protocol
Purified VLPs were migrated in SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie blue, and the fraction corresponding to molecular weights between 35-80 kDa was cut and in-gel digested with trypsin (Sequencing grade Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptide mixtures extracted from geles were desalted using micro-columns (C18 ZipTip®, Merck, Millipore), eluted in 60% ACN/0.1% formic acid, dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, prior to nano-LC MS/MS analysis.  Tryptic peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online with a hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q- Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific), and peptide mixtures injected into a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated into a PepMap TM RSLC C18 column (2um, 100A,75µm ID, 50 cm length) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Elution was performed using the following gradient: 1% to 55% B over 86 min and 55% to 99% B over 9 min with a constant flow rate of 200 nl/min. (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN). The mass spectrometer was operated in data- dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans.  7 The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution and MS/MS were performed using a data-dependent top12 method at a resolution of 17.5K using a dynamic exclusion list.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using PatternLab for Proteomics software,v 4.0.0.84 (http://patternlabforproteomics.org). A target-decoy database was generated using Drosophila melanogaster UP000000803 from Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org) 2018/10/31 added with the amino acidic sequences of Gag, EnvFm and 127 most common contaminants. Search parameters were set as follows: tryptic peptides; methionine oxidation as variable modification. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) using the following parameters; acceptable FDR: 1% at the protein level-

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gag, Env, Bovine leukemia virus, Virus-like particles

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Prtoeomics Unit IIBCE& Institut Pasteur de Montevideo

### Submitter
Rosario Durán

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Prtoeomics Unit IIBCE& Institut Pasteur de Montevideo


