### Accession
PXD000652

### Title
CSF proteome mapping: Human cerebrospinal fluid LC-MS/MS, Part 2

### Description
3 mL CSF from a pool of 21 neurologically healthy donors was separated into a bound and a depleted fraction using a MARS Hu-14 column. This experiment represents the depleted fraction. Gel separation on a gradient gel (SDS-PAGE) followed and the gel lane was cut into 46 fractions. Each fraction was in-gel trypsin digested and analyzed separately by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. Resulting data was searched using SeachGui, summarized in PeptideShaker and exported to the CSF-PR.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
In this study, the human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteome was mapped using three different strategies prior to Orbitrap LC-MS/MS analysis: SDS-PAGE and mixed mode reversed phase-anion exchange for mapping the global CSF proteome, and hydrazide-based glycopeptide capture for mapping glycopeptides. A maximal protein set of 3081 proteins (28,811 peptide sequences) was identified, of which 520 were identified as glycoproteins from the glycopeptide enrichment strategy, including 1121 glycopeptides and their glycosylation sites. To our knowledge, this is the largest number of identified proteins and glycopeptides reported for CSF, including 417 glycosylation sites not previously reported. From parallel plasma samples, we identified 1050 proteins (9739 peptide sequences). An overlap of 877 proteins was found between the two body fluids, whereas 2204 proteins were identified only in CSF and 173 only in plasma. All mapping results are freely available via the new CSF Proteome Resource (http://probe.uib.no/csf-pr), which can be used to navigate the CSF proteome and help guide the selection of signature peptides in targeted quantitative proteomics.

### Keywords
['Lc-ms/ms', 'Homo sapiens', 'Cerebrospinal fluid']

### Affiliations
['PROBE']

### Submitter
['Astrid Guldbrandsen']

### Lab Head
[]

### SDRF
characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
characteristics[organism part]: ['cerebrospinal fluid']
characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
characteristics[disease]: ['uninfected']
comment[fractionation method]: ['AC=PRIDE:0000124; NT=Sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis']
comment[label]: ['AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample']
comment[instrument]: ['AC=MS:1001742; NT=LTQ Orbitrap Velos']
comment[separation]: ['AC=PRIDE:0000563;NT=Reversed-phase chromatography']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=Variable;TA=M']

