### Accession
PXD041273

### Title
DUX4-r exerts a neomorphic activity that depens on GTF2I in acute lymphoblastic leukemia

### Description
Translocations producing rearranged versions of the transcription factor DUX4 (DUX4-r) are one of the most frequent causes of B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). DUX4-r retains the DNA binding domain of wt DUX4, but is truncated on the C-terminal transcription activation domain. The precise mechanism through which DUX4-r causes leukemia is unknown and no targeted therapy is currently available. We found that the rearrangement leads to both a loss and a gain of function in DUX4-r. Loss of CBP/EP300 transcriptional co-activators interaction and inability to bind and activate repressed chromatin. Gain of interaction with the transcription factor GTF2I, which redirects DUX4-r toward leukemogenic targets. Importantly, this neomorphic activity exposes an Achilles' heel whereby DUX4-r positive leukemia cells are exquisitely sensitive to GTF2I targeting, which inhibits DUX4-r leukemogenic activity. Our work elucidates the molecular mechanism through which DUX4-r causes leukemia and suggest a possible therapeutic avenue tailored to this B-ALL subtype.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affinity purification from REH cells was performed 12h after doxycycline induction. 2.5x10^8 cells were resuspended in 20mL of Buffer N (10mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 300mM sucrose, 10mM KCl, 0,1mM EDTA, 0,1mM EGTA, 0,1mM DTT, 0,75mM spermidine, 0,15mM spermine, 0,1% NP-40, 50mM NaF) and incubated in ice for 10’ to isolate intact nuclei. After one wash in the same volume of Buffer N, nuclei were resuspended in the same volume of high-salt nuclear extraction buffer C420 (20mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 420mM NaCl, 25% Glycerol, 1mM EGTA, 0,1 mM DTT 50mM NaF), and vigorously shaken in a thermomixer at 1400rpm for 30’ at 4°C in order to extract nuclear proteins. Samples where then centrifuged at 16000xg for 10’ at 4°C, and the supernatant, which contains nuclear proteins, was collected. Nuclear extracts were then adjusted to 150mM salt by addition of HEPES buffer (20mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 50mM NaF), and incubated at 4°C while rotating with 1ug/mL of avidin (IBA #2-0204-015) to chelate biotinylated proteins, and 20U/mL of Benzonase nuclease (Sigma Aldrich- E8263-5KU) and 50ng/mL of RNase A (ThermoFisher- EN0531) to remove any remaining nucleic acids. After clearing at 16000xg for 10’ at 4°C, supernatants were pre-cleared with 2,5mL (bead volume) of cross-linked Sepharose (Sigma Aldrich - DCL6B100) for 1h while rotating at 4°C. Extracts where then quantified with the Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate (Bio-Rad #5000006) using 1ug/uL gamma-globin as standard. Absorbance was read at 595nm using a spectrophotometer. For each purification, 80mg of pre-cleared nuclear extracts were incubated with 2mL (bead volume) of StrepTactin sepharose beads (IBA #2-1201-010), for 4h at 4°C while rotating. Then, three washes in TNN-HS (10mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 150mM NaCl, 0,1% NP-40, 50mM NaF) buffer were performed, and beads-bound proteins were specifically eluted with three subsequent incubations with 2V of 2.5mM biotin-containing TNN-HS buffer. Next, eluted proteins were incubated with 2mL (bead volume) of anti-HA agarose beads (SigmaAldrich-A2095) while rotating at 4°C overnight. The following day, two washes in TNN-HS were performed, followed by two additional washes in TNN buffer (10mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 150mM NaCl, 50mM NaF) in order to get the rid of any leftover NP-40 detergent in the buffer. Finally, HA beads- bound proteins were eluted with elution buffer (50mM HEPES-KOH pH7.9, 150mM NaCl, 1% SDS) and precipitated with Acetone. For this, 4V of ice-cold 100% acetone were added to 1V of eluted proteins, followed by vortexing and incubation at -20°C for 1h. Samples were then centrifuged at 15000xg for 10’. The whole procedure was repeated twice to get the rid of all the remaining SDS. One aliquot of each protein sample was kept for quantification via silver staining. Samples were resolubilized in 50 uL of detergent-based buffer [1% sodium deoxycholate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 10 mM Tris, and 40 mM chloroacetamide] with Complete mini EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche - 04693159001), sonicated for 15 cycles (30 sec on: 30 sec off) and heated at 95C for 10min. Trypsin digestion   (1.5 h) and peptide cleanup were performed using the S-trap system (Protifi  ) following manufacturer’s specifications. Peptides were eluted and vacuum centrifuged to complete dryness. Purified peptides were resolubilized in 1% FA to a concentration of 1 ug/uL and 1 uL was injected to achieve a peptide load of 1 µg on column.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent fashion (DDA) coupled to an Ultimate3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 50-cm reversed phase column packed in-house (Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm; Agilent Technologies). Samples were eluted over a linear gradient ranging from 9-13% acetonitrile over 2 min and from 13-44% over 95min, 44-99% acetonitrile in 3 minutes, followed by 99% acetonitrile for 5 minutes with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. MS1 spectra had a resolving power of 60.000   at 200 m/z with the AGC target set to “standard” and the maximum injection time set to “auto”. MS/MS spectra were acquired with HCD fragmentation, a HCD collision energy of 28%, a 1.4-m/z-wide isolation window, a resolving power of 30.000  at 200 m/z, the AGC target set to “standard” and the maximum injection time set to “auto”.To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant58 software version 2.2.0 to search the human_proteome 20180425 (93,606 sequences; 37,037,628 residues). Searches were performed using default settings, namely: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 1 missed cleavages allowed; protein N-terminus-acetylation. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a FDR less than 1%. Label-free protein quantification was based on the spectral counts considering only proteins identified with minimum two peptides in any tandem affinity purification. Specific interactors of wt DUX4, DUX4-IGH or DUX4-del50 were selected as those being detected in all the three biological replicates and showing spectral counts (MS/MS) fold enrichment ≥ 2 with respect of the control tandem affinity purifications. To generate protein-protein interaction networks, Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT v2.0)59 was performed using as input the list of identified wt DUX4, DUX4-IGH or DUX4-del50 specific interactors. Only proteins showing a Fold Change score (FC) >1.5 and probability score (SAINT SP) >0.9 were included in the protein-protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
Translocations producing rearranged versions of the transcription factor double homeobox 4 (DUX4-r) are one of the most frequent causes of B cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL). DUX4-r retains the DNA binding domain of wild-type DUX4 but is truncated on the C-terminal transcription activation domain. The precise mechanism through which DUX4-r causes leukemia is unknown, and no targeted therapy is currently available. We found that the rearrangement leads to both a loss and a gain of function in DUX4-r. Loss of CBP/EP300 transcriptional coactivator interaction leads to an inability to bind and activate repressed chromatin. Concurrently, a gain of interaction with the general transcription factor 2 I (GTF2I) redirects DUX4-r toward leukemogenic targets. This neomorphic activity exposes an Achilles' heel whereby DUX4-r-positive leukemia cells are exquisitely sensitive to GTF2I targeting, which inhibits DUX4-r leukemogenic activity. Our work elucidates the molecular mechanism through which DUX4-r causes leukemia and suggests a possible therapeutic avenue tailored to this B-ALL subtype.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Proteomics, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
San Raffaele Scientific Institute

### Submitter
Davide Gabellini

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Gabellini
San Raffaele Scientific Institute


