### Accession
PXD016109

### Title
Activation of Akt, Nrf2, and NF-κB signal transduction pathways in the liver as a mechanism of survival for torpid Myotis ricketti Bats

### Description
Unfolded protein accumulation in the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) induced by cold exposure is termed UPRER. Some mammals hibernate to overcome cold winter. We investigated whether hibernating bats are under UPRER and activate Akt, Nrf2, and NF-κB signaling pathways that are critical for cell survival against cold. Results of Western blotting showed that several UPRER marker proteins such as PERK and ATF4 had a higher abundance in torpid than in active bats. Cellular redistribution of GRP78 and a lower degree of binding between PERK and GRP78 were also seen in torpid bats, suggesting the occurrence of UPRER. Results also showed that torpid bats had a higher amount of p-Akt (Ser473), a higher ratio of p-Akt (Ser473)/Akt, a lower amount of Keap1/Nrf2 and NF-κB (p65)/I-κBα complexes, and a higher degree of NF-κB (p65) nuclear translocation than active bats, indicating simultaneous activation of Akt, Nrf2, and NF-κB during hibernation. Evidence of such activation was not observed in fasted, cold-treated, or normal mice. Using PPI network and IPA analyses, we examined the proteomes of liver and liver mitochondria of bats and found a global metabolic adjustment and survival adaptation in response to UPRER in hibernating bats. Our data provide the first molecular evidence of a complex cross talk involving Akt, Nrf2, and NF-κB via the PERK-EIF2-ATF4 regulatory axis under UPRER in bats to ensure their survival during hibernation.

### Sample Protocol
Liver proteins were obtained from 0.1 g of liver tissue by homogenization in a tube containing ceramic beads and 1 mL lysis buffer (10% glycerol, 2% SDS, 1.25% β-mercaptoethanol, 25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 12.5 mM EDTA, 1/50 tablet of cOmplete™ EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail) using a Precellys® 24 grinder (Bertin technologies, France). Liver homogenates were boiled at 100°C for 10 min and then centrifuged at 12,000 xg, 4°C for 15 min. Liver mitochondria were extracted from 0.02 g liver tissue by Dounce homogenizer using the Mitochondria Isolation Kit for Tissue (89801, Thermo Scientific, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. Mitochondrial proteins were obtained by boiling mitochondrion suspensions in 0.2 mL lysis buffer at 100°C for 10 min and collecting supernatants after centrifugation at 12,000 xg, 4°C for 15 min. All protein supernatants were divided into small aliquots and stored at -80oC. One aliquot was used to determine protein concentration using the Quick Start™ Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. Each protein sample was fractionated by 10% SDS-PAGE (0.5 µg/lane), and the gel was stained for 10 min with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). After washing with distilled water, each lane of the gel was sliced into ten equal pieces. Each gel piece was placed in a 2-mL tube and destained with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (1:1). After drying in a Speed-Vac (Thermo Electron, Waltham, MA), gel pieces were incubated with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 1% β-mercaptoethanol in dark for 20 min followed by an incubation in a solution containing 5% 4-vinylpyridine in 25 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% acetonitrile (1:1) for 20 min. Proteins in each gel piece were then digested with modiﬁed trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (1%, w/v) at 37oC overnight. The tryptic peptides were extracted with 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min, dried, and stored at -20°C until used.         Tryptic peptides were then dissolved in 10 μL formic acid (0.1%, v/v) and loaded onto an online nanoAcquity ultra Performance LC system (Waters, Manchester, UK), which was coupled to a linear ion trap-orbitrap hybrid (LTQ-Orbitrap XLTM) mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA). The mobile phases were solution A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solution B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Peptides loaded were first captured and desalted in a C18 PepMap trap column (5 mm length, 300 mm inner diameter, 5 mm beads) and then chromatographed in a C18 tip column (13.5 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter and 5 μm beads; YMC-Gel, Liquid Chromatography) with 5-35% linear solution B gradient for 90 min, followed by 35-95% solution B gradient for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min.      Eluted peptides were ionized with a spray voltage of 2 kV and introduced into the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry data were recorded in a data-dependent acquisition mode (isolation width: 1.5 Da), in which one full MS survey scan (m/z: 200-1500) at high resolution (> 30,000 full width at half maximum) was followed by MS/MS scan of the six most intensely charged ions (2+ and 3+). Fragmented ions of each selected precursor were generated by collision-induced dissociation with helium gas at 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The Xcalibur software package (version 2.0.7 SR1, Thermo-Finnigan Inc., San Jose, CA) was used to process the RAW data generated, and the data were analyzed by PEAKS software (v. 8.5, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, Ontario, Canada) and searched for the best matched peptides in our bat protein database (containing 539834 entries) [28]. All proteins identified were annotated with UniPort ID as previously described [28] with the following search parameters: 20 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.8 Da fragment mass tolerance; precursor mass search type, monoisotopic; enzyme, trypsin; max missed cleavage, 2; nonspecific cleavage, 0; fixed modification; S-pyridylethylation; variable modification, methionine oxidation; and variable PTMs per peptide, 2. Results were adjusted to 0.5% FDR at peptide spectrum matches, -10 log P > 20, unique peptides ≥ 1, and De novo ALC Score ≥ 80%. For quantitation, MS spectral counts were normalized to the sum of the spectral counts of a sample as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Bats hibernate to survive stressful conditions. Examination of whole cell and mitochondrial proteomes of the liver of Myotis ricketti revealed that torpid bats had endoplasmic reticulum unfolded protein response (UPR<sub>ER</sub>), global reduction in glycolysis, enhancement of lipolysis, and selective amino acid metabolism. Compared to active bats, torpid bats had higher amounts of phosphorylated serine/threonine kinase (p-Akt) and UPR<sub>ER</sub> markers such as PKR-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK) and activating transcription factor 4 (ATF4). Torpid bats also had lower amounts of the complex of Kelch-like ECH-associated protein 1 (Keap1), nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor 2 (Nrf2), and nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NF-&#x3ba;B) (p65)/I-&#x3ba;B&#x3b1;. Cellular redistribution of 78&#x2009;kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP78) and reduced binding between PERK and GRP78 were also seen in torpid bats. Evidence of such was not observed in fasted, cold-treated, or normal mice. These data indicated that bats activate Akt, Nrf2, and NF-&#x3ba;B via the PERK-ATF4 regulatory axis against endoplasmic reticulum stresses during hibernation.

### Keywords
Eif2, Bats, Mitochondria, Hibernation, Upr, And lc-ms/ms, Liver, Nf-κb, Proteomics, Akt

### Affiliations
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University
National Yang-Ming University  Proteomics Research Center,Taiwan

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
National Yang-Ming University  Proteomics Research Center,Taiwan


