### Accession
PXD026709

### Title
Glomerular proteomic profiling of kidney biopsies with hypertensive nephropathy reveals a signature of disease progression

### Description
Background and Objective: Hypertensive nephropathy (HN) requires a kidney biopsy as gold-standard for its diagnosis but histological findings are not entirely specific and lack specific prognostic markers. We aimed at defining prognostic candidate markers based on glomerular protein signatures. Method: We included adult patients (n=17) with an eGFR >30 ml/min/1.73m2 and proteinuria <3g/d from the Norwegian Kidney Biopsy Registry: stable patients (n=9) and subjects with HN progression (n=8) leading to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) within 20 years of follow-up. Glomerular cross-sections were microdissected from archival kidney biopsy sections and processed for protein extraction. Proteomic analyses were performed using Q-exactive HF mass spectrometer and relative glomerular protein abundance were compared between progressive vs non-progressive patients. Results: Amongst 1870 quality filtered proteins, we identified 58 proteins with an absolute fold change (FC)>1.5, p<0.05, including 17 proteins with absolute FC >2, indicative of HN progression (highest FC: Cadherin 16 and UDP-glucuronosyl-transferase 2B7). Hierarchical cluster and principal component analysis (PCA) with the 17 proteins showed clear separation of samples into HN progressors and non-progressors. Supervised classifier analysis (K nearest neighbour) identified a set of five proteins which classified 16/17 samples correctly. Applying Geneset Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), in general metabolic pathways were enriched in progressors, and structural cell pathways enriched in non-progressors. Pathway analysis identified Epithelial Adherens Junction Signaling as the most affected canonical pathway. The signature of HN progression is different from the respective signature of IgA progression.  Conclusion: Glomerular proteomic profiling can be used to discriminate progressors from non-progressors in HN.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney biopsy cores was cut into ten micrometer thick sections, mounted on polyethylene naphthalate slides (MembraneSlide 1.0 PEN, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging GmbH, Göttingen, Germany), deparaffinized and stained with hematoxylin eosin (HE). Glomerular cross sections without severe morphological damage were laser microdissected (PALM MicroBeam, Zeiss) and collected in the cap of specialized tubes (AdhesiveCap 500 clear, Zeiss).  Proteins were extracted and trypsinized using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. The eluted digested peptides were de-salted using Oasis HLB µElution plates (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), freeze-dried and stored at -20°C until analysis.  The lysophilized peptides were dissolved in 2% ACN/0.1% FA and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate NCR-3500RS LC system

### Data Protocol
Raw proteomics data from the LC-MS analysis was processed with MaxQuant. Identified features were searched against a human “reference proteome” database (downloaded 2019-06-25) from UniProt.org.

### Publication Abstract
Hypertensive nephropathy (HN) requires a kidney biopsy as diagnostic gold-standard but histological findings are unspecific and specific prognostic markers are missing. We aimed at identifying candidate prognostic markers based on glomerular protein signatures. We studied adult patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17) with eGFR &gt;30&#x2009;ml/min/1.73m<sup>2</sup> and proteinuria &lt;3&#x2009;g/d from the Norwegian Kidney Biopsy Registry, including subjects non progressing (NP, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;9), or progressing (P, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) to end-stage renal disease (ESRD) within an average follow-up of 22 years. Glomerular cross-sections from archival kidney biopsy sections were microdissected and processed for protein extraction. Proteomic analyses were performed using Q-exactive HF mass spectrometer and relative glomerular protein abundances were compared between P and NP patients. Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to validate selected data. Amongst 1870 quality filtered proteins, 58 were differentially expressed in P and NP patients' glomeruli, with absolute fold changes (FC) &#x2265;1.5, p&#x2009;&#x2264;&#x2009;0.05. Supervised classifier analysis (K nearest neighbor) identified a set of five proteins, including Gamma-butyrobetaine dioxygenase (BBOX1, O75936) and Cadherin 16 (CDH16, O75309), overexpressed in P, and Eosinophil peroxidase (EPX, P11678), DnaJ homolog subfamily B member 1 (DNAJB1, P25685) and Alpha-1-syntrophin (SNTA1, Q13424), overexpressed in NP glomeruli, correctly classifying 16/17 kidney biopsy samples. Geneset Enrichment Analysis (GSEA), showed that metabolic pathways were generally enriched in P, and structural cell pathways in NP. Pathway analysis identified Epithelial Adherens Junction Signaling as most affected canonical pathway. IHC analysis confirmed overexpression of BBOX1 and Cadherin 16 in glomeruli from P patients. In conclusion, glomerular proteomic profiling can be used to discriminate P from NP HN patients.

### Keywords
Human, Microdissection, Proteomics, Glomerulus, Hypertensive nephropathy, Kidney

### Affiliations
University of Bergen
Renal Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Kenneth Finne

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Peter Marti
Renal Research Group, Department of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bergen, Norway


