### Accession
PXD037977

### Title
Dataset from The proteome landscape of the black soldier fly provides insights into protein function and microbial diversity

### Description
The larvae of black soldier fly (BSF) Hermetia illucens (Diptera: Stratiomyidae), has demonstrated ability in the efficient bioconversion of organic waste into a sustainable source of food and feed, but fundamental biology remains to be discovered to exploit their full biodegradative potential. Herein, LC-MS/MS was used to assess the efficiency of eight differing extraction protocols to build foundational knowledge regarding the proteome landscape of both BSF larvae body and gut. No specific protocol was superior in capturing the BSF body and gut proteome, but each yielded complementary information to improve BSF proteome coverage. Protocol-specific functional annotation using protein level information has shown that the selection of extraction buffer can affect protein detection and their associated functional classes within the measured BSF larval gut proteome. Metaproteome analysis on BSF larvae gut has uncovered the prevalence of two bacterial phyla: actinobacteria and proteobacteria. We envisage that comparing a range of extraction protocols and investigating the proteome from the BSF body and gut separately will expand the fundamental knowledge of the BSF proteome and thereby provide translational opportunities for future research to enhance their efficiency for waste degradation and contribution to the circular economy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from black soldier fly were subjected to filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) wherein the protein extract (100 µg) in 200 µL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) was loaded to a 30 kDa molecular weight cut-off (MWCO) filter (Millipore, Australia) and centrifuged (16,500 ×g, 15 min). The protein on the filter was washed with two 200 µL volumes of urea buffer by centrifugation (16,500 × g, 15 min). Proteins were reduced on-filter with 50 mM DTT in urea buffer (200 µl) (in a Thermomixer, 30 min, 300 rpm), and the filter washed with two 200 µL volumes of urea buffer with centrifugation (16,500 × g, 15 min). Iodoacetamide (50 mM in urea buffer, 100 µL) was applied to the protein on the filter and incubated for 30 min in the dark to alkylate cysteine residues. The filter was washed with 200 µL of urea buffer with centrifugation (16,500 × g, 15 min). The urea buffer was exchanged for 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0) (200 µL) by two consecutive centrifugation steps. All steps were conducted at RT.  Sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Alexandria, Australia) was added (0.01 µg/µL, i.e., 2 µg in 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1 mM CaCl2) to the samples and incubated for 16 h at 37 °C in a thermomixer at 300 rpm. The filters were transferred to fresh microtubes, and the filtrates (containing the peptides) collected following centrifugation (16,500 × g, 10 min). The filters were washed twice with 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and the filtrates were combined and lyophilised by vacuum concentration (4 h, room temperature). The resultant dried peptides were re-suspended in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid and 2 µL (equivalent to 4 µg of total protein) was analysed by LC-MS/MS.Detailed chromatographic profiles and MS conditions were previously described.20, 21 In brief, 2 μL of peptides were chromatographically separated and detected with an Ekspert nanoLC415 (Eksigent, Dublin, CA) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 MS (SCIEX, Redwood City, CA). The peptides were desalted for 3 min on a polar C18 ProteCol trap column (Trajan; 3 µm, 300 Å, 10 mm × 300 µm ID) at a flow rate of 10 μL/min of 0.1% formic acid and separated on a ChromXP C18 (3 μm, 120 Å, 150 mm × 300 µm ID) column at a flow rate of 5 μL/min. The solvents were: (A) aqueous 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and (B) 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile. A linear gradient from 5% to 95% B was delivered over 55 min. The eluent from the HPLC was directed to the Optiflow source of the TripleTOF 6600 MS. The ion spray voltage was set to 4500 V; the curtain gas was set to 138 kPa (30 psi), and the ion source gas 1 and 2 (GS1 and GS2) were both set to 138 kPa. The heated interface was set to 100 °C

### Data Protocol
An in-house BSF proteome database was built by combining protein sequences from UniProt-Diptera (accessed on 07-04-2020), translated open reading frame (ORF) sequences derived from two available BSF genome assemblies (Genbank assembly accessions: GCA_001014895.1 and GCA_009835165.1 coded as G1 and G2) downloaded from NCBI. Initially ORF predictions were used to filter the coding sequences from these two genomes. Subsequently, a Pfam search was performed to filter the proteins containing specific domains. The Pfam annotation was appended to the sequence headers in FASTA format whenever available. These protein sequences were merged with the common repository of adventitious proteins (cRAP) sequences and the iRT pseudo-protein sequences (in total 523,909 sequences). Protein sequences from Enterobacteriaceae and Actinobacteria phylum were downloaded from UniProtKB and added to the BSF database. This combined BSF and microbial database were used to search BSF gut proteome samples (ProteinPilot automatically generates and concatenates a reversed database for false discovery rate estimation).  ProteinPilot v5.0.3 software (SCIEX), incorporating the Paragon and ProGroup algorithms, were used for peptide and protein identification, respectively. ProteinPilot search parameters were described in detail previously.21 For clarity, peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for each BSF larvae file were determined by the Paragon search algorithm22 (SCIEX), wherein each PSM was allocated an unused score. This score represents PSM evidence that is not used elsewhere to identify a peptide. In addition, the confidence of each identification is calculated as per.22 Peptides are then assigned to proteins by means of the ProGroup algorithm (SCIEX), wherein peptide evidence is allocated to proteins and the unique and shared peptide evidence is then used to determine protein groups and protein rankings within each group. In this regard, proteins with shared PSMs will form a protein group while the protein with the largest proportion of unused evidence will be declared the winner of the group and is allocated all unique and shared evidence for that protein; the remaining proteins retain their sum unused score for their unique evidence only. The uncertainty in protein identifications is then controlled by means of a false discovery rate estimation. In this respect, protein identifications are ranked in descending order by their unused scores and deemed acceptable until the proportion of reversed protein identifications meet a threshold of ≤1% of all aggregate identifications. All results presented herein have been filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR). The acquired data files from each replicate from all protocols were first searched against the respective databases to assess the replicate and protocol performance. The outputs from this analysis were used to enumerate the identified proteins and peptides within each replicate. Next, the repertoire of proteomes from each protocol was compared. To avoid the protein accession number redundancies from the individual searches, all spectra data files from the body and gut were searched together to generate a master set of protein identifications from all samples for body or gut. Two master sets were produced -one for the body proteome and one for the gut proteome using the SCIEX Protein Alignment template. Then, individual replicate files were mapped against the master set of accessions to unify the protein accession numbers, and these lists of accession numbers were compiled for each protocol. The protocol lists describing the proteome repertoire was subjected for the downstream comparative and functional analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The larvae of the black soldier fly (BSF), <i>Hermetia illucens</i> (Diptera: Stratiomyidae), have demonstrated the ability to efficiently bioconvert organic waste into a sustainable source of food and feed, but fundamental biology remains to be discovered to exploit their full biodegradative potential. Herein, LC-MS/MS was used to assess the efficiency of eight differing extraction protocols to build foundational knowledge regarding the proteome landscape of both the BSF larvae body and gut. Each protocol yielded complementary information to improve BSF proteome coverage. Protocol 8 (liquid nitrogen, defatting, and urea/thiourea/chaps) was better than all other protocols for the protein extraction from larvae gut samples, and the exclusion of defatting steps yielded the highest number of proteins for the larval body samples. Protocol-specific functional annotation using protein level information has shown that the selection of extraction buffer can affect protein detection and their associated functional classes within the measured BSF larval gut proteome. A targeted LC-MRM-MS experiment was performed on the selected enzyme subclasses to assess the influence of protocol composition using peptide abundance measurements. Metaproteome analysis of the BSF larvae gut has uncovered the prevalence of two bacterial phyla: actinobacteria and proteobacteria. We envisage that using complementary extraction protocols and investigating the proteome from the BSF body and gut separately will expand the fundamental knowledge of the BSF proteome and thereby provide translational opportunities for future research to enhance their efficiency for waste degradation and contribution to the circular economy.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Proteomics, Black soldier fly, Proteome

### Affiliations
CSIRO
CSIRO Agriculture and Food, 306 Carmody Rd, St Lucia QLD 4067, Australia

### Submitter
Sophia Escobar Correas

### Lab Head
Dr Utpal Bose
CSIRO Agriculture and Food, 306 Carmody Rd, St Lucia QLD 4067, Australia


