### Accession
PXD000391

### Title
Salmonella secretome analysis -  Discovery of novel secreted virulence factors from Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium by proteomic analysis of culture supernatants

### Description
Researchers identified effector proteins secreted into defined minimal medium designed to induce expression of the SPI-2 TTSS and its effectors. The secretome of the parent strain was compared to those of strains missing essential (ssaK::cat) or regulatory (ssaL) components of the SPI-2 TTSS.  20 known SPI-2 effectors were identified. To identify novel effector proteins, the secretome data was coupled with machine learning and 12 candidate proteins were selected for further characterization. Using CyaA reporter fusions, six novel type III effectors were identified and two additional proteins that were secreted into J774 macrophages independently of a TTSS were also identified.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium is a leading cause of acute gastroenteritis throughout the world. This pathogen has two type III secretion systems (TTSS) encoded in Salmonella pathogenicity islands 1 and 2 (SPI-1 and SPI-2) that deliver virulence factors (effectors) to the host cell cytoplasm and are required for virulence. While many effectors have been identified and at least partially characterized, the full repertoire of effectors has not been catalogued. In this proteomic study, we identified effector proteins secreted into defined minimal medium designed to induce expression of the SPI-2 TTSS and its effectors. We compared the secretomes of the parent strain to those of strains missing essential (ssaK::cat) or regulatory (&#x394;ssaL) components of the SPI-2 TTSS. We identified 20 known SPI-2 effectors. Excluding the translocon components SseBCD, all SPI-2 effectors were biased for identification in the &#x394;ssaL mutant, substantiating the regulatory role of SsaL in TTS. To identify novel effector proteins, we coupled our secretome data with a machine learning algorithm (SIEVE, SVM-based identification and evaluation of virulence effectors) and selected 12 candidate proteins for further characterization. Using CyaA' reporter fusions, we identified six novel type III effectors and two additional proteins that were secreted into J774 macrophages independently of a TTSS. To assess their roles in virulence, we constructed nonpolar deletions and performed a competitive index analysis from intraperitoneally infected 129/SvJ mice. Six mutants were significantly attenuated for spleen colonization. Our results also suggest that non-type III secretion mechanisms are required for full Salmonella virulence.

### Keywords
Machine learning, Secretome, Effector proteins

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head


