### Accession
PXD040265

### Title
Using long-read CAGE sequencing to profile cryptic-promoter derived transcripts and their contribution to the immunopeptidome

### Description
Recent studies have demonstrated that the non-coding genome can produce unannotated proteins as antigens that induce immune response. One major source of this activity is the aberrant epigenetic reactivation of transposable elements (TEs). In tumors, TEs often provide cryptic or alternate promoters, which can generate transcripts that encode tumor-specific unannotated proteins. Thus, TE-derived transcripts have the potential to produce tumor-specific, but recurrent, antigens shared among many tumors. Identification of TE-derived tumor antigens holds the promise to improve cancer immunotherapy approaches; however, current genomics and computational tools are not optimized for their detection. Here we combined CAGE technology with full-length long-read transcriptome sequencing (Long-Read CAGE, or LRCAGE) and developed a suite of computational tools to significantly improve immunopeptidome detection by incorporating TE-derived and other tumor transcripts into the proteome database. By applying our methods to human lung cancer cell line H1299 data, we demonstrated that long-read technology significantly improves mapping of promoters with low mappability scores and LRCAGE guarantees accurate construction of uncharacterized 5’ transcript structure. Unannotated peptides predicted from newly characterized transcripts were readily detectable in whole cell lysate mass-spectrometry data. Incorporating unannotated peptides into the proteome database enabled us to detect non-canonical antigens in HLA-pulldown LC-MS/MS data. At last, we showed that epigenetic treatment increased the number of non-canonical antigens, particularly those encoded by TE-derived transcripts, which might expand the pool of targetable antigens for cancers with low mutational burden.

### Sample Protocol
We followed the published HLA-I pulldown protocol (Bassani-Sternberg 2018; Marino et al. 2019) using 1 billion H1299 cells as input. We prepared two replicates for H1299 cells treated with DMSO and DACSB for each. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometer coupled with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). The peptide separation was carried out on a Waters CSH C18 column (75 µm x 25 cm, 1.7 μm, Waters) at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min and the following gradient: Time = 0–4 min, 2% B isocratic; 4–8 min, 2–10% B; 8–83 min, 10–25% B; 83–97 min, 25–50% B; 97–105 min, 50–98%. Mobile phase consisted of A, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode in which each MS1 scan was followed by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scan of as many precursor ions in 2 second cycle (Top Speed method). The mass range for MS1 was set to 300 to 1800 m/z with a resolution of 120,000 (200 m/z) and the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 50 ms. For precursor selection, ions with charge state of 1 to 4 were selected. For MS/MS, the selected precursors were fragmented in the Orbitrap using an isolation window of 1.6 m/z, a resolution of 30,000 (200 m/z), and a maximum fill time of 54 ms. Fragmentation energy in HCD MS/MS for charge state of 1 was set at higher level (32%) as opposed to 2 to 4 (27%) for more complete fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was performed with a repeat count of 1, exclusion duration of 15 s, and a minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS set to 10000 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.17.0,(Tyanova et al. 2016; Cox and Mann 2008; Cox et al. 2020) using the H1299 custom proteome databases. Different settings were used for MaxQuant as follows. H1299 cells: {type: “Standard”, digestion mode: “Unspecific”, max.peptide.length:15, peptide FDR: 5%, protein FDR 100%}. Peptides that were potential contaminant or from reverse sequences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antigens, Epigenetic treatment, Immunotherapy, Long-read sequencing, Transposable elements

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA;Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA;McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Ju Heon Maeng

### Lab Head
Dr Ting Wang
Department of Genetics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA;Edison Family Center for Genome Sciences and Systems Biology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA;McDonnell Genome Institute, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO, USA


