### Accession
PXD027521

### Title
Synthetic biology meets proteomics: Construction of à la carte QconCATs for absolute protein quantification C4PR_LIV

### Description
We report a new approach to the assembly and construction of QconCATs, quantitative concatamers for proteomic applications that yield stoichiometric quantities of sets of stable isotope-labelled internal standards. The new approach is based on synthetic biology precepts of biobricks,  making use of loop assembly to construct larger entities from individual biobricks. It offers a major gain in flexibility of QconCAT implementation and enables rapid and efficient editability that permits, for example, substitution of one peptide for another. The basic building block (a Qbrick) is a segment of DNA that encodes two or more quantification peptides for a single protein, readily held in a repository as a library resource. These Qbricks are then assembled in a one tube ligation reaction that enforces the order of assembly, to yield short QconCATs that are useable for small quantification products. However, the DNA context of the short also allows a second cycle of assembly such that five different short QconCATs can be assembled into a longer QconCAT in a second, single tube ligation. From a library of Qbricks, a bespoke QconCAT can be assembled quickly and efficiently in a form suitable for expression and labelling in vivo or in vitro. We refer to this approach as the ALACAT strategy as it permits à la carte design of quantification standards.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digestion. For digestion, 0.5 μg protein for each was treated with 0.05 % (w/v) RapiGestTM SF surfactant at 80 °C for 10 minutes, reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (Melford Laboratories Ltd., UK) at 60 °C for 10 minutes and subsequently alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. Proteins were digested with 0.01 μg Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega, US) at 37 °C overnight. Digests were acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (Greyhound Chromatography and Allied Chemicals, UK) to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v) and incubated at 37 °C for 45 minutes before centrifugation at 13,000 x g 4°C to remove insoluble non-peptidic material.   LC-MS/MS. Samples were analysed using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). Protein digests were loaded onto a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75 µm x 2 cm, 3 µm packing material, 100 Å) using 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid, 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in water at a flow rate of 12 µL min-1 for 7 min. For samples 301, 302 and 304, 5 ng was loaded, and for the Long ALACAT, 303 and 305, 10ng was loaded. The peptides were eluted onto the analytical column (EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm packing material, 100 Å) at 30 °C using a linear gradient of 30 minutes rising from 3 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 % (v/v) formic acid (Fisher Scientific, UK) to 40 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 % (v/v) formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The column was then washed with 79 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 % (v/v) formic acid for 5 min, and re-equilibrated to starting conditions. The nano-liquid chromatograph was operated under the control of Dionex Chromatography MS Link 2.14.  The nano-electrospray ionisation source was operated in positive polarity under the control of QExactive HF Tune (version 2.5.0.2042), with a spray voltage of 1.8 kV and a capillary temperature of 250 °C.  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  Full MS survey scans between m/z 350-2000 were acquired at a mass resolution of 60,000 (full width at half maximum at m/z 200).  For MS, the automatic gain control target was set to 3e6, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms.  The 16 most intense precursor ions with charge states of 2-5 were selected for MS/MS with an isolation window of 2 m/z units.  Product ion spectra were recorded between m/z 200-2000 at a mass resolution of 30,000 (full width at half maximum at m/z 200).  For MS/MS, the automatic gain control target was set to 1e5, and the maximum injection time was 45 ms. Higher-energy collisional dissociation was performed to fragment the selected precursor ions using a normalised collision energy of 30 %.  Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were loaded into Thermo Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) and searched against a custom ALACATs database using Mascot v.2.7 (Matrix Science London, UK) with trypsin as the specified enzyme, one missed cleavage allowed, Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, label [13C6][15N2]lysine and [13C6][15N4]arginine set as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine set as a variable modification. A precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.01 Da were applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Loop assembly, Quantitative proteomics, Synthetic biology, Qconcat

### Affiliations
MRC Toxicology Unit University of Cambridge
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, L697ZB, Liverpool, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J. Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Crown Street, L697ZB, Liverpool, United Kingdom


