### Accession
PXD035074

### Title
A holistic foodomics approach coupled with metagenomics elucidates the environmental signature of PDO/PGI potatoes

### Description
Nowadays, given the globalization as well as the numerous technological developments and innovations that govern the food market, consumer’s expectations, regarding the food they eat, have increased and the information they receive should be at least reliable. This proof-of- concept study is the first analysis of potato tuber tissue using integrated multi-omics approaches across genome-wide DNA methylation, RNA sequencing and quantitative proteomics to obtain the molecular portrait of famous PGI potatoes of Naxos island. Furthermore, we used metagenomics analysis in order to discriminate potato tubers produced in diverse PGI regions based on the distinct microbiological patterns. Hence, we reveal key molecular factors related to harvest and post-harvest through the dynamics of causal models.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was conducted for tuber samples using three  biological replicates. 100 mg of frozen tissue were mixed with 600 μL  Tris HCl solution (100 mM, pH=7.6) containing 4% SDS and 0.1 DTT, and  were incubated at 95oC for 3 min. After sonicated for 2 h, samples  were centrifuged at 16000 g for 5 min and the supernatant extracted  was used for Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing of the DIA data was performed using DIA-NN.

### Publication Abstract
The term "terroir" has been widely employed to link differential geographic phenotypes with sensorial signatures of agricultural food products, influenced by agricultural practices, soil type, and climate. Nowadays, the geographical indications labeling has been developed to safeguard the quality of plant-derived food that is linked to a certain terroir and is generally considered as an indication of superior organoleptic properties. As the dynamics of agroecosystems are highly intricate, consisting of tangled networks of interactions between plants, microorganisms, and the surrounding environment, the recognition of the key molecular components of terroir fingerprinting remains a great challenge to protect both the origin and the safety of food commodities. Furthermore, the contribution of microbiome as a potential driver of the terroir signature has been underestimated. Herein, we present a first comprehensive view of the multi-omic landscape related to transcriptome, proteome, epigenome, and metagenome of the popular Protected Geographical Indication potatoes of Naxos.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Epigenomics, Potatoes, Pdo/pgi, Authentication, Foodomics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece
Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources- ELGO Dimitra PO Box 238 Thermi, Thessaloniki, Postcode: 57001, Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Ioannis Ganopoulos
Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources- ELGO Dimitra PO Box 238 Thermi, Thessaloniki, Postcode: 57001, Greece


