### Accession
PXD024730

### Title
Global analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in  Rheum palmatum

### Description
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) is a novel naturally occurring post-translational modification. The system Khib identification at proteomics level has been performed in various species and tissues to characterize the role of Khib in biological activities. However, the study of Khib in plant species is relatively less. In the present study, the first plant root tissues lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome analysis was performed in wheat with antibody immunoprecipitation affinity, high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomics and bioinformatics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea through 5 minutes sonication on ice and then quantified with a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, America) referring the manufacturer’s instruction. The sampled was firstly incubated with 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 1 hour and then incubated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 0.5 hour at room temperature in dark. Four volume TEAB buffer (100 mM) was added to the protein solution to make sure urea concentration less than 2 M. Trypsin was added into the sample at 1: 50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for 12 hours digestion. Then the second time digestion procedure was performed (1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio, 4 hour). Finally, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) was used for database searching. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the database of wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) in Uniprot (130,673 sequence, October, 2019) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme and a maximum of 4 missing cleavages was allowed. The mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Variable modification was defined as oxidation on methionine and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation on both lysine and N-terminal of protein. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds were specified at 1% and the minimum peptide length was set to 7. All of the other parameters were set to default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Protein metabolism, Rheum palmatum

### Affiliations
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Dryland Farming Technology/College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong 266109, China
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jinzhe Du
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Dryland Farming Technology/College of Agronomy, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao Shandong 266109, China


