### Accession
PXD024566

### Title
Comparative host interactomes of the SARS-CoV-2 nonstructural protein 3 and human coronavirus homologs

### Description
Human coronaviruses have become an increasing threat to global health; three highly pathogenic strains have emerged since the early 2000s, including most recently SARS-CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of coronavirus pathogenesis is needed, including how these highly virulent strains differ from those that cause milder, common-cold like disease. While significant progress has been made in understanding how SARS-CoV-2 proteins interact with the host cell, non-structural protein 3 (nsp3) has largely been omitted from the analyses. Nsp3 is a viral protease with important roles in viral protein biogenesis, replication complex formation, and modulation of host ubiquitinylation and ISGylation. Herein, we use affinity purification-mass spectrometry to study the host-viral protein-protein interactome of nsp3 from five coronavirus strains: pathogenic strains SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV, and endemic common-cold strains hCoV-229E and hCoV-OC43. We divide each nsp3 into three fragments and use tandem mass tag technology to directly compare the interactors across the five strains for each fragment. We find that that few interactors are common across all variants for a particular fragment, but we identify shared patterns between select variants, such as ribosomal proteins enriched in the N-terminal fragment (nsp3.1) analysis for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV. We also identify unique biological processes enriched for individual homologs, for instance nuclear protein important for the middle fragment of hCoV-229E, as well as ribosome biogenesis of the MERS nsp3.1 homolog. Lastly, we further investigate the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 nsp3.1 N-terminal fragment with ATF6, a regulator of the unfolded protein response. We show that SARS-CoV-2 nsp3.1 directly binds to ATF6 and can suppress the ATF6 stress response. Characterizing the host interactions of nsp3 widens our understanding of how coronaviruses co-opt cellular pathways and presents new avenues for host-targeted antiviral therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was carried out as previously described (Davies, Almasy 2020 ACS Infect Dis). Eluted proteins were precipitated via methanol/chloroform water (3:1:3) and washed thrice with methanol. Each wash was followed by a 5 minute spin at 10,000xg. Protein pellets were air dried and resuspended in 1% Rapigest SF (Waters). Resuspended proteins were reduced (TCEP) for 30 minutes, alkylated (iodoacetamide) for 30 minutes, and digested with 0.5 µg trypsin/Lys-C (Thermo Fisher) overnight. Digested peptides were labeled using 16plex TMTpro or TMT11plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) and quenched with the addition of ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were pooled, acidified, and concentrated. Cleaved Rapigest products were removed by centrifugation at 17,000xg for 45 minutes. Triphasic MudPIT columns were prepared as previously described using alternating layers of 1.5cm C18 resin, 1.5cm SCX resin, and 1.5cm C18 resin39. Pooled TMT samples (roughly one-third of pooled IP samples and 10 µg of peptide from global UPR activation samples) were loaded onto the microcapillaries using a high-pressure chamber, followed by a 15 minute wash in methanol and a 30 minute wash in buffer A (95% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were fractionated online by liquid chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system and subsequently analyzed using an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The MudPIT columns were installed on the LC column switching valve and followed by a 20cm fused silica microcapillary column filled with Aqua C18, 3µm, C18 resin (Phenomenex) ending in a laser-pulled tip. Prior to use, columns were washed in the same way as the MudPIT capillaries. MudPIT runs were carried out by 10µL sequential injections of 0, 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 % buffer C (500mM ammonium acetate, 94.9% water, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for IP samples and 0, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 70, 80, 90, 100% buffer C for global UPR activation samples, followed by a final injection of 90% C, 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v). Each injection was followed by a 130 min gradient using a flow rate of 500nL/min (0-6 min: 2% buffer B, 8 min: 5% B, 100 min: 35% B, 105min: 65% B, 106-113 min: 85% B, 113-130 min: 2% B). ESI was performed directly from the tip of the microcapillary column using a spray voltage of 2.2 kV, an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C and a RF Lens of 40%. MS1 spectra were collected using a scan range of 400-1600 m/z, 120k resolution, AGC target of 300%, and automatic injection times. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were obtained using a monoisotopic peak selection mode: peptide, including charge state 2-7, TopSpeed method (3s cycle time), isolation window 0.4 m/z, HCD fragmentation using a normalized collision energy of 32 (TMTpro) or 36 (TMT11plex), resolution 45k, AGC target of 200%, automatic injection times, and a dynamic exclusion (20 ppm window) set to 60s.

### Data Protocol
nsp3.1 analysis combined 5 individual MS runs totaling 62 samples (15x tdTomato, 13x SARS-CoV-2, 9x SARS-CoV, 8x MERS-CoV, 9x hCoV-OC43, 8x hCoV-229E). nsp3.3 analysis combined 5 individual MS runs totaling 63 samples (15x tdTomato, 14x SARS-CoV-2, 9x SARS-CoV, 8x MERS-CoV, 9x hCoV-OC43, 8x hCoV-229E). nsp3.2 analysis combined 4 individual MS runs totaling 63 co-IP samples (tdTomato 15, SARS-CoV-2 14, SARS-CoV 9, hCoV-OC43 9, MERS-CoV 8, hCoV-229E 8). Identification and quantification of peptides were performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the SwissProt human database (TaxID 9606, released 11/23/2019) with nsp3 fragment sequences manually added. Searches were conducted with Sequest HT using the following parameters: trypsin cleavage (maximum 2 missed cleavages), minimum peptide length 6 AAs, precursor mass tolerance 20ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02Da, dynamic modifications of Met oxidation (+15.995Da), protein N-terminal Met loss (-131.040Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011Da), static modifications of TMTpro (+304.207Da) or TMT6plex (+229.163)bat Lys and N-termini and Cys carbamidomethylation (+57.021Da). Peptide IDs were filtered using Percolator with an FDR target of 0.01. Proteins were filtered based on a 0.01 FDR, and protein groups were created according to a strict parsimony principle. TMT reporter ions were quantified considering unique and razor peptides, excluding peptides with co-isolation interference greater that 25%. Peptide abundances were normalized based on total peptide amounts in each channel, assuming similar levels of background in the IPs. For global UPR proteomics, peptide abundances were also scaled. Protein quantification used all quantified peptides. Post-search filtering was done to include only proteins with two identified peptides. Pairwise ratios between conditions were calculated in Proteome Discoverer based on total protein abundance, and ANOVA was performed on individual proteins to test for change in abundances and report adjusted P-values. To filter interactors of individual nsp3 fragments, we used a variable cutoff method combining log2 enrichment and adjusted p-value according to a published method (Plate et al, 2019 Cell Chemical Biology doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2019.04.001). The histogram of log2 protein abundance fold changes for each construct vs the tdTomato control was fitted to a gaussian curve with a bin width of 0.1 using a nonlinear least square fit (excluding outliers) to determine the standard deviation σ of the scatter. For medium- and high-confidence interactors, the cutoff values were 1σ and 2σ respectively. To take into consideration the adjusted p-values, we used a hyperbolic curve y > c(x-x0) where y is the adjusted p-value, x is the log2 fold change, and x0 corresponds to the value of the 1σ or 2σ standard deviation.

### Publication Abstract
Human coronaviruses have become an increasing threat to global health; three highly pathogenic strains have emerged since the early 2000s, including most recently SARS-CoV-2, the cause of COVID-19. A better understanding of the molecular mechanisms of coronavirus pathogenesis is needed, including how these highly virulent strains differ from those that cause milder, common-cold-like disease. While significant progress has been made in understanding how SARS-CoV-2 proteins interact with the host cell, nonstructural protein 3 (nsp3) has largely been omitted from the analyses. Nsp3 is a viral protease with important roles in viral protein biogenesis, replication complex formation, and modulation of host ubiquitinylation and ISGylation. Herein, we use affinity purification-mass spectrometry to study the host-viral protein-protein interactome of nsp3 from five coronavirus strains: pathogenic strains SARS-CoV-2, SARS-CoV, and MERS-CoV; and endemic common-cold strains hCoV-229E and hCoV-OC43. We divide each nsp3 into three fragments and use tandem mass tag technology to directly compare the interactors across the five strains for each fragment. We find that few interactors are common across all variants for a particular fragment, but we identify shared patterns between select variants, such as ribosomal proteins enriched in the N-terminal fragment (nsp3.1) data set for SARS-CoV-2 and SARS-CoV. We also identify unique biological processes enriched for individual homologs, for instance, nuclear protein import for the middle fragment of hCoV-229E, as well as ribosome biogenesis of the MERS nsp3.2 homolog. Lastly, we further investigate the interaction of the SARS-CoV-2 nsp3 N-terminal fragment with ATF6, a regulator of the unfolded protein response. We show that SARS-CoV-2 nsp3.1 directly binds to ATF6 and can suppress the ATF6 stress response. Characterizing the host interactions of nsp3 widens our understanding of how coronaviruses co-opt cellular pathways and presents new avenues for host-targeted antiviral therapeutics.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Ap-ms, Covid-19

### Affiliations
Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Jonathan Davies

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Departments of Biological Sciences and Chemistry, Vanderbilt University


