### Accession
PXD020040

### Title
ASB2beta-induced changes to the skeletal muscle proteome and ubiquitinome

### Description
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification that has been shown to have a range of effects, such as regulating protein function, protein:protein interactions, protein localization, and protein abundance by targeting proteins for degradation by the 26S proteasome.  We have previously shown that the muscle-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase, ASB2, is down-regulated in models of muscle growth and that overexpression ASB2 is sufficient to induce muscle atrophy. To gain insight into the effect of increased ASB2 expression on skeletal muscle mass and function, we used 2-dimensional nano-ultra-high-performance mass spectrometry to investigate ASB2-induced changes to the mouse skeletal muscle proteome, and whether these were associated with changes in protein ubiquitination.  The results show that in vivo recombinant adeno-associated viral vector-mediated ASB2β overexpression induces impaired intrinsic force production and progressive muscle atrophy over 12 weeks, while ASB2 knockdown induces mild muscle hypertrophy. ASB2-induced muscle atrophy and dysfunction were associated with the early down regulation of mitochondrial and contractile proteins, and the upregulation of proteins involved in proteasome-mediated protein degradation, protein synthesis and the cytoskeleton/sarcomere. The overexpression ASB2β also resulted in marked changes in protein ubiquitination, however, there was no simple relationship between changes in ubiquitination status and protein abundance. To gain insights into proteins that interact with ASB2, and potential ASB2 targets, in muscle cells, flag-tagged wild type ASB2, and a mutant ASB2 with a deleted C-terminal SOCS box domain (dSOCS) were immunoprecipitated from C2C12 myotubes and subjected to label-free proteomic analysis to determine the ASB2 interactome. ASB2β was found to interact with a range of cytoskeletal and nuclear proteins. When combined with the in vivo ubiquitinomic data, we identified several novel potential ASB2β target substrates that await further investigation. Overall, this study reveals for the first time the complexity of changes to the proteome and ubiquitinome during E3 ligase-mediated skeletal muscle atrophy and dysfunction.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue was homogenized in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% SDS, 25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.9 containing 20 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 2 mM sodium orthovanadate, and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche; 11873580001) by tip-probe sonication and centrifuged at 16 000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C. Lysates were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone overnight at −30°C. Protein pellets were centrifuged at 10 000 x g, 10 minutes at 4°C resuspended in 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 25 mM TEAB, pH 7.9 and quantified by Qubit fluorescence (Thermo Fisher; Q33212). Concentrations were normalized and 600 μg of protein reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 60 minutes at 25°C followed by alkylation with 40 mM chloroacetamide for 30 minutes at 25°C in the dark. The reaction was quenched to a final concentration of 20 mM dithiothreitol and digested with lysyl endopeptidase Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries; 125-05061) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 2 hours at 25°C. The mixture was diluted 5-fold with 25 mM TEAB and digested with trypsin (Promega; V5111) at 1:50 enzyme to substrate ratio for 16 hours at 30°C. The peptide mixture was acidified to a final concentration of 2% formic acid and centrifuged at 16 000 g for 15 minutes. Peptides were desalted using hydrophilic-lipophilic balance—solid phase extraction (HLB-SPE) (Waters; 186000128) and eluted with 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. The purified peptides were aliquoted (95% for diGly immunoprecipitation analysis and 5% for total proteome analysis) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Immunoprecipitation of diGly-containing peptides was performed essentially as described previously19,20 by resuspending the peptides in IP buffer (50 mM MOPs, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 50 mM NaCl2, pH 7.2) and incubated with agarose-conjugated anti-diGly antibody (Cell Signalling Technologies, 5562, PTMScan Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG)) overnight at 4°C with rotation. The beads were washed four times with IP buffer followed by water and eluted with 0.2% TFA and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Immunoprecipitated peptides and peptides for total proteome analysis were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, and labelled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) for 1.5 hours at room temperature followed by de-acylation with 0.25% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes and quenching with 0.1% TFA. Peptides from each 10-plex experiment were pooled and desalted using HLB-SPE and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptides were fractionated (12 fractions for total proteome analysis and 6 fractions for diGly-peptide analysis) on an in-house packed TSKgel amide-80 HILIC column as previously described.C2C12 myoblasts were seeded on 6-well plates in growth media (DMEM containing 25 mM glucose, 10 % FBS, 4mM Glutamine) so that they were ~50 % confluent after 24 h. After 24hrs, DNA plasmids encoding Flag-tagged ASB2β (WT Flag-ASB2β) or Flag-tagged ASB2β lacking the C-terminal SOCS box domain (residues 584-634; dSOCS Flag-ASB2β) were transfected into the myoblasts using TRANS-IT transfection reagent following manufacturer’s protocol (MirusBio, USA). After 24h, the media was changed to differentiation media (DMEM containing 25mm glucose, 2 % horse serum, 4mM Glutamine), and cells were differentiated over 4 d with replenishment every 48 h. After 4 d of differentiation, myotubes were lysed in 0.3% CHAPS, 150 mM NaCl, 5 % glycerol in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche; 11873580001) by passing through a 22- and 27-gauge needle at 4°C. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g, 10 min at 4°C and quantified by BCA (Thermo Fisher; 23225). Two mg of protein was incubated with 40 µl of μMACS Anti-DYKDDDDK beads (Miltenyi Biotech; 130-101-591) for 45 min with rotation at 4°C. The suspension was separated with a μMACS column and magnetic separator, and washed with lysis buffer containing only 0.01% CHAPS followed by lysis buffer containing no CHAPS. Proteins were eluted with 2 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 7.5) containing 1 mM DTT, 5 mM IAA and 125 ng of trypsin (Promega; V5111), and digested overnight at room temperature. Peptides were acidified to 1% TFA and desalted using Styrene Divinylbenzene - Reversed-Phase Sulfonate (SDB-RPS) microcolumns and eluted with 80% acetonitrile in 2% ammonium hydroxide followed by vacuum concentration.

### Data Protocol
Peptides from muscle were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) using Dionex nano-UHPLC. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient of 5-30% Buffer B over 120 minutes at 300 nL/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The column was maintained at 50°C using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 70,000 resolution at 200 m/z (350 – 1,550 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 20 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 32 normalized collision energy; 35,000 resolution; 120 ms injection time; 2e5 AGC target). Mass spectrometry data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.1 and searched with Sequest HT against the mouse UniProt database (May 2016). The data were searched with a maximum of three miss-cleavages and methionine oxidation, lysine TMT and lysine diGly-TMT set to variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and peptide N-terminus TMT was set as a fixed modification. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and product-ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. All results were filtered to 1% peptide spectral matches false discovery rate (FDR) using Percolator and total proteomic data filtered to 1% FDR using Protein Validator in Proteome Discoverer. The localization of modification sites was performed with PTM-RS. All data were normalized to the median of each sample and diGly peptides were further normalized to total proteome data to investigate changes in ubiquitylation at each site. The diGly-modified peptides and proteins were expressed relative to control (AAV:MCS) treated muscles and t-tests were performed in Perseus with Benjamin-Hochberg FDR set to 5%. Peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and loaded onto a 50 cm x 75 μm inner diameter column packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18AQ particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC) using Dionex nano-UHPLC. Peptides from C2C12 were separated using a linear gradient of 5-30% Buffer B over 90 minutes at 300 nL/min (Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The column was maintained at 50°C using a PRSO-V1 ion-source (Sonation) coupled directly to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (MS). A full-scan MS1 was measured at 70 000 resolution at 200 m/z (300 – 1550 m/z; 100 ms injection time; 3e6 AGC target) followed by isolation of up to 15 most abundant precursor ions for MS/MS (1.2 m/z isolation; 27 normalized collision energy; 17,500 resolution; 55 ms injection time; 1e5 AGC target). A sweep gas was applied during sample loading and re-conditioning to prevent contaminant ions entering the mass spectrometer. Mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant v1.5.8.3 with all default parameters and searched against the mouse UniProt database (March 2018). The data were searched with a maximum of two miss-cleavages and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and product-ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. The MaxLFQ and match-betwee-runs options was enabled. All results were filtered to 1% peptide spectral matches and protein false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins were expressed relative to control treated cells and t-tests were performed in Perseus with Benjamin-Hochberg FDR set to 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a posttranslational protein modification that has been shown to have a range of effects, including regulation of protein function, interaction, localization, and degradation. We have previously shown that the muscle-specific ubiquitin E3 ligase, ASB2&#x3b2;, is downregulated in models of muscle growth and that overexpression ASB2&#x3b2; is sufficient to induce muscle atrophy. To gain insight into the effects of increased ASB2&#x3b2; expression on skeletal muscle mass and function, we used liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry to investigate ASB2&#x3b2;-mediated changes to the skeletal muscle proteome and ubiquitinome, via a parallel analysis of remnant diGly-modified peptides. The results show that viral vector-mediated ASB2&#x3b2; overexpression in murine muscles causes progressive muscle atrophy and impairment of force-producing capacity, while ASB2&#x3b2; knockdown induces mild muscle hypertrophy. ASB2&#x3b2;-induced muscle atrophy and dysfunction were associated with the early downregulation of mitochondrial and contractile protein abundance and the upregulation of proteins involved in proteasome-mediated protein degradation (including other E3 ligases), protein synthesis, and the cytoskeleton/sarcomere. The overexpression ASB2&#x3b2; also resulted in marked changes in protein ubiquitination; however, there was no simple relationship between changes in ubiquitination status and protein abundance. To investigate proteins that interact with ASB2&#x3b2; and, therefore, potential ASB2&#x3b2; targets, Flag-tagged wild-type ASB2&#x3b2;, and a mutant ASB2&#x3b2; lacking the C-terminal SOCS box domain (dSOCS) were immunoprecipitated from C2C12 myotubes and subjected to label-free proteomic analysis to determine the ASB2&#x3b2; interactome. ASB2&#x3b2; was found to interact with a range of cytoskeletal and nuclear proteins. When combined with the in&#xa0;vivo ubiquitinomic data, our studies have identified novel putative ASB2&#x3b2; target substrates that warrant further investigation. These findings provide novel insight into the complexity of proteome and ubiquitinome changes that occur during E3 ligase-mediated skeletal muscle atrophy and dysfunction.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Adeno-associated virus, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Benjamin Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Parker
The University of Melbourne


