### Accession
PXD009489

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis Beijing B0/W148 cluster strains

### Description
Nowadays proteomics is the one of the major instruments for editing and correct decryption of genomic information. Genomic correction of socially significant pathogens, like Mycobacterium tuberculosis, is by far the most relevant. We conducted proteogenomic analysis of W-148 strain, which belong to the Beijing B0/W148 cluster. Strains of this cluster possess unique pathogenic properties and have a unique genome organization. Taking into account a high similarity of cluster strains at the genomic level we analysed MS/MS datasets obtained for 63 clinical isolates of Beijing B0/W148. Based on H37Rv and W-148 annotations we identified 2,546 proteins, representing more than 60 % of total proteome. A set of peptides (n=404), specific for W-148 was found in comparison with H37Rv. Start sites for 32 genes were corrected based on combination of LC-MS/MS proteomic data with genomic six frame translation. Additionally, presence of peptides for 10 pseudogenes has been confirmed. Thus, the data obtained by us undoubtedly shows the need for conducting genome annotation based on proteomic data. Corrected during the study W-148 genome annotation will allow to use it in studies on Beijing B0/W148 cluster strains.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial cells were suspended in 50 μL lysozyme and 100 μL 100mМ TrisHСl pH 7.6 with 3 µL of Protease inhibitor Mix (GE Healthcare).  Cells disrupted on a bead-beating homogenizer (MPBio, FastPrep-24) with 0.5-mm silica-zirconium beads, time at 4 min followed by 5 min on ice. To reduce disulfide bonds and to block cysteine residues the collected suspension was added by SDS to a final concentration of 10 % and DTT (BioRad) to a final concentration of 10 mM and incubated at 60 °C for 30 min.  The sample was by centrifugation at 13,000 g, 4 °С for 5 min. Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method using the Bradford Protein Assay Kit (BioRad). Proteins were then separated on a 7.5% 1D SDS-PAGE on a PROTEAN II (Bio-Rad) at 20 mA for 20 min and 40 mA overnight. The gel was stained with Colloidal blue. Proteins were excised in 1x1 mm pieces that were destined in 10mM DTT in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at 56oC, followed by a second wash in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 50% (v/v) ACN (1-2 h, 50oC). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Promega) in a 1:50 enzyme:protein (w/w) ratio at 37 °C overnight (approx 16 h). The cleavage was stopped by adding 5% TFA and peptides were extracted in a solution containing 50% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v) followed by extraction in 75% ACN and 5% TFA (2v/v). Peptides were concentrated by speedvac and dissolved in 20 μL 1% acetic acid. The supernatant peptides were removed and used for LC-MS analysis. LC-MS Peptides were separated with high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System, Thermo Scientific, USA) in a 15-cm long C18 column with a diameter of 75 μm (Acclaim® PepMap™ RSLC, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptides were eluted with a gradient from 5-35 % buffer B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) over 115 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Total run time including 15 min to reach 99 % buffer B, flushing 10 min with 99 % buffer B and 15 min re-equilibration to buffer A (0.1 % formic acid) amounted 65 mins. Further analysis was performed with a Q Exacitve HF mass spectrometer (Q ExactiveTM HF Hybrid Quadrupole-OrbitrapTM Mass spectrometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (MS) and 15,000 (MS/MS) in a range of 400-1,500 m/z (MS) and 200-2,000 m/z (MS/MS). An isolation threshold of 67,000 was determined for precursors selection and up to top 25 precursors were chosen for fragmentation with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 25 V and 100 ms activation time. Precursors with a charged state of +1 were rejected and all measured precursors were excluded from measurement for 20 s. 2-4 technical runs were measured for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was captured from the mass spectrometer and converted to MGF (Mascot Generic Format) files using ProteoWizard with the following parameters: peakPicking true 2, msLevel 2, zeroSamples removeExtra (Kessner 2008). For thorough protein identification, the generated peak lists were searched with the MASCOT (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd, UK) and X! Tandem (VENGEANCE, 2015.12.15, The Global Proteome Machine Organization) search engines. Database-searching parameters included the following: tryptic hydrolysis, no more than one missed site, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. Oxidation of methionine was set as possible modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed. For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allowed quick check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Resulting files were submitted to the Scaffold 4 software (version 4.2.1, Proteome Software, Inc, USA) for validation and further analysis. We used the local false discovery rate scoring algorithm with standard experiment-wide protein grouping. A 1 % FDR threshold was applied to search results from individual datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Nowadays proteomics is one of the major instruments for editing and correcting annotation of genomic information. The correct genome annotation is necessary for omics studies of clinically relevant pathogens like Mycobacterium tuberculosis as well as for the progress in drug design and in silico biology. Here, we focused on the proteogenomic analysis of W-148 strain belonging to the Beijing B0/W148 cluster. This cluster, also known as a "successful" clone possesses unique pathogenic properties and has a unique genome organization. Taking into account high similarity of cluster strains at the genomic level we analyzed MS/MS dataset obtained for 63 clinical isolates of Beijing B0/W148. Based on H37Rv and W-148 annotations we identified 2546 proteins representing more than 60% of total proteome. A set of peptides (n&#x202f;=&#x202f;404) specific for W-148 was found when compared with H37Rv. Start sites for 32 genes were corrected based on the combination of LC-MS/MS proteomic data with genomic six-frame translation. Additionally, we have shown the presence of peptides related to 10 genes earlier known as "pseudogenes". SIGNIFICANCE: Mycobacterium tuberculosis is one of the most dangerous pathogens. Phylogenetically, it may be divided into major lineages and among them, lineage 2 (predominantly Beijing genotype) one of the most successful lineages with an increasing prevalence in the global population. At the same time, strains of the Beijing B0/W148 cluster, a "successful" clone of Mycobacterium tuberculosis possess even more interesting features. Only one complete genome of this cluster, W-148, present in the NCBI database (CP012090.1) and it demonstrates a number of significant differences from the well-known reference genome H37Rv. For the W-148 strain many genes are annotated as "pseudo" and no attempts were made to correct this. Thereby, in this study, we have conducted a proteomic analysis of the cluster strains and corrected current genome annotation. We hope that the data obtained will help to increase the quality of identifications in proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of M. tuberculosis Beijing B0/W148 cluster strain in subsequent studies.

### Keywords
Label-free proteomic analysis, Proteogenomics, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Proteomics, Beijing b0/w148

### Affiliations
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology
PhD, Head of laboratory of Molecular microbial genetics Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine

### Submitter
Alexander Smolyakov

### Lab Head
Dr Egor Shitikov
PhD, Head of laboratory of Molecular microbial genetics Federal Research and Clinical Centre of Physical-Chemical Medicine


