### Accession
PXD023718

### Title
BioID using Rac1G15A in human podocyte

### Description
Previous studies showed that Rac1, one of the prototypical Rho GTPases, is critical for the normal development and health of podocytes. However, the upstream regulatory mechanism for Rac1 activity in podocytes is unknown. In the current study, BioID was used to identify interactors of Rac1 in human podocytes

### Sample Protocol
Immortalized human podocytes were incubated for 16 hrs with doxycycline and biotin. Cells were collected by scraping in PBS, pelleted at 800 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C, and snap frozen on dry ice. The pellets were incubated for 1 hr at 4°C with RIPA buffer supplemented with 1mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail. Lysates were then sonicated and centrifuged. Biotinylated proteins in the supernatant were pulled down with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin C1 for 3 hrs at 4°C. Finally, the beads were rinsed 5 times in RIPA followed by 4 washes in low detergent buffer. Samples were then analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Results were analyzed by the Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.9.0 software (Proteome Sciences). For statistics, t-test within the Scaffold was used after normalizing to total spectral counts. All proteins with a p-value of <0.05 and a fold change of two over the BirA controls were considered as interactors of BirA-Rac1G15A.

### Publication Abstract
Rho GTPases are regulators of the actin cytoskeleton and their activity is modulated by GTPase-activating proteins (GAPs) and guanine nucleotide exchanging factors (GEFs). Glomerular podocytes have numerous actin-based projections called foot processes and their alteration is characteristic of proteinuric kidney diseases. We reported previously that Rac1 hyperactivation in podocytes causes proteinuria and glomerulosclerosis in mice. However, which GAP and GEF modulate Rac1 activity in podocytes remains unknown. Here, using a proximity-based ligation assay, we identified CdGAP (ARHGAP31) and &#x3b2;-PIX (ARHGEF7) as the major regulatory proteins interacting with Rac1 in human podocytes. CdGAP interacted with &#x3b2;-PIX through its basic region, and upon EGF stimulation, they both translocated to the plasma membrane in podocytes. CdGAP-depleted podocytes had altered cell motility and increased basal Rac1 and Cdc42 activities. When stimulated with EGF, CdGAP-depleted podocytes showed impaired &#x3b2;-PIX membrane-translocation and tyrosine phosphorylation, and reduced activities of Src kinase, focal adhesion kinase, and paxillin. Systemic and podocyte-specific CdGAP-knockout mice developed mild but significant proteinuria, which was exacerbated by Adriamycin. Collectively, these findings show that CdGAP contributes to maintain podocyte function and protect them from injury.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Podocyte, Ms

### Affiliations
McGill University Health Centre
Tomoko Takano, Dr. Professor - Department of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, MOntreal, QC, Canada

### Submitter
Jun Matsuda

### Lab Head
Dr Tomoko Takano
Tomoko Takano, Dr. Professor - Department of Medicine, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University, MOntreal, QC, Canada


