### Accession
PXD037531

### Title
High resolution human sperm proteome LC-MSMS

### Description
The aim of this study was to achieve a higher resolution of the human sperm proteome for better understanding of the molecular causes of male infertility. For this purpose, we examined the proteomic profiles of sperm from 76 men for proteins with deregulated abundances. Infertile men had abnormal semen parameters and were involuntarily childless. Men in the cohort with normal fertility had normozoospermia and had fathered children without medical assistance. Mass spectrometry analysis led to an in-depth reconstruction of the human sperm proteome. The corresponding genes were mainly involved in cellular motility, response to stimuli, adhesion, and reproduction. We also observed increasing numbers of at least three-fold differentially abundant sperm proteins from oligozoospermia and oligoasthenozoospermia to oligoasthenoteratozoospermia, compared with normozoospermia. Primarily, flagellar assembly and sperm motility, sperm-egg interaction, and male gametogenesis were affected. This suggests that sperm of infertile men carry signatures of impaired sperm production and are functionally impaired. Not least, we present new male infertility markers in addition to established ones.

### Sample Protocol
Upon swim-up, spermatozoa were separated from seminal plasma by centrifugation for 5 min at 1,000 g. After discarding the plasma, cells were resuspended twice in phosphate-buffered saline and re-pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000 g for 5 min, each time succeeded by discard of the supernatant. Washed spermatozoa were shock-frosted in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. Following thawing on ice, samples were boiled in lithium dodecyl sulfate buffer and purified by electrophoresis on a 4–12% gradient NOVEX gel. Upon in-gel digestion, peptides were separated on a 30 cm reverse-phase capillary (75 µm inner diameter) packed with Reprosil C18 (1.9 µm). Elution with a 4 h gradient from 5–60% acetonitrile at 200 nl/min used an Easy LC1000 HPLC system directly mounted to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Raw data analysis was performed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.2.8 with label free quantification (LFQ) activated and match between runs. Time windows for matching and aligning were 0.7 and 20 minutes, respectively. For consideration, a protein had to be determined in a minimum of 2 peptides (1 unique, 1 razor) with q-value ≤ 0.05, each.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8, using Human Ensembl database as search space. Using standard settings and LFQ normalisation activated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Sperm

### Affiliations
Institut of Molecular Biology
Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution (iomE), Anthropology Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz | JGU Germany

### Submitter
Mario Dejung

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Herlyn
Institute of Organismic and Molecular Evolution (iomE), Anthropology Johannes Gutenberg-Universität Mainz | JGU Germany


