### Accession
PXD023810

### Title
Identification of proteins precipitated by means of Acyl-RAC

### Description
The objective was to perform protein identification by ESI-LC-MSMS on a sample subjected to Acyl-RAC assay in order to study protein palmitoylation. The user transfected human paxillin (mCherry-paxillin-CAIL) into a mouse cell line and performed Acyl-RAC assay. The aim of this analysis was to determine whether human paxillin is palmitoylated and confirm the quality of the Acyl-RAC technique to detect palmitoylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The user performed Acyl-RAC assay and the PCF received a bead sample in leammli buffer. Sample was concentrated and purified by 1D gel electrophoresis. Proteins were then in-gel digested and peptides were analysed by nanoLC-MSMS using an easynLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) using the Mus musculus Reference proteome (uniprot.org) as well as the sequence of the recombinant Paxillin (provided by user). Data were analysed and validated with Scaffold (Proteome Software) with 1% of protein FDR and at least 2 unique peptides per protein with a 0.1% of peptide FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Palmitoylation, 3t3-nih, Paxillin

### Affiliations
Associate Professor Dept of Cell Physiology & Metabolism Centre Médical Universitaire 1, Rue Michel-Servet 1211 Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva,
Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism,
Centre Médical Universitaire,
1. Rue Michel-Servet
1211 Geneva 4

### Submitter
Bernhard Wehrle-Haller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Wehrle-Haller
Associate Professor Dept of Cell Physiology & Metabolism Centre Médical Universitaire 1, Rue Michel-Servet 1211 Geneva, Switzerland


