### Accession
PXD012407

### Title
Quantitative intrinsic auto-cathodoluminescence can resolve spectral signatures of tissue-isolated collagen extracellular matrix

### Description
By analyzing isolated collagen gel samples, we demonstrated in situ detection of spectrally deconvoluted auto-cathodoluminescence signatures of specific molecular content with precise spatial localization over a maximum field of view of 300 µm. Correlation of the secondary electron and the hyperspectral images proved ~40 nm resolution in the optical channel, obtained due to a short carrier diffusion length, suppressed by fibril dimensions and poor electrical conductivity specific to their organic composition. By correlating spectrally analyzed auto-cathodoluminescence with mass spectroscopy data, we differentiated spectral signatures of two extracellular matrices, namely human fibrin complex and rat tail collagen isolate, and uncovered differences in protein distributions of isolated extracellular matrix networks of heterogeneous populations. Furthermore, we demonstrated that cathodoluminescence can monitor the progress of a human cell-mediated remodeling process, where human collagenous matrix was deposited within a rat collagenous matrix. The revealed change of the heterogeneous biological composition was confirmed by mass spectroscopy.

### Sample Protocol
The collagen gel networks were digested with RIPA buffer. The samples were run on a SDS-PAGE gel. SDS–PAGE gel lanes corresponding to the collagen molecular weight were sliced into pieces and proteins were reduced/alkylated before overnight Trypsin (Promega) digestion47. Resulting peptides were extracted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Afterwards, peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips48, and dried again by vacuum centrifugation prior to mass spectrometric analysis. For LC MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended and separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC system in-line connected with an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using MS-Amanda49, and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4 against a home-made database containing the Bos Taurus reference proteome (Uniprot release 2017_05), the rattus norvegicus reference proteome (Uniprot release 2017_05), and the human reference proteome (UniProt release 2017_05). All searches were performed with trypsin cleavage specificity, with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed and ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm for the precursor and 0.05 Da for the fragments. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (Protein N-term), phosphorylation (STY), pyroglutamic acid (peptide N-term Q) were considered as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
By analyzing isolated collagen gel samples, we demonstrated in situ detection of spectrally deconvoluted auto-cathodoluminescence signatures of specific molecular content with precise spatial localization over a maximum field of view of 300&#x2009;&#xb5;m. Correlation of the secondary electron and the hyperspectral images proved ~40&#x2009;nm resolution in the optical channel, obtained due to a short carrier diffusion length, suppressed by fibril dimensions and poor electrical conductivity specific to their organic composition. By correlating spectrally analyzed auto-cathodoluminescence with mass spectroscopy data, we differentiated spectral signatures of two extracellular matrices, namely human fibrin complex and rat tail collagen isolate, and uncovered differences in protein distributions of isolated extracellular matrix networks of heterogeneous populations. Furthermore, we demonstrated that cathodoluminescence can monitor the progress of a human cell-mediated remodeling process, where human collagenous matrix was deposited within a rat collagenous matrix. The revealed change of the heterogeneous biological composition was confirmed by mass spectroscopy.

### Keywords
Cathodoluminescence-sem, Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
EPFL
Institute of bioengineering, School of Life science, EPFL, Switzerland

### Submitter
Hans Mattias Larsson

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Mattias Larsson
Institute of bioengineering, School of Life science, EPFL, Switzerland


