### Accession
PXD039930

### Title
Inhibition of diacylglycerol lipase β modulates lipid and endocannabinoid levels in the ex vivo human placenta

### Description
This study utilized MS-based activity-based protein profiling to generate an activity landscape of placental catalytically active serine hydrolases, aiming to investigate the main 2-AGbiosynthetic enzyme in the human placenta

### Sample Protocol
Placental tissues were thawed on ice and homogenized in cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM MgCl2, 2.5 U/mL benzonase). After incubation on ice for 15 min, tissue debris was pelleted by centrifugation (2500 × g, 3 min, 4°C) and supernatant was transferred to a clean tube. Subsequently the supernatant was centrifuged at 30.000 × g (90-120 min, 4°C) to pellet the membrane-associated fraction and separate it from the soluble proteome. After removal of the cytosolic fraction, the membrane pellet was washed with cold HEPES buffer (20 mM, pH 7.2) followed by resuspension in cold HEPES buffer by pipetting. The chemical proteomics workflow was performed as earlier described, with minor adjustments (doi: 10.1038/nprot.2017.159). In short, cytosolic and membrane fractions of placental tissue lysates (250 µg protein, 1 mg/mL, n=5) were incubated with serine hydrolase probe cocktail (10 µM MB108, 10 µM FP-Biotin, 30 min, 37 ˚C, 300 rpm). A pool of denatured vehicle control samples (1% SDS, 5 min, 100°C) was taken along as a negative control. Following steps were preformed according to protocol, including precipitation, alkylation, avidin enrichment, on-bead digestion, and sample preparation. Dried and desalted peptide samples were stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis. Prior to measurement, samples were reconstituted in 50 µL 97:3:0.1 solution (H2O, ACN, FA) containing 10 fmol/µL yeast enolase digest (Waters, cat# 186002325) and transferred to LC-MS vials. Additionally, a quality control sample was prepared to prevent overloading the nanoLC system and the automatic gain control (AGC) of the QExactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data was analyzed by MaxQuant software 2.0 applying match between runs. For further analysis, the following cut-offs were used: unique peptides ≥ 2, identified peptides ≥ 2, ratio positive over negative control ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human placenta, Chemoproteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Graz, Austria
Medical University of Graz

### Submitter
Natascha Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Wadsack
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical University of Graz, Austria


