### Accession
PXD021690

### Title
Proteome of Fam134A/B/C knock-out MEFs

### Description
Selective degradation of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) via autophagy receptors is important to maintain cell homeostasis. In this study we identify FAM134A/RETREG2 and FAM134C/RETREG3 as bona fide ER-phagy receptors containing a classical and functional LIR motif. In contrast to the other family member FAM134B/RETREG1, over-expressed FAM134A and C are in a relatively inactive state, under basal conditions, and require an activation signal to fragment significant amounts of ER. Global proteomes analysis of knockout MEFs suggests distinct and overlapping functions of the three FAM134. Common functions are the maintenance of the ER shape and delivery of mis-folded pro-collagen I to lysosomes. Single knockout of Fam134a or Fam134c lead to swollen ER and massive intracellular accumulation of pro-collagen I. In this context, Fam134a but not Fam134c over-expression is able to recover collagen I levels, in Fam134b knockout MEFs, indicating distinct modes of action. Moreover, we provide evidence that Fam134a has a LIR-independent function in maintaining collagen I homeostasis in a co-receptor complex together with Fam134c. This pathway works in parallel to Fam134b, which in contrast is self-sufficient to drive ER-phagy.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were precipitate in acetone and then reduced and alkylated in a solution of 6M Guanidine-HCl, 5mM TCEP, and 55mM chloroacetamide. Peptides were obtained digesting proteins with LysC (WAKO) for 3h at 37°C and with the endopeptidase sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. Collected peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using the Stop and Go Extraction (STAGE) technique. Instruments for LC MS/MS analysis consisted of a NanoLC 1200 coupled via a nano-electrospray ionization source to the quadrupole-based Q Exactive HF benchtop mass spectrometer. Peptide separation was carried out according to their hydrophobicity on a PicoFrit column, 75m ID, 8Um tip, 250mm bed packed with Reprosil-PUR, C18-AQ, 1.9m particle size, 120 Angstrom pore size (New Objective, Inc., cat. PF7508-250H363), using a binary buffer system consisting of solution A: 0.1% formic acid and B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry, all acquired raw files were processed using MaxQuant (1.6.2.10) and the implemented Andromeda search engine. For protein assignment, spectra were correlated with the UniProt human database (v. 2019) including a list of common contaminants. Searches were performed with tryptic specifications and default settings for mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS spectra. Carbamidomethyl at cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, while oxidations at methionine, acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids, and the false discovery rate for proteins and peptide-spectrum matches to 1%. The match-between-run feature with a time window of 1 min was used. For further analysis, the Perseus software (1.6.2.3) was used and first filtered for contaminants and reverse entries as well as proteins that were only identified by a modified peptide. The LFQ Ratios were logarithmized, grouped and filtered for min. valid number (min. 3 in at least one group). Missing values have been replaced by random numbers that are drawn from a normal distribution. Two sample t-test was performed using FDR=0.05. Probability values (p) < 0.05 were considered statistically significant. To identify significant enriched GO terms, we utilized the 1D enrichment tool in Perseus. Data visualization was done in the statistical environment R. MS analyses of three independent samples for each experiment were performed. Peptides with Log2 Difference ≥ 1 and -Log p-value > 1.3 were considered significantly enriched. Pearson’s correlation coefficients up to 0.9 indicated the high reproducibility between biological repetitions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen, Er-phagy, Proteome, Fam134

### Affiliations
TIGEM Institute 
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy

### Submitter
Paolo Grumati

### Lab Head
Dr Paolo Grumati
Telethon Institute of Genetics and Medicine, Pozzuoli (NA), Italy


