### Accession
PXD028553

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the reaction center-light harvesting 1 complex from Rhodobacter sphaeroides, identifying a previously uncharacterized protein component encoded by a newly-identified  ORF.

### Description
Photosynthesis in purple bacteria, represented by Rhodobacter sphaeroides as a long-established model organism, utilizes a protein-cofactor complex to capture solar energy. This complex is embedded in specialized spherical membrane structures and comprises a central reaction center (RC) encircled by a ring of light harvesting 1 (LH1) polypeptides. An additional protein PufX has two functions: (1) facilitating ubiquinone/ubiquinol exchange between the RC and membrane and (2) inducing complex dimerization – important for maintaining the curvature of the membrane structures. Cryo-EM has revealed a further component that facilitates dimerization, with proteomic analysis confirming its identity as a previously uncharacterized protein encoded by a newly-identified ORF.

### Sample Protocol
Rhodobacter sphaeroides cells were grown in liquid medium illuminated at 150 μmol photons m-2 s-1 and lysed by passage (3X) through a French press at 18,000 psi. Membranes were isolated by ultracentrifugation in a sucrose density gradient and solubilized in 3 % n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside (DDM) for 30 min with stirring at RT in the dark. Reaction center-light harvesting 1 (RC-LH1) complexes were purified from the membranes by further ultracentrifugation in a sucrose density gradient followed by ion-exchange chromatography using a DEAE-Sepharose, column (Sigma) and gradient elution with NaCl. Fractions were monitored by A874/A280 absorbance ratio, and those with a ratio >1.6 were pooled, concentrated to 1 mL and applied to a Superdex 200 gel filtration column. Fractions with A874/A280 >1.9 were pooled and concentrated. For proteomic analysis, a sample containing 50 µg protein (Bio-Rad DC) was solubilized in 100 µL 2% sodium dodecylsulfate, 40 mM Tris base, 60 mM DTT at 60°C for 5 min. Proteins were isolated from lipids and cofactors by precipitation using a 2-D clean up kit (Cytiva) followed by re-solubilization in 50 µl 0.2% (v/v) formic acid containing 2 µg pepsin. Digestion was carried out by incubation at 37°C for 16 h. The resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) and dried by vacuum centrifugation. For analysis by LC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) fitted with an EasyNano C18 reverse phase column (75 µm x 50 cm, 40°C, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were resolved using a 75-min gradient from 97% (v/v) solvent A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) to 50% (v/v) solvent B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with centroid full-scan MS (120,000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30,000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the Rhodobacter sphaeroides reference proteome (www.uniprot.org/proteomes/ UP000002703) downloaded on 28 April 2021 and edited by inserting the putative target protein sequence derived by the reinterpretation of the RSP_2385 ORF. The search engine was Byonic (v2.9.38, Protein Metrics) with default parameters selected and methionine oxidation specified as a variable modification and semi-specific cleavage at both N- and C-sides of F, W, Y and L.

### Publication Abstract
The dimeric reaction centre light-harvesting 1 (RC-LH1) core complex of Rhodobacter sphaeroides converts absorbed light energy to a charge separation, and then it reduces a quinone electron and proton acceptor to a quinol. The angle between the two monomers imposes a bent configuration on the dimer complex, which exerts a major influence on the curvature of the membrane vesicles, known as chromatophores, where the light-driven photosynthetic reactions take place. To investigate the dimerisation interface between two RC-LH1 monomers, we determined the cryogenic electron microscopy structure of the dimeric complex at 2.9&#x2005;&#xc5; resolution. The structure shows that each monomer consists of a central RC partly enclosed by a 14-subunit LH1 ring held in an open state by PufX and protein-Y polypeptides, thus enabling quinones to enter and leave the complex. Two monomers are brought together through N-terminal interactions between PufX polypeptides on the cytoplasmic side of the complex, augmented by two novel transmembrane polypeptides, designated protein-Z, that bind to the outer faces of the two central LH1 &#x3b2; polypeptides. The precise fit at the dimer interface, enabled by PufX and protein-Z, by C-terminal interactions between opposing LH1 &#x3b1;&#x3b2; subunits, and by a series of interactions with a bound sulfoquinovosyl diacylglycerol lipid, bring together each monomer creating an S-shaped array of 28 bacteriochlorophylls. The seamless join between the two sets of LH1 bacteriochlorophylls provides a path for excitation energy absorbed by one half of the complex to migrate across the dimer interface to the other half.

### Keywords
Rhodobacter sphaeroides, Reaction center light-harvesting-1- complex, Lc-ms/ms, Photosynthesis, Purple bacteria, Dimerization

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Neil Hunter
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield


