### Accession
PXD042277

### Title
Leveraging genetic diversity to identify small molecules that reverse mouse skeletal muscle insulin resistance

### Description
Systems genetics has begun to tackle the complexity of insulin resistance by capitalising on computational advances to study high-diversity populations. “Diversity Outbred in Australia (DOz)” is a population of genetically unique mice with profound metabolic heterogeneity. We leveraged this variance to explore skeletal muscle’s contribution to whole-body insulin action through metabolic phenotyping and skeletal muscle proteomics of 215 DOz mice. Linear modelling identified 553 proteins that associated with whole-body insulin sensitivity (Matsuda Index) including regulators of endocytosis and muscle proteostasis. To enrich for causality, we refined this network by focussing on negatively associated, genetically regulated proteins, resulting in a 76-protein fingerprint of insulin resistance. We sought to perturb this network and restore insulin action with small molecules by integrating the Broad Institute Connectivity Map platform and in vitro assays of insulin action using the Prestwick chemical library. These complimentary approaches identified the antibiotic thiostrepton as an insulin resistance reversal agent. Subsequent validation in ex vivo insulin resistant mouse muscle, and palmitate induced insulin resistant myotubes demonstrated potent insulin action restoration, potentially via up-regulation of glycolysis. This work demonstrates the value of a drug-centric framework to validate systems level analysis by identifying potential therapeutics for insulin resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Whole quadriceps muscle samples were prepared as previously described with modification (100, 101). First, tissue was snap frozen with liquid nitrogen and pulverized before resuspension in 100 µL of trypsin buffer (phosphate buffered saline; PBS containing 10 mM EDTA and 0.01 ug/uL mass-spectrometry grade trypsin). Samples were incubated for 30 minutes at 37 °C before being pelleted by centrifugation (10,000 g, 5 minutes at 4 °C). Samples were then resuspended in 1.4 mL mitochondrial isolation buffer (70 mM sucrose, 220 mM Mannitol, 1 mM EGTA, 2 mM HEPES. pH at 7.4) and homogenised on ice in a glass Dounce homogeniser. Samples were then twice pelleted by centrifugation, first at 1000 g x 10 min to remove insoluble debris and second at 10,000 g x 10 min to extract the crude mitochondrial fraction, both centrifugation steps were performed at 4 °C and the supernatant of the second step was collected as the post-mitochondrial fraction (PMF). The mitochondrial pellet was re-solubilised in 1 mL of isolation buffer by repeated pipetting on ice prior to centrifugation (10.000 g x 10 min at 4*C) and resuspension in 50 µL of isolation buffer. Protein concentration of both mitochondrial and PMF was determined by BCA assay, 10 µg of protein was then prepared as previously described (4). Reduction/alkylation (10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA) buffer was added to each sample before incubation for 20 minutes at 60 °C. Once cooled to room temperature, 0.4 mg trypsin and 0.4 mg LysC was added to each sample and incubated overnight (18h) at 37C with gentle agitation. 30µL water and 50 µL 1% TFA in ethyl acetate was added to stop digestion and dissolve any precipitated SDC. Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis by StageTip clean up using SDB-RPS solid phase extraction material (102). Briefly, 2 layers of SDB-RPS material was packed into 200 µL tips and washed by centrifugation at 1,000 x g for 2 minutes with 50 µL acetonitrile followed by 0.2% TFA in 30% methanol and then 0.2% TFA in water. 50 µL of samples were loaded to StageTips by centrifugation at 1,000 g for 3 minutes. Stage tips were washed with subsequent spins at 1,000 g for 3 minutes with 50 µL 1% TFA in ethyl acetate, then 1% TFA in isopropanol, and 0.2% TFA in 5% ACN. Samples were eluted by addition of 60µL 60% ACN with 5% NH4OH4. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 30 µL 0.1% TFA in 2% ACN.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic sample analysis was conducted using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC coupled to a Exploris Orbitrap mass spectrometer. 2 µL of sample was injected on to an in-house packed 150 µm x 15 cm column (1.9 mm particle size, ReproSilPurC18-AQ) and separated using a gradient elution and with column temperature of 60 °C, with Buffer A consisting of 0.1% formic acid in water and Buffer B consisting of 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN. Samples were loaded to the column at a flow rate 3 µL min-1 at 3% B for 3 minutes, before dropping to 1.2 µL min-1 over 1 minute for the gradient elution. The gradient was increased to 32% B over 50 min, then to 60% B over 0.5 min and 98% B over 0.5 min and held for 1.5 min, before returning to a flow rate of 3 µL min-1 at 3% B. Eluting peptides were ionized by electrospray with a spray voltage of 2.3kV and a transfer capillary temperature of 300 °C. Mass spectra were collected using a DIA method with varying isolation width windows (widths of m/z 22-589) between 350 - 1650 according to Table S1. MS1 spectra were collected between m/z 350-1650 at a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 4e5 with a 50 ms maximum injection time. Ions were fragmented with stepped HCD collision energy at 27.5% and MS2 spectra collected between m/z 300-2000 at resolution of 30,000, with an AGC target of 3e5 and the maximum injection time of 54 ms.  Proteomics raw data files were searched using DIA-NN using a library free FASTA search against the reviewed UniProt mouse proteome (downloaded May 2020) with deep learning enabled (102, 103). The protease was set to Trypsin/P with 1 missed cleavage, N-term M excision, carbamidomethylation and M oxidation options on. Peptide length was set to 7-30, precursor range 350-1650, and fragment range 300-2000, and FDR set to 1%. Both the PMF and mitochondrial fractions were filtered for mitochondrial proteins using based on MitoCarta 3.0 and presence in 50% in mice. Across both fractions we quantified 2073 proteins (1629 proteins in the PMF and 444 in the mitochondrial fraction). Proteomic intensities were log2 transformed and median normalised prior to analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Systems genetics has begun to tackle the complexity of insulin resistance by capitalising on computational advances to study high-diversity populations. 'Diversity Outbred in Australia (DOz)' is a population of genetically unique mice with profound metabolic heterogeneity. We leveraged this variance to explore skeletal muscle's contribution to whole-body insulin action through metabolic phenotyping and skeletal muscle proteomics of 215 DOz mice. Linear modelling identified 553 proteins that associated with whole-body insulin sensitivity (Matsuda Index) including regulators of endocytosis and muscle proteostasis. To enrich for causality, we refined this network by focusing on negatively associated, genetically regulated proteins, resulting in a 76-protein fingerprint of insulin resistance. We sought to perturb this network and restore insulin action with small molecules by integrating the Broad Institute Connectivity Map platform and in vitro assays of insulin action using the Prestwick chemical library. These complementary approaches identified the antibiotic thiostrepton as an insulin resistance reversal agent. Subsequent validation in ex vivo insulin-resistant mouse muscle and palmitate-induced insulin-resistant myotubes demonstrated potent insulin action restoration, potentially via upregulation of glycolysis. This work demonstrates the value of a drug-centric framework to validate systems-level analysis by identifying potential therapeutics for insulin resistance.

### Keywords
Mouse, Diversty outbred, Insulin resistance, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney
School of Life and Enviromental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney

### Submitter
David James

### Lab Head
Dr David Ernest James
School of Life and Enviromental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney


