### Accession
PXD015636

### Title
Getting further into NFU2 function in Fe-S clusters transfer, a proteomic approach, interactome

### Description
untargeted co-immunoprecipitation experiments followed by shotgun mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
1 g of aerial tissues from two weeks old seedlings was crosslinked in 1% formaldehyde in phosphate buffered saline solution (PBS  137 mM NaCl, 10 mM Phosphate, 2.7 mM KCl, and a pH of 7.4) buffer two times (7 min under vacuum). The reaction was blocked by adding 300 mM glycine (30 min under vacuum). Fixed tissues were rinsed three times with water, dried and frozen in liquid nitrogen prior grinding. Powder was diluted in 2 ml of RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Nonidet P-40, 1% sodium-deoxycholate) and centrifuged two times 10 min at 14,000g to remove cell debris. 50 µl of antibodies directed against GFP and coupled to magnetic beads (Miltenyi Biotec®) were added to the supernatant and mixed (wheel rotation) for 30 min at 4°C. Tubes were then placed on magnetic rack and after 4 washes with RIPA buffer, proteins were eluted with 100 µl of 1X Laemmli solution.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed in the Maxquant environment (Cox & Mann, 2008) v.1.5.0.0 and Andromeda was employed for database search (Cox et al., 2011). The MS/MS data were matched against the TAIR10 + GFP database. For protein identification and quantification, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set up as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. At least two peptides razor and one unique are necessary for protein identification and quantification. Up to two missed cleavage was allowed for protease digestion. For the other characteristics, Maxquant default parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
Iron-sulfur (Fe-S) proteins have critical functions in plastids, notably participating in photosynthetic electron transfer, sulfur and nitrogen assimilation, chlorophyll metabolism, and vitamin or amino acid biosynthesis. Their maturation relies on the so-called SUF (sulfur mobilization) assembly machinery. Fe-S clusters are synthesized de novo on a scaffold protein complex and then delivered to client proteins via several transfer proteins. However, the maturation pathways of most client proteins and their specificities for transfer proteins are mostly unknown. In order to decipher the proteins interacting with the Fe-S cluster transfer protein NFU2, one of the three plastidial representatives found in Arabidopsis thaliana, we performed a quantitative proteomic analysis of shoots, roots, and seedlings of nfu2 plants, combined with NFU2 co-immunoprecipitation and binary yeast two-hybrid experiments. We identified 14 new targets, among which nine were validated in planta using a binary bimolecular fluorescence complementation assay. These analyses also revealed a possible role for NFU2 in the plant response to desiccation. Altogether, this study better delineates the maturation pathways of many chloroplast Fe-S proteins, considerably extending the number of NFU2 clients. It also helps to clarify the respective roles of the three NFU paralogs NFU1, NFU2, and NFU3.

### Keywords
Chloroplaste, Gfp immunoprecipitation, Interactome

### Affiliations
INRA
FeROS, BPMP, INRA

### Submitter
Nathalie Berger

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Dubos
FeROS, BPMP, INRA


