### Accession
PXD016570

### Title
Plasma proteome profiling of freshwater and seawater life stages of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss)

### Description
The sea-run phenotype of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), like other anadromous salmonids, present a juvenile stage fully adapted to life in freshwater known as parr. Development in freshwater is followed by the smolt stage, where preadaptations needed for seawater life are developed making fish ready to migrate to the ocean, after which event they become post-smolts. While these three life stages have been studied using a variety of approaches, proteomics has never been used for such purpose. The present study characterised the blood plasma proteome of parr, smolt and post-smolt rainbow trout using a gel electrophoresis liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry approach alone or in combination with low-abundant protein enrichment technology (combinatorial peptide ligand library). In total, 1,822 proteins were quantified, 17.95% of them being detected only in plasma post enrichment. Across all life stages, the most abundant proteins were ankyrin-2, DNA primase large subunit, actin, serum albumin, apolipoproteins, hemoglobin subunits, hemopexin-like proteins and complement C3. When comparing the different life stages, 17 proteins involved in mechanisms to cope with hyperosmotic stress and retinal changes, as well as the downregulation of nonessential processes in smolts, were significantly different between parr and smolt samples. On the other hand, 11 proteins related to increased growth in post-smolts, and also related to coping with hyperosmotic stress and to retinal changes, were significantly different between smolt and post-smolt samples. Overall, this study presents a series of proteins with the potential to complement current seawater-readiness assessment tests in rainbow trout, which can be measured non-lethally in an easily accessible biofluid. Furthermore, this study represents a first in-depth characterisation of the rainbow trout blood plasma proteome, having considered three life stages of the fish and used both fractionation alone or in combination with enrichment methods to increase protein detection.

### Sample Protocol
2.6. Low-abundance proteins enrichment Knowing the protein concentration of plasma pools (measured by BCA), enriched plasma (EP) was prepared using ProteoMiner™ Protein Enrichment Small-Capacity Kit (Bio-Rad) in triplicates on each of the pools (10 mg of protein) following the manufacturer’s instructions and increasing the sample binding time to 3 h.  2.7. Analysis of proteins by GeLC-MS/MS 2.7.1. 1-D SDS-PAGE analysis For each plasma pool, 10 µg of plasma (EP or whole plasma (WP)) were analysed in triplicates in order to expand protein identifications and to account for technical noise during data analysis [63,69]. Samples were mixed in reducing buffer (13.1 mM Tris—pH 6.8, 2.63% v/v Glycerol, 0.42% v/v sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 0.243% v/v bromophenol blue and 163.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT)), heated up to 95˚C for 5 min and centrifuged at 2,000 g for 30 s. Reduced lysates were loaded into a 1-D SDS polyacrylamide gel (4–15%, Mini-PROTEAN TGX, BIO-RAD) with a protein ladder reference (5μl, BenchMark, 10-220kDa, ThermoFisher Scientific). Gels were run using a Mini PROTEAN Tetra Cell System (Bio-Rad) at 200 V (400 mA) for around 50 min. Protein bands were fixed and stained with SimplyBlue Safestain (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions and destained overnight in MilliQ water (Millipore, Merck) at RT. 1-D SDS-PAGE pictures were taken using an inGenius LHR Gel Imaging System (SynGene) and band densitometry data was obtained using GeneTools software version 4.3.8 (SynGene). Profile height (i.e. band intensity) to relative mobility (Rf) data was imported into R and plotted using ggplot2 package [70]. 2.7.2. In-gel digestion  On the next day, each gel lane was cut in 24 gel plugs of 3-4 mm in a laminar flow fume cabinet and fractions were stored in separate 1.5 ml tubes. Destain solution (100 µl) (50% 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50% acetonitrile (ACN, Fisher Chemical)) was added to each plug and incubated at 37oC for 10 min in a thermoblock. The liquid was discarded and replaced with another 100 µl of destain solution and incubated again for 10 min. After discarding the liquid, 50 µl of 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Bio-Rad) was added to each sample to reduce proteins. After a 30 min incubation at 37oC, the liquid was discarded and the plugs were alkylated with 50 µl of 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, GE Healthcare) for 30 min at 37oC. After discarding the liquid, 50 µl of 100% ACN was added to each tube and incubated for 15 min at 37oC. Then, the ACN was removed and the gels plugs were air dried at RT for 10 min before adding 50 µl of trypsin (Roche, 0.01 mg/ml in 10% acetic acid and 45 mM Ambic) and incubating it at 37oC. After 30 min, an extra 20 µl of 50 mM Ambic was added to each tube and left overnight. Then, 70 µl of 100% ACN was added to each tube and incubated at RT for 15 min with shaking. The liquid was transferred to new tubes, while 50 µl of 97.5% ACN and 2.5% formic acid was added to each gel plug and incubated at RT for 15 min with shaking to extract any remaining peptides. This liquid was added to the corresponding tube and the gel plugs were discarded. Finally, the trypsin digests were dried using a vacuum drier (Savant DNA SpeedVac 110, Thermo Scientific). 2.7.3. LC-MS/MS analysis Tryptic digests were analysed with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL LC−MSn mass spectrometer (Thermo) equipped with a nanospray source and coupled to an Ultra High Pressure Liquid Chromatographer system (Waters nanoAcquity). Initially, 5 μL of sample resuspended in ultrapure water were loaded, desalted and concentrated in a BEH C18 trapping columns (Waters) with the instrument operated in positive ion mode. The peptides were then separated on a BEH C18 nanocolumn (1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using an ACN/water gradient; 1% ACN for 1 min, followed by 0−62.5% ACN during 21 min, 62.5− 85% ACN for 1.5 min, 85% ACN for 2 min and 100% ACN for 15 min. MS spectra were collected using data-dependent acquisition in the m/z range 400−2,000 using a precursor ion resolution of 30,000, following which individual precursor ions (top 5) were automatically fragmented using collision induced dissociation with a relative collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30 s and exclusion duration of 180 s.

### Data Protocol
2.7.4. LC-MS/MS data analysis and protein identification Mass spectrometry data was analysed using Progenesis QIP (Nonlinear Dynamics). WP and EP datasets were analysed independently following the ‘fractionation experiment’ analysis. Two pairwise comparisons were performed for WP datasets (i.e. Parr (WP) vs. Smolt (WP), Smolt (WP) vs. Post-smolt (WP)) and two more for EP datasets (i.e. Parr (EP) vs. Smolt (EP), Smolt (EP) vs. Post-smolt (EP)). The initial search parameters allowed for a single trypsin missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl fixed modification of cysteine residues, oxidation of methionine (variable), acetylation of N-terminal peptides, a precursor mass tolerance of 10 parts per million, charge of deconvoluted ions of over 1, a fragment mass tolerance of ±0.5 Da, and FDR of 0.01.  After normalization, the Hi3 (Top3, using the three most abundant peptides) method was used for protein quantification [71]; therefore a minimum of 3 peptides was required for quantification. Moreover, only those proteins identified based on at least one unique peptide (a peptide that can only be matched to a single protein in the underlying database) were quantified. Statistical differences were tested by ANOVA in Progenesis QIP. To be considered differentially abundant proteins (DAPs), a q-value below 0.05 (q < 0.05) and a fold change (FC) bigger than 2 was required. However, since the sole purpose of EP was to improve the coverage of WP, proteins quantified in WP were not statistically tested in EP. Peptide sequences were matched to a database search against the Oncorhynchus mykiss SwissProt database, which was downloaded from MASCOT [downloaded in August 2018] and loaded into Progenesis QIP. Those identified as ‘uncharacterised’ in the rainbow trout genome were sequentially blasted against the Atlantic salmon (actinopterygii, salmoniformes, salmonidae. Genome assembly: ICSASG_v2), zebrafish (Danio rerio, actinopterygii, cypriniformes, cyprinidae. Genome assembly: GRCz11), and human (Homo sapiens, actinopterygii, primates, hominidae. Genome assembly: GRCh38.p13) SwissProt databases, in this order of preference. Only homologies of E-value lower than 0.01 were accepted as valid.

### Publication Abstract
The sea-run phenotype of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), like other anadromous salmonids, present a juvenile stage fully adapted to life in freshwater known as parr. Development in freshwater is followed by the smolt stage, where preadaptations needed for seawater life are developed making fish ready to migrate to the ocean, after which event they become post-smolts. While these three life stages have been studied using a variety of approaches, proteomics has never been used for such purpose. The present study characterised the blood plasma proteome of parr, smolt and post-smolt rainbow trout using a gel electrophoresis liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry approach alone or in combination with low-abundant protein enrichment technology (combinatorial peptide ligand library). In total, 1,822 proteins were quantified, 17.95% of them being detected only in plasma post enrichment. Across all life stages, the most abundant proteins were ankyrin-2, DNA primase large subunit, actin, serum albumin, apolipoproteins, hemoglobin subunits, hemopexin-like proteins and complement C3. When comparing the different life stages, 17 proteins involved in mechanisms to cope with hyperosmotic stress and retinal changes, as well as the downregulation of nonessential processes in smolts, were significantly different between parr and smolt samples. On the other hand, 11 proteins related to increased growth in post-smolts, and also related to coping with hyperosmotic stress and to retinal changes, were significantly different between smolt and post-smolt samples. Overall, this study presents a series of proteins with the potential to complement current seawater-readiness assessment tests in rainbow trout, which can be measured non-lethally in an easily accessible biofluid. Furthermore, this study represents a first in-depth characterisation of the rainbow trout blood plasma proteome, having considered three life stages of the fish and used both fractionation alone or in combination with enrichment methods to increase protein detection.

### Keywords
Smoltification, Salmonid, Rainbow trout, Fish, Freshwater, Seawater, Adaptation

### Affiliations
Institute of Aquaculture, Stirling
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling

### Submitter
Bernat Morro

### Lab Head
Dr Amaya Albalat
Institute of Aquaculture, University of Stirling


