### Accession
PXD021878

### Title
Arg-GlcNAcylation of Salmonella proteins

### Description
This project explores the impact of SseK mediated Arg-GlcNAcylation on Salmonella proteins. Using Site directed mutagenesis, MS analysis and phenotypic studies we show Arg-GlcNAcylation appears to modulate the functions of multiple salmonella enzymes. This work demonstrates effectors can have multiple roles both within host cells and bacterial pathogens themselves.

### Sample Protocol
Gel seperated affinity isolated proteins were subjected to in-gel digests with either lys-C or Tyrpsin to enabled the identification of Arg-GlcNAcylation events. Peptides were concentrated and desalted using C18 stage tips and then analyzed on a Q-Exactive plus Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Identification of Arg-glycosylation events was accomplished using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4) (50). The predicted amino acid sequences for tagged GloA; GloB; GloC; YajL were combined into a database with the Salmonella typhimurium SL1344 proteome (Uniprot accession: UP000008962) and searched allowing carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification and the variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, Arg-GlcNAcylation (H13C8NO5; 203.0793Da to Arginine). Searches were performed with either Trypsin or Lys-C cleavage specificity each protein sample allowing 2 miscleavage events with a maximum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% set for protein and peptide identifications. The resulting modified peptides output was processed within the Perseus (v1.4.0.6) (51) analysis environment to remove reverse matches and common protein contaminates prior.

### Publication Abstract
Type III secretion system effector proteins have primarily been characterized for their interactions with host cell proteins and their ability to disrupt host signaling pathways. We are testing the hypothesis that some effectors are active within the bacterium, where they modulate bacterial signal transduction and physiology. We previously determined that the Citrobacter rodentium effector NleB possesses an intra-bacterial glycosyltransferase activity that increases glutathione synthetase activity to protect the bacterium from oxidative stress. Here we investigated the potential intra-bacterial activities of NleB orthologs in Salmonella enterica and found that SseK1 and SseK3 mediate resistance to methylglyoxal. SseK1 glycosylates specific arginine residues on four proteins involved in methylglyoxal detoxification, namely GloA (R9), GloB (R190), GloC (R160), and YajL (R149). SseK1-mediated Arg-glycosylation of these four proteins significantly enhances their catalytic activity, thus providing another important example of the intra-bacterial activities of type three secretion system effector proteins. These data are also the first demonstration that a Salmonella T3SS effector is active within the bacterium.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Effectors, Arg-glcnacylation, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA.
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Hardwidge
College of Veterinary Medicine, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS, 66506, USA.


