### Accession
PXD041321

### Title
Proteomic profiling of mouse brain pyruvate kinase binding proteins: a hint for moonlighting functions of PKM1?

### Description
Affinity based proteomic profiling is widely used for identification of proteins involved in for-mation of various interactomes. Pyruvate kinase (PK), a classical glycolytic enzyme catalyzing the last step of glycolysis, exists in four isoforms, one of which, PKM2; pyruvate kinase muscle isoform M2 (expressed in actively dividing cells), exhibits many non-canonical (moonlighting) functions. Although the other muscle isoform, PKM1, predominantly expressed in adult differ-entiated tissues, lacks the moonlighting functions, certain evidence exists that it can also perform some non-canonical functions. In order to evaluate the proteomic profile of mouse brain pro-teins bound to PKM1, we have combined in this study affinity-based separation of mouse brain proteins followed by their mass spectrometry identification. Using the highly purified rabbit muscle pyruvate kinase, PKM1 and a 32-mer peptide (PK peptide), sharing high sequence ho-mology with the interface contact region of all PK isoforms, common proteins bound to both af-finity ligands have been recognized. Quantitative affinity binding to the affinity ligands of se-lected identified proteins was validated using a surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensor. Bi-oinformatic analysis has shown that the identified proteins, bound to both full length PKM1 and the PK-peptide, form a protein network (interactome). Some of these interactions are relevant for noncanonical (moonlighting) functions of PKM1

### Sample Protocol
Lysates of brain homogenates (protein concentration of 6 mg/ml) were added to the affinity resin washed with buffer A. The suspension (1 : 1), containing a cocktail of prote-ase inhibitors added at a concentration recommended by the manufacturer, was incubat-ed overnight at 4°C and gentle stirring. Then the affinity resin was washed with 100 vol-umes of buffer A to remove nonspecifically bound proteins (protein content in the wash-ings was controlled by OD280), and then the remaining proteins were eluted at room tem-perature with 0.1 M glycine buffer, pH 2.8, containing 3 M NaCl (at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min), using a column (1 × 2 cm). The eluate (30 mL) was concentrated to 0.25 mL us-ing an Amicon Ultra centrifuge device. Proteins were extracted with a mixture of chloro-form–methanol [41]. The reduction of disulfide bonds, the alkylation of sulfhydryl groups, and trypsinolysis were performed on Vivaspin 500 centrifuge filters with a 10,000 Da membrane, as described in [41]. Samples were evaporated using a 5301 vacuum concen-trator (Eppendorf, Germany), dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed using LC-MS/MS.The mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific, USA) integrated system for high-performance liquid separation of pep-tides in the nanoflow mode. Chromatographic separation of peptides was carried out on an analytical reverse phase column Acclaim Pepmap® C18 (75 µm x 150 mm, 2 µm par-ticle size, Thermo Scientific, USA) in a linear elution gradient of mobile phase A (0.1% aqueous solution of formic acid). acid) and mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) from 2% to 40% at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min for 60 min, followed by equilibration of the chromatographic system in the initial conditions of the gradient ( A : B = 2 : 98) for 5 min. A Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelec-trospray ionization source (nESI) was operated in the positive ionization mode with a res-olution of 120000 at m/z 200, the ion accumulation volume in the trap was set to 1E6, the ion accumulation time in the trap was maximum 50 ms. The dominant charge state of precursor ions was set as 2+, charge states above 4+ and below 2+ were excluded from fur-ther analysis. Scanning of tandem spectra was carried out in the mode of automatic selec-tion of 20 dominant peaks of precursor ions recorded at m/z = 350–1400. The resolution for detecting fragment ions was set to 15,000 at m/z 200, the ion accumulation volume in the trap was 1E5, and the ion accumulation time in the trap was a maximum of 50 ms. Parent ions were isolated in a window of 2.0 m/z, offset by 0.5 m/z for better isotope capture. Measured precursors ions were excluded from subsequent analysis for 20 s after scanning.

### Data Protocol
The obtained mass spectrometric data with the *.raw extension were processed by the MaxQuant software (v 1.6.3.4) with the built-in Andromeda search algorithm. Mouse (Mus musculus) Swiss Prot/Uniprot complete proteome protein sequence database downloaded from the Uniprot database with addition of reversed sequences and commonly encoun-tered contaminating sequences to apply the target decoy approach. The method was used to calculate the FDR (False Discovery Rate) parameter; the FDR parameter of 1% was taken as a cutoff for protein registration. The following parameters were used for signal extrac-tion and its subsequent processing: proteolytic cleavage enzyme was trypsin; the maxi-mum allowable amount of intrapeptide residues of lysine or arginine was not more than 1; the allowable error in measuring the monoisotopic mass of the peptide was ± 0.01 Da, the allowable error in measuring the fragment ion was ± 0.05 Da. Carbamide methylation of cysteine residues was chosen as a fixed chemical modification, and methionine oxida-tion was chosen as a variable modification [20]

### Publication Abstract
Affinity-based proteomic profiling is widely used for the identification of proteins involved in the formation of various interactomes. Since protein-protein interactions (PPIs) reflect the role of particular proteins in the cell, identification of interaction partners for a protein of interest can reveal its function. The latter is especially important for the characterization of multifunctional proteins, which can play different roles in the cell. Pyruvate kinase (PK), a classical glycolytic enzyme catalyzing the last step of glycolysis, exists in four isoforms: PKM1, PKM2, PKL, and PKR. The enzyme isoform expressed in actively dividing cells, PKM2, exhibits many moonlighting (noncanonical) functions. In contrast to PKM2, <i>PKM1</i>, predominantly expressed in adult differentiated tissues, lacks well-documented moonlighting functions. However, certain evidence exists that it can also perform some functions unrelated to glycolysis. In order to evaluate protein partners, bound to PKM1, in this study we have combined affinity-based separation of mouse brain proteins with mass spectrometry identification. The highly purified PKM1 and a 32-mer synthetic peptide (PK peptide), sharing high sequence homology with the interface contact region of all PK isoforms, were used as the affinity ligands. This proteomic profiling resulted in the identification of specific and common proteins bound to both affinity ligands. Quantitative affinity binding to the affinity ligands of selected identified proteins was validated using a surface plasmon resonance (SPR) biosensor. Bioinformatic analysis has shown that the identified proteins, bound to both full-length PKM1 and the PK peptide, form a protein network (interactome). Some of these interactions are relevant for the moonlighting functions of PKM1. The proteomic dataset is available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD041321.

### Keywords
Pyruvapyruvate kinase; pyruvate kinase isoforms; pkm; non-canonical moonlighting functions; pkm-binding proteins; interactomete kinase; pyruvate kinase isoforms; pkm; non-canonical moonlighting functions; pkm-binding proteins; interactome

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Head of "Human proteome" Core Facility Center, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry

### Submitter
Olga Tikhonova

### Lab Head
Dr Olga Tikhonova
Head of "Human proteome" Core Facility Center, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


