### Accession
PXD002669

### Title
Pathology tissue-quantitative mass spectrometry analysis to profile  histone post-translational modification patterns in patient samples

### Description
Histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) generate a complex combinatorial code that has been implicated with various pathologies, including cancer. Dissecting such a code in physiological and diseased states may be exploited for epigenetic biomarker discovery, but hPTM analysis in clinical samples has been hindered by technical limitations. Here, we developed a method (PAThology tissue Histones by Mass Spectrometry - PAT-H-MS) that allows to perform a comprehensive, unbiased and quantitative MS-analysis of hPTM patterns on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. In pairwise comparisons, histone extracted from FFPE tissues showed patterns similar to fresh frozen samples for 24 differentially modified peptides from histone H3. In addition, when coupled with a histone-focused version of the super-SILAC approach, this method allows the accurate quantification of modification changes among breast cancer patient samples. We applied this strategy to the analysis of breast cancer subtypes, revealing significant changes between Luminal A and Triple Negative samples in peptides containing K27me3 and K9me3, which were validated by immunohistochemistry and western blot analysis. These results pave the way for retrospective epigenetic studies that combine the power of MS-based hPTM analysis with the extensive clinical information associated with FFPE archives.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were obtained from four 10 um-thick paraffin sections through few steps: (1) deparaffinization and rehydration using standard protocols, (2) lysis and homogenization by sonication in a high detergent buffer, (3) protein extraction and de-crosslinking at high temperatures and (4) SDS-PAGE, which removes contaminants and excess detergent and separates histones from other proteins present in the sample. Histones were obtained from frozen tissues through homogenization, nuclei purification and SDS separatio. LC-MS/MS. Peptide mixtures were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on an in-house-made 25 cm column (inner diameter 75 μm, outer diameter 350 μm outer diameter, 1.9  μm ReproSil, Pur C18AQ medium), using a ultra nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (EASY-nLC™ 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientic) connected online  to a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN plus 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected in an aqueous 1% TFA solution at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and were separated with a 100 min linear gradient of 0–40% solvent B, followed by a 5 min gradient of 40–60% and a 5 min gradient of 60–95% at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in the data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were analyzed in the Orbitrap detector with resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400. The five most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value for MS1 of 3×106 and fragmented by HCD with a normalized collision energy setting of 25%. The maximum allowed ion accumulation times were 20 msec for full scans and 50 msec for MS/MS and the target value for MS/MS was set to 1×106. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 20 sec and the standard mass spectrometric conditions for all experiments were as follows: spray voltage of 2.4 kV, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow.

### Data Protocol
Acquired RAW data were analyzed by the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.3.0.5, which performed peak list generation and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine (16). The Uniprot MOUSE 1301 (33202 entries) and HUMAN 1301 (43990 entries) databases were used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Arg-C. The estimated false discovery rate of all peptide identifications was set at a maximum of 1%.  The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor and fragment ions. Three missed cleavages were allowed, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. We focused on lysine methylation and acetylation, including as variable modifications lysine D3-acetylation (+45.0294 Da), lysine monomethylation (+ 59.0454, corresponding to the sum of D3-acetylation (+45.0294) and monomethylation (+14.016 Da)), dimethylation (+28.031 Da), trimethylation (+42.046 Da), and lysine acetylation (+42.010 Da). To reduce the search time and the rate of false positives, which increase with increasing the number of variable modifications is included in the database search, the raw data were analyzed multiple times with the following sets of variable modifications: (1) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and lysine acetylation, (2) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, dimethylation and trimethylation, (3) D3-acetylation, lysine monomethylation with D3-acetylation, trimethylation and lysine acetylation. In addition, for the mouse samples we included in the search lysine modifications that may be induced by formalin fixation (Zhang): formylation (+27.9949 Da), methylene adducts (+12 Da) and methylol adducts (+30.0106 Da), which were included in a 4th search job together with  D3-acetylation. MaxQuant search results were exported and peptides with Andromeda score less than 60 and localization probability score less than 0.75  were removed. Modified peptide parameters and representative MS/MS spectra for each modified peptide are reported in Table S2 and Figure S1, respectively. Identifications and retention times were used to guide the manual quantification of each modified peptide using QualBrowser version 2.0.7 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Site assignment was evaluated using QualBrowser and MaxQuant Viewer 1.3.0.5. Extracted ion chromatograms (XIC) were constructed for each doubly charged precursor based on its m/z value, using a mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a mass precision up to four decimals. For each histone modified peptide, the relative abundance (RA) was estimated by dividing the area under the curve (AUC) of each modified peptide for the sum of the areas corresponding to all the observed forms of that peptide. For SILAC experiments, Arg10 was selected as heavy label its XIC and the relative abundance quantified. L/H ratios of relative abundances were calculated for each modified peptide

### Publication Abstract
Histone post-translational modifications (hPTMs) generate a complex combinatorial code that has been implicated with various pathologies, including cancer. Dissecting such a code in physiological and diseased states may be exploited for epigenetic biomarker discovery, but hPTM analysis in clinical samples has been hindered by technical limitations. Here, we developed a method (PAThology tissue analysis of Histones by Mass Spectrometry - PAT-H-MS) that allows to perform a comprehensive, unbiased and quantitative MS-analysis of hPTM patterns on formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) samples. In pairwise comparisons, histone extracted from formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues showed patterns similar to fresh frozen samples for 24 differentially modified peptides from histone H3. In addition, when coupled with a histone-focused version of the super-SILAC approach, this method allows the accurate quantification of modification changes among breast cancer patient samples. As an initial application of the PAThology tissue analysis of Histones by Mass Spectrometry method, we analyzed breast cancer samples, revealing significant changes in histone H3 methylation patterns among Luminal A-like and Triple Negative disease subtypes. These results pave the way for retrospective epigenetic studies that combine the power of MS-based hPTM analysis with the extensive clinical information associated with formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded archives.

### Keywords
Biomarker; epigenetics; ffpe; super-silac; cancer

### Affiliations
Istituto Europeo di Oncologia
Dept. Exp. Oncology Istituto Europeo di Oncologia Via Giuseppe Ripamonti, 435, 20141 Milano

### Submitter
Roberta Noberini

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Dept. Exp. Oncology Istituto Europeo di Oncologia Via Giuseppe Ripamonti, 435, 20141 Milano


