### Accession
PXD001685

### Title
A Combined Shotgun and Targeted Mass Spectrometry Strategy for Breast Cancer Biomarker Discovery

### Description
Metastasizing breast cancer is an incurable disease. Thus, it is important to find proteins responsible for tumor dissemination, which may be used as biomarkers or treatment targets. In this study, we established the combination of a non-targeted LC-MS/MS discovery and a targeted LC-SRM verification workflow for improved discovery and validation of biomarkers. We collected 80 breast tumors, stratified for estrogen receptor status and development of distant recurrence (DR+/-). After enrichment of N-glycosylated proteins, label-free LC-MS/MS was performed on all of the individual tumors in triplicates. In total, 1515 glycopeptides from 778 proteins were identified, used to create a map of the breast cancer N-glycosylated proteome. Based on the breast cancer N-glycosylated proteome map we constructed a 92-plex targeted label-free LC-SRM panel, enriched for interesting proteins, and analyzed the samples for the selected proteins, resulting in 10 proteins differentially regulated between DR+/DR- tumors. We also compared the LC-SRM results to clinically reported HER2 status. 17 of 18 patients could be classified the same way, demonstrating the clinical accuracy of LC-SRM. In conclusion, we demonstrated the use of a combined non-targeted LC-MS/MS and targeted LC-SRM strategy, at large scale on clinical samples, and identified 10 proteins as potential biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
N-glycosylated proteins are extracted from fresh frozen primary breast cancer tissue followed by LC-MS/MS analysis and label-free LC-SRM analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was processed usind 2DDB framework. MS/MS spectra were searched using X!Tandem. Label-free LC-SRM data was processed using mProphet.

### Publication Abstract
It is of highest importance to find proteins responsible for breast cancer dissemination, for use as biomarkers or treatment targets. We established and performed a combined nontargeted LC-MS/MS and a targeted LC-SRM workflow for discovery and validation of protein biomarkers. Eighty breast tumors, stratified for estrogen receptor status and development of distant recurrence (DR &#xb1; ), were collected. After enrichment of N-glycosylated peptides, label-free LC-MS/MS was performed on each individual tumor in triplicate. In total, 1515 glycopeptides from 778 proteins were identified and used to create a map of the breast cancer N-glycosylated proteome. Based on this specific proteome map, we constructed a 92-plex targeted label-free LC-SRM panel. These proteins were quantified across samples by LC-SRM, resulting in 10 proteins consistently differentially regulated between DR+/DR- tumors. Five proteins were further validated in a separate cohort as prognostic biomarkers at the gene expression level. We also compared the LC-SRM results to clinically reported HER2 status, demonstrating its clinical accuracy. In conclusion, we demonstrate a combined mass spectrometry strategy, at large scale on clinical samples, leading to the identification and validation of five proteins as potential biomarkers for breast cancer recurrence. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange and PASSEL with identifiers PXD001685 and PASS00643.

### Keywords
Distant recurrence, Shotgun, Mrm, Breast cancer, Srm

### Affiliations
Kirurgiska kliniken, SUS Institutionen för kliniska vetenskaper i Lund Lunds universitet
Genedata AG

### Submitter
Reto Ossola

### Lab Head
Dr Emma Nimeus-Malmstroem
Kirurgiska kliniken, SUS Institutionen för kliniska vetenskaper i Lund Lunds universitet


