### Accession
PXD024044

### Title
Exosome proteomics under hypoxia

### Description
TMT multiplexed exosome samples, SEC purified from cells cultured under Normoxia and Hypoxia

### Sample Protocol
Samples were TCA precipitated and resuspended in 2% Sodium deoxycholate, 100mM EPPS pH 8.2, 10mM TCEP and 40mM Chloro-N,N-diethylacetamide. After incubation for 10min at 95°C, samples were diluted with 1 volume 100mM EPPS and LysC and Trypsin were added in a wt/wt ratio of 1:100. Samples were digested overnight at 37°C, followed by TMT labelling (1µL TMT reagent per sample) for 1 hour at room temperature. Labelling was quenched by addition of hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.5%. Samples were combined and purified by SDB-RPS (3M Millipore) stage-tip cleanup. For cleanup, samples were mixed with 5 volumes Isopropanol/1% TFA and loaded directly on stage-tips. Samples were washed with 200µL Isopropanol/1% TFA and a subsequent wash with 200µL 0.2% TFA in water. Elution was performed using 80% acetonitrile/5% Ammonium hydroxide. Eluates were dried and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/1% formic acid for LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Samples were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and a 22 cm long, 75 µm ID fused-silica column, which had been packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (ReproSil-Pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 45°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 5-38% acetonitrile over 190 min and directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a spray voltage of 2.3 kV. Full scan MS spectra (350-1400 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106. Up to 20 most intense peptides per full scan were isolated using a 1 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (normalized collision energy of 35). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 45,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 80 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Ions with charge states of 1 and > 6 as well as ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize repeated sequencing of already acquired precursors. Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.4 software (ThermoFisher Scientific). Files were recalibrated using the Homo Sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 2018-11-21) with methionine oxidation (+15.995) as dynamic modification and Chloro-N,N-diethylacetamide (Cys,+113.084), TMT6 (N-terminal, +229.1629) and TMT6 (+229.1629) at lysines as fixed modifications. Spectra were selected using default settings and database searches performed using SequestHT node in PD. Database searches were performed against trypsin digested Homo Sapiens SwissProt database and FASTA files of common contaminants (`contaminants.fasta` provided with MaxQuant) for quality control. Fixed modifications were set as TMT6 at the N-terminus and chloro-N,N-diethylacetamide at cysteine residues. As dynamic modifications TMT6 (K), TMT6+K8 (K, +237.177), Arg10 (R, +10.008) and methionine oxidation were set. At the protein terminus acetylation (N-term, +42.011), methionine-loss (M, -131.040) and methionine-loss + acetylation (M, -89.030) were set as dynamic modifications. After search, posterior error probabilities were calculated and PSMs filtered using Percolator using default settings. Consensus Workflow for reporter ion quantification was performed with default settings, except the minimal signal-to-noise ratio was set to 5. Results were then exported to Excel files for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-free therapy using extracellular vesicles (EVs) from adipose-derived mesenchymal stromal/stem cells (ASCs) seems to be a safe and effective therapeutic option to support tissue and organ regeneration. The application of EVs requires particles with a maximum regenerative capability and hypoxic culture conditions as an in vitro preconditioning regimen has been shown to alter the molecular composition of released EVs. Nevertheless, the EV cargo after hypoxic preconditioning has not yet been comprehensively examined. The aim of the present study was the characterization of EVs from hypoxic preconditioned ASCs. We investigated the EV proteome and their effects on renal tubular epithelial cells in vitro. While no effect of hypoxia was observed on the number of released EVs and their protein content, the cargo of the proteins was altered. Proteomic analysis showed 41 increased or decreased proteins, 11 in a statistically significant manner. Furthermore, the uptake of EVs in epithelial cells and a positive effect on oxidative stress in vitro were observed. In conclusion, culture of ASCs under hypoxic conditions was demonstrated to be a promising in vitro preconditioning regimen, which alters the protein cargo and increases the anti-oxidative potential of EVs. These properties may provide new potential therapeutic options for regenerative medicine.

### Keywords
Hypoxia, Exosomes

### Affiliations
Institute for biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main
Universitätsklinikum Frankfurt am Main

### Submitter
Kevin Klann

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute for biochemistry II, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main


