### Accession
PXD037729

### Title
Chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry of the human Rix1 complex

### Description
PELP1 is a scaffold protein with diverse cellular functions including its role as the central scaffold for the human Rix1 complex (PELP1, WDR18, TEX10, and SENP3). We have reconstituted the mammalian Rix1 complex and identified a sub-complex made of the conserved Rix1 domain of PELP1 and the WDR18 protein. Moreover, using Cryo-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) and aided by chemical crosslinking and mass spectrometry, we determined the structure of this PELP1 Rix1 domain complexed with WDR18.

### Sample Protocol
Purified complex (6.0 M for PELP1 Rix1 domain – WDR18 sub-complex and 2.0 M for Rix1 complex) was crosslinked with 1.0 mM and 1.2 mM, respectively, of bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) in 50 mM Hepes pH 7.3, 600 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5% Glycerol at room temperature for 10 min before quenching with 300 mM Tris pH 7.5 for 15 min at 4 °C.  5 L of the crosslinked complex was diluted to 20 L and digested with addition of 1 L trypsin (0.1 g/L) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer overnight at 37°C. The digests were then stored at -80 °C for subsequent MS analysis. Protein digests were analyzed by LC/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer interfaced with an M-Class nanoAcquity UPLC system equipped with a 75 m x 150 mm HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 m particle, Waters Corporation) and a C18 trapping column (180 m × 20 mm) with 5 m particle size at a flow rate of 450 nL/min.  5 L of digested sample was injected onto the column. Peptides were eluted by using a linear gradient from 97% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water (v/v)) and 3% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (v/v)) to 40% solvent B over 70 minutes. For the mass spectrometry, a top-ten data dependent acquisition method was employed with a dynamic exclusion time of 15 seconds and exclusion of singly charged species.  The mass spectrometer was employed with a nanoflex source with a stainless-steel needle and used in the positive ion mode.  Instrument parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2.75 kV; capillary temperature, 275 °C; S-lens, 60; scan range (m/z) of 375 to 1500; 1.6 m/z isolation window; resolution: 70,000 (MS), 17,500 (MS/MS); automated gain control (AGC), 3 x 106 ions (MS), 5 x 104 (MS/MS); and a maximum IT of 100 ms (MS), 50 ms (MS/MS).  Mass calibration was performed before data acquisition using the Pierce LTQ Velos Positive Ion Calibration mixture.

### Data Protocol
The LC/MS raw data were first converted to an MGF format using Mascot Distiller from Matrix Science and then analyzed using the Batch-Tag Web function of the Protein Prospector web-based software developed by the UCSF Mass Spectrometry Facility. The MGF file was searched against sequences for members of the human Rix1 complex by employing the User Protein Sequence field with other search parameters including: tryptic specificity and 3 missed cleavages; precursor charge range of 2, 3, 4, and 5; monoisotopic values; parent mass tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 50 ppm; oxidation of methionine and incorrect monoisotopic assignment as a variable modifications; and in the Crosslinking field, the Link Search Type was defined as DSS.  The putative crosslinked peptide output was triaged by limiting the mass error of putative crosslinks to two standard deviations from the average error (about 5 ppm); requiring a Score Difference value >4 except for the cases of intermolecular crosslinks of identical peptides or peptides less than or equal to 3 amino acid residues; and total expectation values below 1 x 10-4.

### Publication Abstract
PELP1 (Proline-, Glutamic acid-, Leucine-rich protein 1) is a large scaffolding protein that functions in many cellular pathways including steroid receptor (SR) coactivation, heterochromatin maintenance, and ribosome biogenesis. PELP1 is a proto-oncogene whose expression is upregulated in many human cancers, but how the PELP1 scaffold coordinates its diverse cellular functions is poorly understood. Here we show that PELP1 serves as the central scaffold for the human Rix1 complex whose members include WDR18, TEX10, and SENP3. We reconstitute the mammalian Rix1 complex and identified a stable sub-complex comprised of the conserved PELP1 Rix1 domain and WDR18. We determine a 2.7&#x2009;&#xc5; cryo-EM structure of the subcomplex revealing an interconnected tetrameric assembly and the architecture of PELP1's signaling motifs, including eleven LxxLL motifs previously implicated in SR signaling and coactivation of Estrogen Receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;) mediated transcription. However, the structure shows that none of these motifs is in a conformation that would support SR binding. Together this work establishes that PELP1 scaffolds the Rix1 complex, and association with WDR18 may direct PELP1's activity away from SR coactivation.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Q-exactive, Bs3, Rix1, Crosslinking, Protein prospector, Pelp1

### Affiliations
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences
Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 111 TW Alexander Drive MD F0-04 Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709

### Submitter
Jason Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Jason G. Williams
Mass Spectrometry Research and Support Group  National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences 111 TW Alexander Drive MD F0-04 Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709


