### Accession
PXD037367

### Title
CSF and Brain neuropeptidomics in dementia pathophysiology

### Description
Development of a mass spectrometry biomarker assay to characterize cerebrospinal fluid and brain proteoforms of the granin family of neuropeptides in dementia pathophysiology

### Sample Protocol
Samples were TMT® labelled and processed by ultrafiltration, with flow-through subjected to further purification. Samples were then fractionated by basic-reversed phase and analysed by LC-MS2 using data-dependent acquisition mode with an inclusion list of neurosecretory proteins.

### Data Protocol
Reporter ion intensities were extracted for all peptidic features in the Proteome Discoverer environment. Bioinformatics analyses were performed using Proteome Sciences proprietary platform, including steps for: isotope impurity correction; filtering; normalisation; iterative PCA-based imputation and linear modelling-based detection of regulated peptidic features. Peptide sequence assignments were made using SEQUEST (in the Proteome Discoverer environment) and PEAKS Studio.

### Publication Abstract
The granin neuropeptide family is composed of acidic secretory signaling molecules that act throughout the nervous system to help modulate synaptic signaling and neural activity. Granin neuropeptides have been shown to be dysregulated in different forms of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). Recent studies have suggested that the granin neuropeptides and their protease-cleaved bioactive peptides (proteoforms) may act as both powerful drivers of gene expression and as a biomarker of synaptic health in AD. The complexity of granin proteoforms in human cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain tissue has not been directly addressed. We developed a reliable nontryptic mass spectrometry assay to comprehensively map and quantify endogenous neuropeptide proteoforms in the brain and CSF of individuals diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment and dementia due to AD compared to healthy controls, individuals with preserved cognition despite AD pathology ("Resilient"), and those with impaired cognition but no AD or other discernible pathology ("Frail"). We drew associations between neuropeptide proteoforms, cognitive status, and AD pathology values. Decreased levels of VGF proteoforms were observed in CSF and brain tissue from individuals with AD compared to controls, while select proteoforms from chromogranin A showed the opposite effect. To address mechanisms of neuropeptide proteoform regulation, we showed that the proteases Calpain-1 and Cathepsin S can cleave chromogranin A, secretogranin-1, and VGF into proteoforms found in both the brain and CSF. We were unable to demonstrate differences in protease abundance in protein extracts from matched brains, suggesting that regulation may occur at the level of transcription.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Brain, Csf, Peptidomics

### Affiliations
Proteome Sciences
Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, University of Oxford United Kingdom

### Submitter
Michael Bremang

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Becky Carlyle
Department of Physiology, Anatomy & Genetics, University of Oxford United Kingdom


