### Accession
PXD001691

### Title
An optimised protocol for protein extraction from salt gland-enriched tissues of a mangrove tree species for proteomic analysis

### Description
Preparation of proteins from salt-gland-enriched tissues of mangrove plant is necessary for a systematic study of proteins involved in the plant’s unique desalination mechanism.  Extraction of high-quality proteins from the leaves of mangrove tree species, however, is difficult due to the presence of high levels of endogenous phenolic compounds.  In our study, preparation of proteins from only a part of the leaf tissues was required, rendering extraction even more challenging.  By comparing several extraction methods, we developed a reliable procedure for obtaining sufficient proteins from salt gland-enriched tissues of the mangrove species Avicennia officinalis.  Protein extraction was markedly improved using a phenol-based extraction method.  Despite the lower protein yield obtained, one-dimensional protein gel profiles with greater resolution could be obtained, with more than twice the number of proteins detected when 1D-LC-MS/MS analyses were compared.  Further analysis of proteins that were solely present in each extraction method favoured the phenol-based extraction. Phenol-based extracts contained nearly 10 times more solely-detected proteins than those were detectable in the extracts without using phenol.  The protocol established could thus be applied for downstream high-throughput proteomic analyses involving LC-MS/MS or equivalent.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from salt gland-enriched tissues of A. officinalis using three extraction methods, which were compared in this study. For the TUTS extraction method, leaf tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen before TUTS buffer [25mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH8.5; 8M Urea; 2% Triton X-100; 0.1% SDS; protease inhibitor] was added. The samples were either homogenized (on/off pulse 1min/1min) or sonicated (on/off pulse 5s/25s) for 30min, or by a combination of both and compared against samples that were vortexed. Samples were centrifuged (16,000g, 24°C, 3min) to collect the supernatant. For trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone-based extraction method, leaf tissues were ground as described (above) before ice-cold TCA/acetone solution [10% TCA; 1% poly(vinylpolypyrrolidone) (PVPP); 2% 2-mercaptoethanol (2-ME) re-suspended in acetone] was added. The samples were either vortexed, homogenized, sonicated or by a combination of both as before and incubated overnight at -20°C to precipitate the proteins.  Samples were centrifuged (16,000g, 4°C, 3min) to collect the pellet. The pellet was washed twice with acetone, air-dried, dissolved in 100µl TUTS buffer before supernatant was collected (16,000g, 24°C, 3min). For phenol-based extraction method, leaf tissues were ground and re-suspended in ice-cold TCA/acetone buffer as described for TCA/acetone-based extraction method. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged (16,000g, 4°C, 3min) and pellets were washed once with methanol [80% methanol; 0.1M ammonium acetate], once with acetone [100% acetone; 0.07% 2-ME] before air-dried. Proteins from air-dried samples were extracted [1:1 mixture SDS extraction buffer (30% sucrose; 2% SDS, 0.1M Tris-HCl; 5% 2-ME):Tris-buffered phenol (pH8)] and proteins collected in the phenol (upper) phase (16,000g, 4°C, 3min) were precipitated overnight (-20°C) with 80% methanol containing 0.1M ammonium acetate. The protein pellets collected by centrifugation were washed twice with pre-cooled methanol, twice with pre-cooled acetone before it was left to dry.  The air-dried protein pellet was dissolved in 100µl TUTS buffer. For gel-based analysis, samples were separated through SDS-PAGE before each was cut into 10 fragments. Each of the gel fragments was immersed in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for 5min and replaced by 100% ACN, which was eventually removed.  The samples were reduced by 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (57°C, 1h), alkylated with 10mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (room temperature, 1h). Trypsin (12.5ng/µl trypsin in 500mM TEAB) digestion was then performed (4°C, 30min) before trypsin removal and replacement with 500mM TEAB.  The samples were left overnight (37°C), the digested peptides extracted (5% formic acid (FA) in 50% ACN and subsequently in 100% CAN) before the supernatant were vacuum-dried. For the shotgun approach, each protein sample was reduced (5mM TCEP, room temperature, 1h), alkylated (10mM MMTS, room temperature, 10min) and trypsin-digested (overnight, 37°C, trypsin:protein = 1:20). Sample clean-up was performed by strong cation exchange chromatography, i.e., the digested samples diluted with 5ml strong cation exchange mobile phase A [10mM potassium phosphate in 25% ACN, pH3]. The solution was passed through a 3μm PolySULFOETHYL A column (35mm×4.6mm). Peptides were separated by a stepwise gradient: 0% mobile phase B (1M KCl, 10mM potassium phosphate in 25% ACN, pH3), 10min; 35% mobile phase B, 10min; 100% mobile phase B, 10min and 0% mobile phase B, 10min (flow rate 0.5ml/min). Samples were then desalted, the resulting peptides lyophilized and resuspended in water containing 2% ACN and 0.1% FA. For both approaches, peptide separation was carried out on an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex in Trap Elute configuration. The samples were reconstituted in 45l diluent (98% water, 2% ACN, 0.05% FA) before 5l of each was loaded on a 200μmx0.5mm trap column and eluted on an analytical 75μm×150mm column. Peptides were separated by a gradient formed by mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min: 5-12% mobile phase B, 30min; 12-30% mobile phase B, 90min; 30-90% mobile phase B, 1min; 90-90% mobile phase B, 7min; 90-5% mobile phase B, 5min and maintained at 5% mobile phase B, 13min. The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across mass range of 400–1800m/z in high resolution mode (>30000) using 250ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 20 precursors/cycle was chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100ms maximum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion of 15s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15000) with rolling collision energy on.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed with ProteinPilot 4.5 software Revision 1656 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (4.5.0.0) and integrated false discovery rate (FDR) analysis function.  The MS/MS spectra obtained were searched against a protein sequence database derived from transcriptome sequencing of mangrove epidermal peel (total 174552 entries including both normal and decoy sequences) with the following search parameters: Sample Type — Identification; Cys Alkylation — MMTS; Digestion — trypsin; Special Factors — None; Species — None.  The processing was specified as follows: ID Focus—Biological Modifications; Search Effort — Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold — 0.05 (10.0%).  Only proteins with <1% global false discovery rate (FDR) were used for further analysis.  Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (i.e., emPAI) scores, where available, were obtained using Matrix Science Mascot Server Version 2.4.0.

### Publication Abstract
Preparation of proteins from salt-gland-rich tissues of mangrove plant is necessary for a systematic study of proteins involved in the plant's unique desalination mechanism. Extraction of high-quality proteins from the leaves of mangrove tree species, however, is difficult due to the presence of high levels of endogenous phenolic compounds. In our study, preparation of proteins from only a part of the leaf tissues (i.e. salt gland-rich epidermal layers) was required, rendering extraction even more challenging. By comparing several extraction methods, we developed a reliable procedure for obtaining proteins from salt gland-rich tissues of the mangrove species Avicennia officinalis. Protein extraction was markedly improved using a phenol-based extraction method. Greater resolution 1D protein gel profiles could be obtained. More promising proteome profiles could be obtained through 1D-LC-MS/MS. The number of proteins detected was twice as much as compared to TUTS extraction method. Focusing on proteins that were solely present in each extraction method, phenol-based extracts contained nearly ten times more proteins than those in the extracts without using phenol. The approach could thus be applied for downstream high-throughput proteomic analyses involving LC-MS/MS or equivalent. The proteomics data presented herein are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001691.

### Keywords
Avicennia / mangrove / protein extraction/ phenol / salt gland-enriched tissues /1d-lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
NUS Environmental Research Institute, National University of Singapore, 5A Engineering Drive 1, T-Lab, #02-01, Singapore 117411.
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore 14 Science Drive 4 Singapore 117543

### Submitter
Wee-Kee Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Lin Qingsong
Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore 14 Science Drive 4 Singapore 117543


