### Accession
PXD010078

### Title
Analysis of Escherichia coli CyDisCo proteome changes in response to the expression of scFv and the misfolded scFv

### Description
E. coli CyDisCo strain enables a high yield secretion of disulfide bond-containing proteins to the periplasm via Twin-arginine (Tat) pathway. Introducing two exogenous oxidases: the yeast sulfydryl oxidase (Erv1p) and human protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), the CyDisCo strain changes the cytoplasm into an oxidized environment, where the disulfide bonds can efficiently be formed. In this study, we analyzed the proteome changes upon the expression of disulfide bond-containing scFv and the misfolded scFv in the CyDisCo strain. The correctly folded protein is secreted to the periplasm, while the misfolded protein accumulates exclusively in the inclusion body fraction. We observed a high number of significant changes mostly in proteins associated with protein folding and degradation, oxidative stress, membrane transport and integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Each pellet was solubilized in 600 µl lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7, 2% SDS) and the protein concentration was determined by the Bicinchoninic Acid (BCA) Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cytoplasmic fraction proteins (100 μg) were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested in-solution using trypsin [1]. Desalting of peptides prior to mass spectrometry analysis using Stage tips, C8 material (ThermoFisher Scientific) was performedaccording to the protocol by Rappsilber et al. (2007) [2]. For absolute quantification,a tryptic digest of yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH1, Waters, USA) was added into the samples to final concentration of 50 fmol/μL. Proteins from periplasmic and membrane fractions (30 μg) were separated via 1D SDS-PAGE and the entire gel lanes were cut into ten pieces each and proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, USA) overnight. Peptides were purifiedusing ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore). Samples were concentrated to dryness in a vaccum centrifuge and stored at -70 °C. Shortly before MS analysis samples were dissolved in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid.  1. J. Muntel, M. Hecker, D. Becher, An exclusion list based label-free proteome quantification approach using an LTQ Orbitrap. Rapid Commun. Mass Spectrom. 26 (2012), 701–709.  2. J. Rappsilber, M. Mann, Y. Ishihama, Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc. 2 (2007), 1896–1906.

### Data Protocol
For the cytoplasmic samples the nanoACQUITYTM UPLCTM system (Waters) was used to separate and introduce peptides into the Synapt G2 (Waters) mass spectrometer. Parameters for liquid chromatography and IMSE (MSE with ion mobility separation) were used as described previously in Zühlke et al. (2016) [3]. The peptides eluted from periplasmic and membrane samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis performed on a Proxeon nLC 1200 coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed with an 80-min nonlinear gradient (1-99%) in 0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile on the in-house self-packed columns (id 100 μm, od 360 μm, length 200 mm; packed with 3.6 µm Aeris XB-C18 reversed-phase material (Phenomenex)). A full MSscan (resolution of 60,000) was acquired using the automatic data-dependent mode of the instrument. After acquisition of the full MS spectra, up to 20 dependent scans (MS/MS) were performed according to precursor intensity by collision-induced dissociation fragmentation (CID) in the linear ion trap. The MS/MS spectra of cytoplasmic samples were searched against a randomized E. coli K12 W3110 UniProt/Swissprot database (Proteome ID: UP000000318, 4 257 entries, version December 2017) with added amino acid sequences of scFv, mutated scFv, yeast mitochondrial thiol oxidase (Erv1p) and human protein disulfide isomerase (PDI), laboratory contaminants and yeast ADH1 sequence. MS/MS spectra of periplasmic and membrane samples were search against above mentioned database, excluding yeast ADH1, using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.8.3) [4]. Peptide search was performed with the Andromeda search algorithms [5]. The search parameters were set as follows: a minimal peptide length of six, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification, and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated and protein identifications with FDR< 1% were considered acceptable. A minimum of two unique peptides was used for relative quantification with the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in the MaxQuant.  3. D. Zühlke, K. Dörries, J. Bernhardt, S. Maaß, J. Muntel, V. Liebscher, J. Pané-Farré, K. Riedel, M. Lalk, U. Völker, S. Engelmann, D. Becher, S. Fuchs, M. Hecker, Costs of life - Dynamics of the protein inventory of Staphylococcus aureus during anaerobiosis. Scientific Reports. 6 (2016), 28172.  4. J. Cox, M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized ppb-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein 98 quantification. Nature biotechnology 26 (12) (2006), 1367-1372.  5. J. Cox, N. Neuhauser, A. Michalski, R.A. Scheltema, J.V. Olsen, M. Mann, Andromeda: a peptide search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment. J Proteome Res. 10(4) (2011), 1794-805.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Proteome, Tat system, Stress response

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17489 Greifswald
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Katarzyna Dolata

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Dolata
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology Ernst-Moritz-Arndt-University Greifswald Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8 17489 Greifswald


