### Accession
PXD013906

### Title
CUL3(BPM) E3 ubiquitin ligases regulate MYC2, MYC3 and MYC4 stability and JA responses

### Description
The Jasmonate pathway regulators MYC2, MYC3 and MYC4 are central nodes in plant signaling networks integrating environmental and developmental signals to fine-tune jasmonate defenses and plant growth. Hence, their activity needs to be tightly regulated in order to optimize plant fitness. Among the increasing number of mechanisms regulating MYCs, protein stability is arising as a major player. However, how the levels of MYCs proteins are modulated is still poorly understood. Here, we report that MYC2, MYC3 and MYC4 are targets of BPM proteins, which act as substrate adaptors of CUL3-based E3 ubiquitin ligases. Reduction-of-function of CUL3(BPM) in amiR-bpm lines, bpm235 triple mutants and cul3ab double mutants enhance MYC2 and MYC3 stability and accumulation, and potentiates plant responses to JA such a root-growth inhibition, and MYC-regulated gene expression. BPM3 protein is stabilized by JA, suggesting a new negative feedback regulatory mechanism to control MYCs activity. Our results uncover a new layer for JA-pathway regulation by CUL3(BPM)-mediated degradation of MYC TFs.

### Sample Protocol
A.thaliana 35S:GFP-BPM6 seedlings were ground in liquid nitrogen. Seedlings powder was transferred in a cold mortar and lysed with a ratio weight/lysis (gramme/milliliter) buffer volume 1/3 during 15 min (lysis buffer containing 50mM Tris HCl pH8, 50mM NaCl, 1% Triton, protease inhibitors Complete EDTA free Roche). The protein extracts were clarified by centrifugation and GFP-BPM6 complexes were immunoprecipitated using magnetic microparticles (MACS purification system, Miltenyi Biotech) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and as previously described (Stoetzel et al. 2016). µMACS magnetic microbeads are coated with a monoclonal anti-GFP antibody (Miltenyi Biotech). Beads coated with anti-HA antibodies were used for negative controls. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments were carried out in biological independent duplicates, each of them was divided in 3 affinity purification replicates. Proteins were eluted out of the magnetic stand with the SDS-loading buffer from the kit.

### Data Protocol
Eluted proteins were digested with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on a QExactive+ mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nanoLC1000 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, USA) as described previously (Chicois et al. 2018). Data were searched against the TAIR10 database with a decoy strategy. Peptides were identified with Mascot algorithm (version 2.5, Matrix Science, London, UK) and data were imported into Proline 1.4 software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Proteins were validated on Mascot pretty rank equal to 1, and 1% FDR on both peptide spectrum matches (PSM score) and protein sets (Protein Set score). The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein. This Spectral Count was submitted to a negative binomial test using an edgeR GLM regression through the R-package (R v3.5.0). For each identified protein, an adjusted p-value corrected by Benjamini-Hochberg was calculated, as well as a protein fold-change (FC). The results are presented in a Volcano plot using protein log2 fold changes and their corresponding log10 adjusted pvalues to highlight enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The jasmonate (JA)-pathway regulators MYC2, MYC3, and MYC4 are central nodes in plant signaling networks integrating environmental and developmental signals to fine-tune JA defenses and plant growth. Continuous activation of MYC activity is potentially lethal. Hence, MYCs need to be tightly regulated in order to optimize plant fitness. Among the increasing number of mechanisms regulating MYC activity, protein stability is arising as a major player. However, how the levels of MYC proteins are modulated is still poorly understood. Here, we report that MYC2, MYC3, and MYC4 are targets of BPM (BTB/POZ-MATH) proteins, which act as substrate adaptors of CUL3-based E3 ubiquitin ligases. Reduction of function of CUL3<sup>BPM</sup> in <i>amiR-bpm</i> lines, <i>bpm235</i> triple mutants, and <i>cul3ab</i> double mutants enhances MYC2 and MYC3 stability and accumulation and potentiates plant responses to JA such as root-growth inhibition and MYC-regulated gene expression. Moreover, MYC3 polyubiquitination levels are reduced in <i>amiR-bpm</i> lines. BPM3 protein is stabilized by JA, suggesting a negative feedback regulatory mechanism to control MYC activity, avoiding harmful runaway responses. Our results uncover a layer for JA-pathway regulation by CUL3<sup>BPM</sup>-mediated degradation of MYC transcription factors.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Jasmonate, Myc, Phytohormone, Proteasome

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Campus Universidad Autonoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Roberto Solano
Departamento de Genética Molecular de Plantas, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas, Campus Universidad Autonoma, 28049 Madrid, Spain.


