### Accession
PXD022644

### Title
First penicillin-binding protein occupancy patterns for 15 β-lactams and β-lactamase inhibitors in Mycobacterium abscessus

### Description
Mycobacterium abscessus (Mab) causes serious infections that often require over 18 months of antibiotic combination therapy. With β lactam antibiotics being safe, double β-lactam and β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor combinations are of interest for improving treatment of Mab infections and minimizing toxicity. However, a mechanistic approach for building these combinations is lacking since little is known about which penicillin-binding protein (PBP) target receptors are inactivated by different β-lactams in Mab. This project aimed to identify PBPs in Mab and study the binding affinities of each of these PBPs with β-lactam antibiotics. These first PBP occupancy patterns in Mab provide a mechanistic foundation for selecting and optimizing safe and effective combination therapies with β-lactams.

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation, cell membranes containing PBPs were labelled with Bocillin FL and separated by SDS-PAGE. The resolved PBP bands were excised into approximately 1 mm3 gel pieces. Each piece was digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison WI) according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly, gel pieces were washed three times with NANOpure® water by vortex mixing for 5 min, destained twice with methanol : 50 mM NH4HCO3 (1:1, v/v) for 10 min with intermittent vortex mixing. Then, samples were dehydrated for 5 min in acetonitrile : 50 mM NH4HCO3 (1:1, v/v) with intermittent vortex mixing and dried in a SpeedVac® vacuum centrifuge for 5 min. The clean samples were rehydrated and incubated in freshly prepared 25 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at 56 °C.  Then, freshly prepared 55 mM idodoacetamide in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and incubated for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The reduced and alkylated samples were washed twice with NANOpure® water, dehydrated in acetonitrile : 50 mM NH4HCO3 (1:1, v/v) and dried in a SpeedVac® vacuum centrifuge. The chemically modified samples were rehydrated in (12 ng/mL) sequencing grade trypsin in 0.01% ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant : 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 5 min, and overlaid with 0.04 mL 0.01% ProteaseMAX™ Surfactant : 50 mM NH4HCO3 and gently mixed, and incubated for 1 h at 50 °C. The digestion reactions were inactivated by adding trifluoroacetic acid TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v), and were centrifuged at 13,000 g for 10 min to minimize introduction of non-peptide material to the LC-MS system. Nano-LC/MS/MS was applied to identify mycobacterial PBPs using a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). It is supplied with an EASY Spray nanospray operating in positive ion mode, and an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separations were achieved in an EASY Spray PepMAP column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a C18 column (25 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter [ID] and 3 µm 100 Å pore size). The original TopTen™ was the basic method applied in the scan sequence of the mass spectrometer. The analysis program employed a full scan recorded between 375 and 1,575 Da at resolution of 60,000. The MS/MS scan was performed at a resolution of 15,000 to create product ion spectra and identify amino acid sequences in successive instrument scans of the 15 best abundant spectral peaks. The MS/MS data was analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 provided by Thermo Fisher Scientific (San Jose, CA).

### Data Protocol
This program was set up to search proteins (including DD- and LD-transpeptidases) from Mycobacterium abscessus strain ATCC 19977 (SwissProt TaxID=561007, on September 25th 2019) assuming trypsin as the digestion enzyme. We allowed for the active serine to be labelled with Bocillin FL as a post-translational modification. We performed a separate search for LD-transpeptidase; in this search, we allowed for the active cysteine to be labelled with Bocillin FL. This search involved a precursor ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Also, the Scaffold 4.9.0 software (Proteome Software Inc, Portland, OR) was used for validation of the MS/MS results based on peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were considered if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with the Scaffold delta-mass correction. In addition, protein identifications were considered if they could be recognized at a probability of more than 99.0% and contained at least one identified peptide by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Mycobacterium abscessus</i> causes serious infections that often require over 18&#x2009;months of antibiotic combination therapy. There is no standard regimen for the treatment of <i>M. abscessus</i> infections, and the multitude of combinations that have been used clinically have had low success rates and high rates of toxicities. With &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics being safe, double &#x3b2;-lactam and &#x3b2;-lactam/&#x3b2;-lactamase inhibitor combinations are of interest for improving the treatment of <i>M. abscessus</i> infections and minimizing toxicity. However, a mechanistic approach for building these combinations is lacking since little is known about which penicillin-binding protein (PBP) target receptors are inactivated by different &#x3b2;-lactams in <i>M. abscessus</i> We determined the preferred PBP targets of 13 &#x3b2;-lactams and 2 &#x3b2;-lactamase inhibitors in two <i>M. abscessus</i> strains and identified PBP sequences by proteomics. The Bocillin FL binding assay was used to determine the &#x3b2;-lactam concentrations that half-maximally inhibited Bocillin binding (50% inhibitory concentrations [IC<sub>50</sub>s]). Principal component analysis identified four clusters of PBP occupancy patterns. Carbapenems inactivated all PBPs at low concentrations (0.016 to 0.5&#x2009;mg/liter) (cluster 1). Cephalosporins (cluster 2) inactivated PonA2, PonA1, and PbpA at low (0.031 to 1 mg/liter) (ceftriaxone and cefotaxime) or intermediate (0.35 to 16 mg/liter) (ceftazidime and cefoxitin) concentrations. Sulbactam, aztreonam, carumonam, mecillinam, and avibactam (cluster 3) inactivated the same PBPs as cephalosporins but required higher concentrations. Other penicillins (cluster 4) specifically targeted PbpA at 2 to 16 mg/liter. Carbapenems, ceftriaxone, and cefotaxime were the most promising &#x3b2;-lactams since they inactivated most or all PBPs at clinically relevant concentrations. These first PBP occupancy patterns in <i>M. abscessus</i> provide a mechanistic foundation for selecting and optimizing safe and effective combination therapies with &#x3b2;-lactams.

### Keywords
Penicillin-binding proteins, Cell wall biosynthesis, Pona1, Beta-lactams, Pbpa, Pona2, Mycobacterium abscessus

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida
Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Orlando, FL

### Submitter
Yinzhi Lang

### Lab Head
Dr Jürgen B. Bulitta
Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, College of Pharmacy, University of Florida, Orlando, FL


