### Accession
PXD019440

### Title
BLI-MS: combining Biolayer Interferometry and Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Biolayer Interferometry (BLI) is a technology which allows to study the affinity between two interacting macro-molecules and to visualize their kinetic of interaction in real time. In this work we combine BLI interaction measurement with mass spectrometry in order to identify the proteins interacting with the bait. We provide for the first time the proof of concept of the feasibility of BLI-MS in complex biological mixtures.

### Sample Protocol
The eluate was then retrieved and processed by FASP [22] as previously described. For each LC-MS/MS run, one third of the sample was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (Dionex RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Dionex) using a 60 min gradient. One blank was run between samples to prevent carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top10 acquisition method. The instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70 000 for MS scans and 17 500 for MS/MS scans. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts with 200 ms for the injection time, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105 with 120 ms for the injection time. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2 000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version 1.6.6.0 and searched with Andromeda search engine against the database of Mus musculus from Swiss-Prot 04/2020 to which we added the sequence of the GFP. To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set an initial mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. Match between runs was allowed. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously [23]. Results were analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org [24]. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. GFP was quantified according to intensity values in the proteingroups.txt output file, after filtering out intensities calculated only on one unique peptide “by matching”.  As for total background proteins, we retained proteins identified with at least 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Biolayer interferometry (BLI) is a technology which allows to study the affinity between two interacting macro-molecules and to visualize their kinetic of interaction in real time. In this work, we combine BLI interaction measurement with mass spectrometry in order to identify the proteins interacting with the bait. We provide for the first time the proof of concept of the feasibility of BLI-MS in complex biological mixtures.

### Keywords
Biolayer interferometry; mass spectrometry; molecular interaction

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera
Proteomics platform Necker, Université de Paris - Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris 75015, France


