### Accession
PXD023848

### Title
Non-transformed cells respond to fat by inducing glucose metabolism

### Description
Hepatic fat accumulation has been widely associated with diabetes and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we aim to characterize the metabolic response that high fat availability elicits in livers prior to development of these diseases. We find that, after a short term on high fat diet, otherwise healthy mice show elevated hepatic glucose metabolization, activated glucose uptake, glycolysis and glucose contribution to serine as well as elevated pyruvate carboxylase activity compared to control diet mice. To understand other changes in the liver tissue after high fat diet exposure, we conducted untargeted transcriptomics and proteomics. This glucose phenotype occurred independent from transcriptional or proteomic programming, which identified increased peroxisomal and lipid metabolism pathways. Interestingly, we observe that high fat diet fed mice exhibit an increased lactate production when challenged with glucose. This trait seems to find a parallel in a human cohort, where we observe a correlation between waist circumference and lactate secretion after an oral glucose bolus across healthy individuals. In an in vitro model of hepatoma cells, we found physiologically relevant palmitate exposure stimulated production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and glucose uptake, a similar glycolytic phenotype to the in vivo study. This effect is inhibited upon interference with peroxisomal lipid metabolism and ROS production. Furthermore, we find that with exposure to an HCC-inducing hepatic carcinogen, continuation of high fat diet enhances the formation of HCC (100% with resectable tumors) as compared to control (50% with resectable tumors) in mice. However, regardless of the dietary background, all murine tumors showed similar alterations in glucose metabolism compared to those identified in fat exposed non-transformed mouse livers. Further, the presence of tumors in high fat diet exposed mice normalized glucose tolerance. Lipidomics analysis of tumor tissue and liver tissue from high fat diet exposed mice identified tumor tissue enrichment of diacylglycerol (DG) and phosphatidylcholine (PC) species. Some of these species were also increased in high fat diet liver tissue compared to control diet liver tissue. These findings suggest that fat can induce similar metabolic changes in non-transformed liver cells than found in HCC, and that peroxisomal metabolism of lipids may be a factor in driving a glycolytic metabolism In conclusion, we show that normal, non-transformed livers respond to fat by inducing glucose metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were isolated from liver samples from control diet and high fat diet livers after 8 weeks of feeding (no vehicle or DEN-injected samples were used in this analysis due to potential interactions with 13C6-glucose tracing) using the iST sample preparation kit (PreOmics, Germany). Purified peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) and the peptide concentration was determined on a Lunatic instrument (Unchained Lab). 2µg peptides were injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF BioPharma mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient reaching 9% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 15 min, (33% MS solvent B in 90 min and 55% MS solvent B in 100 min and 97% MS solvent B  in 125 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min, followed by a 45-minute wash at 97% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs of all 10 samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm (version 1.6.11.0 ) with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of 2020_06), containing 17,042 sequences (www.uniprot.org) .  Proteomic analysis was conducted with the raw peptide counts derived from MaxQuant results were analyzed for missingness and transformed to log counts and then quantile normalized. The normalized counts were transformed into an eSet using Msnbase (89), and analyzed using limma using model CD vs HFD (90). Volcano plots were created to visualize the differential peptide abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Liver cancer, Diethylnitrosamine (den), Cancer metabolism, Hepatocellular carcinoma, Lipid metabolism, Metabolism, Liver metabolism, High fat diet

### Affiliations
KU Leuven-VIB Center for Cancer Biology
VIB Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah-Maria Fendt
KU Leuven-VIB Center for Cancer Biology


