### Accession
PXD006577

### Title
Proteomics analysis of streptomyces sp. MBT76 demonstrates the production of qinichelins, new mixed catecholate-hydroxamate siderophores

### Description
Actinomycete genomes contain a plethora of orphan gene clusters encoding unknown secondary metabolites, and representing a huge unexploited pool of chemical diversity. The explosive increase in genome sequencing and the massive advance of bioinformatic tools have revolutionized the rationale for natural product discovery from actinomycetes. In this context, we applied a genome mining approach to discover a group of unique catecholate-hydroxamate siderophores termed as qinichelins from Streptomyces sp. MBT76. Quantitative proteomics statistically correlated a gene cluster of interest (qch) to its unknown chemotype (qinichelin), after which structural elucidation of isolated qinichelin was assisted by bioinformatics analysis and verified by MS2 and NMR experiments. Strikingly, intertwined functional crosstalk among four separately located gene clusters was implicated in the biosynthesis of qinichelins.

### Sample Protocol
The Streptomyces sp. genome sequence has been published, GenBank accession number: LNBE00000000. Here, Streptomyces sp. MBT76 was grown in liquid NMMP medium containing 1% (w/v) glycerol and 0.5% (w/v) mannitol as carbon sources, but lacking polyethylene glycol. This  basic NMMP medium were perturbed by using four different additives (or no additive) to create varying growth conditions: (A) no additive, (B) 2% (w/v) NaCl, (C) 1% (w/v) starch, (D) 0.8% (w/v) Bacto peptone (Difco), (E) 0.6% (w/v) Bacto yeast extract (Difco). All the cultures of Streptomyces sp. MBT76 were incubated at 30 °C for 72 hours, with constant shaking at 220 rpm. Mycelium was washed in 2 ml of 100 mM Tris/HCl buffer (pH 7.5) supplemented with 10 mM MgCl2, and then resuspended in 5 ml of ice cold acetone for 10 min. After removal of acetone by centrifugation, the pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of 1% (w/v) SDS for 2 min. The resulting protein suspension was separated from the debris by centrifugation, and the protein concentrations were determined using the Qubit fluorometric system (Thermo) with BSA standard. Some 167 µg of protein  was precipitated for each sample using chloroform/methanol and then dissolved using RapiGest SF surfactant (Waters, Milford MA). The proteins were further digested with trypsin after iodoacetamide treatment, and the resulting primary amines of the peptides were dimethyl labeled using three combinations of isotopomers of formaldehyde and cyanoborohydride on Sep-Pak C18 200 mg columns (Waters, Milford MA), via CH2O + NaBH3CN (light, condition A (exp. 1), condition C (exp. 2)), CD2O + NaBH3CN (medium, condition D (exp. 1 & 2)), and 13CD2O + NaBD3CN (heavy, condition B (exp. 1), condition E (exp. 2). Light-, medium-, and heavy-labeled peptides with 4 Da mass differences were mixed 1:1:1 to obtain 0.5 mg for fractionation by cationic exchange (SCX) chromatography using a polysulfoethyl A column (PolyLC, 100 x 2.1 mm, particle size 5 m, average pore size 200 Å). Mobile phases for SCX chromatography consisted of solvent A (10 mM KH2PO4, 20% (v/v) acetonitrile, pH 3) and solvent B (10 mM KH2PO4, 20% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.5 M KCl, pH 3). The running program for SCX was a gradient of 0-18% solvent B in 18 CV (column volume), 18-30% solvent B in 6 CV, and 30-100% solvent B in 5 CV, at a constant flow rate of 250 μl/min. In total, 24 peptide fractions were collected. Acidified peptides were desalted using StageTips. To remove acetonitrile, samples were concentrated in a vacuum concentrator. Prior to LC-MS analysis, the volume was adjusted to 70 μl using a 3% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid solution. Peptides were analyzed on a Surveyor nanoLC system (Thermo, Waltham, MA) hyphenated to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Gold and carbon coated emitters (OD/ID = 360/25 μm tip ID = 5 μm), trap column (OD/ID = 360/100 μm packed with 25 mm robust Poros10R2/15 mm BioSphere C18 5 μm 120 Å) and analytical columns (OD/ID = 360/75 μm packed with 20 cm BioSphere C18 5 μm 120 Å) were obtained from Nanoseparations (Nieuwkoop, the Netherlands). The mobile phases [A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/H2O, B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/acetonitrile] were made with ULC/MS grade solvents (Biosolve, Valkenswaard, the Netherlands). The emitter tip was coupled end-to-end with the analytical column via a 15 mm long TFE Teflon tubing sleeve (OD/ID 0.3 × 1.58 mm, Supelco, St Louis, MO) and installed in a stainless steel holder mounted in a nano-source base (Idex, Northbrook, IL). General mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: an electrospray voltage of 1.6–2.0 kV was applied to the emitter, no sheath and auxiliary gas flow, ion transfer tube temperature 150°C, capillary voltage 20 V, tube lens voltage 110 V.  For shotgun proteomics analysis, 10 μl of the samples was pressure loaded on the trap column with a 10 μl min−1 flow for 5 min followed by peptide separation with a gradient of 95 min 7–25% B, at a flow of 300 μl min−1 split to 250 nl min−1 by the LTQ divert valve. For each data-dependent cycle, one full MS scan (300–2000 m/z) acquired at high mass resolution (60 000 at 400 m/z, AGC target 1 × 106, maximum injection time 1000 ms) in the orbitrap was followed by five MS/MS fragmentations in the LTQ linear ion trap (AGC target 1 × 104, maximum injection time 50 ms for mixture 1 of the glucose vs mannitol measurement, 120 ms for the other mixtures) from the five most abundant ions. MS2 settings were as follows: collision gas pressure 1.3 mT, normalized collision energy 35%, ion selection threshold of 750 counts, activation q = 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms. Fragmented precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 150 s and ions with z < 2 or unassigned were not analyzed. Exclusion width was set to −10 ppm to +10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 in one run. Variable modification was set to oxidation of methionine, fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteine, and dimethyl labelling was selected as quantification method. MS/ MS spectra were searched against a database of translated coding sequences obtained from genome of Streptomyces sp. MBT76 with a false discovery rate of 1% for both proteins and peptides, and an additional second peptide search was performed. Quantification was performed according to MaxQuant standard settings. In short, a median protein expression ratio was determined using normalized expression ratios of positively identified peptides and of low-scoring versions of peptides already positively identified in a separate MS/MS event. No median ratio was determined when less than three peptide ratios were available.

### Publication Abstract
The explosive increase in genome sequencing and the advances in bioinformatic tools have revolutionized the rationale for natural product discovery from actinomycetes. In particular, this has revealed that actinomycete genomes contain numerous orphan gene clusters that have the potential to specify many yet unknown bioactive specialized metabolites, representing a huge unexploited pool of chemical diversity. Here, we describe the discovery of a novel group of catecholate-hydroxamate siderophores termed qinichelins (2-5) from Streptomyces sp. MBT76. Correlation between the metabolite levels and the protein expression profiles identified the biosynthetic gene cluster (named qch) most likely responsible for qinichelin biosynthesis. The structure of the molecules was elucidated by bioinformatics, mass spectrometry, and NMR. The genome of Streptomyces sp. MBT76 contains three gene clusters for the production of catecholate-peptide siderophores, including a separate cluster for the production of a shared catecholate precursor. In addition, an operon in the qch cluster was identified for the production of the ornithine precursor for qinichelins, independent of primary metabolism. This biosynthetic complexity provides new insights into the challenges scientists face when applying synthetic biology approaches for natural product discovery.

### Keywords
Siderophore, Lc-msms, Natural products, Streptomyces, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Leiden University
Molecular Biotechnology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jacob Gubbens

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.dr. G.P. van Wezel
Molecular Biotechnology, Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Sylviusweg 72, 2333 BE, The Netherlands


