### Accession
PXD006384

### Title
Metaproteomics of colonic microbiota unveils discrete protein functions among colitic mice and control groups

### Description
We utilized the well-characterized murine T cell transfer model of colitis to find specific  alterations in the intestinal luminal proteome associated with inflammation. Mass spectrometry  proteomic analysis of colonic samples permitted the identification of ~10,000-12,000 unique peptides that corresponded to 5610 protein clusters identified across three groups, including the colitic Rag1 -/- T cell recipients, isogenic Rag1 -/- controls, as well as wild-type mice. Bioinformatic analyses on host and microbial proteins found specific proteins and GO term functionalities unique to each group, as well as GO terms shared across the three cohorts. We further demonstrated that the colitic mice exhibited a significant increase in Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia that was substantiated with 16S rDNA sequencing.

### Sample Protocol
At the time of harvest, colonic contents were collected by flushing with 5 ml of sterile PBS. Samples were filtered using a 70 µm nylon cell strainer, divided into 8 equal aliquots, centrifuged at 10,000xg for 10 min, aspirated, and the bacterial pellets frozen at -80 °C until needed. Previously prepared colonic content bacterial samples were thawed on ice, pooled by treatment group, and bacterial pellets were used immediately for proteomic sample preparation: prepared bacterial pellet samples were re-suspended in 500 µL of lysis buffer (Roche cOmplete protease inhibitor tablet (04-693-159-001) in PBS). Samples were lysed via sonication in a Qsonica Q700 sonicator with Cup Horn attachment at 4 °C for 10 min (amplitude: 80; pulse: 10 sec. on, 20 sec. off). Insoluble cellular material was removed via centrifugation (10,000xg for 5 min), and the remaining soluble protein concentration was measured (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit). 100 µg aliquots were subjected to trypsin digestion to generate peptides for MudPIT shotgun proteomics analysis [36]. Briefly, proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid at 4 °C overnight, centrifuged, washed twice with methanol, and dried. Proteins were resuspended and denatured in 60 µL of 8 M urea, 100 mM TrisHCl, pH 8.5, introduced to 1 µL of 300 mM TCEP to reduce all disulfide bonds, and incubated for 20 min at 25 °C. The reduced thiols were then alkylated via addition of 7 µL 500 mM 2-chloroacetamide and incubated for 15 min at 25 °C while protected from light. Following alkylation, samples were diluted with 180 µL of 50 mM TrisHCl, pH 7.6. General proteomic digestion was performed by addition of 5 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega V5111) to each sample in the presence of 1 mM CaCl2 and incubation overnight at 37 °C with gentle rocking. Samples were quenched with 12.5 µL of formic acid, centrifuged (21,000xg, 5 min), and the supernatant was stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Standard MudPIT tandem mass spectrometry was performed using a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer. The sample and analytical columns were joined by a zero-dead volume union (Waters). Peptides were eluted at 0.2 ml/min using an 11-step MudPIT program. The first step began with 100% buffer A (95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) with a 2.5 min gradient of 0 to 15% buffer B (20% H2O, 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). This was followed by a 30 min gradient of 15 to 45% buffer B, a 10 min gradient of 45 to 75% buffer B, a 5 minute gradient of 75% to 100% buffer B, 2.5 min of 100% buffer B, and finally 20 min of 100% buffer A. Each subsequent step began with 1 min of 100% buffer A, a 4min salt pulse with x% buffer C (500 mM ammonium acetate, 95% H2O, 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), then 5 min 100% buffer A, followed by a 105 min gradient from 5 to 65% buffer B, and finally 5 min of 100% buffer A. The 4 min buffer C salt pulses (x) were as follows: 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70%, 80%, 90%, 100%.  Precursor ions were recorded by scanning in the range of m/z 400.00−1800.00 with the FTMS analyzer and a resolution of 60,000. The top eight peaks were selected for fragmentation using CID with normalized collision energy set to 35.0. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, repeat duration of 30.00 sec, exclusion list size of 100, and exclusion duration set to 60.00 sec.

### Data Protocol
Precursor and fragmentation ion data were extracted from the Xcalibur RAW files via rawXtract 1.9.9.2 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17) in the MS1 and MS2 file formats. The MS2 spectra were scored with Blazmass 0.9993 against peptides of the Comprehensive Protein Identification Library (ComPIL) database, containing over 80 million proteins from multiple microbial database sources as well as human, mouse, and plant proteins [37]. Both Blazmass and ComPIL source code are open source (https://github.com/sandipchatterjee/blazmass_compil). Settings for peptide scoring included: 1) a variable modification of oxidized methionine (+15.9949 Da), 2) a static modification for alkylated cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da), and 3) a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 50 ppm tolerance for fragmentation ions. Filtering was performed using DTASelect 2.1.3 (http://fields.scripps.edu/yates/wp/?page_id=17), requiring 2 peptides per protein and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with respect to peptides. The following parameters were used for filtering when run from the command line: “--quiet --brief --trypstat --modstat -y 2 -DM 10 --extra --dm --sfp 0.01 -p 2”.

### Publication Abstract
Metaproteomics can greatly assist established high-throughput sequencing methodologies to provide systems biological insights into the alterations of microbial protein functionalities correlated with disease-associated dysbiosis of the intestinal microbiota. Here, the authors utilize the well-characterized murine T cell transfer model of colitis to find specific changes within the intestinal luminal proteome associated with inflammation. MS proteomic analysis of colonic samples permitted the identification of &#x2248;10&#xa0;000-12&#xa0;000 unique peptides that corresponded to 5610 protein clusters identified across three groups, including the colitic Rag1<sup>-/-</sup> T cell recipients, isogenic Rag1<sup>-/-</sup> controls, and wild-type mice. The authors demonstrate that the colitic mice exhibited a significant increase in Proteobacteria and Verrucomicrobia and show that such alterations in the microbial communities contributed to the enrichment of specific proteins with transcription and translation gene ontology terms. In combination with 16S sequencing, the authors' metaproteomics-based microbiome studies provide a foundation for assessing alterations in intestinal luminal protein functionalities in a robust and well-characterized mouse model of colitis, and set the stage for future studies to further explore the functional mechanisms of altered protein functionalities associated with dysbiosis and inflammation.

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Murine colitis, Microbiota, Metaproteomics, Rag1 -/-, Compil, Mudpit, T cell transfer, 16s sequencing

### Affiliations
TSRI
Assistant Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine TSRI - California Campus USA

### Submitter
Greg Stupp

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Wolan
Assistant Professor Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine TSRI - California Campus USA


