### Accession
PXD011033

### Title
HEK293 femtomolar GPCR signaling

### Description
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest class of cell surface signaling proteins; they participate in all physiological processes and are the targets of 30% of marketed drugs. Typically, nanomolar-micromolar concentrations of ligand are used to activate GPCRs in experimental systems. However, by measuring cAMP with increased spatial and temporal resolution, we can now detect GPCR responses to an extraordinarily wide range of ligand concentrations: from attomolar to millimolar. Mathematical modeling shows that the addition of femtomolar concentrations of ligand can activate a significant proportion of cells provided that a cell can be activated by 1-2 binding events. In addition to cAMP, activation of the endogenous b2-adrenoceptor (b2AR) and muscarinic M3R by femtomolar concentrations of ligand in cell lines and human cardiac fibroblasts causes sustained increases in nuclear ERK or cytosolic PKC, respectively. These responses are spatially and temporally distinct from those that occur at higher concentrations of ligand, and result in a unique proteomic profile. This highly sensitive signaling is dependent on the GPCRs forming pre-assembled higher-order signaling complexes at the plasma membrane. Recognizing that GPCRs respond to ultra-low concentrations of neurotransmitters and hormones challenges established paradigms of drug action and provides a new dimension of GPCR activation that is quite distinct from that typically observed.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and grown to confluency. Cells were treated with vehicle or ligand for 4 h, then incubated in lysis buffer (100 mM Tris pH 7.6, 4% w/v SDS, 100 mM DTT) at 95°C for 3 min, prior to sonication (30 sec, 30% amplitude, Qsonica Q125) and centrifugation (16,000g, 5 min, RT). 100 µg supernatant was digested using the FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon), with trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C. Digested peptides were labeled using 40 mM 12C3 light or 13C3 heavy formaldehyde with 20 mM NaCNBOH for 1 hour at 37°C, before the reaction was quenched with formic acid (to pH 2.5). The light- and heavy-labeled samples were mixed at a 1:1 ratio, and desalted using C-18 desalting columns and three washes with 0.1% v/v formic acid. Samples were eluted in 70% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid, then dried by SpeedVac (LABCONCO). Peptides were fractionated following resuspension in Strong Anion Exchange (SAX) buffer (20 mM acetic acid, 20 mM phosphoric acid, 20 mM boric acid) pH 11 and loading onto stage tips containing five layers of anion exchange discs. The first fraction was collected following centrifugation (1,000g, 3 min, RT). A total of seven fractions were collected by sequentially eluting fractions from the stage tips in SAX buffer at pH 8, 6, 5, 4, 3 and SAX buffer 7 (10% v/v formic acid, pH 1). Fractions were dried, then resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile with 1% v/v formic acid by sonication at 37°C for 10 min prior to LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a Q ExactiveTM or Q Exactive PlusTM Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled online with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-UHPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were injected onto an AcclaimTM PepMap100 RSLC C18 analytical column (100 Å pore size, 75 µm i.d. x 50 cm reversed phase nanoViper column, Thermo Scientific) with 95% buffer A (0.1% v/v formic acid) at a flow rate of 250 or 300 nL/min. The peptides were eluted over 60 min using a gradient to 42.5% buffer B (80% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid). The eluate was nebulized and ionized using a Nano ElectroSpray Ion Source (Thermo Scientific) with coated borosilicate emitter and a capillary voltage of 1700 V. Peptides were selected for MS/MS analysis using XcaliburTM software (Thermo Scientific) in full MS/dd-MS2 (TopN) mode with the following parameter settings: MS AGC target 3E6, MS maximum injection time 120 ms, MS/MS TopN=10 or 12, MS/MS AGC target 1e5, MS/MS maximum injection time 120 ms, normalized collision energy 27, and isolation window of 2 or 1.8 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 sec.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.17). Searches were performed against human sequences downloaded from UniProt (August 2015 version) using the following parameters: specific digestion with trypsin with up to two missed cleavages, protein Nterminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine alkylation was set as a fixed modification.Data were analyzed using Perseus software (version 15.0.15). Common contaminants, reverse peptides,and proteins identified only by a modification site were removed. All data were expressed relative to vehicle-treated controls (heavy/light or transformed 1/[heavy/light], as appropriate), ratios were log2 normalized to allow quantitative analysis, and any non-valid values removed. Only proteins that differed significantly from vehicle controls (t-test with p<0.05) were retained and Z-scored to prepare the data for clustering. Hierarchical clustering was performed using default settings. Data for individual proteins are expressed as the log2 change relative to vehicle control from n biological repeats as stated.The proteins used for hierarchical clustering were further classified by their Biological Process GeneOntology (GO) term, using the Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID, v6.7) to generate pie charts. Classifications with p-values <0.05 were used to group proteins according to biological function, synonymous classifications were removed, and the number of proteins classified within these groups were counted. Only classifications thatwere identified in at least two biological replicates were included within the final count.

### Publication Abstract
G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are the largest class of cell surface signaling proteins, participate in nearly all physiological processes, and are the targets of 30% of marketed drugs. Typically, nanomolar to micromolar concentrations of ligand are used to activate GPCRs in experimental systems. We detected GPCR responses to a wide range of ligand concentrations, from attomolar to millimolar, by measuring GPCR-stimulated production of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) with high spatial and temporal resolution. Mathematical modeling showed that femtomolar concentrations of ligand activated, on average, 40% of the cells in a population provided that a cell was activated by one to two binding events. Furthermore, activation of the endogenous &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-adrenergic receptor (&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>AR) and muscarinic acetylcholine M<sub>3</sub> receptor (M<sub>3</sub>R) by femtomolar concentrations of ligand in cell lines and human cardiac fibroblasts caused sustained increases in nuclear translocation of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) and cytosolic protein kinase C (PKC) activity, respectively. These responses were spatially and temporally distinct from those that occurred in response to higher concentrations of ligand and resulted in a distinct cellular proteomic profile. This highly sensitive signaling depended on the GPCRs forming preassembled, higher-order signaling complexes at the plasma membrane. Recognizing that GPCRs respond to ultralow concentrations of neurotransmitters and hormones challenges established paradigms of drug action and provides a previously unappreciated aspect of GPCR activation that is quite distinct from that typically observed with higher ligand concentrations.

### Keywords
Compartmentalized signaling, Ultra-low, Highly sensitive, Femtomolar, Gpcr, M3r, Camp, Signaling complex, B2ar

### Affiliations
Monash University, Melbourne
Drug Discovery Biology Theme, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia

### Submitter
Srgjan Chivchiristov

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Louise Halls
Drug Discovery Biology Theme, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia


