### Accession
PXD003640

### Title
ON THE ACCURACY, PRECISION AND STATISTICAL SIGNIFICANCE OF COMPRESSED RATIOS IN ISOBARIC LABELLING

### Description
Despite the outstanding advantages that isobaric labelling has to offer in quantitative proteomics, its precision and accuracy are undermined by ratio compression, which is consequence of the co-isolation of peptides within a selected isolation window. Here, using the two-proteomes approach we investigated the relationships between precision and accuracy on the statistical significance of peptide and protein ratios in three types of mass spectrometers.

### Sample Protocol
Two lysates of 400 µg of E.coli were digested in parallel - referred as digestion A and digestion B - using FASP. Samples were dissolved in 8M urea and 0.1M TEAB. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 40⁰C and alkylated in 50 mM IAA for 20 min in dark. First digestion using Lys-C (1:50 w/w, Wako) was performed during 4h at RT in a wet chamber, followed by a dilution 8-fold in 50 mM TEAB. Second digestion using trypsin (1:100 w/w, Promega) was carried out overnight at 37⁰C. U2OS extract was in-solution digested. 96 µg of E.coli digested peptides were used for each channel using the iTRAQ® 8plex (AB Sciex). Digestion A was used for channels 113, 115, 117 and 119, whilst digestion B was used for 114, 116, 118 and 121. On the other hand, 100 µg of U2OS were used for the labelling of the first four tags. Then, E.coli peptides were combined in 2.5:1 ratios, whereas U2OS peptides were mixed in 1:1 ratios. Finally, 120 µg of E.coli were mixed with 150 µg of U2OS in order to obtain a ratio 0.8:1 between species. All samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on three instruments. The Impact (Bruker) was coupled online to a nanoLCUltra system (Eksigent), equipped with a CaptiveSpray source supplemented with a nanoBooster. Samples were loaded onto a C18, 5 µm, 0.1 x 20 mm trap column (NanoSeparations) and eluted (300 nl/min) onto an analytical column (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads, 3 μm, 75 μm x 50 cm) heated to 45 °C, during 150 min. The QqTOF Impact was operated in DDA. The voltage was set to 1.35 kV and the temperature of the source to 180oC. The MS survey scan was performed at a spectra rate of 2.5 Hz scanning an 80-1600 m/z window. The minimum signal for triggering MS/MS was set to a normalized threshold of 500 counts. The 30 most abundant peaks with (z ≥2 and m/z>350) from the survey scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the collision cell by CID using a collision energy of 23 – 56 eV as function of the m/z value. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 30 s using the rethinking option (5-fold). Data were transformed to MGF using the Compass DataAnalysis. The 400 most abundant non-deconvoluted fragment ions exceeding a threshold of 100 counts were exported. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo) was coupled to an Eksigent nano LC system through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon). NanoLC was performed as for the Impact. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT scanning a window between 350 and 1500 m/z. The m/z values triggering MS/MS with a repeat count of 1 were put on an exclusion list for 70 s. The signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 5000 counts. The 15 most abundant isotope patterns with charge ≥2 from the survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation. NCE was set to 38.0, the Q value to 0.25 and an activation time to 0.10 ms. Waveform filter was activated. Fragments were detected in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 7500 FWHM at m/z 400. The maximum IT for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 500 ms and 250 ms respectively and AGC values were set to 1E6 and 3E4, respectively for each scan mode. The Q Exactive (Thermo) was connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Proxeon) through an EASY-Spray nanoESI source. The peptides were trapped on a trap column (75 µm i.d. x 20 mm, reprosil C18, 3µm, 120 Å) using solvent A (0.1% Formic Acid, 5 % DMSO in water) at a pressure of 500 bar. The peptides were separated on an EASY-spray Acclaim PepMap® analytical column (75 µm i.d. × 500 mm, RSLC C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) using a 120 min linear gradient at a 200 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer operating in DDA. Full scan spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350-1500 m/z, resolution 70,000 at m/z 200, AGC target 3e6, maximum injection time 100 ms). After the MS scans, the 20 most intense peaks were selected for HCD fragmentation at 32 % NCE. HCD spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution 17500, AGC target 5e4, maximum IT 120 ms). Different isolation windows were used depending on the technical characteristics of each instrument. For the LTQ Orbitrap Velos, 0.5,1, 1.5 and 2 Da; and for the Impact and Q Exactive, 0.7, 1, 1.5, 2 and 3 Da. For each isolation window value, 1 microgram of sample was injected and two technical replicates were performed.

### Data Protocol
All files were analysed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo) with Sequest HT as the search engine against a concatenated Uniprot database of Homo sapiens (20,187 sequences), Escherichia coli (4,305 sequences) and supplemented with frequently observed contaminants (397 sequences). iTRAQ 8plex labelling in lysine and N-terminal were included as fixed modifications, together with carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ 8plex labelling of tyrosine were included as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm for all instruments and fragment mass tolerance was 0.05 Da for Impact and 0.025 for LTQ Orbitrap Velos and QExactive. The integration of reporter ions was performed using the most confident centroid with a tolerance of 50 ppm. Reagents impurities were corrected as indicated by the manufacturer. PSMs were filtered using Percolator (v2.04) with a FDR of 1%. Quantification results at PSM level were exported for further analysis. Subsequent quantification and statistical analysis was performed using ISOBAR (version 1.10) in R (version 3.1.2 “Pumkin Helmet”).

### Publication Abstract
Isobaric labeling is gaining popularity in proteomics due to its multiplexing capacity. However, copeptide fragmentation introduces a bias that undermines its accuracy. Several strategies have been shown to partially and, in some cases, completely solve this issue. However, it is still not clear how ratio compression affects the ability to identify a protein's change of abundance as statistically significant. Here, by using the "two proteomes" approach (E. coli lysates with fixed 2.5 ratios in the presence or absence of human lysates acting as the background interference) and manipulating isolation width values, we were able to model isobaric data with different levels of accuracy and precision in three types of mass spectrometers: LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Impact, and Q Exactive. We determined the influence of these variables on the statistical significance of the distorted ratios and compared them to the ratios measured without impurities. Our results confirm previous findings1-4 regarding the importance of optimizing acquisition parameters in each instrument in order to minimize interference without compromising precision and identification. We also show that, under these experimental conditions, the inclusion of a second replicate increases statistical sensitivity 2-3-fold and counterbalances to a large extent the issue of ratio compression.

### Keywords
Ratio compression, Accuracy, Isobaric labelling, Precision, Statistics

### Affiliations
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre

### Submitter
Ana Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz Peralta
Spanish National Cancer Research Centre


