### Accession
PXD042256

### Title
Molecular profiling and specific targeting of gemcitabine-resistant subclones in heterogeneous pancreatic cancer cell populations

### Description
Purpose: Chemotherapy is pivotal in the multimodal treatment of pancreatic cancer patients. In recent years, technical advances have developed experimental methods that unveiled a high degree of inter- and intratumoral heterogeneity in pancreatic cancer. We hypothesized that intratumoral heterogeneity (ITH) impacts response to gemcitabine treatment and demands specific targeting of resistant subclones. Experimental Design: We addressed the effect of ITH on response to gemcitabine treatment using single cell-derived cell lines (SCDCL) from the classical-like cell line BxPC3 and the basal-like cell line Panc-1 which were analyzed by mRNA-seq and mass spectrometry. Results: Individual SCDCLs of the parental tumor cell populations of BxPC3 and Panc-1 showed considerable heterogeneity in response to gemcitabine. Unsupervised principal component analysis (PCA) including the 1,000 most variably expressed genes showed a clustering of the SCDCLs according to their respective sensitivity to gemcitabine treatment for BxPC3, while this clustering was less clear for Panc-1. In BxPC3 SCDCLs, enriched signaling pathways EMT, TNF signaling via NfKB, and IL2STAT5 signaling correlated with more resistant behavior to gemcitabine. In Panc-1 SCDCLs MYC targets V1 and V2 as well as E2F targets were associated with stronger resistance to gemcitabine. Feature extraction of proteomes again identified less proteins whose expression was associated with the response of individual SCDCLs in Panc-1 compared to BxPC3. Based on molecular profiles, we could show that the gemcitabine-resistant SCDCLs of both BxPC3 and Panc-1 are more sensitive to the BET inhibitor JQ1 compared to the respective gemcitabine-sensitive SCDCLs. Conclusions: Our model system of SCDCLs identified gemcitabine-resistant subclones within a parental tumor population and provides evidence for the critical role of ITH for treatment response in pancreatic cancer. Through molecular profiling, we identified specific signaling pathways and protein signatures that might help to explain the differential response to treatment among clones. We exploited these molecular differences for an improved and more targeted therapy of resistant subclones of a heterogeneous tumor.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and establishment of SCDCLs The PDAC-derived cell line BxPC3 (classical-like subtype) and Panc-1 (basal-like subtype) were cultured in DMEM high glucose with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin-Glutamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) at 37°C, 5% CO2 in a humidified atmosphere. Mycoplasma contamination was excluded in both cell lines by PCR (MycoScope PCR Detection Kit, Genlantis, San Diego, CA). Cell line authentication was performed by short tandem repeat (STR) profiling using the PowerPlex® 21 System (Promega, Madison, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. To generate single cell-derived cell lines (SCDCLs), limited dilution of both parental cell lines was performed in 96-well plates. Each well was examined by phase-contrast microscopy three hours after plating to ensure that only wells harboring a single cell were used for further cultivation. After single-cell clones were grown to approximately 80% confluency in a T25 flask, RNA and protein were collected.  Treatment response of individual SCDCLs to gemcitabine To measure the sensitivity to gemcitabine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), cells of the respective parental cell population growing in log phase (2,000 cells of BxPC3 and 1,500 cells of Panc-1 per well) were seeded in 96-well plates. After a period of 24 hours, the cells were treated with gemcitabine concentrations ranging from 2.5 to 320 nmol/L for 72 hours. After this time, the survival fraction of the cells was determined. For this purpose, cell metabolism was used as a surrogate parameter for viability by using the CellTiter-Blue assay (Promega, Madison, USA). Normalisation was based on untreated controls. IC50 and ICmax of parental cell populations were determined using dose-response curves. Subsequently, each SCDCL was treated with gemcitabine in the same experimental set-up at the IC50 and ICmax of the respective parental cell population. Finally, for selected SCDCLs, complete dose-response curves were generated, as performed for the parental cell lines. Each individual measurement was carried out in triplicates and repeated three times. Label-free micro-LC tandem mass spectrometry  Protein from each SCDCL was extracted using the EasyPep™ Mini MS Sample Prep Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, USA). Extracted protein was analyzed using label-free micro-LC tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 nHPLC, ThermoFisher & 5600+ Triple TOF, AB Sciex) using data-independent acquisition (DIA). After digestion of non‐labeled protein samples with trypsin, transmitted ions were fragmented and analyzed in the TOF MS Analyzer at high resolution.

### Data Protocol
The raw SWATH data were processed using the software tool DIA-NN v1.7.16 (data-independent acquisition by neural networks) developed by Vadim Demichev et al. (Demichev et al, 2020). The software was used in the high accuracy LC mode with RT-dependent cross-normalization enabled. Mass accuracy, MS1 accuracy, and scan window settings were set to 0, as DIA-NN optimizes these parameters automatically. The ‘match between runs’ function was used to first develop a spectral library using the ‘smart profiling strategy’ from the data-independent acquisition data. The human UniProtKB/swiss-prot database (version 2020/12/6) was used for protein inference from identified peptides. Trypsin/P was specified as protease. The precursor ion generation settings were set to peptide length of 7–52 amino acids, the maximum number of missed cleavages to one. The maximum number of variable modifications was set to zero. N-terminal methionine excision and cysteine carbamidomethylation were enabled as fixed modifications. The resulting report file was further processed in the DIA-NN R package (Demichev et al., 2020) for MaxLFQ-based (Cox et al., 2014) protein quantification. A report was generated containing unique proteins (proteins that were not assigned to a group of homologs) that passed the FDR cut-off of 0.01 applied on the precursor level and were identified and quantified using proteotypic peptides only.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Intratumor heterogeneity, Gemcitabine, Pancreatic cancer, Treatment response

### Affiliations
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538 Lübeck Germany
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany

### Submitter
Thorben Sauer

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Gemoll
Section for Translational Surgical Oncology and Biobanking, Department of Surgery, University of Lübeck and University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Lübeck, Germany


