### Accession
PXD041551

### Title
Characterization of two novel proteins involved in mitochondrial DNA anchoring in Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei is a single celled eukaryotic parasite in the group of the Kinetoplastea. The parasite harbors a single mitochondrion with a singular mitochondrial genome that is known as the kinetoplast DNA (kDNA). The kDNA consists of a unique network of thousands of interlocked circular DNA molecules. To ensure proper inheritance of the kDNA to the daughter cells, the genome is physically linked to the basal body, the master organizer of the cell cycle in trypanosomes. The connection that spans, cytoplasm, mitochondrial membranes and the mitochondrial matrix is mediated by the Tripartite Attachment Complex (TAC). Using a combination of proteomics and RNAi we test the current model of hierarchical TAC assembly and identify TbmtHMG44 and TbKAP68 as novel candidates of a complex that connects the TAC to the kDNA. Depletion of TbmtHMG44 or TbKAP68 each leads to a strong kDNA loss but not missegregation phenotype as previously defined for TAC components. We demonstrate that the proteins rely on both the TAC and the kDNA for stable localization to the interface between these two structures. In vitro experiments suggest a direct interaction between TbmtHMG44 and TbKAP68 and that recombinant TbKAP68 is a DNA binding protein. We thus propose that TbmtHMG44 and TbKAP68 are part of a distinct complex connecting the kDNA to the TAC.

### Sample Protocol
Flagella were extracted as described above. We used flagella from TAC102 RNAi, TbmtHMG44 RNAi and TbKAP68 RNAi cell lines, either non-induced or induced for three days. The isolated flagella were resuspended in LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen, NU PAGE) and proteins were denatured at 70°C for 10 minutes. The sample preparation and mass spectrometry were performed as previously described (Amodeo et al., 2021). In brief: The protein lysates were each separated on 10% gradient SDS gels (ThermoFisher Scientific) for 8 min at 180 V. Then the proteins were fixed and stained with a Coomassie solution, and the gel lane was cut into slices, minced, and destained. Proteins were reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C and then alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min, at room temperature, in the dark. To obtain peptides, the proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C and the peptides were extracted from the gel using acetonitrile and ammonium bicarbonate (Rappsilber et al., 2007). For mass spectrometric analysis, peptides were separated on a 50 cm self-packed column (New Objective) with 75 µm inner diameter filled with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH) mounted to an Easy-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and sprayed online into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). We used a 103-min gradient from 3% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated with a top 20 MS/MS data-dependent acquisition scheme per MS full scan.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were searched using the Andromeda search engine integrated into MaxQuant software suite 1.6.5.0 using the TriTrypDB-46_TbruceiTREU927_AnnotatedProteins protein databasem(11,203 entries) (Cox et al., 2011; Cox & Mann, 2008). For the analysis, carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Match between run option was activated. Contaminants, reverse database hits, protein groups only identified by site, and proteingroups with none unique and less than 2 peptides were removed by filtering from the MaxQuant proteinGroups file. Missing values were put in by shifting a beta distribution obtained from the LFQ intensity values to the limit of quantitation. Further analysis and graphical representation was performed in the R framework incorporating ggplot2 package in-house R scripts (R Development Core Team, 2014; Wickham, 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB) Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


