### Accession
PXD045191

### Title
Direct recruitment of Mis18 to interphase spindle poles promotes CENP-A chromatin assembly.

### Description
CENP-A chromatin specifies mammalian centromere identity, and its chaperone HJURP replenishes CENP-A when recruited by the Mis18 complex (Mis18C) via M18BP/KNL2 to CENP-C at kinetochores during interphase. However, the Mis18C recruitment mechanism remains unresolved in species lacking M18BP1, such as fission yeast. Fission yeast centromeres cluster at G2 spindle pole bodies (SPBs) when CENP-ACnp1 is replenished and where Mis18C also localizes. We show that SPBs play an unexpected role in concentrating Mis18C near centromeres through the recruitment of Mis18 by direct binding to the major SPB LInker of Nucleoskeleton and Cytoskeleton (LINC) complex component Sad1. Mis18 recruitment by Sad1 is important for CENP-ACnp1 chromatin establishment and acts in parallel with a CENP-C-mediated Mis18C recruitment pathway to maintain centromeric CENP-ACnp1, but is independent of Sad1-mediated centromere clustering. SPBs therefore provide a non-chromosomal scaffold for both Mis18C recruitment and centromere clustering during G2. This centromere-independent Mis18-SPB recruitment provides a mechanism that governs de novo CENP-ACnp1 chromatin assembly by the proximity of appropriate sequences to SPBs and highlights how nuclear spatial organization influences centromere identity.

### Sample Protocol
IP eluate was reduced with 25 mM DTT at 80°C for 1 min, then denatured by addition of urea to 8M. Sample was applied to a Vivacon 30k MWCO spin filter (Sartorius cat #VN01H21) and centrifuged at 12.5k g for 15-20 minutes. Protein retained on the column was then alkylated with 100 μL of 50 μM iodoacetamide (IAA) in buffer A (8 M urea ,100 mM Tris pH 8.0) in the dark at RT for 20 min. The column was then centrifuged as before, and washed with 100 μL buffer A, then with 2 x 100 μL volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic). 3 μg/μL trypsin (Pierce # 90057) in 0.5 mM AmBic was applied to the column, which was capped and incubated at 37° overnight. Digested peptides were then spun through the filter, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH <= 2, loaded onto manually-prepared and equilibrated C18 reverse-phase resin stage tips (Sigma #66883-U) (Rappsilber et al. 2007), washed with 100 uL 0.1% TFA, and stored at -20°C prior to MS analysis.  Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 2 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). In both cases, peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated at 50°C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (190 min). FTMS spectra were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 7.0×105. MS2 was performed in the ion trap with ion target of 1.0×104 and HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al. 2007) with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann 2008) version 1.6.1.0 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Schizosaccaromyces pombe complete/reference proteome set of PomBase database (released in July, 2016), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011). For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm as described by Cox et al. 2014. Absolute protein quantification was performed as described in Schwanhüusser et al. 2011. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.  Perseus (Tyanova et al. 2016) version 1.6.2.1 was used to analyze output of the MaxQuant searches. Protein identifications based on reverse peptide, potential contaminant, and "only-site" IDs (only modified peptides) were filtered out, as were IDs with less than 2 valid peptide IDs. Intensity values were log2 transformed to facilitate statistical analysis. Replicate data was grouped, and proteins with less than 2 valid values in at least one group were filtered out. Imputation replaced missing values from a normal distribution with settings width = 0.3 and downshift = 1.8. Volcano plots were generated using 2-sample Student's t-tests with a p-value of 0.05. Horiontal cutoffs at y = 1.3 on the plots represent statistical significance by this test. Vertical lines were drawn at Log2(+/-2) enrichment as a guide for meaningful abundance differences.

### Publication Abstract
CENP-A chromatin specifies mammalian centromere identity, and its chaperone HJURP replenishes CENP-A when recruited by the Mis18 complex (Mis18C) via M18BP1/KNL2 to CENP-C at kinetochores during interphase. However, the Mis18C recruitment mechanism remains unresolved in species lacking M18BP1, such as fission yeast. Fission yeast centromeres cluster at G2 spindle pole bodies (SPBs) when CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> is replenished and where Mis18C also localizes. We show that SPBs play an unexpected role in concentrating Mis18C near centromeres through the recruitment of Mis18 by direct binding to the major SPB linker of nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton (LINC) component Sad1. Mis18C recruitment by Sad1 is important for CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin establishment and acts in parallel with a CENP-C-mediated Mis18C recruitment pathway to maintain centromeric CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> but operates independently of Sad1-mediated centromere clustering. SPBs therefore provide a non-chromosomal scaffold for both Mis18C recruitment and centromere clustering during G2. This centromere-independent Mis18-SPB recruitment provides a mechanism that governs de novo CENP-A<sup>Cnp1</sup> chromatin assembly by the proximity of appropriate sequences to SPBs and highlights how nuclear spatial organization influences centromere identity.

### Keywords
Fission yeast, Centromere, Cenp-a chromatin, Mis18 complex

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Nitobe London

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Allshire
University of Edinburgh


