### Accession
PXD006926

### Title
Xenopus A6 cells nanoLC-MS/MS -  The Lhx1-Ldb1 complex interacts with Furry to regulate microRNA expression during pronephric kidney development

### Description
The transcriptional events driving specification of the kidney have been well characterized. However, it remains undetermined how initial kidney field size is established, patterned, and proportioned. Lhx1 is a transcription factor expressed in the kidney anlage and is required for specification of the kidney field, but few Lhx1 interacting cofactors or downstream targets have been identified. By tandem-affinity purification, we isolated Furry (FRY), a multifunctional protein that acts as a transcriptional co-repressor of microRNAs. We found that Xenopus embryos depleted of fry exhibit loss of the kidney field, phenocopying the lhx1 depleted animals. In addition, we demonstrated synergism between Fry and Lhx1, identified candidate microRNAs regulated by the pair, and confirmed these microRNA clusters influence specification of the kidney field. Therefore, our data shows that a tissue-specific transcription factor, Lhx1, interacts with a broadly expressed microRNA repressor, Fry, to establish the kidney field.

### Sample Protocol
A6 cells, derived from Xenopus kidney epithelium (ATCC: CCL-102) were maintained in XTC media. Cells were transfected with the plasmids pCS2+TAP-LL-CA/LL-∆C (Constructs details can be found in Supporting Information) using Lipofectamine 2000 following manufacturer’s instructions (Life Technologies). Transfected cells were culture for 24 h, washed with PBS and stripped by adding cold PBS + 0.5 mM EDTA, centrifuged and the pellet frozen at -80°C. TAP was performed following manufacturer’s instructions (InterPlay Mammalian TAP System, Agilent Technologies).  Half of each submitted sample was separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained with coomassie and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: • Washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. • Reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. • Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. • Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analyzed directly without further processing.  Each gel digest was analyzed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Velos Pro. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75μm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and MS/MS performed in the LTQ. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot with the following parameters: Enzyme: Trypsin Database: Xenbase X. laevis and X.tropicalis (concatenated forward and reverse plus common contaminants) Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Deamidation (N,Q) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance: 10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.8 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold software for validation, filtering and to create a non- redundant list per sample. Data were filtered using a minimum protein value of 90%, a minimum peptide value of 50% (Prophet scores) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular events driving specification of the kidney have been well characterized. However, how the initial kidney field size is established, patterned, and proportioned is not well characterized. Lhx1 is a transcription factor expressed in pronephric progenitors and is required for specification of the kidney, but few Lhx1 interacting proteins or downstream targets have been identified. By tandem-affinity purification, we isolated FRY like transcriptional coactivator (Fryl), one of two paralogous genes, fryl and furry (fry), have been described in vertebrates. Both proteins were found to interact with the Ldb1-Lhx1 complex, but our studies focused on Lhx1/Fry functional roles, as they are expressed in overlapping domains. We found that Xenopus embryos depleted of fry exhibit loss of pronephric mesoderm, phenocopying the Lhx1-depleted animals. In addition, we demonstrated a synergism between Fry and Lhx1, identified candidate microRNAs regulated by the pair, and confirmed these microRNA clusters influence specification of the kidney. Therefore, our data shows that a constitutively-active Ldb1-Lhx1 complex interacts with a broadly expressed microRNA repressor, Fry, to establish the kidney field.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevie, Nanolc-ms/ms, A6, Kidney epithelial cells

### Affiliations
Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, USA
University of Pittsburgh

### Submitter
Eugenel Espiritu

### Lab Head
Dr Neil A Hukriede
Department of Developmental Biology, University of Pittsburgh, USA


