### Accession
PXD011436

### Title
Proteomics of nitrogen metabolism in rhizosphere bacteria

### Description
In this study we use proteomics to study nitrogen metabolism in three taxonomically diverse bacterial strains previously isolated from Arabidopsis roots. The strains were cultivated on five different nitrogen sources (ammonium, glutamate, lysine, serine and urea), and label-free quantitative proteomics was used to profile cellular protein composition.

### Sample Protocol
To frozen cell pellets, 250 uL of lysis buffer (5% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH 7.5) was added, along with ~100 uL of acid-washed glass beads (1 mm diameter). Samples were then incubated for 10 min on an orbital mixer at 95° C with 1500 rpm shaking, then at -80° C for 10 min, then bead-beaten (Bioruptor) at 5 ms-1 for 10 min. Next, samples were again incubated at -80° C for 10 min, then again incubated for 10 min on an orbital mixer at 95° C with 1500 rpm shaking, then again bead-beaten (Bioruptor) at 5 ms-1 for 10 min. Finally, samples were centrifuged at 20,000x g for 10 min at RT, and 200 uL of supernatant was transferred to a new tube. Protein was then precipitated via the addition of 800 uL MeOH, 500 uL H2O, and 200 uL chloroform followed by centrifugation at 10,000x g for 5 min at 4° C. The upper aqueous phase was removed and discarded, then 700 uL MeOH was added to the lower organic phase and samples were centrifuged at 20,0000x g for 10 min at 4° C. Protein pellets were then rinsed twice with -20° C acetone via centriguation at 20,0000x g for 10 min at 4d C, before being air-dried at RT for 15 min. Dried protein pellets were then stored at -80° C. To solubilise protein pellets, 40 uL of solubilisation buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM TEAB, 5 mM DTT) was added, and samples were incubated on an orbital mixer at 28° C for 1 h with 350 rpm mixing. Next, CAA was added to a final concentration of 30 mM, and samples were incubated on an orbital mixer at 28° C for 30 min with 350 rpm mixing in darkness. To quantify protein concentration, an aliquot of the protein extract was taken and diluted 1:8 in water, then a Bradford assay (X) was performed on the diluted protein samples using BSA as standard. Next, 40 ug of protein extract was transferred to a new tube and incubated with 0.8 ug Lys-C for 2 h at 37d C with 350 rpm shaking. Samples were then diluted 1:8 in TEAB, 0.8 ug of trypsin was added, and samples were incubated overnight at 37° C. Next day, samples were acidified by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1%. Peptides were then cleaned up via SPE using SDB-RP stage tips. Following elution from stage tips, peptides were dried down in a vacuum centrifuge and stored at -80° C.  Digested peptides were analysed on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Dried peptides were resolubilised in solvent A (0.1% formic acid), and loaded onto an in-house packed C18 column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell 120, (Agilent)). Following loading, samples were eluted from the C18 column with solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) using a 2.5 h gradient, comprising: linear increase from 4-27% B over 120 min, 27-50% B over 19 min, followed by column washing and equilibration. Flow rate was at 250 nL/min. Data-dependent acquisition was used to acquire MS/MS data, whereby the 10 most abundant ions (charges 2-5) in the survey spectrum were subjected to HCD fragmentation. MS scans were acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000, while MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Following fragmentation, precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Label-free quantification of protein abundance was conducted with MaxQuant v1.5.3.8 (Tyanova et al 2016). Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against FASTA protein sequences for the three studied bacterial strains, obtained from IMG (Chen et al 2017). Sequences of common contaminant proteins were also included in the search database. Protein FDR and PSM FDR were set to 0.01%. Minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Nitrogen metabolism in the rhizosphere microbiome plays an important role in mediating plant nutrition, particularly under low inputs of mineral fertilizers. However, there is relatively little mechanistic information about which genes and metabolic pathways are induced by rhizosphere bacterial strains to utilize diverse nitrogen substrates. Here we investigate nitrogen substrate utilization in three taxonomically diverse bacterial strains previously isolated from Arabidopsis roots. The three strains represent taxa that are consistently detected as core members of the plant microbiome: Pseudomonas, Streptomyces, and Rhizobium. We use phenotype microarrays to determine the nitrogen substrate preferences of these strains, and compare the experimental results vs. computational simulations of genome-scale metabolic network models obtained with EnsembleFBA. Results show that all three strains exhibit generalistic nitrogen substrate preferences, with substrate utilization being well predicted by EnsembleFBA. Using label-free quantitative proteomics, we document hundreds of proteins in each strain that exhibit differential abundance values following cultivation on five different nitrogen sources: ammonium, glutamate, lysine, serine, and urea. The proteomic response to these nitrogen sources was strongly strain-dependent, with lysine nutrition eliciting widespread protein-level changes in <i>Pseudomonas</i> sp. <i>Root9</i>, whereas <i>Rhizobium</i> sp. <i>Root491</i> showed relatively stable proteome composition across different nitrogen sources. Our results give new protein-level information about the specific transporters and enzymes induced by diverse rhizosphere bacterial strains to utilize organic nitrogen substrates.

### Keywords
Nitrogen; bacteria; metabolism; amino acids; proteomics; mass spectrometry; rhizosphere microbiome; bacterial root microbiota

### Affiliations
University of Cologne, Botanical Institute and CEPLAS
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Richard Jacoby

### Lab Head
Dr Stanislav Kopriva
University of Cologne, Botanical Institute and CEPLAS


