### Accession
PXD013499

### Title
Identification of potential interacting proteins for Drosophila IRP1A, IRP1B, AGBE

### Description
In an effort to understand the relationship between iron homeostasis and glycogen synthesis in Drosophila, we performed mass spectrometry to identify any candidate interact with IRP1A or IRP1B, the Drosophila orthologs of human IRP1/Aco1 as well as AGBE, the Drosophila ortholog of human GBE1.

### Sample Protocol
Target genes were tagged with 3xFlag epitope tag using CRISPR. Samples containing either whole body larvae or ring gland were collected for protein extraction. Protein lysates were incubated with anti-Flag agarose beads to purify target proteins. To look for any proteins being pulled down together with target proteins, samples were run on the SDS gels followed by commassie blue staining. Gel bands were excised and digested with trypsin. Fractions containing tryptic peptides were resolved and ionized by using nanoflow HPLC coupled to an LTQ XL-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometerNanoflow chromatography and electrospray ionization were accomplished by using a PicoFrit fused silica capillary column. Peptide mixtures were injected onto the column at a flow rate of 3000 nl/min and resolved at 500 nl/min using a 60 minute linear gradient from 0 to 45% v/v aqueous ACN in 0.2% v/v formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, recording high-accuracy and high-resolution survey Orbitrap spectra using external mass calibration,  with a resolution of 30,000 and m/z range of 400-2000. The fourteen most intense multiply charged ions were sequentially fragmented by using collision induced dissociation, and a spectra of their fragments were recorded in the linear ion trap. After two fragmentations, all precursors selected for dissociation were dynamically excluded for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Peptides were searched with carbamidomethyl cysteine as a static modification and oxidized methionine and deamidated glutamine and asparagine as dynamic modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Iron Regulatory Protein 1 (IRP1) is a bifunctional cytosolic iron sensor. When iron levels are normal, IRP1 harbours an iron-sulphur cluster (holo-IRP1), an enzyme with aconitase activity. When iron levels fall, IRP1 loses the cluster (apo-IRP1) and binds to iron-responsive elements (IREs) in messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encoding proteins involved in cellular iron uptake, distribution, and storage. Here we show that mutations in the Drosophila 1,4-Alpha-Glucan Branching Enzyme (AGBE) gene cause porphyria. AGBE was hitherto only linked to glycogen metabolism and a fatal human disorder known as glycogen storage disease type IV. AGBE binds specifically to holo-IRP1 and to mitoNEET, a protein capable of repairing IRP1 iron-sulphur clusters. This interaction ensures nuclear translocation of holo-IRP1 and downregulation of iron-dependent processes, demonstrating that holo-IRP1 functions not just as an aconitase, but throttles target gene expression in anticipation of declining iron requirements.

### Keywords
Larvae, Glycogen, Drosophila, Iron, Prothoracic gland

### Affiliations
University of Alberta

### Submitter
Nhan Huynh

### Lab Head
Dr Nhan Huynh
University of Alberta


