### Accession
PXD027366

### Title
Myxopyronin B inhibits growth of a Fidaxomicin-resistant Clostridioides difficile isolate and interferes with toxin synthesis

### Description
Fidaxomicin is considered the current gold standard antibiotic for treating Clostridioides difficile infections and kills bacterial cells by inhibition of the RNA polymerase through binding to its switch region. Although binding sites do not overlap, also Myxopyronin B inhibits the RNA polymerase by binding its switch region. The here presented data prove that there is no cross-resistance between Fidaxomicin and Myxopyronin B in a Fidaxomicin-resistant C. difficile strain. Moreover, comparative LC-MS/MS analyses of Fidaxomicin, Myxopyronin B and Rifaximin stress in C. difficile strain 630 revealed that Myxopyronin B is able to suppress early phase toxin synthesis in C. difficile to the same degree as Fidaxomicin. Conclusively, Myxopyronin B is proposed as lead structure for the design of novel antibiotics for the therapy of C. difficile infections.

### Sample Protocol
C. difficile 630 was grown in CDMM medium (Neumann-Schaal et al., 2015) to mid-exponential phase and stressed with Rifaximin (1.75 ng/ml), Fidaxomcin (6 ng/ml), and Myxopyronin B (500 ng/ml). Cells were grown in the presence of the antibiotics for further 90 minutes. Treated cells and cells grown with DMSO only were harvested and proteins were extracted by bead beating in a FastPrep-25 homogenizer (MP Biomedicals, Santa Ana, California, USA; three cycles at 6.5 m/s à 30 s). Glass beads and cell debris were removed by three centrifugation steps at 15,000 rpm and 4 °C. Protein extracts were stored at -70 °C. Protein concentrations were determined using Roti®-Nanoquant (Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and 50 µg of each protein extract 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA), alkylated with 20 mM IAA (IAA; Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and acidified with phosphoric acid (Carl Roth®, Karlsruhe, Germany). Samples were loaded on S-traps (ProtiFi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) and proteins were digested with trypsin according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Trypsinized peptides were purified and fractionated by a basic reverse phase workflow on self-packed C18 columns as done previously (Mücke et al., 2020). MS samples were analyzed on a Q Exactive™ HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA). Peptides loaded onto self-packed analytical columns with integrated emitter (100 µm x 20 cm) containing C18 reverse phase material (3 µm, Dr. Maisch) and were eluted using a 85 min gradient from 5 to 50 % of acetonitrile, 0.1 % acetic acid at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Full survey scans were performed with a resolution of 60,000 in the range of 333 – 1650 m/z. MS/MS scans were performed for the fifteen most abundant precursor ions per scan cycle excluding unassigned charge states and singly charged ions and dynamic exclusion enabled for 30 s. Internal lock mass calibration was applied (lock mass 445.12003).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were searched against a strain specific protein database (3762 entries, obtained from Uniprot on March 15th, 2021 (UP000001978)) using the Andromeda based search engine MaxQuant ((Cox et al., 2011); version 1.6.17.0). Common contaminants and reverse sequences were added by the MaxQuant software. Parameters were set as follows: Trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages was assumed. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Default parameters were used for protein identification. For label-free protein quantification unique and razor peptides were considered with a minimum ratio count of 2. Match between runs was enabled with default settings within each sample group. C. difficile proteins were considered as identified if they were identified with at least two unique peptides in at least two out of three biological replicates. Averaged LFQ intensities were used to calculate log2 fold changes. For identification of significantly changed protein intensities the R package DEqMS was used (Zhu et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myxopyronin b, Antibiotic resistance, Antibiotic therapy, Clostridioides difficile, Fidaxomicin, Rifaximin, Toxins, Rna polymerase inhibitors

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


