### Accession
PXD005157

### Title
Differential proteomic comparison of the breast cancer secretome using a quantitative paired analysis workflow

### Description
Worldwide, breast cancer is the main cause of cancer mortality in women. Most cases originate in mammary ductal cells that secrete the nipple aspirate fluid (NAF). In cancer patients, this breast secretome contains proteins associated with the tumor microenvironment. NAF studies are challenging because inter-individual variability is substantial. To better address this limitation, we introduced a paired-proteomic strategy that relies on NAF sample analysis from both breasts of patients with unilateral breast cancer. We developed a software extension to the PatternLab for Proteomics software to take advantage of this setup. Briefly, the software relies on a peptide-centric approach and uses the binomial distribution to attribute a probability for each peptide as being linked to the disease or not; these probabilities are then propagated to a final protein p-value according to the Stouffer’s Z-score method. Our approach was applied to both a discovery-driven (shotgun) analysis of NAF samples and a hypothesis-driven (targeted) assessment of 19 cancer-related proteins described in the literature. Shotgun results culminated in the reliable quantitative proteomic profiling of NAF samples from healthy and cancer cohorts. A total of 1,083 proteins were identified, of which 77 were differentially abundant, being mainly involved in glycolysis (Warburg effect) and immune system activation (activated stroma). Additionally, in the estrogen receptor-positive subgroup, proteins related to the lipid metabolism and the complement cascade displayed higher abundance, as expected for this well-differentiated subtype of cancer. The targeted analysis of NAF samples from triple negative patients revealed three differentially abundant proteins related to cell migration/attraction and tumor cell differentiation. In summary, we debuted a paired differential bioinformatics workflow, performing a proof-of-principal differential proteomic analysis of NAF samples in unilateral breast cancers patients. The results revealed a promising statistical paired analysis workflow, thus validating NAF as a treasure-trove for studying this paired-organ cancer type.

### Sample Protocol
One hundred micrograms of lyophilized NAF proteins were dissolved in 20 μL of 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate/ 8 M urea and reduced by incubating in 5 μL of 100 mM dithiothreitol in water for 3 h at 37°C. After cooling to room temperature, the sample was alkylated with 5 μL of 400 mM iodacetamide in water for 15 min in the dark at room temperature. The urea concentration was reduced to 1 M following the addition of 130 μL of deionized water. Trypsin (Promega, San Luis Obispo, CA, USA) was added at an enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) and digestion was performed for 18 h at 37 °C. Formic acid was added to the digest to reach a final concentration of 1% (v/v). The digested peptide mixture was desalted by using homemade tip columns packed with Poros R2 resin (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). To ensure similar recovery yields for all samples, only half the saturating amount of sample was applied to similar sized columns. Samples were finally dried in a vacuum centrifuge (20).  Desalted tryptic peptides were resuspended in 100 µL of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. One microliter of peptide solution was used for concentration determination based on the absorbance at 280 nm (NanoDrop 2000 Spectrophotometer, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, Germany). Samples were then analyzed by nLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Peptide-spectrum matching was performed using the Comet search engine (version 2016.01), which is available inside the computational environment of PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0, http://patternlabforproteomics.org) (21). Sequences from Homo sapiens were downloaded from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (containing 20,160 entries, on September 20, 2016, from http://www.uniprot.org/). The final search database, constructed by the PatternLab’s Search Database Generator tool, included a reverse decoy for each target sequence plus sequences from 127 common contaminants, such as BSA, keratin and trypsin (final number of entries 40,574). The search parameters applied included: fully tryptic and semi-tryptic peptide candidates with masses between 550 and 5,500 Da, peptide sequences with up to two missed cleavages, 40 ppm for precursor mass and bins of 1.0005 m/z for MS/MS. The modifications were carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as fixed and variable, respectively. The validity of the peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was assessed using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) (21). Identifications were grouped by tryptic status (tryptic and semi-tryptic), resulting in two distinct subgroups. For each result, the XCorr, DeltaCN, and Comet’s secondary score values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminator. A cutoff score was established to accept a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% (peptide level). A minimum sequence length of 6 amino acid residues was required and the results were further filtered to only accept PSMs with precursor mass error of less than 6 ppm. Proteins identified by only one spectrum (i.e., 1-hit-wonders) having an XCorr below 2.5 were excluded from the identification list. The post-processing filter resulted in a global FDR, at the protein level, of less than 1% and was independent of the tryptic status (22).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Breast cancer, Paired analysis

### Affiliations
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Av. Brasil 4365, Manguinhos 21040-360, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil

### Submitter
Giselle Brunoro

### Lab Head
Dr Jonas Perales
Laboratory of Toxinology, Oswaldo Cruz Institute, Fiocruz, Av. Brasil 4365, Manguinhos 21040-360, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil


