### Accession
PXD037455

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana root tissue plasma membrane protein enrichment following Endosidin2 treatment

### Description
Using a previously identified small molecule inhibitor of the plant exocyst complex subunit EXO70A1, Endosidin2 (ES2), combined with a plasma membrane enrichment method and quantitative proteomic analysis, we examined the composition of plasma membrane proteins in the root of Arabidopsis seedlings, after inhibition of the ES2-targetted exocyst complex.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Membrane Enrichment: Arabidopsis seeds were sterilized and sowed on half-strength Murashige and Skoog (½ MS) media with vitamins (Caisson Labs, Smithfield, UT, USA) and 0.8% agar (Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Six-day-old seedlings were removed from the agar plates and transferred to liquid ½ MS media with 40 μM ES2 or 0.5% DMSO. After two hours treatment under light, the roots of the seedlings were quickly excised and transferred to the plasma membrane enrichment buffer. The process of plasma membrane enrichment followed exactly the published protocol (Collins et al., 2017). The plasma membrane enrichment experiments were repeated four times under identical conditions.
Methanol-Chloroform Precipitation: The mass spectrometry sample preparation procedure was based on previous literature (Hsu et al., 2018). Protein concentrations from enriched plasma membrane fractions were quantified using the bicinchoninic acid method. For each sample, 250 μg of enriched plasma membrane protein was processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Proteins from each sample were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TECP) and 40 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) at 95°C for 5 min. Methanol, chloroform, and ddH2O were added to each 100 µl sample in a volume ratio of 4:1:3, respectively (Wessel and Flügge, 1984). The solution was mixed and centrifuged at 16,000x g for 3 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. Four volumes of methanol were added to the sample after removing the upper aqueous layer carefully without disturbing the intermediate protein disk. The solution was mixed and centrifuged again at the same settings. The supernatant was removed, the precipitated protein pellet was washed with 400 µL methanol, and the sample was air-dried. 
Protein Digestion: The precipitated protein pellet was dissolved with 100 µl of 12 mM sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and 12 mM sodium lauroyl sarcosinate (SLS) in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). Protein amount was quantified by BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dissolved protein extract was diluted 5-fold with 50 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate buffer (TEAB) and digested with Lys-C in a ratio of 1:100 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3 h at 37°C, and trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight at 37°C. SDC and SLS were removed by adding 100% acetyl acetate in a ratio of 1:1 (vol/vol) sample to acetyl acetate volume ratio. The digests were desalted by homemade stage tip with styrene divinyl benzene (SDB-XC) membrane (3M) after the digests were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH ~3. 
Dimethyl Labeling: Every 50–100 µg of tryptic peptides was dissolved in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB and mixed with 4 µl of 4% 13CD2O for DMSO-treated samples or 12CH2O for ES2-treated samples, and then 4 µl of freshly prepared 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride was immediately added (Boersema et al., 2009). The mixture was agitated for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 16 µl of ice-cold 1% ammonium hydroxide and agitated for 1 min. Heavy and light dimethyl-labeled peptides were mixed after the labeled peptides were acidified with 20 µl of 10% formic acid and then fractionated by basic pH reverse-phase stage tips. 
Basic pH Reverse-phase Fractionation: Two mg of the Magic C18-AQ beads (5 µm particles) were suspended in 200 µL of methanol and loaded into a 200 µL StageTip with a 20 µm polypropylene frit (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA) (Dimayacyac-Esleta et al., 2015). The C18 StageTip was activated with 50 µL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) and washed with 50 µL of 200 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. Dimethyl-labeled peptides 25–50 µg were fractionated from the StageTip with 50 µL of 6 different ACN concentrations: 5, 10, 15, 20, 25% and 80% of ACN in 200 mM ammonium formate, pH 10. The eluted peptides were dried and stored at -20°C.
LC-MS/MS Analysis: Twenty-five µg of dimethyl-labeled peptides used in fractionations were dissolved in 5 µL of 0.3% formic acid (FA) with 3% ACN and 4 µL of each fraction injected into an EasynLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 45 cm in-house packed column (360 µm OD × 75 µm ID) containing C18 resin (2.2 µm, 100Å, Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA, USA) with a 30 cm column heater (Analytical Sales and Services, Flanders, NJ, USA) set at 60°C. The mobile phase buffer for 25 µg peptide fractions consisted of 0.1% FA in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (buffer B) run with a 150 min gradient of 5–30% buffer B at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Easy-nLC 1000 was coupled online with a Velos Pro LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode in which a full MS scan (from m/z 350–1500 with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400) was followed by MS/MS of the 10 most intense ions being subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation (normalized collision energy–30%, automatic gain control–3E4, max injection time–100 ms).



### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched directly against the Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (TAIR10) with no redundant entries using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016a) with 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff for protein and peptide. The first peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6 Da. Search criteria included a static carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modifications of oxidation on methionine residues and acetylation at N-terminus of proteins. The search was performed with full tryptic digestion and allowed a maximum of two missed cleavages on the peptides analyzed from the sequence database. Dimethyl-labeling quantitation was performed by setting the multiplicity as 2 (DimethLys0 and DimethNter0; DimethLys6 and DimethNter6). Re-quantify and match between runs function were enabled. After database searches, the Perseus software platform (Version 1.6.1.3) (Tyanova et al., 2016b) was used to further analyze the MaxQuant-derived protein groups file.

### Publication Abstract
To sustain normal growth and allow rapid responses to environmental cues, plants alter the plasma membrane protein composition under different conditions presumably by regulation of delivery, stability, and internalization. Exocytosis is a conserved cellular process that delivers proteins and lipids to the plasma membrane or extracellular space in eukaryotes. The octameric exocyst complex contributes to exocytosis by tethering secretory vesicles to the correct site for membrane fusion; however, whether the exocyst complex acts universally for all secretory vesicle cargo or just for specialized subsets used during polarized growth and trafficking is currently unknown. In addition to its role in exocytosis, the exocyst complex is also known to participate in membrane recycling and autophagy. Using a previously identified small molecule inhibitor of the plant exocyst complex subunit EXO70A1, Endosidin2 (ES2), combined with a plasma membrane enrichment method and quantitative proteomic analysis, we examined the composition of plasma membrane proteins in the root of Arabidopsis seedlings, after inhibition of the ES2-targetted exocyst complex, and verified our findings by live imaging of GFP-tagged plasma membrane proteins in root epidermal cells. The abundance of 145 plasma membrane proteins was significantly reduced following short-term ES2 treatments and these likely represent candidate cargo proteins of exocyst-mediated trafficking. Gene Ontology analysis showed that these proteins play diverse functions in cell growth, cell wall biosynthesis, hormone signaling, stress response, membrane transport, and nutrient uptake. Additionally, we quantified the effect of ES2 on the spatial distribution of EXO70A1 with live-cell imaging. Our results indicate that the plant exocyst complex mediates constitutive dynamic transport of subsets of plasma membrane proteins during normal root growth.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Enriched plasma membrane

### Affiliations
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Purdue University
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University

### Submitter
Xiaohui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Staiger
Department of Botany and Plant Pathology, Department of Biological Sciences, Purdue University


