### Accession
PXD011792

### Title
In vivo proteome of Pseudomonas aeruginosa in airways of cystic fibrosis patients

### Description
Chronic airway infection with P. aeruginosa (PA) is a hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) disease.  The mechanisms producing PA persistence in CF therapies remain poorly understood.  To gain insight on PA physiology in patient airways and better understand how in vivo bacterial functioning differs from in vitro conditions, we investigated the in vivo proteomes of PA in 35 sputum samples from 11 CF patients.  We developed a novel bacterial-enrichment method enabling improved identification of PA proteome with CF sputum samples.   The in vivo PA proteomes were compared with the proteomes of ex vivo-grown PA populations from the same patient sample.   We detected 1528 PA proteins (encoded by 1458 core genes and 70 accessory genes) that were expressed in CF airways, of which 1178 proteins were commonly identified with the ex vivo-grown PA populations.  Label-free quantitation and proteome comparison revealed the in vivo up-regulation of siderophore TonB-dependent receptors, remodeling in central carbon metabolism including glyoxylate cycle and lactate utilization, and alginate overproduction.  Knowledge of these in vivo proteome differences or others derived using the presented methodology could lead to future treatment strategies aimed at altering PA physiology in vivo to compromise infectivity or improve antibiotic efficacy.

### Sample Protocol
The CF sputum samples were homogenized with 5 volumes of PBS containing 0.1% DTT, and were plated on MacConkey agar plates, and grown for 2 days at 37°C.  Colony counts were recorded, and 96 PA colonies were randomly selected from each CF sputum sample, and cryopreserved in 20% glycerol.  This study was approved by the University of Washington Institutional Review Board (#50542). The CF sputum samples were homogenized, and were subjected to two rounds of centrifugation at 4°C, including 100 × g for 10 min and 10,000 × g for 20 to collect a sputum pellet that was enriched for bacteria.   The pellet was subsequently washed with 0.1% (v/v) of Triton X-100 and with 0.1% (v/v) of Brij 58.  The final pellet was stored at -80°C freezer, before processing for proteomics analysis. Proteins were extracted from PA cell pellets, CF sputum pellets, or raw sputum samples using the extraction buffer [100 mM Tris (pH 8.0), 4 % SDS, 10 mM DTT] with incubation at 95 °C heating block for 5 min.  The extraction mixtures were vortexed for 30 s, and were sonicated with a GE-130 ultrasonic processor using settings of 50% amplitude, 30 s duration for two cycles.  SDS was removed through buffer exchange with Amicon filters (10 KDa MWCO) (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA).  Proteins were alkylated, and digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA), and peptides were purified with C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA).   Proteome samples were analyzed with a VELOS-FTICR system coupled to a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC, or with a Q Exactive Plus system coupled to a Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Proteome data were searched with Comet (65) (version 2015.01 rev.02) against the concatenated database containing forward and reverse protein sequences of human genome, PAO1 core genome, and PA accessory genome (35) (total of 80,200 entries, downloaded from Uniprot (66) and Pseudomonas Genome Database (67) on April 20, 2015).  The core genome sequence of Pseudomonas aeruginosa was determined from 12 reference genomes using Spine v0.1.2 with a core genome definition of sequences present in at least 11 of the 12 references as previously described (35). Using this core genome sequence and the software package AGEnt v0.1.2 (35), the accessory genome portions of 100 Pseudomonas aeruginosa isolates obtained from patients with bloodstream infections were determined from their draft genome assemblies.  Accession numbers of genome sequences are provided in Supplemental Material.  Unique accessory element sequences, defined as those sequences at least 200 bp in length with at least 85% nucleotide similarity, were determined using ClustAGE software v0.4 (68).    The search settings for VELOS-FT data included 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 13C offsets (-1/0/1/2/3) enabled, fragment bin tolerance 1.0005, fragment bin offset 0.4, variable modifications of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da), fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021464 Da).  Only fully tryptic peptide sequences were considered and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed.  The Comet search for the QE plus data was performed with the same parameter settings as VELOS-FT data, except for that fragment bin tolerance 0.01 and fragment bin offset 0 were used for QE plus data.  A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was use as a cutoff for acceptable peptide identification score.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic airway infection with P.&#xa0;aeruginosa (PA) is a hallmark of cystic fibrosis (CF) disease. The mechanisms producing PA persistence in CF therapies remain poorly understood. To gain insight on PA physiology in patient airways and better understand how in vivo bacterial functioning differs from in vitro conditions, we investigated the in vivo proteomes of PA in 35 sputum samples from 11 CF patients. We developed a novel bacterial-enrichment method that relies on differential centrifugation and detergent treatment to enrich for bacteria to improve identification of PA proteome with CF sputum samples. Using two nonredundant peptides as a cutoff, a total of 1304 PA proteins were identified directly from CF sputum samples. The in vivo PA proteomes were compared with the proteomes of ex vivo-grown PA populations from the same patient sample. Label-free quantitation and proteome comparison revealed the in vivo up-regulation of siderophore TonB-dependent receptors, remodeling in central carbon metabolism including glyoxylate cycle and lactate utilization, and alginate overproduction. Knowledge of these in vivo proteome differences or others derived using the presented methodology could lead to future treatment strategies aimed at altering PA physiology in vivo to compromise infectivity or improve antibiotic efficacy.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Cystic fibrosis, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Bacterial population proteomes

### Affiliations
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Xia Wu

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
University of Washington Department of Genome Sciences


