### Accession
PXD003399

### Title
The comparative proteomics research of Toxoplasma infection in mice liver

### Description
The comparative proteomics research of Toxoplasma infection in mice liver

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were ground into powder in liquid nitrogen, extracted with Lysis buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 4℅ CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing 1mM PMSF and 2mM EDTA (final concentration). After 5 min, 10 mM DTT (final concentration) was added to the samples. The suspension was sonicated at 200 W for 15 min and then centrifuged at 4 °C, 30 000g for 15 min. The supernatant was mixed well with 5× volume of chilled acetone containing 10% (v/v) TCA and incubated at -20 °C overnight. After centrifugation at 4 °C, 30 000g, the supernatant was discarded.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo),[5600 msconverter] and the MGF file were searched. Proteins identification were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK;version 2.3.02) against database containing xxx sequences. For protein identification, a mass tolerance of xx Da(ppm) was permitted for intact peptide masses and xx Da for fragmented ions, with allowance for one missed cleavages in the trypsin digests. Gln->pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated (NQ) as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) as fixed modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2, Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg, Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Itraq8plex, Toxoplasma gondii, Liver, Tripletof 5600

### Affiliations
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Junjun He

### Lab Head
Dr Xingquan zhu
Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences (LVRI, CAAS)


