### Accession
PXD002254

### Title
Using proteomics to understand seed development in Phaseolus vulgaris L.: developing resources to modulate seed quality traits

### Description
Common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is the most consumed grain legume in developing countries in Latin America and Sub-Saharan Africa1. Like other legumes, common bean seeds are rich in protein, carbohydrates, fibers and other health-promoting phenolic compounds thus being vital for food security and income source for local small farmers2. Seed quality traits depend on accumulation of various storage molecules during the seed development (SD) process and influenced by the genotype and adaptive changes to environment3. Concerning common bean, there is still a lack of a deeper molecular knowledge of SD that is hampering the development of new biotech approaches for seed trait modulation and could timely address challenges of agriculture or industry. Our present work aims to unravel the molecular mechanisms underlying SD using a proteomic approach. To achieve this goal, we characterized SD in terms biomass, seed length and weight in the genotype SER16, one of the most promissory drought-resistant release of the CIAT-CGIAR. Seed samples were collected at the 4 main SD stages: Late-Embryogenesis (10 days after anthesis, d.a.a.), Early (20 d.a.a.) and Late Maturation (30 d.a.a.) and Desiccation (40 d.a.a.). The analysis of bean proteome was conducted using a gel-free proteomic analysis (LC-MS/MS) under the scope of EU-FP7-PRIME-XS project. A total of 410 unique proteins were differentially expressed throughout the 4 major seed development stages, in which most of the identified proteins belong in the ‘protein metabolism’ (31,98%) functional category, that includes synthesis, regulation, folding. Other functional categories are represented such as carbohydrate and lipid metabolism (11,26%) and stress/defense and redox metabolism (11,04%). We identified 93 proteins were unique to the first (10-20 d.a.a.), 22 to the second (20-30 d.a.a.) and 40 to the last (30-40 d.a.a.) phase transition, reflecting the major biological processes occurring at this specific seed developmental stage. This study will contribute to reveal key metabolic pathways and mechanisms with potential role in modulating common bean seed development and quality traits.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation After the samples were centrifuged (20,000 x g for 10 min at 4 ˚C) the supernatants were reduced with 2 mM dithiothreitol (Fluka, Buch, CH) for 30 min at 56 ˚C and alkylated with 4 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Steinheim, DE) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The proteins were digested with Lys-C (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100) for 4h at 37 ˚C. Subsequently trypsin was added for an overnight digestion at 37 ˚C (enzyme/substrate ratio 1:100) (Promega, Madison, WI). The peptides were separated and analyzed on a LC-MS/MS system with a label-free approach. LC-MS/MS After resuspended in 10% formic acid (FA) the peptides were analyzed using nanoflow reversed phase liquid chromatography on a Proxeon Easy-nLC 100 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, DE) connected to a LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, DE). The peptides were first trapped with 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) on an in-house-made double-fritted trap column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm x 100 cm, Dr Maisch, GmbH Ammerbuch, Germany) before being separated on an in-house-made analytical column (2.7 µm, 50 µm x 50 cm, Agilent Zorbax SB-C18, Amstelveen, The Netherlands). The buffers used were buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitril). The 120 min gradient starts with 7% buffer B (0.1% FA in ACN) and goes up to 30% in 90 min and then to 100% B in 30 min at a flow rate of 150 nl/min. After the separation the peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap mass spectrometer, introduced through a nanoelectrospray ion source by using an in-house-made fused silica needle (10 µm inner diameter tip) applied at a voltage of 1.7 kV. Full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375 to 1600 were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60 000. The 20 most intense ions were selected for collision-induced fragmentation in the linear ion trap at a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) was used for the analysis of raw data[1,2]. The data were searched against the Phaseolus vulgaris L. Uniprot FASTA database (version of December 15, 2014): (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=Phaseolus&sort=score). False discovery rate was set to 1% for peptide. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. The minimum peptide length was specified to be seven amino acids. The initial maximal mass tolerance in MS mode was set to 7 ppm, whereas fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for fragment data. The acquired data from MaxQuant were used to perform bioinformatics analysis with Perseus (version 1.5.1.6). Several matrix’s were used to filter contaminations and not significantly proteins. For the normalization the Transform matrix was used and set on log2. Running a volcano plot with t-test, using false discovery of 5%, shows which protein are significantly up-, down- regulated and which protein are not significantly changed.

### Publication Abstract
Ovaries were taken from five sexually mature amphipods: Gammarus fossarum, Gammarus pulex, Gammarus roeseli, Hyallela azteca and Parhyale hawaiensis. The soluble proteome extracted from individual pair of ovaries from five biological replicates was trypsin digested and the resulting peptides were analyzed by high resolution tandem mass spectrometry. The spectra were assigned with four protein sequence databases with different specificities: a RNAseq-derived G. fossarum database; a RNAseq-derived P. hawaiensis database; both originating from ovaries transcriptome; the Daphnia pulex database derived from whole-genome sequencing and the NCBInr database. The best interpretation was obtained for most animals with the specific RNA-seq protein database previously established by means of RNAseq carried out on G. fossarum. Proteins identified in the five amphipod species allow defining the core-proteome of female reproductive tissues of the Senticaudata suborder. The data accompanying the manuscript describing the database searches and comparative analysis Trapp et al., 2015 [1] have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD002253 (G. fossarum), PXD002254 (G. pulex), PXD002255 (G. roeseli), PXD002256 (H. Azteca), and PXD002257 (P. hawaiensis).

### Keywords
Seed development, Seed trait modulation, Metabolic pathways, Label-free, Seed quality

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Jamila Bouraada

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


