### Accession
PXD014096

### Title
Label-free proteomic approach to study the non-lethal effects of silver  nanoparticles on a biofilm gut model

### Description
Among all the food-related nanoparticles consumed every day, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs),due totheir anti-microbial properties, are one of the most commonly utilized. Despite this, the effects of sub-lethal concentrations of AgNPs, especially on gut biofilms, has been poorly investigated. To address these issues, we investigated the proteomic response of a mono-species Escherichia coli gut biofilm, used as in-vitro human gut model, to chronic and acute exposure of sub-lethal concentrations(1 µg/mL) of AgNPs. We used a new gel and label-free proteomic approach based on shotgun nanoflow scale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) that, respect to the traditional proteomic investigation, allows a higher dynamic range of quantification of the whole proteome. To assess all different possible exposure scenarios, we compared the total proteome of four samples: untreated cells, cells treated with AgNPs for 24h (acute treatment), for 96h (chronic treatment), and cells grown in the presence of AgNPs for 96h and treated again for 24h (acute and chronic treatment). Proteomic profiling provided new insight into the mechanisms exerted by AgNPs highlighting the important role of the bacterial biofilm in protecting intestinal epithelial cells. Among the 1917 proteins identified, 216 were ANOVA significant and several pathways resulted altered including biofilm formation, bacterial adhesion, ROS stress response and glucose utilization.

### Sample Protocol
The cell pellet was resuspended in 4% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6 and 100 mM DTT, boiled for 5’ and centrifuged 30’ at 13000 rpm . Proteins were quantified with 2-D Quant Kit (GE healthcare), 200 μg of protein were then trypsinized using the two digestion FASP method.Digested samples were directly analyzed on a QExactive mass spectrometer coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. For each sample, 4 μL of peptides were loaded on a self-made column (75 μm × 150 mm) packed with reverse-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient from 2 to 35% B in 80 min, 47% B in 4 min and 98% B in 4 min. Samples were acquired in a randomized order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA), acquiring full-scan MS spectra (300−1700 m/z) at a resolution of 70000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 3000000, followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation on the twelve most intense signals per cycle. HCD spectra were acquired at a resolution of 35,000 using a normalized collision energy of 25 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 50000 ions. Charge state screening was enabled and singly and unassigned charge states were rejected. Only precursors with an intensity above 8300 were selected for MS/MS(2% underfill ratio). Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 30 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1010 and 445.1200.

### Data Protocol
Raw data obtained from the mass spectrometer were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.5.3.3 (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start) for peptide identification and quantifications.Identification was performed with MaxQuant integrated Andromeda search engine against the against the UniProt E. coli protein database (1352175 entries), downloaded Sept 29, 2016. Searches settings were: two missed cleavage; fixed modification of cysteine (carbamidomethylation); variable modifications of methionine (oxidation); the minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; 4.5 ppm MS and 0.5 Da MS/MS tolerance; “match between runs” option; a target-decoy search strategy. Identifications were accepted with false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% for peptide and proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acute and chronic exposure, Gut biofilm, Non-lethal effects, Label free proteomics, Silver nanoparticles

### Affiliations
Lab. Fisiologia vegetale. Uninsubria, Varese . Italy
Uninsubria

### Submitter
Guido Domingo

### Lab Head
Dr Dr.ssa Milena Marsoni
Lab. Fisiologia vegetale. Uninsubria, Varese . Italy


