### Accession
PXD005734

### Title
ABPP of Ibrutinib Resistance in B Cell Malignancies

### Description
Ibrutinib,a novel Bruton'styrosine kinase inhibitor, demonstrated high response rates in B-cell lymphomas but a growing number of ibrutinib treated patients relapse with resistance, fulminant progression and accelerated mortality. Using chemical proteomics and a high-throughput ex vivo assay in a reconstructed tumor microenvironment (TME), we determined the molecular basis for ibrutinib activity and mechanism of acquired ibrutinib resistance.  Reciprocal activation of PI3K-AKT-mTOR and integrin β1 signaling were identified as a signaling hub of kinome for ibrutinib resistance, resulting in enforced TME-lymphoma interactions, promoting mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) growth and drug resistance. Combinatorial disruption of BCR signaling and ibrutinib resistance associated pathways led to release of MCL cells from TME, reversal of drugresistance and enhanced anti-MCL activity in murine and patient-derived xenograft models. This study integrated TME-mediated de-novo and acquired drug resistance mechanisms and provides the rationale for novel combination therapeutic strategy against MCL and other B cell malignancies.

### Sample Protocol
Activity-Based Protein Profiling (ABPP) Cell pellets were sonicated briefly in IP/Lysis buffer containing 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and 5% glycerol and centrifuged to clear the lysate. The supernatant was passed through a Zeba spin desalting column (Catalog # 89891, Thermo), which had been conditioned 3 times with reaction buffer containing 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Triton X-100 at pH 7.4. An aliquot (1 mg) of total protein was labeled with 10 μM desthiobiotin-ATP reagent (catalog # 88310, Thermo) at room temperature for 10 minutes. After reduction with 500 mM DTT at 65 ºC for 30 minutes and alkylation with 1 M iodoacetamide in darkness for 30 minutes, the labeled proteins were passed through the Zeba spin desalting column, which had been conditioned 3 times with digestion buffer containing 2 M urea, 20 mM Tris, pH 8.0 and trypsin in solution digestion was carried out at 37 ºC for two hours with enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50. The labeled peptides were captured with high capacity streptavidin agarose resin at room temperature for 1 hour. After 3 washes with IP/Lysis buffer, 4 washes with PBS and 4 washes with H2O, the peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After Speedvac concentration, the peptides were re-dissolved in aqueous 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. For drug treatment experiments, the cells were treated for 6 h prior to collection with 2 micromolar Ibrutinib to inhibit BTK and other potential drug targets. LC-MS/MS  A nanoflow liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) interfaced with an electrospray ion trap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo, San Jose, CA) was used for tandem mass spectrometry peptide sequencing experiments and relative quantification of ATP probe uptake.  The sample was first loaded onto a pre-column (2 cm x 100 micron ID packed with PepMap C18 reversed-phase resin, 5 micron particle size, 100Å pore size) and washed for 8 minutes with aqueous 2% acetonitrile containing 0.04% trifluoroacetic acid.  The trapped peptides were then eluted onto the analytical column, (C18, 75 micron ID x 50 cm packed with PepMap C18 reversed-phase resin, 2 micron particle size, 100Å pore size, Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA).  The gradient was programmed as: 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) for 8 minutes, solvent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 50% in 90 minutes, increasing from 50% to 90% B in 7 minutes, then held at 90% for 5 minutes.  Re-equilibration was achieved by decreasing solvent B from 90% to 5% in 1 minute and holding at 5% B for 10 minutes. The flow rate for the analytical column was 300 nl/min. For the LTQ-Orbitrap, 5 tandem mass spectra were collected in a data-dependent manner following each survey scan, respectively. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with AGC target set to 1,000,000 to obtain accurate peptide mass measurements, and the MS/MS scans were acquired using with AGC target set to 30,000 (linear ion trap). Previously sampled peptide peaks are excluded from MS/MS for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Quantification Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) and MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) were used to identify and quantify peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm for Orbitrap data. Dynamic modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys), oxidation (Met), and Desthiobiotin (Lys). Peptide identification FDR was set to 0.05. The UniProt human database was downloaded in July, 2015. The identification of peptides with significant changes was manually verified. Data normalization was performed using iterative rank order normalization (IRON), software implementation of IRON is available at [http://gene.moffitt.org/libaffy/](Welsh et al., 2013). Go enrichment analysis and KEGG pathway visualization Fold-change distribution of the ATP binding proteome was performed by GraphPad. Go enrichment analysis was performed on the ABPP profile using PANTHER classification system (Mi et al., 2013). Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment analysis was performed on the increased protein kinases (comparing ibrutnib resistance and parental cells) from 2 out of 3 cell lines.

### Publication Abstract
The novel Bruton's tyrosine kinase inhibitor ibrutinib has demonstrated high response rates in B-cell lymphomas; however, a growing number of ibrutinib-treated patients relapse with resistance and fulminant progression. Using chemical proteomics and an organotypic cell-based drug screening assay, we determine the functional role of the tumour microenvironment (TME) in ibrutinib activity and acquired ibrutinib resistance. We demonstrate that MCL cells develop ibrutinib resistance through evolutionary processes driven by dynamic feedback between MCL cells and TME, leading to kinome adaptive reprogramming, bypassing the effect of ibrutinib and reciprocal activation of PI3K-AKT-mTOR and integrin-&#x3b2;1 signalling. Combinatorial disruption of B-cell receptor signalling and PI3K-AKT-mTOR axis leads to release of MCL cells from TME, reversal of drug resistance and enhanced anti-MCL activity in MCL patient samples and patient-derived xenograft models. This study unifies TME-mediated de novo and acquired drug resistance mechanisms and provides a novel combination therapeutic strategy against MCL and other B-cell malignancies.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Activity-based protein profiling, Ibrutinib, B-cell cancers

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Jianguo Tao, MD/PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


