### Accession
PXD002915

### Title
Comprehensive proteome analysis reveals the central role of macrophage lysosomes in regulating immune responses

### Description
Phagocytosis and autophagy in macrophages have been shown to be essential to both innate and adaptive immunity. Lysosomes are the main catabolic subcellular organelles responsible for degradation and recycling of both extracellular and intracellular material, which are the final steps in phagocytosis and autophagy. Lysosomes are critical for the correct function of macrophages; however, the molecular mechanisms underlying lysosomal functions after infection remain to be fully clarified. In this study, we conducted a quantitative proteomics analysis of the changes in constitution and glycosylation of proteins in lysosomes derived from murine RAW 264.7 macrophage cells treated with different types of pathogens comprising examples of bacteria (Listeria monocytogenes, L. m), DNA viruses (Herpes simplex virus type-1, HSV-1) and RNA viruses (vesicular stomatitis virus, VSV). In total, 3,704 lysosome-related proteins and 264 glycosylated proteins were identified. Bioinformatic analysis showed lysosomes initiated distinct pathways according to the type of pathogens and function via integrated signaling of the innate and adaptive immune systems. Fluctuations in the glycosylation of several lysosomal proteins were also determined. Immunofluorescence assays showed that autophagy was increased following infection with all three types of pathogens, while only L. m infection stimulated lysosomal biosynthesis. Combined with more detailed immunoblotting and immunofluorescence analyses, these results suggest that macrophage lysosomes function as a signaling center in regulating immune responses to microbial infection.

### Sample Protocol
Lysosomes were dissolved in 8 M urea/PBS lysis buffer containing proteinase inhibitors followed by protein concentration measurement using a Nano Drop 2000. Equal amounts of protein (100 µg) from each group were treated with 10 mM DTT at 50°C for 1 h followed by 25 mM IAA at 50°C for 1 h in the dark. Subsequently, the reaction solution was diluted with PBS to give a final urea concentration of 1 M. For peptide/protein identification, Lys-C was added at a protein/protease mass ratio of 100: 1 and Trypsin was added at 25 : 1 sequentially. Both enzymatic digestion processes were incubated for overnight at 37°C. For glycosylation screening sample, PNGase F was additional added as ratio of 4 Units/ 100 µg protein. After incubated for 3 h at 37°C Lys-C and Trypsin digestion were executed as described above. The experimental procedure for TMT isobaric labeling was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions with few changes. Briefly, samples were desalted with Oasis® HLB extraction cartridges, and labeled with 0.8 mg TMT reagent. Peptides derived from wild-type (WT), L. m, HSV-1 and VSV were labeled with TMT-6 plex-128, TMT-6 plex-129, TMT-6 plex-130 and TMT-6 plex-131, respectively. Equal amounts of labeled peptides from the four groups were mixed and desalted. The product was dried and dissolved in 100 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for subsequent high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) separation.  High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) The peptides were separated with the UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo scientific). The total combined TMT-labeled sample was loaded onto a C18 peptide separation column (Xbridge BEH300, C18, 5 µm, 4.6×250 mm, Waters). Gradient elution with water/acetonitrile solution at pH 10.0 was used for fractionation of the peptides into 50 microtubes (1.5 mL liquid per tube). The fractions were dried and combined to give 20 samples based on peptide concentration and then dissolved in 20 µl 0.1% TFA for further liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS The peptide mixtures were separated using the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm, 150 mm, Upchurch) custom packed with C18 resin (300 Å, 5 µm) with a 60 min gradient elution at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/mL followed by online electrospray ionization for MS and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analyses in the Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo) with ionic voltage +2.3 kVa. Full scan masses were measured at a resolution of 70,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM) in the orbitrap. The top 20 most abundant precursor ions were sent to a higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) cell for fragmentation (MS/MS) with 27% normalized collision energy and fragments were submitted to the orbitrap mass analyzer for data collection. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis MS data analysis was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific). In detail, SEQUEST HT algorithm was used to match MS data files with the UniProt/SwissProt mouse database (released at 20150615). Mass spectra was filtered based on minimum number of peaks of 200 and intensity of 20,000 before submitting to SEQUEST HT. Full tryptic activity was applied as enzymatic pattern with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites, a minimum 6 peptides and a maximum 144 peptides length. The search algorithm was set as the following parameters: precursor tolerance, 20 ppm; fragment tolerance, 0.02 Da; static modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021) and lysine and N-terminal TMT-6plex modification (+229.163). Methionine oxidation (+15.995) and asparagine and glutamine deamination (+0.984) were specified as dynamic modifications. Protein identification was considered valid if at least one peptide was statistically significant (p<0.05 with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 5%).

### Publication Abstract
Phagocytosis and autophagy in macrophages have been shown to be essential to both innate and adaptive immunity. Lysosomes are the main catabolic subcellular organelles responsible for degradation and recycling of both extracellular and intracellular material, which are the final steps in phagocytosis and autophagy. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying lysosomal functions after infection remain obscure. In this study, we conducted a quantitative proteomics analysis of the changes in constitution and glycosylation of proteins in lysosomes derived from murine RAW 264.7 macrophage cells treated with different types of pathogens comprising examples of bacteria (Listeria monocytogenes, L. m), DNA viruses (herpes simplex virus type-1, HSV-1) and RNA viruses (vesicular stomatitis virus, VSV). In total, 3,704 lysosome-related proteins and 300 potential glycosylation sites on 193 proteins were identified. Comparative analysis showed that the aforementioned pathogens induced distinct alterations in the proteome of the lysosome, which is closely associated with the immune functions of macrophages, such as toll-like receptor activation, inflammation and antigen-presentation. The most significant changes in proteins and fluctuations in glycosylation were also determined. Furthermore, Western blot analysis showed that the changes in expression of these proteins were undetectable at the whole cell level. Thus, our study provides unique insights into the function of lysosomes in macrophage activation and immune responses.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Innate immunity, Pathogen, Macrophage lysosome

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences 
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Dongdan Santiao 5#, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China

### Submitter
Wei Ge

### Lab Head
Dr wei.ge  
National Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology & Department of Immunology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Dongdan Santiao 5#, Dongcheng district, Beijing 100005, China


