### Accession
PXD045763

### Title
Thioredoxins regulate light acclimation of the proteome in Arabidopsis

### Description
In this study we used proteomics, metabolomics and reverse genetics to investigate how different light environmental factors such as intensity or variability affect long-term and short-term acclimation responses of Arabidopsis and the importance of the chloroplast redox network in their regulation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were prepared for mass spectrometric analysis by in-solution digestion using LysC and trypsin and the resulting peptides purified as described previously (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Measurements were performed on a Q Exactive Plus HF mass spectrometer coupled with a nLC1000 nano‐HPLC (both Thermofisher).

### Data Protocol
The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantified proteins across samples. Quantitative analysis was performed with MaxQuant v1.6.10.43 (https://maxquant.net/maxquant/) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using standard settings. Peak lists were searched against the Arabidopsis reference proteome (UP000006548, April 2019). Data imputation was performed within Perseus v1.6.10.43 (https://maxquant.net/perseus/), where missing values were imputed with the default method for downstream processes that require a complete data set (Tyanova and Cox, 2018).

### Publication Abstract
During photosynthesis, plants must manage strong fluctuations in light availability on different time scales, leading to long-term acclimation and short-term responses. However, little is known about the regulation and coordination of these processes and the modulators involved. In this study, we used proteomics, metabolomics, and reverse genetics to investigate how different light environmental factors, such as intensity or variability, affect long-term and short-term acclimation responses of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) and the importance of the chloroplast redox network in their regulation. In the wild type, high light, but not fluctuating light, led to large quantitative changes in the proteome and metabolome, accompanied by increased photosynthetic dynamics and plant growth. This finding supports light intensity as a stronger driver for acclimation than variability. Deficiencies in NADPH-thioredoxin reductase C (NTRC) or thioredoxins m1/m2, but not thioredoxin f1, almost completely suppressed the re-engineering of the proteome and metabolome, with both the induction of proteins involved in stress and redox responses and the repression of those involved in cytosolic and plastid protein synthesis and translation being strongly attenuated. Moreover, the correlations of protein or metabolite levels with light intensity were severely disturbed, suggesting a general defect in the light-dependent acclimation response, resulting in impaired photosynthetic dynamics. These results indicate a previously unknown role of NTRC and thioredoxins m1/m2 in modulating light acclimation at proteome and metabolome levels to control dynamic light responses. NTRC, but not thioredoxins m1/m2 or f1, also improves short-term photosynthetic responses by balancing the Calvin-Benson cycle in fluctuating light.

### Keywords
Q exactive plus hf mass spectrometer coupled with a nlc1000 nano‐hplc, Arabidopsis, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Geigenberger lab, Plant Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Biozentrum der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany
LMU Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Fakultät für Biologie, Biozentrum

### Submitter
Dejan Dziubek

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Geigenberger
Geigenberger lab, Plant Sciences, Faculty of Biology, Biozentrum der Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Germany


