### Accession
PXD020945

### Title
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) and Lewy Body Dementia (LBD): Detection of S-Nitrosylation in Key Proteins in Human, Post-mortem Brain Samples

### Description
FAD and Lewy Body Dementia (LBD): Detection of S-Nitrosylation in Key Proteins in Human, Post-mortem Brain Samples

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were homogenized into lysis buffer freshly prepared (100 mM HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.7, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM neocuproine, 1% Triton X-100, 20 mM IAM, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, and 0.1%SDS) on ice using a Teflon pestle and a Jumbo Stirrer (Thermo Fisher). The homogenates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C, and supernatants were collected. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. The supernatants were washed once with 1 time volume of 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.7) by centrifugation at 5,000 g for 25 min at 4°C with 10 K MWCO spin filters.

### Data Protocol
Agilent Spectrum Mill MS proteomics Workbench B.06 was used for peak list generation, database searching, and FDR estimation. Parameters for data extractions were: precursor MH+ 300 – 8000 Da, scan time range 0-200 min, sequence tag length > 1, merge scans with same precursor m/z ±30s and ±0.05 m/z, default for precursor charge, true for find 12C precursor, MS noise threshold 100 counts. MS/MS spectra were searched against the human SwissProt protein database (downloaded on 06/18/2019) with ±10 ppm precursor ion tolerance and ±20 ppm fragment ion tolerance.

### Publication Abstract
Protein S-nitros(yl)ation (SNO) is a posttranslational modification involved in diverse processes in health and disease and can contribute to synaptic damage in Alzheimer's disease (AD). To identify SNO proteins in AD brains, we used triaryl phosphine (<i>SNO</i>TRAP) combined with mass spectrometry (MS). We detected 1449 SNO proteins with 2809 SNO sites, representing a wide range of S-nitrosylated proteins in 40 postmortem AD and non-AD human brains from patients of both sexes. Integrative protein ranking revealed the top 10 increased SNO proteins, including complement component 3 (C3), p62 (SQSTM1), and phospholipase D3. Increased levels of S-nitrosylated C3 were present in female over male AD brains. Mechanistically, we show that formation of SNO-C3 is dependent on falling &#x3b2;-estradiol levels, leading to increased synaptic phagocytosis and thus synapse loss and consequent cognitive decline. Collectively, we demonstrate robust alterations in the S-nitrosoproteome that contribute to AD pathogenesis in a sex-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Ad, Lbd, Lc-ms2

### Affiliations
MIT

### Submitter
Hongmei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven. R. Tannenbaum
MIT


