### Accession
PXD012443

### Title
Nitrosoproteomic Analysis Deciphers the S-Nitrosylome in Carbon Metabolism of Tea Leaves

### Description
Cysteine S-nitrosylation is a reversible protein post-translational modification and critically regulates the activity, localization and stability of proteins. Tea (Camellia sinensis (L.)) is one of the most thoroughly studied evergreen crop due to its broad non-alcoholic beverage and huge economic impact in the world. However, to date, little is known about the S-nitrosylome in this plant. Here, we performed a global analysis of cysteine S-nitrosylation in tea leaves. In total, 228 cysteine S-nitrosylation sites were identified in 191 proteins, representing the first extensive data on the S-nitrosylome in tea plants. These S-nitrosylated proteins were located in multiple subcellular compartments, especially in the chloroplast and cytoplasm. The analysis of functional enrichment and PPI network revealed that the S-nitrosylated proteins were mainly involved in carbon metabolism, especially in Calvin cycle and TCA cycle. These results suggested that S-nitrosylated proteins in tea leaves might play critical regulatory roles in the carbon metabolism. Overall, this study not only globally analyzed the functional annotation of cysteine S-nitrosylation in tea leaves, but also preliminarily provided the valuable information for further investigating the functions of cysteine S-nitrosylation in tea plants.

### Sample Protocol
4.1 Plant Material and Growth Conditions Plants of the ‘QN 3’ were used in this study. The seedlings were grown in phytotron under the 12-h light (25 °C)/12-h dark (20 °C) photoperiod with 18000 Lx photos m−2·s−2 light intensity and 75% humidity. Plants were irrigated with nutrient solution (Plant- Prod 20- 20- 20 Fertilizer, Lambrou Agro, Cyprus) every 2 days. The tea leaves were collected after one week, and the samples were stored at −80 °C until used for protein extraction. 4.2 Protein extraction   The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of the phenol extraction buffer (10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protein inhibitor, 50 μM PR-619, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication. An equal volume of Tris equilibrium phenol was added and centrifuged at 5500 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was taken and precipitated by adding 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate/methanol overnight, and the protein pellet was washed with methanol and acetone, respectively. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 4.3 TMT Labeling  A 300 μg sample was taken and the volume was made up with labeling buffer, the protein was labeled according to the instructions of Iodo-TMT kit. Briefly, the labeled reagent was thawed, dissolved in methanol, mixed with protein in the dark, and incubated for 1 h at room temperature. The labeled protein was precipitated with 6 times pre-cooled acetone to remove excess reagents, and then washed with acetone for 2 times. The protein was broken up with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for enzymatic hydrolysis. 4.4 Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for 4h-digestion. 4.5 HPLC Fractionation The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 4 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 4.6 Affinity Enrichment Tryptic peptides dissolved in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed Anti-TMT antibody beads (Lot number Prod#90076, Thermo) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with IP buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 4.7 LC-MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in liquid A phase (0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid), and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high performances liquid system. Mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile; mobile phase B was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile. Liquid phase gradient setting: 0 - 20 min, 9% - 23% B; 20 - 33min, 23% - 25% B;33 - 37min, 35% - 80% B; 37- 40 min, 80% B. The flow rate was maintained at 700 nL/min.   The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. The fixedfirst mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
4.8 Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against tea database (36,951 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and S-nitrosylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. 4.9 Bioinformatics Analysis  Secondary structures of proteins were predicted by NetSurfP. The probability for one given type of secondary structure of the modified cysteine residues was compared to those of the control residues for all S-nitrosylated proteins identified in this study, and p-value was calculated as previously described. GO annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and the proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. KEGG database was used to annotate protein pathway. Identified proteins were annotated by InterProScan (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/scan.html) that scans given sequence against that the protein signatures of the InterPro member databases. Wolfpsort, a subcellular localization prediction software (a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test), was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Correction for multiple hypothesis testing was carried out using standard false discovery rate control methods. The GO and pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant. PPI network analysis for the identified S-nitrosylated proteins was performed using Cytoscape software, and the PPI network was obtained from the STRING database version 10.5. A graph theoretical clustering algorithm, MCODE, was utilized to analyze densely connected regions.

### Publication Abstract
Cysteine S-nitrosylation is a reversible protein post-translational modification and critically regulates the activity, localization and stability of proteins. Tea (Camellia sinensis (L.) O. Kuntze) is one of the most thoroughly studied evergreen crop due to its broad non-alcoholic beverage and huge economic impact in the world. However, little is known about the S-nitrosylome in this plant. Here, we performed a global analysis of cysteine S-nitrosylation in tea leaves. In total, 228 cysteine S-nitrosylation sites were identified in 191 proteins, representing the first extensive data on the S-nitrosylome in tea plants. These S-nitrosylated proteins were located in various subcellular compartments, especially in the chloroplast and cytoplasm. Furthermore, the analysis of functional enrichment and PPI network revealed that the S-nitrosylated proteins were mainly involved in multiple metabolic pathways, including glycolysis, pyruvate metabolism, Calvin cycle and TCA cycle. Overall, this study not only systematically identified the proteins of S-nitrosylation in cysteines of tea leaves, but also laid the solid foundation for further verifying the roles of S-nitrosylation in cysteines of tea plants.

### Keywords
Carbon metabolism, Cysteine s-nitrosylation, Camellia sinensis (l.) o. kuntze

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, China

### Submitter
lihuan Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaotang Ding
Tea Research Institute, Qingdao Agricultural University, Qingdao, Shandong, China


