### Accession
PXD024997

### Title
Clinical Assay for the Early Detection of Colorectal Cancer Using Mass Spectrometric Wheat Germ Agglutinin Multiple Reaction Monitoring

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is currently the third leading cause of cancer related mortality in the world. U.S. Food and Drug Administration-approval circulating tumor markers, including carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen (CA) 19-9 and CA125, were used as prognostic biomarker of CRC that attributed to low sensitivity in diagnosis of CRC. Therefore, our purpose is to develop a novel strategy for novel clinical biomarker for early CRC diagnosis. We used mass spectrometry (MS) methods such as nanoLC-MS/MS, targeted LC-MS/MS, and stable iso-tope-labeled multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) MS coupled to machine learning algorithms and logistic regression to analyze plasma samples from patients with early-stage CRC, late-stage CRC, and healthy controls (HCs).

### Sample Protocol
20 μL of plasma sample was added and mixed with agarose bound WGA for 1 hr. WGA-bound proteins were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) three times and eluted with elution buffer (0.5 M N-acetylglucosamine dissolved in 1 mM acetic acid). The Bradford assay was conducted to determine protein concentrations after elution. Proteins (20 μg) were lyophilized in a SpeedVac system. Extended isotope-labeled peptides or BSA were spiked into the sample after the protein pellet had been reconstituted in 30 μL of double-distilled (dd)H2O. DTT (550 mM, 1 μL) was added to the sample and incubated at 56 °C for 45 min. After 2 μL of IAM (450 mM) was added to the sample and incubated in the dark for 45 min, the sample was digested with trypsin (0.5 μg) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digestion was quenched by adjusting the final concentration in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS 7 software (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada) was used to sequence WGA-captured proteins from acquired MS/MS spectra against the Universal Protein Knowledgebase, a human protein database (UniProt; http://www.uniprot.org/) containing 168,088 protein entities (UniProt, 2020/01) with MS tolerance set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance set to 0.6 Da. dMRM data were processed with Skyline (MacCoss Lab Software, USA). Details of method validation are provided in "Supplementary Information".

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; multiple reaction monitoring; tandem mass spectrometer; wheat germ agglutinin; plasma

### Affiliations
PhD Program in Medical Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical
University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan
PhD Program in Medical Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan

### Submitter
I Jung Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Ching-Yu Lin
PhD Program in Medical Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan School of Medical Laboratory Science and Biotechnology, College of Medical Science and Technology, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 11031, Taiwan


