### Accession
PXD021231

### Title
Shotgun  proteomics of Cutibacterium granulosum VPI 0507

### Description
We performed shotgun proteomics on the bacterium Cutibacterium granulosum VPI 0507.

### Sample Protocol
Cutibacterium granulosum VPI 0507 was grown anaerobically on PYG medium (DSMZ medium 104).  Cultures were grown to mid-exponential phase and then lysed with a French press.    Proteins in the sample (e.g., cell extract) were prepared for LC-MS/MS.  Proteins were precipitated by adding 1000 µL of chilled 15% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid and 0.2% (w/v) dithiothreitol in acetone to 250 µL of sample and incubating at -80°C for 20 min and then -20°C overnight.  Proteins were harvested by centrifugation (21,100 g for 20 min at 4 °C), air-dried to remove acetone, and then resuspended in 100 µL of 6 M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC).  They were reduced with 2.5 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol in AMBIC at 37°C for 30 min, then alkylated with 7.7 µL of 194.6 mM iodoacetamide in AMBIC for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.  Alkylation was stopped by adding 20 µL of 200 mM dithiothreitol in AMBIC and incubating at room temperature for 10 min.  Proteins were digested to peptides with trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega V5073) in a 1:25 enzyme:protein (w/w) ratio at 37°C for 4 hours.  Then the trypsin in the mixture was activated by adding 550 µL of AMBIC and then continued for 16 h at 37°C.  Digestion was terminated by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v).  Peptides were desalted with the Millipore C18 ZipTips (ZTC18S096).  The tip was wet by slowly aspiring 10 µL of 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN), discarding the solvent, and repeating once.  Then the tip was equilibrated by aspiring 10 µL of 0.1% TFA, discarding solvent, and repeating once.  The digested sample containing 1% TFA was slowly aspirated in and out of the tip for 10 cycles to maximize binding.  The tip was rinsed with 20 µL of 0.1% TFA/5% ACN and eluted by 100 µL of 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid/60% ACN.  The eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and resuspended in 40 µL of 0.1% TFA.    The resulting peptides were analyzed using LC-MS.  The LC was a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a PepMap C18 column (75 µm × 25 cm with 2 µm pore size; Thermo Scientific).  The amount of peptide injected was 1 µg, the flow rate of mobile phase was 200 µL/min, and the column temperature was 40°C.  The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (B), and they were used in a gradient elution.  The concentration of B was decreased from 10% to 8% over 3 min, increased to 46% over 66 min, increased to 99% over 3 min, held at 99% for 2 min, decreased to 2% over 0.5 min, and held at 2% for 15 min.    The MS was an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific).  The instrument was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode.  Peptides were ionized and transferred to the mass analyzer with a spray voltage of 1.8  kV, radio frequency lens level of 46%, and ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C.  Survey full-scan MS spectra were then acquired with m/z range of 375 to 1575, resolution of 60,000, automatic gain control (AGC) target of 4×105, and ion filling time of 50 ms.  After the survey scan, MS/MS was performed on the most abundant precursors with charge state between 2 and 3.  Precursors were isolated using a 3-s cycle with isolation window width of 1.2m/z.  Fragmentation of precursors was done by collisionally induced dissociation (CID) with normalized collision energy of 30%, and the resulting fragments were detected using the rapid rate in the ion trap.  MS/MS spectra were acquired with AGC target of 5×103, ion filling time of 35 ms, and dynamic exclusion time of 50 s with 10 ppm mass window.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified from LC-MS/MS data using X!TandemPipeline.  The version of X! Tandem used was Alanine.  The database was a fasta file containing all proteins in C. granulosum predicted by IMG/M.  The parameter “Fragment ion mass tolerance (monoisotropic)” was set to 0.1 (based on preliminary analysis with recombinant SCACT and SCS).  All other parameters were kept at default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cutibacterium granulosum, Bacteria, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of California, Davis

### Submitter
Timothy Hackmann

### Lab Head
Dr Timothy John Hackmann
University of California, Davis


