### Accession
PXD026016

### Title
Design and development of nanoproteomics strategies for biomarker identification in cerebrospinal fluid of leptomeningeal disease, using as model lymphoma non-Hodgkin B.

### Description
The early diagnosis of leptomeningeal disease is a challenge because it is an asymptomatic pathology in the early stages. Hence, it is highly relevant to identify a panel of biomarkers to help in the diagnosis and/or prognostic. For this purpose, we have explored a multipronged proteomics approaches, in cerebrospinal fluid, to determine a potential panel of biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid. Thus, a systematic and exhaustive characterization of more than 347 CSF samples have been performed by an integrated LC-MS/MS (n 20) and functional proteomics  (n 347) analysis to establish protein profiles which has been useful to develop a panel of biomarkers validated by in silico approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Collection.  i.-CSF suspected and diagnosed LM samples: CSF collected by National DNA Bank-ISCIII  (www.bancoadn.org) at  the University of Salamanca, Spain, according to the recommended CSF collection and biobank protocol (according to the Helsinki Declaration in 1975). Participants provided written informed consent to conduct the research. These institutions follow the defined protocols and comply with the recommendations of the National and International Ethics Committees and Cancer Research Center/IBMCC (USAL-CSIC). ii.- CSF samples of control subjects: Normal CSF samples (1 mL) were provided by Lee Biosolutions (Maryland Height, Missouri, USA). They are all from donors who are negative for meningitis and other neurological diseases/diseases. Each sample is composed of ≥3 donors in each pool. All donors should provide written informed consent, and suppliers should report that the local institutional ethics committee has approved the clinical protocol.       Sample Preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis For this characterization, a pool of 20 CSF samples (+/- Infiltration or +/- LM) and depleted by organic solvent extraction adapted from Fernandez et al. (A comparison of depletion versus equalization for reducing high-abundance proteins in human serum. Electrophoresis. 2011;32(21):2966-2974) and Larssen et al. (A rapid method for preparation of the cere-brospinal fluid proteome. Proteomics. 2014; 15: 10-15) and Pierce total depletion kit (following manufacture descriptions) (Pierce Inc).    SDS-PAGE Separation.  A total of 20-25 μg of total protein were run on a 4-20% polyacrylamide precast Ready Gels (Mini-Protean TGX Precast Gels, Bio Rad Laboratories, Inc., USA) under reducing conditions. Gels were stained in a 0.5% (w/v) Coomassie Brillant Blue solution. Polyacrylamide gels were then digitized with a gel reader and stored at 4°C in an aqueous solution containing 1% (v/v) acetic acid until analysis.  In-gel digestion and nano-UPLC-MS/MS analysis.  Each gel lane was manually cut into three fragments and digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) following the method described by Shevchenko et al., 1996, with slight modifications. Briefly, Coomassie Blue gel plugs were stopped with a 1:1 (v/v) working solution of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate-acetonitrile. The acetonitrile-dehydrated plugs were then treated with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56°C for 45 min and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature and in the dark for 30 min. The proteins were digested with formic acid and dealkylated using C18. The samples were partially dried and stored at -20°C until being analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Then, the trypsin digested proteins were analyzed by reversed-phase LC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A nanoUPLC system (nanoAcquity, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoSpray flex, Proxeon, Thermo) was used for reversed-phase LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were dissolved in 0.5% FA/3% ACN and loaded onto a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC 2G-V/M Trap Symmetry 5 μm particle size, 180 μm x 120 μm C18 column, Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH 1.7 μm, 130 Å, 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Waters Corp., Milford, MA, USA) flow rate of 250 nL/min, gradient A formic acid 0.5 % and B: ACN, from 1 to 40% B in 120 minutes. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in the positive on mole applying a da-ta-dependent automatic switch between survey MS scan and tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) acquisition. Survey scans were acquired in the mass range of m/z 400 to 1600 with 30,000 resolution at m/z 400 with lock mass option enabled for the 445.120025 ions. The 20 most intense peaks having ≥2 change state and above the 500 intensity threshold were selected in the ion trap for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation with 35% normalized energy, 10 ms activation time, q=0.25, ±2 m/z precursor isolation width and wideband activation. Maximum injection time was 1000 and 50 ms for survey and MS/MS scans, respectively AGC was 1x106 for MS and 5x103 for MS/MS scans. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 90s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Data Analysis.  All raw files were converted to .mgf using Proteowizard. Data files were searched using Comet via SearchGUI (v.3.2.10) against the Homo Sapiens; and PeptideShaker (v.1.16.2) against a custom database combining the NeXtProt database downloaded January 2020 with CrAP contaminant sequences. Search parameters were set a follows carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein N-terminal as variable ones, precursor and fragments mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da mass tolerances for precursor and product ions, respectively, and fully tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages. In all cases, contaminants were removed for the ulterior analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In the present work, leptomeningeal disease, a very destructive form of systemic cancer, was characterized from several proteomics points of view. This pathology involves the invasion of the leptomeninges by malignant tumor cells. The tumor spreads to the central nervous system through the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and has a very grim prognosis; the average life expectancy of patients who suffer it does not exceed 3 months. The early diagnosis of leptomeningeal disease is a challenge because, in most of the cases, it is an asymptomatic pathology. When the symptoms are clear, the disease is already in the very advanced stages and life expectancy is low. Consequently, there is a pressing need to determine useful CSF proteins to help in the diagnosis and/or prognosis of this disease. For this purpose, a systematic and exhaustive proteomics characterization of CSF by multipronged proteomics approaches was performed to determine different protein profiles as potential biomarkers. Proteins such as PTPRC, SERPINC1, sCD44, sCD14, ANPEP, SPP1, FCGR1A, C9, sCD19, and sCD34, among others, and their functional analysis, reveals that most of them are linked to the pathology and are not detected on normal CSF. Finally, a panel of biomarkers was verified by a prediction model for leptomeningeal disease, showing new insights into the research for potential biomarkers that are easy to translate into the clinic for the diagnosis of this devastating disease.

### Keywords
Protein microarrays, Cerebrospinal fluid (csf), Protein-based biomarker., Lc-ms/ms, Leptomeningeal metastasis (lm)

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine and General Service of Cytometry, Cancer Research Centre-IBMCC, IBSAL. University of Salamanca-CSIC
Department of Medicine and General Service of Cytometry, Cancer Research Centre, IBSAL. University of
Salamanca-CSIC, Campus Miguel de Unamuno s/n, 37007 Salamanca, Spain

### Submitter
Pablo Juanes-Velasco

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Fuentes García
Department of Medicine and General Service of Cytometry, Cancer Research Centre-IBMCC, IBSAL. University of Salamanca-CSIC


