### Accession
PXD037275

### Title
Direct cell-to-cell transfer in stressed tumor microenvironment aggravates tumorigenic or metastatic potential in pancreatic cancer

### Description
Pancreatic cancer exhibits a characteristic tumor microenvironment (TME) due to enhanced fibrosis and hypoxia and is particularly resistant to conventional chemotherapy. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying TME-associated treatment resistance in pancreatic cancer are not fully understood. Here, we developed an in vitro TME mimic system comprising pancreatic cancer cells, fibroblasts and immune cells, and a stress condition, including hypoxia and gemcitabine. Cells with high viability under stress showed evidence of increased direct cell-to-cell transfer of biomolecules. The resulting derivative cells (CD44high/SLC16A1high) were similar to cancer stem cell-like-cells (CSCs) with enhanced anchorage-independent growth or invasiveness and acquired metabolic reprogramming. Furthermore, CD24 was a determinant for transition between the tumorsphere formation or invasive properties. Pancreatic cancer patients with CD44low/SLC16A1low expression exhibited better prognoses compared to other groups. Our results suggest that crosstalk via direct cell-to-cell transfer of cellular components foster chemotherapy-induced tumor evolution and that targeting of CD44 and MCT1(encoded by SLC16A1) may be useful strategy to prevent recurrence of gemcitabine-exposed pancreatic cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome of CMs collected from in vitro TME models (s-TME model and normal co-culture condition using fibroblasts, CAFs, MØ-U937 and Panc0203 cells) by total exosome isolation reagent (Invitrogen). Whole cell lysates of Panc0203, SP0926, and SP1030 cells, which were prepared in sample buffer (7 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 100 mM DTT, 4.5% CHAPS, 40 mM Tris). Peptides were analyzed following two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) methodologies. Nano LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Easy n-LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray source. Samples were separated on a C18 nanobore column (150 mm × 0.1 mm, 3 μm pore size; Agilent). The mobile phase A for LC separation was 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in deionized water, and the mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The chromatography gradient was designed for a linear increase from 0% B to 60% B in 9 min, 60% B to 90% B in 1 min, and 3% B in 5 min. The flow rate was maintained at 1,800 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired using data-dependent acquisition with a full mass scan (380 – 1,700 m/z) followed by 10 MS/MS scans.  For MS1 full scans, the orbitrap resolution was 15,000 and the AGC was 2×105. For MS/MS in the LTQ, the AGC was 1×104. .

### Data Protocol
The mascot algorithm (Matrixscience, USA) was used to identify peptide sequences present in a protein sequence database.  Database search criteria were, taxonomy ; homo sapiens (downloaded Apr 10 2018), fixed modification ; carbamidomethylated  at cysteine residues ; variable modification ; oxidized at methionine residues, maximum allowed missed cleavage;  2, MS tolerance; 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance ; 0.8 Da. The peptides were filtered with a significance threshold of P<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic cancer exhibits a characteristic tumor microenvironment (TME) due to enhanced fibrosis and hypoxia and is particularly resistant to conventional chemotherapy. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying TME-associated treatment resistance in pancreatic cancer are not fully understood. Here, we developed an in vitro TME mimic system comprising pancreatic cancer cells, fibroblasts and immune cells, and a stress condition, including hypoxia and gemcitabine. Cells with high viability under stress showed evidence of increased direct cell-to-cell transfer of biomolecules. The resulting derivative cells (CD44<sup>high</sup>/SLC16A1<sup>high</sup>) were similar to cancer stem cell-like-cells (CSCs) with enhanced anchorage-independent growth or invasiveness and acquired metabolic reprogramming. Furthermore, CD24 was a determinant for transition between the tumorsphere formation or invasive properties. Pancreatic cancer patients with CD44<sup>low</sup>/SLC16A1<sup>low</sup> expression exhibited better prognoses compared to other groups. Our results suggest that crosstalk via direct cell-to-cell transfer of cellular components foster chemotherapy-induced tumor evolution and that targeting of CD44 and MCT1(encoded by SLC16A1) may be useful strategy to prevent recurrence of gemcitabine-exposed pancreatic cancers.

### Keywords
Cell-to-cell transfer, Tumor microenvironment, Gemcitabine, Pancreatic cancer, Metabostemness

### Affiliations
The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10 Discovery Drive, Farmington, CT 06032, USA
Seoul National University

### Submitter
GIYONG JANG

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Lee
The Jackson Laboratory for Genomic Medicine, 10 Discovery Drive, Farmington, CT 06032, USA


