### Accession
PXD005356

### Title
Dbf4-dependent kinase (DDK) and the Rtt107 scaffold promote Mus81-Mms4 resolvase activation during mitosis

### Description
DNA repair by homologous recombination is under stringent cell cycle control. This includes the last step of the reaction, disentanglement of DNA joint molecules (JMs). Previous work has established that JMs resolving nucleases are activated specifically at the onset of mitosis. In case of budding yeast Mus81-Mms4, this cell cycle stage-specific activation is known to depend on phosphorylation by CDK and Cdc5 kinases. Here, we show that a third cell cycle kinase, Cdc7-Dbf4 (DDK), targets Mus81-Mms4 in conjunction with Cdc5 - both kinases bind to as well as phosphorylate Mus81-Mms4 in an interdependent manner. Moreover, DDK-mediated phosphorylation of Mms4 is strictly required for Mus81 activation in mitosis, establishing DDK as a novel regulator of homologous recombination. The scaffold protein Rtt107, which is part of the Mus81-Mms4 complex, interacts with Cdc7 and thereby targets DDK and Cdc5 to the complex enabling full Mus81 activation. Therefore, Mus81 activation in mitosis involves at least three cell cycle kinases, Cdk1, Cdc5 and DDK. Furthermore, tethering of the kinases in a stable complex with Mus81 is critical for efficient JM resolution

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation was performed on SILAC (lysine only) labled yeast cells. After Co-IP, the eluates were pooled and precipitated using TCA. Precipitated proteins were separated on 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen). The gel was stained with GelCode Blue (Thermo Scientific). The gel lane was cut into 10 slices and subjected to in-gel digestion. The extracted peptides were then analyzed using Easy n-LC 1000 coupled to Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using MaxQuant computational platform version 1.5.2.22. Carbamidomethlyation of cystein was used as fixed modification along with oxidzed methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. The raw data was searched against yeast ORF database, with initial parent and fragment mass tolerance of 7 and 20 ppm respectively. Proteins and peptides were filtered for 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
DNA repair by homologous recombination is under stringent cell cycle control. This includes the last step of the reaction, disentanglement of DNA joint molecules (JMs). Previous work has established that JM resolving nucleases are activated specifically at the onset of mitosis. In case of budding yeast Mus81-Mms4, this cell cycle stage-specific activation is known to depend on phosphorylation by CDK and Cdc5 kinases. Here, we show that a third cell cycle kinase, Cdc7-Dbf4 (DDK), targets Mus81-Mms4 in conjunction with Cdc5-both kinases bind to as well as phosphorylate Mus81-Mms4 in an interdependent manner. Moreover, DDK-mediated phosphorylation of Mms4 is strictly required for Mus81 activation in mitosis, establishing DDK as a novel regulator of homologous recombination. The scaffold protein Rtt107, which binds the Mus81-Mms4 complex, interacts with Cdc7 and thereby targets DDK and Cdc5 to the complex enabling full Mus81 activation. Therefore, Mus81 activation in mitosis involves at least three cell cycle kinases, CDK, Cdc5 and DDK Furthermore, tethering of the kinases in a stable complex with Mus81 is critical for efficient JM resolution.

### Keywords
Yeast, Dna repair, Ddk

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Institute for Biochemistry, Core facility 
DNA Replication & Genome Integrity Group Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany ( lab head )

### Submitter
Nagarjuna  Nagaraj

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Pfander
DNA Replication & Genome Integrity Group Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried, Germany ( lab head )


