### Accession
PXD017107

### Title
Mutations in the exocyst component EXOC2 (Sec5) cause severe defects in human brain development

### Description
The exocyst is an octameric protein complex and an essential component of the membrane transport machinery required for tethering vesicles at the plasma membrane prior to fusion. Here we report on pathogenic variants in one of the exocyst subunits, EXOC2 (Sec5), in unrelated families. Analysis of patient’s fibroblasts revealed reduced protein levels in Family 1, impaired secretory vesicle fusion with the plasma membrane and defective bulk exocytosis. Based on genetic and functional genomics findings, we suggest that the EXOC2 variants we have identified are the cause of the neurological disorder in these patients.

### Sample Protocol
Fibroblasts (300,000 cells) were normalised using BCA to 20 μg of protein, lysed, denatured, digested with Trypsin and LysC using the PreOmics iST-NIH kit (PreOmics GmbH) with minor modifications. Peptides were individually labelled with TMT10plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT; ThermoFisher) at a ratio of 8 μg tag to 1 μg protein. Samples were then mixed at a 1:1 ratio and peptides purified PreOmics iST-NIH kit columns and dried out using CentriVap Vacuum concentrator (Labconco). Pooled peptides were fractioned by offline Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions with additional fractions containing 14%, 16%, 19% and 21% (v/v) ACN to a total of 12 fractions. Fractions were reconstituted in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1 % (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected to the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 μL/min of 2% (v/v) CH3CN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min applied before the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 3% B, (ii) 6-95 min, 3-22% B (iii) 95-105min 22-40% B (iv) 105-110min, 40-80% B (v) 110-115min, 80-80% B (vi) 115-117min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode MS spectra scanning from m/z 350-1550 at 120000 resolution with AGC target of 4e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 sec cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2-5 were isolated with isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision (HCD) mode with stepped collision energy of 35 ±5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 50000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s. Raw files were processed using MaxQuant platform (v.1.6.5.0) and searched against reviewed UniProt human database (June 2019) containing canonical and isoform sequences using default settings for a TMT 10plex experiment with the following modifications: deamination (of asparagine and glutamine) as variable modification, and a mass shift of +113.084 on cysteine as a fixed modification as per PreOmics kit. All modified peptides were used for quantification. Correction factors for the relevant TMT batch were entered into the search parameters.

### Data Protocol
The proteinGroups.txt output from the search was processed in Perseus (v. 1.6.5.0). Briefly, log2-transformed TMT reporter intensity (corrected) values were grouped into control (n=4 biological replicates) and three technical replicates of P2 (EXOC2 p.Arg437*) and P3 (EXOC2 p.Arg130His; p.Leu580Ser). Entries annotated by MaxQuant as “potential contaminant”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were removed from the dataset. Identified proteins were filtered to include 100% valid values across all samples and normalized by subtraction of the median value. Profile plots were generated from the normalized log2-transformed reporter data. A two-sided t-test was performed between control and P2/P3 groups and significance determined by p-value<0.05 and a fold change of 1.5 (log2=0.585). The results of the t-test were expressed as a volcano plot plotted in Prism (v. 8.1.2, GraphPad).

### Publication Abstract
The exocyst, an octameric protein complex, is an essential component of the membrane transport machinery required for tethering and fusion of vesicles at the plasma membrane. We report pathogenic variants in an exocyst subunit, EXOC2 (Sec5). Affected individuals have severe developmental delay, dysmorphism, and brain abnormalities; variability associated with epilepsy; and poor motor skills. Family 1 had two offspring with a homozygous truncating variant in EXOC2 that leads to nonsense-mediated decay of EXOC2 transcript, a severe reduction in exocytosis and vesicle fusion, and undetectable levels of EXOC2 protein. The patient from Family 2 had a milder clinical phenotype and reduced exocytosis. Cells from both patients showed defective Arl13b localization to the primary cilium. The discovery of mutations that partially disable exocyst function provides valuable insight into this essential protein complex in neural development. Since EXOC2 and other exocyst complex subunits are critical to neuronal function, our findings suggest that EXOC2 variants are the cause of the patients' neurological disorders.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt6plex, Fibroblasts, Exoc2

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3010, Australia.

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Arthur Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and The Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria, 3010, Australia.


