### Accession
PXD029455

### Title
MS-based proteomic characterization of Toxoplasma gondii PRP4K and PRP8 interactomes

### Description
The apicomplexa comprise a large phylum of single-celled, obligate intracellular protozoa that infect humans and animals and cause severe parasitic diseases. Available therapeutics against these devastating diseases are limited by suboptimal efficacy and frequent side effects, as well as the emergence and spread of resistance. Here, we use a drug repositioning strategy and identify altiratinib, a compound originally developed to treat glioblastoma, as a promising drug candidate with broad spectrum activity against apicomplexans. Altiratinib is parasiticidal and blocks the development of intracellular zoites in the nanomolar range and with a high selectivity index. We have identified TgPRP4K of T. gondii as the primary target of altiratinib by genetic target deconvolution. TgPRP4K is phylogenetically related to the cyclin-dependent-like kinase family (CLK) and its closest ancestor in humans is the splicing factor kinase PRP4 kinase (PRP4K or PRPF4B) and in P. falciparum is PfCLK3 (PF3D7_1114700), a kinase that has been identified as a multistage cross-species antimalarial drug target. We found an altiratinib-resistant parasite line has a wild-type (WT) allele of TgPRP4K and a mutation E1325K in TgPRP8, a protein located in the catalytic core of the spliceosome that has been shown to interact with PRP4K in Schizosaccharomyces pombe to facilitate spliceosome activation. This reinforces the possibility that the PRP4K-PRP8 complex is at the basis for the anti-Toxoplasma activity of altiratinib. To gain insight about the role of both proteins in T. gondii, we characterized their interactomes.

### Sample Protocol
T. gondii extracts from RH∆ku80 or Pru∆ku80 cells stably expressing HAFlag-tagged TgPRP4K and TgPRP8, were incubated with anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) for 1 hour at 4°C. Beads were washed with 10-column volumes of BC500 buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 500 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitors). Bound polypeptides were eluted stepwise with 250 g/ml FLAG peptide (Sigma Aldrich) diluted in BC100 buffer. For size-exclusion chromatography, protein eluates were loaded onto a Superose 6 HR 10/30 column equilibrated with BC500. Flow rate was fixed at 0.35 ml/min, and 0.5-ml fractions were collected. Proteins present in different fractions eluted from the size-exclusion chromatography were merged and separated by SDS-PAGE (PRP4K: two lanes containing merges of fractions 24 and 26, and of fractions 28 and 30; PRP8: three lanes containing merges of fractions 14, 16 and 18, of fractions 20 and 22, and of fractions 24 and 26). Protein were stained with colloidal blue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and gel bands excised before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using 50-min gradients.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (version 2.6) through concomitant searches against the Toxoplasma gondii database (ME49 taxonomy, version 30 downloaded from ToxoDB47, the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens taxonomy, February 2019 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminants, and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively 10 ppm and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptide-spectrum-matches (PSMs), PSM homology threshold p-value ≤ 0.01, PSM score ≥ 25, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation and grouping of the protein groups identified in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
The Apicomplexa comprise a large phylum of single-celled, obligate intracellular protozoa that include <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i>, <i>Plasmodium</i>, and <i>Cryptosporidium</i> spp., which infect humans and animals and cause severe parasitic diseases. Available therapeutics against these diseases are limited by suboptimal efficacy and frequent side effects, as well as the emergence and spread of resistance. We use a drug repurposing strategy and identify altiratinib, a compound originally developed to treat glioblastoma, as a promising drug candidate with broad spectrum activity against apicomplexans. Altiratinib is parasiticidal and blocks the development of intracellular zoites in the nanomolar range and with a high selectivity index when used against <i>T. gondii</i>. We have identified <i>Tg</i>PRP4K of <i>T. gondii</i> as the primary target of altiratinib using genetic target deconvolution, which highlighted key residues within the kinase catalytic site that conferred drug resistance when mutated. We have further elucidated the molecular basis of the inhibitory mechanism and species selectivity of altiratinib for <i>Tg</i>PRP4K and for its <i>Plasmodium falciparum</i> counterpart, <i>Pf</i>CLK3. Our data identified structural features critical for binding of the other <i>Pf</i>CLK3 inhibitor, TCMDC-135051. Consistent with the splicing control activity of this kinase family, we have shown that altiratinib can cause global disruption of splicing, primarily through intron retention in both <i>T. gondii</i> and <i>P. falciparum</i>. Thus, our data establish parasitic PRP4K/CLK3 as a potential pan-apicomplexan target whose repertoire of inhibitors can be expanded by the addition of altiratinib.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Splicing, Nanolc-ms/ms, Kinase, Interactome

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


