### Accession
PXD048549

### Title
Developmental dynamics of the postsynaptic proteome to understand synaptic maturation and dysmaturation

### Description
The postsynaptic density (PSD) is a protein condensate composed of ~1,000 proteins beneath the postsynaptic membrane of excitatory synapses. The number, shape, and plasticity of synapses are altered during development. However, the dynamics of synaptic protein composition across development have not been fully understood. Here we show alterations of PSD protein composition in mouse and primate brains during development. Proteins involved in synapse regulation are enriched in the differentially expressed (288 decreased and 267 increased) proteins on mouse PSD after a 2-week-old, which may be involved in changes of synaptic signal transduction. We find that the changes in PSD protein abundance in mouse brains correlate with gene expression levels in postnatal mice and perinatal primates. Proteome analysis of PSD from developing common marmosets (Callithrix jacchus) shows that the changes of PSD composition in mouse brain after 2-week-old occur in the marmoset brain mainly during the neonatal period and continue until adulthood. We also describe the changes of PSD proteome at the late developmental stage of marmoset, which may be involved in synaptic pruning observed in primate brains. The maturation of PSD composition is likely defective in autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Our results provide a comprehensive architecture of the remodeling of PSD composition across development, which may explain the molecular basics of synapse maturation and the pathology of psychiatric disorders, such as ASD.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sample was reduced with 50 mM dithiothreitol and 7 M guanidine-HCl / 1M Tris (pH8.5) / 10 mM EDTA at 37 °C for 2 h, followed by carboxymethylation with 100 mM sodium iodoacetate at 25 °C for 30 min. The protein solution was desalted with PAGE Clean Up Kit (Nacalai tesque) following to instruction manual. The protein precipitate was dissolved with 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH8.0) / 0.03% n-Dodecyl-β-D-maltoside, and digested with trypsin (TPCK-treated, Worthington Biochemical). The digested mixture was analyzed by nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with Easy-nLC1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a nano ESI spray column (75 μm (inside diameter) × 150 mm (length), NTCC analytical column C18, 3 μm, Nikkyo Technos), with a gradient of 0-100% buffer B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) in buffer A (MilliQ water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1 over 250 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in the positive-ion mode for mass spectrometry and tandem mass spectrometry, and the tandem mass spectrometry spectra were acquired using the data-dependent TOP 10 method.

### Data Protocol
The acquired data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with integrated Mascot (version 2.8.0 Matrix Science). The MSMS data were used to search the NCBI-nr protein database (20160711, Taxonomy: Mus or Callithrix jacchus), using the following parameters: enzyme = trypsin; maximum missed cleavages = 3; fixed midifications = Carboxymethyl (C); variable modifications = Acetyl (Protein N-term), Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M); product mass tolerance = ± 15 ppm; product mass tolerance = ± 30 milli mass unit; instrument type = ESI-TRAP. Label free quantification was carried out using method ussing Proteome Discoverer 2.2 or 2.4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brain postsynaptic density mouse primate

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN

### Submitter
Takehiro Suzuki

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular characterization unit, Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN


