### Accession
PXD037507

### Title
A Subtractive Proteomics Approach for the Identification of Immunodominant Acinetobacter baumannii Vaccine Candidate Proteins

### Description
Background: Acinetobacter baumannii is one of the most dangerous multidrug-resistant pathogens worldwide. Currently, 50-70% of clinical isolates of A. baumannii are extensively drug-resistant (XDR) and available antibiotic options against A. baumannii infections are limited. There are still needs to discover specific de facto bacterial antigenic proteins that could be effective vaccine candidates in human infection. With the growth of research in recent years, several candidate molecules have been identified for vaccine development. So far, there is no public health authorities approved vaccine against A. baumannii. Methods: The purpose of this study was to identify immunodominant vaccine candidate proteins that can be immunoprecipitated specifically with patients’ IgGs. Relaying on hypothesis that IgGs of infected person have capacity to capture immunodominant bacterial proteins. Herein, outer membrane and secreted proteins of sensitive and drug resistant A. baumannii were captured by using IgGs obtained from patient and healthy control sera and were identified by LC-MS/MS analysis. Results: By using subtractive proteomic approach, we determined 34 unique proteins which were captured only in drug-resistant A. baumannii strain via patient sera. After extensive evaluation of predicted epitope regions, solubility, membrane transverse characteristics, and structural properties, we selected several notable vaccine candidates. Conclusion: We identified vaccine candidate proteins that triggered de facto response of human immune system against the antibiotic-resistant A. baumannii. Precipitation of bacterial proteins via patient immunoglobulins was a novel approach to identify the proteins which have potential to trigger to response in patient immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) of immunoprecipitated proteins A FASP Protein Digestion Kit (Expedeon, UK) was used in the sample preparation process (22). Following the immunoprecipitation, 30 μL from 100 μL eluent was mixed with 200 μL urea sample solution (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8). The protein samples were then transferred to a 30 kDa cut-off spin filter cartridge (FASP kit; Expedeon, Inc.) and centrifuged at room temperature 14000 x g for 15 minutes. The contaminants were removed by buffer exchange in two successive washes with 200 μL urea sample solution (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) with a 15 min centrifugation at 14000 x g. The samples were incubated with iodoacetamide solution for 20 minutes in the dark and centrifuged at 14000 x g for 10 minutes. After three successive washes with urea sample solution (8M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8), the samples were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution. Protein digestion was achieved by adding 400 ng/mL Trypsin/Lys-C (Promega, USA) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and incubating at 37 OC overnight. Following the initial digestion, proteins were digested with 400 ng/mL Trypsin-Gold (Promega, USA) for six hours at 37 OC. Peptides were then eluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and 500 mM NaCl sodium chloride (provided in FASP kit; Expedeon, Inc.) by centrifugation at 14000 x g for 10 minutes. Collected samples were dried with a vacuum concentrator (Speedvac, Eppendorf, USA).  ZipTip Purification of Samples To remove the salts from samples and purify them, ZipTip C18 (Merck-Millipore, Germany) tips were used in this step. Digested peptides were resolved with 10 μL 0.1% TFA (Sigma, Germany) containing mass spectrometry grade water (Fluka, USA). Before sample purification, C18 materials of ZipTips were washed with 10 μL ACN, conditioned twice with 70% ACN and equilibrated twice by using 10 μL of 3% ACN and 0.1% acetic acid. Afterward, resolved samples were pipetted 10 times for each sample by using an equilibrated ZipTip. Following this step, captured peptides in C18 material were washed twice by pipetting of 10 μL 5% ACN and 0.1% acetic acid, and in this way, impurities were washed out. Purified peptides were eluted from ZipTip using 10 μL 60% ACN and 0.1% acetic acid and dried using a vacuum concentrator. Before analysis, samples were resolved in 10 μL of 3% ACN and 0.1% formic acid and transferred to thin glass in MS vials.  Mass Spectrometry Analysis Shotgun proteomic analyses have been performed with AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600+ integrated to Eksigent ekspert™ nanoLC 400 System (AB Sciex, USA). Trap column, 3 μm, ChromXP C18CL, and nanoAQUITY UPLC® NanoLC column (1.8 μm HSS T3 75 μm x 150 mm) was used in the trap-elute mode for the separation of peptides. Within the 310 minutes of analysis, Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) Top20 tandem MS was performed. Raw data analysis and multiple analytical measurements in a single sample were done using Analyst® TF v.1.6 (AB Sciex, USA) software. Precursor and product ion evaluations were completed with PeakView (1.2, AB Sciex). Generated peak-lists containing MS and MS/MS spectra were used to identify proteins, protein isoforms, and their modifications with ProteinPilot 4.5 Beta (AB Sciex, USA). Identification was made using the UniProtKB-based reference library of resistant strain A. baumannii BAA 1710 (UP000002446) and non-resistant strain A. baumannii 17978 (UP000006737). During identifying proteins, the false discovery rate (FDR) was determined to be 1%, and proteins containing at least two identified peptide fragments were considered correct identification.

### Data Protocol
Identified peptides were grouped with Venn diagrams. Linear B Cell Epitope Prediction tool of Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) was used to predict the epitope from identified amino acid sequences(23). Bepipred Linear Epitope Prediction method was used, and window size was determined as seven amino acids during calculations(24). Beta-barrel structure of proteins was analyzed by Protein Homology/analogY Recognition Engine 2.0 (PHYRE2) web-based software(25). The BOCTOPUS database was used to determine both beta-barrel structure and transmembrane properties of proteins(26). As another transmembrane site-determining web-based tool, TMHMM 2.0 (Transmembrane Hidden Markov Model) was also used to analyze the transmembrane sites of proteins (27). To analyze the solubility of proteins, PROSO II software was used(28). The potential glycosylation of nine selected proteins was predicted using the GlycoPP v1.0 web server(29). FASTA sequences of eight intact proteins and one with the missing region (B0V885) were submitted to Alphafold v2.1.0(30) to generate the 3D structure modelings of the respective proteins with default parameters. We selected three models for each run to get the best ranking models. Python script provided by Mayachemtools(31) was used to produce Ramachandran plots of the predicted structures, and we performed all the computations on our localHPC cluster.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoprecipitation, Proteomics, Vaccine candidate, Acinetobacter baumannii (a. baumannii), Immunodominant

### Affiliations
Erciyes University Genkök
1- Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey 2- Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKÖK) Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey

### Submitter
Servet ÖZCAN

### Lab Head
Dr Servet ÖZCAN
1- Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey 2- Genome and Stem Cell Center (GENKÖK) Erciyes University, Kayseri, Turkey


