### Accession
PXD040239

### Title
A snapshot of Bothrops jararaca snake venom gland subcellular proteome

### Description
The synthesis of snake venom proteins is subjected to finely regulated processes in the specialized secretory epithelium within the venom gland. Such processes occur within a defined time frame in the cell and at specific cellular locations. Thus, the determination of subcellular proteomes allows the characterization of protein groups for which the site may be relevant to their biological roles, thereby allowing the deconvolution of complex biological circuits into functional information. In the case of snake venom glands, subcellular proteome analysis could help understand the molecular basis of venom variability. Consequently, knowing the functional implications of such phenotypic plasticity could prove relevant in envenoming treatment and biological research. In this regard, we performed subcellular fractionation of proteins from B. jararaca snake venom gland, focusing on nuclear proteins since this cellular compartment comprises key effectors that shape gene expression. Our results provided a snapshot of B. jararaca's subcellular venom gland proteome. They pointed to a 'conserved' proteome core among different life stages (newborn and adult) and between genders (adult male and female).

### Sample Protocol
(Please see the related paper for more information on reference numbering) Venom gland extraction was carried out as described in [35]. A total of 12 animals were used from distinct regions of the state of São Paulo (Supplementary table 1) Pooled gland samples from adult females (F; n=3), adult males (M; n=3), and newborns (N; n=6; 3 from each gender) were processed aiming at a subcellular proteomic characterization. All animal work was conducted in agreement with the Ethical Principles in Animal Research, adopted by the Brazilian College of Animal Experimentation, and was approved by the Ethical Committee for Animal Research of Butantan Institute, São Paulo, Brazil (protocol n° 1371/15).  Subcellular fractionation  Cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were obtained after sequential centrifugation in proprietary buffer solutions using the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Tissues (Thermo Fisher, USA), following the manufacturer's recommendations. From each pooled sample, three fractions were obtained: cytoplasmatic (Cyto), soluble nuclear (N(s)), and chromatin-bound nuclear (N(cb)) proteins. After obtaining subcellular fractions, protein extracts were quantified using the Bradford method [36] and in-solution trypsin digestion was performed as described previously [28]. Briefly, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of each subcellular fraction sample to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 60 min. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM, and the samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature in the dark. DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM to quench the excess IAA. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice-cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 10,000 g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice-cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 2.5 mM), followed by adding 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.5) to a final volume of 100 µL. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at a 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate), and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. After desalting using C-18 cartridges, peptide samples were dried in a SpeedVac and redissolved in 85 µL of 1% formic acid prior to nanoflow liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) analysis. For quantitative proteomic analysis, intrafraction (Cyto, N(s), or N(cb)) normalization of samples (N, M and F) was performed in three steps, based on A280 reading on a Nanodrop instrument, average Total ion Count (TIC) from single MS1-only runs, and average TIC from single DDA runs. LC-MS/MS Each sample (27 in total) was analyzed in three technical replicates (3 LC-MS/MS runs for each sample in each subcellular fraction) by reversed-phase nano-chromatography coupled with high-resolution nano-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Chromatography was performed using an Easy 1200 nanoLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Samples (4 µL per run) were initially applied, at 2 μL/min of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water, to a 2-cm-long trap column (100 μm inner diameter), packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 3 μm matrix (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Next, peptides were submitted to chromatographic separation on a 44-cm-long column (75 μm inner diameter), packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 120 Å 1.9 μm matrix (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) directly into a PicoFritTM Self-Pack column (New Objective, Littleton, MA, USA). Fractionation was performed at 200 nL/min with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% acetonitrile in water as mobile phases A and B, respectively. Elution was carried out with a gradient from 2% to 50% B for 153 min; concentration was increased to 100% B in 4 min and maintained for 2 min more. The eluted peptides were introduced directly into a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap instrument. Ionization was achieved by applying 1.9 kV to the source, setting the capillary temperature to 250 °C, and alternate current (radiofrequency) level of the S-lenses at 60 V. The complete MS1 scans (300 to 1,500 m/z) were acquired in the profile mode with one micro-scan at 70,000 resolution and an automatic gain control target value of 1×106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The 12 most intense precursor ions within the isolation window and offset of 2.0 and 0.5 m/z were selected for HCD (higher-energy collision dissociation) fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30 units. The MS2 spectra (200 to 2,000 m/z) were acquired in centroid mode with one microscan at 17,500 resolution and an AGC target value of 5×104 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s, whereas peaks with unassigned charges or z = 1 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
(Please see the related paper for more information on reference numbering) We used three databases to perform our multi-round searches, as described below. Database 1 (DB1) consisted of 116,562 non-redundant proteins from Bothrops species transcriptome from NCBI (131,124 transcripts from Bothrops jararaca female venom gland; GEXA01), 45,096 transcripts from adult Bothrops jararaca accessory venom gland (GFJM01), and 32,144 from adult Bothrops moojeni venom gland (GFWW01)]. The transcript sequences were concatenated and used as input for the prediction of Open Reading Frames (ORFs) using the software TransDecoder (version 5.5.0) [37]. The translated amino acid sequences with a minimal length of 60 amino acids were aligned by BLASTP [38]  against the protein databases of Uniprot/Swissprot and the NCBI non-redundant Transcriptome Shotgun Assembly (TSA-NR) with cutoff e-value ≤ 1x10-5. Further, the predicted proteins were searched against the PFAM protein families' database [39]with the "hmmsearch" tool [40] with a cutoff e-value ≤ 1x10-3. The TransDecoder usually predicts more than one coding sequence by transcript, but only one candidate was selected, following the hit priority order of UniProtKB/Swissprot, PFAM, and TSANR-NCBI. The selected proteins were clustered to reduce the redundancy using the software CD-HIT version 4.7[41] (parameters aS and c = 0.98). Database 2 (DB2) consisted of 130,116 entries from Uniprot_SwissProt&TrEMBL taxonomy Serpentes (Taxon id # 8570) - downloaded on May 07, 2020 - for which all entries displaying 100% sequence identity (and that were a subset of a more extended sequence) were merged into a single entry, using the Generate Search DB option from the PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0.0.27) public domain software [42]Finally, database 3 (DB3) consisted of Uniprot_SwissProt, downloaded on May 08, 2020 (562,375 entries).  Protein identification  All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using PEAKS Studio X+ build 20200219 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Canada). After data refinement with the precursor (mass only) correction option, PEAKS DE NOVO analysis was run assuming trypsin digestion, with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02 Da) was set as a fixed modification. The first PEAKS DB analysis was performed against DB1 (see the previous section) using these same parameters plus the possibility of up to two missed enzyme cleavages and non-specific cleavage at one side of the peptides. Also, up to three of the following variable modifications were accepted per peptide: pyroglutamic acid from glutamine (−17.03 Da), deamidation at asparagine/glutamine (+0.98 Da), oxidation at methionine (+15.99 Da), and lysine/N-terminal formylation (+27.99 Da). Unmatched peptides ("de novo only") with an ALC score of at least 80% were submitted to a second search round against DB2; finally, "de novo only" peptides from the DB2 search were submitted to the third round against DB3. The three search rounds' results were merged, and false discovery rates (FDR) were estimated using the PEAKS decoy fusion approach. FDR levels equal to or smaller than 1% were established at peptide and protein levels, and protein identifications were only accepted for proteins with at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Snake venom protein synthesis undergoes finely regulated processes in the specialized secretory epithelium within the venom gland. Such processes occur within a defined period in the cell and at specific cellular locations. Thus, the determination of subcellular proteomes allows the characterization of protein groups for which the site may be relevant to their biological roles, thereby allowing the deconvolution of complex biological circuits into functional information. In this regard, we performed subcellular fractionation of proteins from B.&#xa0;jararaca venom gland, focusing on nuclear proteins since this cellular compartment comprises key effectors that shape gene expression. Our results provided a snapshot of B.&#xa0;jararaca's subcellular venom gland proteome and pointed to a 'conserved' proteome core among different life stages (newborn and adult) and between sexes (adult male and female). Overall, the top 15 highly abundant proteins identified in B.&#xa0;jararaca venom glands mirrored the panel of highly expressed genes in human salivary glands. Therefore, the expression profile observed for such a protein set could be considered a conserved core signature of salivary gland secretory epithelium. Moreover, the newborn venom gland displayed a unique expression signature of transcription factors involved in regulating transcription and biosynthetic processes and may mirror biological constraints of the ontogenetic development of B.&#xa0;jararaca, contributing to venom proteome diversity.

### Keywords
Snake venom, Subcellular fractionation, Snake venom gland, Bothrops jararaca, Proteome

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Functional Proteomics  -

Department of Science and Technology -
Federal University of São Paulo (UNIFESP), Sao Jose dos Campos-SP, Brazil
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of São Paulo, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil

### Submitter
Andre Zelanis

### Lab Head
Dr André Zelanis
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Department of Science and Technology, Federal University of São Paulo, São José dos Campos, SP, Brazil


