### Accession
PXD034458

### Title
Quantitation of ATIs in Wheat by LC-MS/MS – LFQ Orbitrap

### Description
A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro).

### Sample Protocol
Flour (25 mg) was extracted two times with 1 mL 50% 1-propanol in Tris-HCl (0.5 mol/L, pH 8.8) (v/v) containing 1% dithiothreitol (DTT) (w/v) (Svevo: 2 × 1.3 mL and R5P8b: 2 × 2.1 mL; Bobwhite and 22-2, 2 × 2.8 mL). For each extraction step, the samples were vortexed for 2 min and then stirred at 60 °C for 30 min. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatants were collected in 15 mL tubes. The solutions were homogenized by shaking. Aliquots (150 µL containing 150 µg protein) were transferred in 1.5 mL tubes. Proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone (600 µL) overnight at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 3,550 rcf and 22 °C for 25 min, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with ice-cold acetone (200 µL). The tubes were stored at -20 °C, shipped to Australia and Austria and again stored at -20 °C until further analysis. The protein pellets were reduced and alkylated as described in 2.3.1 and after evaporation to dryness, the residues were dissolved in Tris-HCl (0.5 mL, pH 7.8, 0.1 mol/L Tris-HCl, 0.04 mol/L urea). Tryptic hydrolysis (5 µg trypsin, 1:50 enzyme-substrate-ratio) was performed for 18 h overnight at 37 °C in the dark. The reaction was stopped by adding 2 µL TFA. Purification was done using Discovery DSC-18 solid phase extraction columns (100 mg, Sigma-Aldrich, MO, USA) according to manufacturer instruction and peptides were eluted with 40% ACN containing 0.1% FA. The solvent was evaporated and the peptides were stored at -20 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were directly used as input in MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0). For the first search, a large FASTA file containing all entries from the genus Triticum of the UniProtKB database (download 10.12.2020) were used and a FDR of 100% on peptide level was applied. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as fixed modification and trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Match-between runs (matching time window 0.7 min, alignment time window 20 min) was enabled, and the results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids. From the identified proteins in the first search, a smaller database was built in UniProtKB. This FASTA file was used for the second search with 1% peptide and protein FDR and in addition to the before mentioned parameters, the iBAQ algorithm was applied. A total sum normalization of iBAQ protein intensities between samples was performed to correct for different total protein injection amounts.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitation of wheat proteins is still a challenge, especially regarding amylase/trypsin-inhibitors (ATIs). A selection of ATIs was silenced in the common wheat cultivar Bobwhite and durum wheat cultivar Svevo by RNAi and gene editing, respectively, in order to reduce the amounts of ATIs. The controls and silenced lines were analyzed after digestion to peptides by LC-MS/MS with different approaches to evaluate changes in composition of ATIs. First, a targeted method with stable isotope dilution assay (SIDA) using labeled peptides as internal standards was applied. Additionally, four different approaches for relative quantitation were conducted, in detail, iTRAQ labeled and label free quantitation (LFQ) combined with data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA). Quantitation was performed manually (Skyline and MASCOT) and with different proteomics software tools (PLGS, MaxQuant, and PEAKS X Pro). To characterize the wheat proteins on protein level, complementary techniques as high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and gel electrophoresis were performed. The targeted approach with SIDA was able to quantitate all ATIs, even at low levels, but an optimized extraction is necessary. The labeled iTRAQ approach revealed an indistinct performance. LFQ with low resolution equipment (IonTrap) showed similar results for major ATIs, but low abundance ATIs as CM1, were not detectable. DDA measurements with an Orbitrap system and evaluation using MaxQuant showed that the relative quantitation was dependent on the wheat species. The combination of manual curation of the MaxQuant search with Skyline revealed a very good performance. The DIA approach with analytical flow found similar results compared to absolute quantitation except for some minor ATIs, which were not detected. Comparison of applied methods revealed that peptide selection is a crucial step for protein quantitation. Wheat proteomics faces challenges due to the high genetic complexity, the close relationship to other cereals and the incomplete, redundant protein database requiring sensitive, precise and accurate LC-MS/MS methods.

### Keywords
Amylase/trypsin inhibitor; wheat; crsipr-cas9; rnai;

### Affiliations
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institut of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institut of Technology
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany

### Submitter
Sabrina Geisslitz

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Scherf
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany


