### Accession
PXD013606

### Title
Comparative proteome analysis across moss, monocots and dicots unveils the evolutionary dynamics of core processes

### Description
Comparative functional genomics offers a powerful approach to study species evolution. To date, the majority of these studies have focused on the transcriptome in mammalian and yeast phylogenies. Here we present a novel multi-species proteomic dataset and a computational pipeline to compare the protein levels across multiple plant species systematically. Globally we find that protein levels diverge according to phylogenetic distance, but is more constrained than at the mRNA level. Module-level comparative analysis of groups of proteins shows that proteins that are more highly expressed tend to be more conserved. To interpret the evolutionary patterns of conservation and divergence, we develop a novel integrative analysis pipeline that combines publicly available transcriptomic datasets to define co-expression modules. Our analysis pipeline can be used to relate the changes in protein levels to different species-specific phenotypic traits. We present a case study with the rhizobia-legume symbiosis process that supports the important role of autophagy and redox management processes in this symbiotic association.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was precipitated from the plant extract through chloroform/methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer and lysed on ice via probe sonication. Proteins were digested at room temperature overnight using sequencing grade trypsin. Peptides from whole plants were subjected to high pH reserved-phase fractionation. All fractions were analyzed via nano-UPLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was searched with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.5). Searches were performed against the following UniProt protein sequence databases (v20150827): Medicago truncatula, Arabidopsis thaliana, Solanum tuberosum, Oryza sativa, Physcomitrella patens, and Zea mays. Label-free quantification was performed within MaxQuant using MaxLFQ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Lc-ms/ms, Plants, Phylogeny

### Affiliations
Thomas and Margaret Pyle Chair at the Morgridge Institute for Research  Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry  University of Wisconsin, Madison  Director, NIH National Center for Quantitative Biology of Complex Systems
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Harald Marx

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua J. Coon
Thomas and Margaret Pyle Chair at the Morgridge Institute for Research  Professor, Biomolecular Chemistry and Chemistry  University of Wisconsin, Madison  Director, NIH National Center for Quantitative Biology of Complex Systems


