### Accession
PXD019193

### Title
quantitative proteomic analysis of proteasome in response to MG132

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system and autophagy are two major intracellular proteolytic pathways and both remove misfolded and proteotoxic proteins from eukaryotic cells. This study describes the detailed informations about the change in composition and interactome of proteasomes after prolonged MG132 treatment.

### Sample Protocol
IP samples were digested by filter-adided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q-exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Briefly, peptide samples were separated on a two-column system, consisting of a trap column and an anlytical column with a 120 min gradient. The MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200 with 30% of normalized collision energy. The maximum ion injection time for the full scan and MS/MS scan was 20 and 100ms, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant. The MS/MS spectra were subjected to searches in the Human UniProt protein sequence database by means of the Andromeda search engine. Mass tolerance for precursor ions and MS/MS ions was set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively. The global false discovery rate for the peptide, protein, and modification level was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The 26S proteasome, a self-compartmentalized protease complex, plays a crucial role in protein quality control. Multiple levels of regulatory systems modulate proteasomal activity for substrate hydrolysis. However, the destruction mechanism of mammalian proteasomes is poorly understood. We found that inhibited proteasomes are sequestered into the insoluble aggresome via HDAC6- and dynein-mediated transport. These proteasomes colocalized with the autophagic receptor SQSTM1 and cleared through selective macroautophagy, linking aggresomal segregation to autophagic degradation. This proteaphagic pathway was counterbalanced with the recovery of proteasomal activity and was critical for reducing cellular proteasomal stress. Changes in associated proteins and polyubiquitylation on inhibited 26S proteasomes participated in the targeting mechanism to the aggresome and autophagosome. The STUB1 E3 Ub ligase specifically ubiquitylated purified human proteasomes in vitro, mainly via Lys63-linked chains. Genetic and chemical inhibition of STUB1 activity significantly impaired proteasome processing and reduced resistance to proteasomal stress. These data demonstrate that aggresomal sequestration is the crucial upstream event for proteasome quality control and overall protein homeostasis in mammals.

### Keywords
Interactome, Mg132, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


