### Accession
PXD045017

### Title
Papillary thyroid cancer phosphorylated proteomics

### Description
Phosphorylated proteomics profiling were performed on 37 paired tumor-normal tissues of human papillary thyroid cancer

### Sample Protocol
The samples were homogenized in lysis buffer consisting of 2.5% SDS/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Then the samples were subjected to treatment with ultra sonication. After centrifugation, proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding 4 times of pre-cooled acetone. The protein pellet was dissolved in 8 M Urea/100 mM Tris-Cl. After centrifugation, the supernatant was used for the reduction reaction (10 mM DTT, 37 °C for 1 h), followed by an alkylation reaction (40 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature/dark place for 30 min). Protein concentration was measured by the Bradford method. Urea was diluted below 2 M using 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (enzyme: protein, w/w) for overnight digestion at 37 °C. The next day, TFA was used to bring the pH down to 6.0 to end the digestion. After centrifugation (12000×g, 15 min), the supernatant was subjected to peptide purification using Sep-Pak C18 desalting column. The peptide eluate was vacuum dried and stored at -20 °C for later use.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data acquisition was carried out on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer coupled with an Easy-nLC 1200 system. Peptides were loaded through auto-sampler and separated in a C18 analytical column (75μm × 25cm, C18, 1.9μm, 100Å). Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) were used to establish the separation gradient. A constant flow rate was set at 300 nL/min. For DDA mode analysis, each scan cycle consists of one full-scan mass spectrum (R = 60 K, AGC = 300%, max IT = 20 ms, scan range = 350–1500 m/z) followed by 20 MS/MS events (R = 15 K, AGC = 100%, max IT = auto, cycle time = 2 s). HCD collision energy was set to 30. Isolation window for precursor selection was set to 1.6 Da. Former target ion exclusion was set for 35 s.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Papillary thyroid cancer, Phosphorylated proteomics

### Affiliations
Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics
Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Di Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hai-long Piao
Dalian Institute of Chemical and Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


