### Accession
PXD004883

### Title
The proteasome acts as a hub for local and systemic plant immunity in Arabidopsis thaliana and constitutes a virulence target of Pseudomonas syringae type-III effector proteins

### Description
Recent evidence suggests that the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is involved in several aspects of plant immunity and a range of plant pathogens subvert the UPS to enhance their virulence. Here we show that proteasome activity is strongly induced during basal defense in Arabidopsis. Mutant lines of the proteasome subunits RPT2a and RPN12a support increased bacterial growth of virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv. tomato DC3000 (Pst) and Pseudomonas syringae pv. maculicola ES4326. Both proteasome subunits are required for Pathogen-associated molecular patterns (PAMP)-triggered immunity (PTI) responses. Analysis of bacterial growth after a secondary infection of systemic leaves revealed that the establishment of systemic-acquired resistance (SAR) is impaired in proteasome mutants, suggesting that the proteasome also plays an important role in defense priming and SAR. In addition, we show that Pst inhibits proteasome activity in a type-III secretion dependent manner. A screen for type-III effector proteins from Pst for their ability to interfere with proteasome activity revealed HopM1, HopAO1, HopA1 and HopG1 as putative proteasome inhibitors. Biochemical characterization of HopM1 by mass-spectrometry indicates that HopM1 interacts with several E3 ubiquitin ligases and proteasome subunits. This supports the hypothesis that HopM1 associates with the proteasome leading to its inhibition. Thus, the proteasome is an essential component of PTI and SAR, which is targeted by multiple bacterial effectors.

### Sample Protocol
Adult Nicotiana benthamiana plants were syringe infiltrated with Agrobacterium either expressing HopM1-GFP (HopM1 cloned in pGWB5 vector) or a vector GFP alone. After three days, 10 g of plant tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen and proteins were isolated in extraction buffer (150 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA, 10 mM DTT, 2% [w/v] polyvinylpyrrolidone, 1% [v/v] Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (PIC, Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM NaF, 10 mM Na2MoO4, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.5 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride. After centrifugation at 20,000 rcf at 4°C for 30 min, the supernatants were filtered through a miracloth (Millipore). Supernatants were incubated for 2 h at 4°C with 200 µl of anti-GFP trap beads (Chromatek). The beads were washed thrice with 1ml of modified extraction buffer (150 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 5 mM EDTA, 2 mM EGTA and 1% PIC). Proteins were eluted by adding 50 μl of 5x SDS buffer and boiled for 5-10 min and run on 10% SDS-PAGE gel. The gel was stained with Commassie colloidal stain (Invitrogen) and proteins from each lane were trypsin digested and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis using an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 25 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted directly via a Triversa Nanomate nanospray source (Advion Biosciences, NY) into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using MSConvert in ProteoWizard Toolkit (version 3.0.5759)1. MS2 spectra were searched with Mascot engine (Matrix Science, version 2.4.1) against Nicotiana benthamiana database (available on request from Prof. Sophien Kamoun at the Sainsbury Laboratory (http://www.tsl.ac.uk/staff/sophien-kamoun/) ), Pseudomonas syringae database (http://www.uniprot.org/) and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins Database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html). Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modifications, and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 5 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.2, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
Recent evidence suggests that the ubiquitin-proteasome system is involved in several aspects of plant immunity and that a range of plant pathogens subvert the ubiquitin-proteasome system to enhance their virulence. Here, we show that proteasome activity is strongly induced during basal defense in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana). Mutant lines of the proteasome subunits RPT2a and RPN12a support increased bacterial growth of virulent Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato DC3000 (Pst) and Pseudomonas syringae pv maculicola ES4326. Both proteasome subunits are required for pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immunity responses. Analysis of bacterial growth after a secondary infection of systemic leaves revealed that the establishment of systemic acquired resistance (SAR) is impaired in proteasome mutants, suggesting that the proteasome also plays an important role in defense priming and SAR In addition, we show that Pst inhibits proteasome activity in a type III secretion-dependent manner. A screen for type III effector proteins from Pst for their ability to interfere with proteasome activity revealed HopM1, HopAO1, HopA1, and HopG1 as putative proteasome inhibitors. Biochemical characterization of HopM1 by mass spectrometry indicates that HopM1 interacts with several E3 ubiquitin ligases and proteasome subunits. This supports the hypothesis that HopM1 associates with the proteasome, leading to its inhibition. Thus, the proteasome is an essential component of pathogen-associated molecular pattern-triggered immunity and SAR, which is targeted by multiple bacterial effectors.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Pseudomonas

### Affiliations
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Alex Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Jones
University of Warwick


