### Accession
PXD038851

### Title
Human LINE-1 ORF1p complex LC-MS/MS

### Description
Host proteins regulate LINE-1 (L1) retrotransposition. Here, we use immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify proteins that associate with the L1 ORF1-encoded protein (ORF1p) in ribonucleoprotein particles.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were transfected with an L1-expressing plasmid (pJM101/L1.3, pJM101/L1.3FLAG, or pALAF008) using FuGENE HD. For IP reactions, Dynabeads Protein G  conjugated anti-FLAG antibody was incubated with the HeLa cell lysates and the ORF1p-FLAG protein complex bound was eluted using 3xFLAG peptide. After SDS-PAGE, the entire gel lane from each sample was excised and incubated with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) to extract the peptides. The purified peptides then were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on nano-Advance and Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using Xcalibur 3.1, Paradigm Home v.2.0.4 R4 B22, and Cycle Composer v.1.6.0 for mass spectrometry acquisition.

### Data Protocol
LFQ analyses on the resultant datasets were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the peptide hits. The human Uniprot Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) database was used for protein identification and the Mascot Server 2.7.0 database was used as the search engine. The Protein Validator Node of Proteome Discoverer 2.3 calculated high (<0.01), medium (0.01≤ and <0.05), or low (0.05≤) false discovery rates (FDRs) with the peptide hits to generate the protein FDR confidence score. Triplicate data were grouped respectively to obtain each group abundance using the Precursor Ions Quantifier nodes of Proteome Discoverer 2.3. The p-values of the abundance ratios were calculated using the Tukey Honestly Significant Difference test (post-hoc) after an analysis of variance (ANOVA) test.

### Publication Abstract
Some interferon stimulated genes (ISGs) encode proteins that inhibit LINE-1 (L1) retrotransposition. Here, we use immunoprecipitation followed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry to identify proteins that associate with the L1 ORF1-encoded protein (ORF1p) in ribonucleoprotein particles. Three ISG proteins that interact with ORF1p inhibit retrotransposition: HECT and RLD domain containing E3 ubiquitin-protein ligase 5 (HERC5); 2'-5'-oligoadenylate synthetase-like (OASL); and helicase with zinc finger 2 (HELZ2). HERC5 destabilizes ORF1p, but does not affect its cellular localization. OASL impairs ORF1p cytoplasmic foci formation. HELZ2 recognizes sequences and/or structures within the L1 5'UTR to reduce L1 RNA, ORF1p, and ORF1p cytoplasmic foci levels. Overexpression of WT or reverse transcriptase-deficient L1s lead to a modest induction of IFN-&#x3b1; expression, which is abrogated upon HELZ2 overexpression. Notably, IFN-&#x3b1; expression is enhanced upon overexpression of an ORF1p RNA binding mutant, suggesting ORF1p binding might protect L1 RNA from "triggering" IFN-&#x3b1; induction. Thus, ISG proteins can inhibit retrotransposition by different mechanisms.

### Keywords
Human, Retrotransposon, Line-1

### Affiliations
Kyoto University
Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan

### Submitter
Tomoichiro Miyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Tomoichiro Miyoshi
Department of Gene Mechanisms, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan


