### Accession
PXD011949

### Title
KIWIFRUIT PROTEIN CHANGES DURING POSTHARVEST COLD STORAGE

### Description
We report on the kiwifruit postharvest phase through an approach consisting of 2D-DIGE/nanoLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS-based proteomic measurements. Kiwifruit samples stored under conventional, cold-based postharvest conditions were sampled at four stages (from fruit harvest to pre-commercialization) and analyzed in comparison protein content. Proteomics showed that proteins associated with disease/defense, energy, protein destination/storage, cell structure and metabolism functions were affected at precise fruit postharvest times. By lining up kiwifruit postharvest processing to a proteomic depiction, this study integrates previous observations on protein content in postharvest pomes treated with specific chemical additives, and provides a reference framework for further studies on the optimization of fruit storage before its commercialization.

### Sample Protocol
Kiwifruit (Actinidia deliciosa cv. Hayward) samples were harvested from a commercial orchard. Fruits were randomly sampled from 10 selected vines at the commercial ripening stage 82 of the BBCH scale; they were selected for uniformity and the absence of physical defects/decay. Healthy fruits were stored in a controlled chamber at 4 °C, with 85% relative humidity, and removed after 0 (T0), 30 (T1), 60 (T2) and 90 (T3) days of cold storage. At each post-harvest stage, 60 selected fruits were sampled and divided in 3 biological replicates. They were quickly peeled and their outer pericarp (without inner pericarp containing locules and seeds) was sampled, rapidly cut, frozen in liquid N2 and stored to -80 °C, until used for further proteomic analyses. Kiwifruit outer pericarp samples were extracted for proteins using a modified version of the phenol/SDS-based method, which were then quantified. Dried kiwifruit proteins from 3 biological replicates of each postharvest stage (50 µg) were independently solved in 2 M thiourea, 7 M urea and 4% w/v CHAPS, and labeled with 400 pmol of Cy2-, Cy3- or Cy5-dyes using the dye-swapping strategy. Proteins in each biological replicate were then resolved and quantified according to the 2D-DIGE procedure. A parallel preparative 2-DE experiment was also performed using 500 µg of unlabeled proteins, which were stained with Sypro Ruby. After spot matching with the master gel from the 2D-DIGE experiment, spots in 2-DE corresponding to those showing quantitative abundance changes in 2D-DIGE were picked and analyzed for protein identification.  2-DE spots were excised, S-alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin. Peptides were resolved on a C18 nano-column (100 × 0.075 mm, 3 μm) and analysed under a CID-MS/MS data-dependent product ion scanning procedure with a LTQ XL mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS data were searched using MASCOT software (v. 2.2.06, Matrix Science, UK) against the A. chinensis protein sequence database (39,040 entries), using a mass tolerance value of 1.8 Da for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragments, with trypsin as proteolytic enzyme, a missed-cleavage maximum value of 2, Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, Met oxidation and pyroglutamic acid formation from N-terminal glutamine as variable modifications.  Protein candidates having at least 2 sequenced peptides with an individual peptide ion score >30 and a peptide expectation value <0.05 (consistent with a confidence level >95%) were considered surely identified.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Actinidia deliciosa</i> cv. Hayward fruit is renowned for its micro- and macronutrients, which vary in their levels during berry physiological development and postharvest processing. In this context, we have recently described metabolic pathways/molecular effectors in fruit outer endocarp characterizing the different stages of berry physiological maturation. Here, we report on the kiwifruit postharvest phase through an integrated approach consisting of pomological analysis combined with NMR/LC-UV/ESI-IT-MS<sup>n</sup>- and 2D-DIGE/nanoLC-ESI-LIT-MS/MS-based proteometabolomic measurements. Kiwifruit samples stored under conventional, cold-based postharvest conditions not involving the use of dedicated chemicals were sampled at four stages (from fruit harvest to pre-commercialization) and analyzed in comparison for pomological features, and outer endocarp metabolite and protein content. About 42 metabolites were quantified, together with corresponding proteomic changes. Proteomics showed that proteins associated with disease/defense, energy, protein destination/storage, cell structure and metabolism functions were affected at precise fruit postharvest times, providing a justification to corresponding pomological/metabolite content characteristics. Bioinformatic analysis of variably represented proteins revealed a central network of interacting species, modulating metabolite level variations during postharvest fruit storage. Kiwifruit allergens were also quantified, demonstrating in some cases their highest levels at the fruit pre-commercialization stage. By lining up kiwifruit postharvest processing to a proteometabolomic depiction, this study integrates previous observations on metabolite and protein content in postharvest berries treated with specific chemical additives, and provides a reference framework for further studies on the optimization of fruit storage before its commercialization.

### Keywords
Dige, Proteomics, Postharvest, Kiwifruit

### Affiliations
CNR ISPAAM
Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, National Research Council, 80147 Naples, Italy

### Submitter
anna maria salzano

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, ISPAAM, National Research Council, 80147 Naples, Italy


