### Accession
PXD033974

### Title
Early adipogenesis is repressed through the newly identified FHL2-NFAT5 signaling complex

### Description
The LIM-domain-only protein FHL2 is a modulator of signal transduction and has been shown to direct the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells toward osteoblasts and myocytes phenotypes. We hypothesized that FHL2 may simultaneously interfere with the induction of the adipocyte lineage. Therefore, we investigated the role of FHL2 in adipocyte differentiation using pre-adipocytes isolated from mouse adipose tissue and the 3T3-L1 (pre)adipocyte cell line. Here we report that FHL2 is expressed in pre-adipocytes and for accurate adipocyte differentiation, this protein needs to be downregulated during the early stages of adipogenesis. More specifically, constitutive overexpression of FHL2 drastically inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, which was demonstrated by suppressed activation of the adipogenic gene expression program as shown by extensive RNAseq analyses, and diminished lipid accumulation. To identify the protein-protein interactions mediating this repressive activity of FHL2 on adipogenesis, we performed affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS). This analysis revealed the interaction of FHL2 with the Nuclear factor of activated T-cells 5 (NFAT5), an established inhibitor of adipocyte differentiation. NFAT5 knockdown rescued the inhibitory effect of FHL2 overexpression on 3T3-L1 differentiation, indicating that these proteins act cooperatively.  In conclusion, we present a new regulatory function of FHL2 in early adipocyte differentiation and revealed that FHL2-mediated inhibition of pre-adipocyte differentiation is dependent on its interaction with NFAT5.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins were denatured and alkylated in 50 µl 8 M Urea, 1 M ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) containing 10 mM TCEP (tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride) and 40 mM 2-chloro-acetamide. After 4-fold dilution with 1 M ABC and digestion with trypsin (250 ng/200 µl), peptides were separated from the beads and desalted with homemade C-18 stage tips (3 M, St Paul, MN), eluted with 80% Acetonitrile (ACN) and, after evaporation of the solvent in the speedvac, redissolved in buffer A (0,1% formic acid). After separation on a 30 cm pico-tip column (75 µm ID, New Objective) in-house packed with C-18 material (1.9 µm aquapur gold, dr. Maisch) using a 140 minute gradient (7% to 80% ACN, 0.1% FA), delivered by an easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo), peptides were  electro-sprayed directly into a Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), that was run in DDA mode with a cycle time of 1 second, with the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) switching between -45V and -65V. The full scan (400-1400 mass range) was performed at a resolution of 240,000. Ions reaching an intensity threshold of 10E4, were isolated by the quadrupole with na 0.8 Da window, fragmented with a HCD collision energy of 30% and measured in de Iontrap on rapid mode.

### Data Protocol
After splitting of the raw files into the two CV channels with Freestyle Software (Thermo), analysis of the raw data was performed with MaxQuant (1.6.3.4), using the Uniprot fasta file (UP000000589) of Mus musculus (taxonomy ID: 10090) (2020 Jan 21). To determine proteins of interest, we performed a differential enrichment analysis. We filtered for proteins that were identified in at least two out of three of the replicates of one condition and background corrected and normalized the data by variance stabilizing transformation. We used a left-shifted Gaussian distribution to impute for missingness since our data presented a pattern of missingness not at random (MNAR). Finally, we performed a T-test with multiple testing correction using a Benjamini-Hochberg FDR approach set to 0.5%.

### Publication Abstract
The LIM-domain-only protein FHL2 is a modulator of signal transduction and has been shown to direct the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells towards osteoblast and myocyte phenotypes. We hypothesized that FHL2 may simultaneously interfere with the induction of the adipocyte lineage. Therefore, we investigated the role of FHL2 in adipocyte differentiation. For these studies pre-adipocytes isolated from mouse adipose tissue and the 3T3-L1 (pre)adipocyte cell line were applied. We performed FHL2 gain of function and knockdown experiments followed by extensive RNAseq analyses and phenotypic characterization of the cells by oil-red O (ORO) lipid staining. Through affinity-purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS) novel FHL2 interacting proteins were identified. Here we report that FHL2 is expressed in pre-adipocytes and for accurate adipocyte differentiation, this protein needs to be downregulated during the early stages of adipogenesis. More specifically, constitutive overexpression of FHL2 drastically inhibits adipocyte differentiation in 3T3-L1 cells, which was demonstrated by suppressed activation of the adipogenic gene expression program as shown by RNAseq analyses, and diminished lipid accumulation. Analysis of the protein-protein interactions mediating this repressive activity of FHL2 on adipogenesis revealed the interaction of FHL2 with the Nuclear factor of activated T-cells 5 (NFAT5). NFAT5 is an established inhibitor of adipocyte differentiation and its knockdown rescued the inhibitory effect of FHL2 overexpression on 3T3-L1 differentiation, indicating that these proteins act cooperatively. We present a new regulatory function of FHL2 in early adipocyte differentiation and revealed that FHL2-mediated inhibition of pre-adipocyte differentiation is dependent on its interaction with NFAT5. FHL2 expression increases with aging, which may affect mesenchymal stem cell differentiation, more specifically inhibit adipocyte differentiation.

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Nfat5, Protein-protein interaction, Fhl2

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Utrecht
Dept. Molecular Cancer Research



Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

### Submitter
Harmjan Vos

### Lab Head
Dr Carlie J.M. de Vries
Amsterdam UMC location University of Amsterdam, Department of Medical Biochemistry, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.


