### Accession
PXD005299

### Title
Translating mRNAs strongly correlate to proteins in a multivariate manner and their translation ratios are phenotype specific

### Description
As a well-known phenomenon, total mRNAs poorly correlate to proteins in their abundances as reported. Recent findings calculated with bivariate models suggested even poorer such correlation, whereas focusing on the translating mRNAs (ribosome nascent-chain complex-bound mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs) subset. In this study, we analysed the relative abundances of mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs and proteins on genome-wide scale, comparing human lung cancer A549 and H1299 cells with normal human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, respectively. As discovered, a strong correlation between RNC-mRNAs and proteins in their relative abundances could be established through a multivariate linear model by integrating the mRNA length as a key factor. The R2 reached 0.94 and 0.97 in A549 versus HBE and H1299 versus HBE comparisons, respectively. This correlation highlighted that the mRNA length significantly contributes to the translational modulation, especially to the translational initiation, favoured by its correlation with the mRNA translation ratio (TR) as observed. We found TR is highly phenotype specific, which was substantiated by both pathway analysis and biased TRs of the splice variants of BDP1 gene, which is a key transcription factor of transfer RNAs. These findings revealed, for the first time, the intrinsic and genome-wide translation modulations at translatomic level in human cells at steady-state, which are tightly correlated to the protein abundance and functionally relevant to cellular phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture Cells were labeled with a stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) quantitation kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) as previously described (36). In brief, HBE cells were labelled by light lysine (12C6) containing media, whereas A549 and H1299 cells by heavy lysine (13C6) containing media. Cells were cultured in their respective media for at least six passages to allow maximum lysine incorporation. Equal amounts of protein from light and heavy lysine-labelled cell lines were mixed and separated by SDS–PAGE. Gel bands were excised and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described (36). Mass spectrometry Peptides were analysed by a Finnigan Surveyor HPLC system coupled with LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Beijing, China) as previously described with minor modifications (36). In brief, the peptides were loaded in a C18 reverse-phase column, followed by a 0–40% gradient wash with acetonitrile buffer over 90 min. The eluent was real-time analysed by the LTQ-Orbitrap under data-dependent mode with capillary temperature of 200C and spray voltage of 1.80 kV. Mass range of 400–1800 m/z was scanned in the Orbitrap at resolution r = 60 000 at m/z 400, followed by 10 mass spectrometry (MS)2 scans for each MS in the LTQ with Dynamic Exclusion setting: a repeat count of 2, a repeat duration of 30 s and an exclusion duration of 90 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searching and protein quantification were performed by employing the MaxQuant software。The common search parameters included: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications, oxidation (M), Gln pyro-Glu (N-terminus), and acetyl (N-terminus); 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
As a well-known phenomenon, total mRNAs poorly correlate to proteins in their abundances as reported. Recent findings calculated with bivariate models suggested even poorer such correlation, whereas focusing on the translating mRNAs (ribosome nascent-chain complex-bound mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs) subset. In this study, we analysed the relative abundances of mRNAs, RNC-mRNAs and proteins on genome-wide scale, comparing human lung cancer A549 and H1299 cells with normal human bronchial epithelial (HBE) cells, respectively. As discovered, a strong correlation between RNC-mRNAs and proteins in their relative abundances could be established through a multivariate linear model by integrating the mRNA length as a key factor. The R(2) reached 0.94 and 0.97 in A549 versus HBE and H1299 versus HBE comparisons, respectively. This correlation highlighted that the mRNA length significantly contributes to the translational modulation, especially to the translational initiation, favoured by its correlation with the mRNA translation ratio (TR) as observed. We found TR is highly phenotype specific, which was substantiated by both pathway analysis and biased TRs of the splice variants of BDP1 gene, which is a key transcription factor of transfer RNAs. These findings revealed, for the first time, the intrinsic and genome-wide translation modulations at translatomic level in human cells at steady-state, which are tightly correlated to the protein abundance and functionally relevant to cellular phenotypes.

### Keywords
Translation ratios，translating mrnas

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and 9 Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China
Jinan university

### Submitter
Yang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qing-Yu He
Key Laboratory of Functional Protein Research of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Institute of Life and Health Engineering, College of Life Science and 9 Technology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China


