### Accession
PXD041104

### Title
Mass spectrometric analyses for the C281-dimedone adduct and the sulfinylated peptide fragments of Orf1

### Description
Oxidized cysteine residues are highly reactive and can form functional covalent conjugates, of which the allosteric redox switch formed by the lysine-cysteine NOS bridge is an example. Here, we report a non-canonical FAD-dependent enzyme Orf1 that adds a glycine-derived N-formimidoyl group to glycinothricin to form the antibiotic BD-12. X-ray crystallography was used to investigate this complex enzymatic process, which showed Orf1 has two substrate-binding sites that sit 13.5 Å apart unlike canonical FAD-dependent oxidoreductases. One site could accommodate glycine and the other glycinothricin or glycylthricin. Moreover, an intermediate-enzyme adduct with a NOS-covalent linkage was observed in the later site, where it acts as a two-scissile-bond linkage facilitating nucleophilic addition and cofactor-free decarboxylation. The chain length of nucleophilic acceptors vies with bond cleavage sites at either N–O or O–S accounting for N-formimidoylation or N-iminoacetylation. The resultant product is no longer sensitive to aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, a strategy that antibiotic-producing species employ to counter drug resistance in competing species.

### Sample Protocol
Orf1 (0.2 mM) was incubated in the presence of 1 mM glycine at 37°C for 10 mins and added with 10 mM dimedone at room temperature for another 30 mins. The reaction solution was exchanged to a buffer solution containing 25 mM NH4HCO3 with 40 g l-1 trypsin. After overnight incubation at 37°C, the sample (2 g l-1) was injected at a flow rate of 50 l ml-1 into an ACQUITY UPLC CSH C18 peptide column (130 Å, 1 mm x 150 mm, 1.7 m, #186006935) and detected by LC-ESI-MS, a Waters SELECT SERIESTM Cyclic IMS QToF (Manchester, UK). In brief, the gradient was set with 98% (v/v) buffer A for 3 mins to 60% (v/v) buffer B over 20 mins, where buffer A was water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and buffer B was acetonitrile with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The mass was operated in the LC/MSE mode of data acquisition, where alternating 1 second scans for low (4V) or high (10-40V) collision energies with lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The Byonic software 4.2.10 (protein metric) was used for peptide identification. The search parameter was set as: precursor mass tolerance ~20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance ~20 ppm, maximum missed cleavages ~5, and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021464), oxidation (+15.994915), dimedone adduct (+138.068068) and methionine oxidation (+15.994915) with target protein database.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidized cysteine residues are highly reactive and can form functional covalent conjugates, of which the allosteric redox switch formed by the lysine-cysteine NOS bridge is an example. Here, we report a noncanonical FAD-dependent enzyme Orf1 that adds a glycine-derived N-formimidoyl group to glycinothricin to form the antibiotic BD-12. X-ray crystallography was used to investigate this complex enzymatic process, which showed Orf1 has two substrate-binding sites that sit 13.5&#x2009;&#xc5; apart unlike canonical FAD-dependent oxidoreductases. One site could accommodate glycine and the other glycinothricin or glycylthricin. Moreover, an intermediate-enzyme adduct with a NOS-covalent linkage was observed in the later site, where it acts as a two-scissile-bond linkage facilitating nucleophilic addition and cofactor-free decarboxylation. The chain length of nucleophilic acceptors vies with bond cleavage sites at either N-O or O-S accounting for N-formimidoylation or N-iminoacetylation. The resultant product is no longer sensitive to aminoglycoside-modifying enzymes, a strategy that antibiotic-producing species employ to counter drug resistance in competing species.

### Keywords
N-formimmidolation and iminoacetylation enzyme

### Affiliations
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529 Taiwan
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yung-Lin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tsung-Lin Li
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, 11529 Taiwan


