### Accession
PXD005837

### Title
Identification of neuropeptides in the Crown-of-Thorns Starfish, Acanthaster planci

### Description
The Crown-of-thorns starfish (COTS) Acanthaster planci feeds on hard corals and its outbreaks are a major cause of destruction of coral communities on the Australian Great Barrier Reef. Whilst population booms and the social behaviour of COTS have been well studied, little is known about the neural mechanisms underlying COTS metabolism and behaviour. One of the major classes of chemical messengers that regulate metabolic and behavioural processes in animals are neuropeptides. Here, we have analysed COTS genome and transcriptome sequence data to identify neuropeptide precursor proteins in this species. Mass spectrometry was employed to identify neuropeptides extracted from radial nerve cords. Forty-nine neuropeptide precursors were identified, including homologs of neuropeptide signaling systems that are evolutionarily conserved throughout the Bilateria.

### Sample Protocol
COTS were collected from individual reefs in regions of the Great Barrier Reef, Cairns, Queensland, by the Reef Rescue dive squad and transferred to either Under Water World SeaLife Aquarium (Mooloolaba) and the AIMS culture facility (Townsville). Animals were housed in protein-skimmed saltwater aquariums for durations varying from two days to six months and received a minimal diet of fish pieces and pellets or nori seaweed (not optimal and therefore animals may have been malnourished). COTS limbs were amputated, dissected and the radial nerve removed. Dissected radial nerves were viewed and photographed with a light microscope (BX51; Olympus) equipped with a camera (UC50; Olympus). COTS radial nerve (pooled male and female) were collected from animals (n = 4) and the peptides extracted from homogenized tissue using acidified methanol (Sigma-Aldrich; methanol/acidic acid/milliQ water, 90:9:1). To purify peptides, extracts were filtered through an Ultrafree-MC, HV 0.45 µm pore-size sterile filter (Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA) then centrifuged through an Amicon Ultra-4 centrifugal filter unit (10 kDa; Millipore Corporation, Billerica, MA, USA) at 4000×g for 40 min (4ºC). The eluent was collected and lyophilized before further analysis. Lyophilized peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in milliQ water, then separated by reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using a Zorbax 50 x 0.5 mm C18 column (Agilent). The mobile phases for reverse phase separation were 0.1% TFA in MilliQ water (solvent A) and 0.1% TFA in acetonitrile (solvent B). A linear gradient from 0% to 60% of solvent B at flow rate of 1 ml/min over 60 min was used. HPLC fractions (3 min/fraction) were collected for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified by database searching using PEAKS v7.0 (BSI, Canada) against the protein database built from the COTS transcriptomes and genome data. Search parameters were as follows: no enzyme was used; and variable modifications included methionine oxidation, conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid, deamidation of asparagine and C-terminal amidation; precursor mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da and a fragment ion mass error tolerance was set to 0.1 Da; false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <= 1%, and the individual peptide ion score [-10*Log(p)] was calculated accordingly, where p is the probablity that observed match is a random event.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Crown-of-thorns starfish, Acanthaster planci, Neurotransmitter, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland, Australia, 4558

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast, Maroochydore DC, Queensland, Australia, 4558


