### Accession
PXD027352

### Title
Sub-centrosomal mapping identifies augmin-TuRC as part of a centriole-stabilizing scaffold

### Description
Centriole biogenesis and maintenance are crucial for cells to generate cilia and assemble centrosomes that function as microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs). Centriole biogenesis and MTOC function both require the microtubule nucleator -tubulin ring complex (TuRC). It is widely accepted that TuRC nucleates microtubules from the pericentriolar material (PCM) that is associated with the proximal part of centrioles. However, TuRC also localizes more distally and in the centriole lumen, but the significance of these findings is unclear. Here we identify spatially and functionally distinct sub-populations of centrosomal TuRC. Luminal localization is mediated by augmin, which is linked to the centriole inner scaffold through POC5. Disruption of luminal localization impairs centriole integrity and interferes with cilium assembly. Defective ciliogenesis is also observed in TuRC mutant fibroblasts from a patient suffering from microcephaly with chorioretinopathy. These results identify a novel, non-canonical role of augmin-γTuRC in the centriole lumen that is linked to human disease.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with 2 μg trypsin in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C overnight. Additional 1 μg trypsin was added and samples were incubated for 2 h at 37°C before formic acid was added (1% final concentration). Samples were cleaned through C18 tips (polyLC C18) and peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile/1% formic acid and diluted to 20% acetonitrile/0.25% formic acid before loading into strong cation exchange columns (polyLC SCX). Peptides were eluted in 5% NH4OH/30% methanol. Samples were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted in H2O with 3% acetonitrile/1% formic acid in a total volume of 50 μl. For mass spectrometry analysis, the reconstituted sample was further diluted 1:8 in H2O with 3% acetonitrile/1% formic acid. Samples were injected in duplicate (5μl per injection). Sample was loaded at a flow rate of 15 μl/min on a 300 μm x 5 mm PepMap100, 5 μm, 100 A, C18 μ-precolumn using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was done with a 90 min run on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMapR RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 A, Thermo Scientific), comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 3 to 35% B in 60 min, from 35 to 50% B in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% B in 2 min. Isocratic elution was done at 85% B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% formic acid in H2O, B= 0.1% formic acid in CH3CN). The outlet of the column was directly connected to a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode, survey MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 (defined at 200 m/z), and lock mass was defined at 445.12 m/z in each scan. In each scan the top speed (most intense) ions were fragmented by CID and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target values for survey and MS/MS scans were 400,000 and 10,000, respectively. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens was tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5,000. The spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database searching was done with Proteome Discoverer software v2.5.0.400 (Thermo) and MaxQuant v1.6.14.0 using Sequest HT and Andromeda search engines, respectively, and SwissProt Human release 2021 01 with contaminants database and manually introduced user proteins. Searches against targeted and decoy database were used for determining the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters for trypsin enzyme specificity allowed for two missed cleavage sites, oxidation in M and acetylation in protein N-terminus. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides with q-value lower than 0.01 and FDR < 1% were considered as positive with a high confidence level. For the quantitative analysis contaminant identifications were removed and unique peptide spectrum matches of protein groups identified with Sequest HT and Andromeda were analyzed with SAINTexpress-spc v3.11. High confidence interactors were defined as those with Bayesian false discovery rate BFDR ≤ 0.02 and fold change FC ≥ 3.

### Publication Abstract
Centriole biogenesis and maintenance are crucial for cells to generate cilia and assemble centrosomes that function as microtubule organizing centers (MTOCs). Centriole biogenesis and MTOC function both require the microtubule nucleator &#x3b3;-tubulin ring complex (&#x3b3;TuRC). It is widely accepted that &#x3b3;TuRC nucleates microtubules from the pericentriolar material that is associated with the proximal part of centrioles. However, &#x3b3;TuRC also localizes more distally and in the centriole lumen, but the significance of these findings is unclear. Here we identify spatially and functionally distinct subpopulations of centrosomal &#x3b3;TuRC. Luminal localization is mediated by augmin, which is linked to the centriole inner scaffold through POC5. Disruption of luminal localization impairs centriole integrity and interferes with cilium assembly. Defective ciliogenesis is also observed in &#x3b3;TuRC mutant fibroblasts from a patient suffering from microcephaly with chorioretinopathy. These results identify a non-canonical role of augmin-&#x3b3;TuRC in the centriole lumen that is linked to human disease.

### Keywords
Augmin, turc, Microtubules, Ciliogenesis, Centriole

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Microtubule Organization Group Mechanisms of Disease Programme Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona) The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST)

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Jens Lüders
Microtubule Organization Group Mechanisms of Disease Programme Institute for Research in Biomedicine (IRB Barcelona) The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST)


