### Accession
PXD010819

### Title
Perception of the peptide hormone Systemin

### Description
Cell suspension cultures of Solanum peruvianum were subjected to stimulation with 10nM systemin, the inactive systemin analog10nM a17, or injected with equal volume of water. For each treatment, a batch of cells was harvested after 2 minutes, 5 minutes, 15 minutes and 45 minutes. Untreated cells were harvested as controls. All treatments and time points were sampled as three independent replicates using independent sets of cells. Microsomal membranes were isolated from each sample, digested with trypsin, enriched for phosphopeptides and subjected to untargeted data-dependent acquisition by LC-MS/MS. Data analysis was performed jointly for all samples, and intensity values of triplicates were averaged.

### Sample Protocol
Microsomal proteins extracted from each harvested cell batch were digested for 3 hours with endoproteinase Lys-C (0.5 µg/µl; Thermo Scientific) at room temperature. After 4-fold dilution with 10mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), samples were digested with 4µl sequencing Grade Modifeid trypsin (0.5µg/µl; Roche) overnight at 37°C. After overnight digestion with trypsin, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added (until pH<=3) to stop digestion. Phosphopeptides were enriched from digested peptides over TiO2. For phosphopeptides enrichment, TiO2 beads were equilibrated with 100µl of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Digested peptides were mixed with same volume of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1 % TFA and incubated for about one minute with 2mg equilibrated TiO2 beads. The solution with the beads was then placed into a self-made microcolumn in a 200µl pipette tip with a C8-disc as aplug. Phosphopeptides were eluted from TiO2 beads in these microcolumns using 5% ammoniume hydroxide. Elutes were immediately acidified by adding 50µl 20% formic acid to reach pH<3. Enriched phosphopeptides were desalted over C18-Stage tip prior to mass spectromemtric analysis. The enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Scientific) as an HPLC-System and a Quadrupole-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) as a mass analyzer. Peptides were eluted from 75 µm x 50 cm C18 analytical column (PepMan, Thermo Scientific) on a linear gradient running from 4 to 64% acetonitrile in 240 min and sprayed directly into the Q-Exactive mass spectromemter. Proteins were identified by MS/MS using information-depepndent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple charged peptides. Up to 12 data-dependent MS/MS spectra were acquired for each full-scan spectrum acquired at 70,000 full-width half-maximum resolution. Fragment spectra were acquired at a resoltion of 35,000. Overall cycle time was approximately one second.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and ion intensity quantitation was carried out by MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8. Spectra were matched against the tomato proteome (Solanum lycopersicum, ITAG2.4, 34725 entries) using Andromeda. Thereby, carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modofication; oxidation of methionine as well as phosphorylation of serine, therionine and tyrosine was set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for the database search was set to 20 ppm on full scans and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. Multiplicilty was set to 1. For label-free quantitation, retention time matching between runs was chosen within a time window of two minutes. Peptides fale discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were set to 0.01, while site FDR was set to 0.05. Hits to contaminants (e.g.keratins) and reverse hits identified by MaxQuant were excluded from further analysis. Reported ion intensity values were used for quantitative data analysis. cRacker was used for label-free data analysis of phosphopeptide ion intensities based on MaxQuant output (evidence.txt). All phosphopeptides and proteotypic non-phosphopeptides were used for quantitation. Within each sample, ion intensities of each peptide ion species (each m/z) were normalized against the total ion intensities in the sample (peptide ion intensity/total sum of ion intensities). Subsequently, each peptide ion species (i.e. each m/z value) was scaled against the average normalized intensities of that ion across all treatments. For each peptide, values from three biological replicates then were averaged after normalization and scaling. In case of non-phosphopeptides, protein ion intensity sums were calculated from normalized scaled ion intensities of all proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Systemin is a small peptide with important functions in plant wound response signaling. Although the transcriptional responses of systemin action are well described, the signaling cascades involved in systemin perception and signal transduction at the protein level are poorly understood. Here we used a tomato cell suspension culture system to profile phosphoproteomic responses induced by systemin and its inactive Thr17Ala analog, allowing us to reconstruct a systemin-specific kinase/phosphatase signaling network. Our time-course analysis revealed early phosphorylation events at the plasma membrane, such as dephosphorylation of H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase, rapid phosphorylation of NADPH-oxidase and Ca<sup>2+</sup>-ATPase. Later responses involved transient phosphorylation of small GTPases, vesicle trafficking proteins and transcription factors. Based on a correlation analysis of systemin-induced phosphorylation profiles, we predicted substrate candidates for 44 early systemin-responsive kinases, which includes receptor kinases and downstream kinases such as MAP kinases, as well as nine phosphatases. We propose a regulatory module in which H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase LHA1 is rapidly de-phosphorylated at its C-terminal regulatory residue T955 by phosphatase PLL5, resulting in the alkalization of the growth medium within 2 mins of systemin treatment. We found the MAP kinase MPK2 to have increased phosphorylation level at its activating TEY-motif at 15 min post-treatment. The predicted interaction of MPK2 with LHA1 was confirmed by <i>in vitro</i> kinase assays, suggesting that the H<sup>+</sup>-ATPase LHA1 is re-activated by MPK2 later in the systemin response. Our data set provides a resource of proteomic events involved in systemin signaling that will be valuable for further in-depth functional studies in elucidation of systemin signaling cascades.

### Keywords
Systemin; solanum peruvianum; membrane proteins; phosphoproteomics; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Uninversity of Hohenheim. Institute of Plant Physiology and biotechnology
Institute of Plant Physiology and Biotechnology University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Fatima Haj Ahmad

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Klaus Schaller
Institute of Plant Physiology and Biotechnology University of Hohenheim


