### Accession
PXD005606

### Title
ELM-seq -  A reporter system coupled with high-throughput sequencing unveils key bacterial transcription and translation determinants

### Description
Quantitative analysis of the sequence determinants of transcription and translation regulation is of special relevance for systems and synthetic biology applications. Here, we developed a novel generic approach for the fast and efficient analysis of these determinants in vivo. ELM-seq (expression level monitoring by DNA methylation) uses Dam coupled to high-throughput sequencing) as a reporter that can be detected by DNA-seq. We used the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae to show that it is a quantitative reporter. We showed that the methylase activity correlates with protein expression, does not affect cell viability, and has a large dynamic range (~10,000-fold). We applied ELM-seq to randomized libraries of promoters or 5’ untranslated regions. We found that transcription is greatly influenced by the bases around the +1 of the transcript and the Pribnow box, and we also identified several epistatic interactions (including the +1 and the “extended Pribnow”). Regarding translation initiation, we confirmed that the Shine-Dalgarno motif is not relevant, but instead, that RNA secondary structure is the main governing factor. With this in hand, we developed a predictor to help tailor gene expression in M. pneumoniae. The simple ELM-seq methodology will allow identifying and optimizing key sequence determinants for promoter strength and translation. The ELM-seq methodology allows both researchers and companies to identify and optimize in an easy and comprehensive manner, key sequence determinants for promoter strength and translation.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in a 25 cm2 flask for 3 days as above, washed with PBS and lysed/collected in 4% SDS, and 0.1 M Hepes pH 7.5. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol (15 μM, 30 min, 56°C), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (180 nmols, 30 min, 25ºC) and digested with 3 μg LysC (Wako) O/N at 37ºC and then with 3 μg of trypsin (Promega) for eight hours at 37˚C following fasp procedure. After digestion, the peptide mix was acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column (The Nest Group, Inc) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixes were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto the 2-cm Nano Trap column with an inner diameter of 100 μm packed with C18 particles of 5 μm particle size (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography using a 25-cm column with an inner diameter of 75 μm, packed with 1.9 μm C18 particles (Nikkyo Technos). Chromatographic gradients started at 93% buffer A and 7% buffer B with a flow rate of 250 nl/min for 5 minutes and gradually increased 65% buffer A and 35% buffer B in 120 min. After each analysis, the column was washed for 15 min with 10% buffer A and 90% buffer B. Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water. Buffer B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 60.000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-2,000 with detection in the Orbitrap. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E6, dynamic exclusion (60 seconds) and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of DDA analysis, following each survey scan the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5,000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35%. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the Ion Trap, AGC was set to 5e4, isolation window of 2 m/z, activation time of 0.1 ms and maximum injection time of 100 ms was used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.0, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine (v2.5, Matrix Science) were used for peptide identification. Samples were searched against a M. pneumoniae database with a list of common contaminants and all the corresponding decoy entries (87,059 entries). Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of three miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-terminal) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR < 5 %. Protein top 3 areas have been calculated with unique peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative analysis of the sequence determinants of transcription and translation regulation is relevant for systems and synthetic biology. To identify these determinants, researchers have developed different methods of screening random libraries using fluorescent reporters or antibiotic resistance genes. Here, we have implemented a generic approach called ELM-seq (expression level monitoring by DNA methylation) that overcomes the technical limitations of such classic reporters. ELM-seq uses DamID (Escherichia coli DNA adenine methylase as a reporter coupled with methylation-sensitive restriction enzyme digestion and high-throughput sequencing) to enable in vivo quantitative analyses of upstream regulatory sequences. Using the genome-reduced bacterium Mycoplasma pneumoniae, we show that ELM-seq has a large dynamic range and causes minimal toxicity. We use ELM-seq to determine key sequences (known and putatively novel) of promoter and untranslated regions that influence transcription and translation efficiency. Applying ELM-seq to other organisms will help us to further understand gene expression and guide synthetic biology.Quantitative analysis of how DNA sequence determines transcription and translation regulation is of interest to systems and synthetic biologists. Here the authors present ELM-seq, which uses Dam activity as reporter for high-throughput analysis of promoter and 5'-UTR regions.

### Keywords
Screening, Translation, Transcription, Reporter

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation

### Submitter
Eva Yus

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Yus
Centre for Genomic Regulation


