### Accession
PXD025046

### Title
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase p110 delta differentially restrains and directs naïve versus effector CD8+ T cell transcriptional programs Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase p110 delta differentially restrains and directs naïve versus effector CD8+ T cell transcriptional programs

### Description
Phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase p110 delta (PI3Kp110δ) is pivotal for CD8+ T cell immune responses. To inform how PI3Kp110δ regulates CD8+ T cells, the current study focuses on PI3Kp110δ controlled transcriptional programs and reveals how PI3Kp110δ selectively induces and represses expression of key genes that create a cytotoxic T cell (CTL). The data identify differences in PI3Kp110δ regulated transcriptional programs between naïve and cytotoxic T cells including differential control of cytolytic effector molecules, costimulatory receptors and the critical inhibitory receptors CTLA4 and SLAMF6. However, common to both naïve and effector cells is PI3Kp110δ control of the production of chemokines and cytokines that orchestrate communication between the adaptive and innate immune system. The study provides a comprehensive resource for understanding how PI3Kp110δ uses multiple mechanisms dependent on Protein Kinase B/AKT, FOXO1 dependent and independent mechanisms and mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) to direct CD8+ T cell fate.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics sample preparation  Cell pellets were lysed in 0.5 mL urea lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, protease (cOmplete Mini EDTA-free, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche) and vigorously mixed for 30 minutes at room temperature. Samples were sonicated with a Branson digital sonicator and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Lysates were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 30°C for 30 minutes before being alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark at room temperature for 45 minutes. Lysates were then diluted with tris buffer (100 mM tris pH 8.0, 1mM CaCl2) to 4 M urea. LysC (Wako), reconstituted in tris buffer, was added to the samples at a 50:1 (protein:LysC) ratio and incubated at 30°C overnight. Samples were then transferred to low-bind 15 ml Falcon tubes (Eppendorf) and further diluted with tris buffer to 0.8 M urea before trypsin (Promega), reconstituted with tris buffer, was added at a ratio of 50:1 protein/trypsin and incubated at 30°C for 8hr. After digestion, samples were adjusted to 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior desalting with C18 Sep-Pack cartridges (Waters). The cartridges were washed twice with 1 mL elution buffer (50% acetonitrile ACN/0.1%TFA) and equilibrated twice with 1mL wash buffer (0.1% TFA). Acidified peptides were loaded twice and then washed three times with 1 mL washing buffer. Peptides were eluted into Eppendorf Protein LoBind tubes by 2 elutions of 600 μL elution buffer each and dried down in a SpeedVac (Genevac).  Strong anion exchange chromatography Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 210 μL SAX sample buffer (10 mM sodium borate–20% (v/v) acetonitrile), pH was adjusted to pH 9.3 with 1 M NaOH if necessary, and then fractionated with an UltiMate 3000 HPLC (high-performance liquid chromatography) system equipped with an AS24 SAX column. For the separation, the buffers used were 10 mM sodium borate (pH 9.3) (SAX buffer A) and 10 mM sodium borate (pH 9.3), 500 mM NaCl (SAX buffer B). An exponential elution gradient starting with Buffer A was used to separate the peptides into 16 fractions, which were collected and desalted with Sep-Pack C18 96-well desalting plates (Waters). Desalted peptides were then dried down with a SpeedVac (Genevac). Dried fractions were then resuspended in 1% formic acid, and separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, Thermo Fisher Scientific) before being electrosprayed into the linear trap quadrupole–Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Rollings et al., Sci. Signal 2018). The chromatography buffers used were as follows: HPLC buffer A (0.1% formic acid), HPLC buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid), and HPLC buffer C (0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 m inner diameter, 2 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) in HPLC buffer C with a constant flow of 5 l/min. After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 m, 100 Å column (75 m, 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the following buffer gradient: 2% B (0 to 3 minutes), 2 to 40% B (3 to 128 minutes), 40 to 98% B (128 to 130 minutes), 98% B (130 to 150 minutes), 98 to 2% B (150 to 151 minutes), and equilibrated in 2% B (151 to 180 minutes) at a flow rate of 0.3 l/min. The eluting peptide solution was automatically electrosprayed into the coupled linear trap quadrupole–Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source at 50°C and a source voltage of 1.9 kV (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Full-scan MS survey spectra (mass/charge ratio, 335 to 1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000. Data were collected using data-dependent acquisition (DDA): the 15 most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ after the accumulation of 5000 ions. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. MS was performed by the Proteomics Facility, University of Dundee, UK.

### Data Protocol
Processing and analysis of proteomic data The data were processed, searched and quantified with the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.10.43). Proteins and peptides were identified using a hybrid database from databases in Uniprot release 2020 06 as described in Marchingo et al., eLife 2020. The following search parameters were used: protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation were selected as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification; Trypsin and LysC were selected as the proteolytic enzymes; up to two missed cleavages were permitted; protein and PSM False discovery rates was set to 0.01 and matching of peptides between runs was switched off. Perseus software package (version 1.6.6.0) was used for data filtering and protein copy number quantification. Proteins were quantified from unique (found only in a specific protein group) and razor (peptides assigned to a specific protein group without being unique to that group) peptides. The data set was filtered to remove proteins categorised as “contaminants”, “reverse” and “only identified by site”. Copy numbers were calculated using the proteomic ruler plugin as described in Wisniewski et al., 2014. Copy numbers of histones in a diploid mouse cell get assigned to the summed peptide intensities of all histones present in a sample. The ratio between the histone peptide intensity and the summed peptide intensities of the other identified proteins is then used to estimate copy number per cell for all identified proteins in the data set.  Statistics and calculations proteomic data Three biological replicates were generated. P values were calculated via a two-tailed, unequal-variance t-test on log10 transformed copy number per cell values in Microsoft Excel. P values < 0.05 were considered as being statistically significant. Fold change > 2 or < 0.5 were considered as cut-off. Heatmaps were generated using the Morpheus tool from the Broad Institute (http://software.broadinstitute.org/morpheus).  Experimental design BR1 IL2: BR1 unstimulated BR2 IL2: BR2 unstimulated BR3 IL2: BR3 unstimulated BR1 TCR: BR1 +TCR 4hr BR2 TCR: BR2 +TCR 4hr BR3 TCR: BR3 +TCR 4hr BR1 TCR IC: BR1 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi  BR2 TCR IC: BR2 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi BR3 TCR IC: BR3 +TCR 4hr+PI3Kdi BR1 TCR MEKi: BR1 +TCR 4hr+MEKi BR2 TCR MEKi: BR2 +TCR 4hr+MEKi BR3 TCR MEKi: BR3 +TCR 4hr+MEKi  BR Biological Replicate

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pi3kp110δ, T cell, Tcr activation

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
University of Dundee

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Doreen Ann Cantrell
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


