### Accession
PXD000658

### Title
Global phosphoproteomic profiling reveals distinct signatures in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphomas

### Description
Ammonium hydroxide and pyrrolidine eluents were dried (SpeedVac) and reconstituted in 25 ul sample loading buffer (0.1% TFA/2% acetonitrile). Eluent from phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation was dried and reconstituted in 35 ul of the loading buffer. An LTQ Orbitrap XL (ThermoFisher) in-line with a Paradigm MS2 HPLC (Michrom bioresources) was employed for acquiring high-resolution MS and MS/MS data. Ten microliters of the phospho-enriched peptides were loaded onto a sample trap (Captrap, Bruker-Michrom) in-line with a nano-capillary column (Picofrit, 75 um i.d.x 15 um tip, New Objective) packed in-house with 10 cm of MAGIC AQ C18 reverse phase material (Michrom Bioresource). Two different gradient programs, one each for MOAC and phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation samples, were used for peptide elution. For MOAC samples, a gradient of 5-40% buffer B (95% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid) in 135 min and 5 min wash with 100% buffer B followed by 30 min of re-equilibration with buffer A (2% acetonitrile/1% acetic acid) was used. For phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation samples, which were a much less complex mixture of peptides, 5-40% gradient with buffer B was achieved in 75 min followed by 5 min wash with buffer B and 30 min re-equilibration. Flow rate was ~0.3 ul/min. Peptides were directly introduced into the mass spectrometer using a nano-spray source. Orbitrap was set to collect 1 MS scan between 400-2000 m/z (resolution of 30,000 @ 400 m/z) in orbitrap followed by data dependent CID spectra on top 9 ions in LTQ (normalized collision energy ~35%). Dynamic exclusion was set to 2 MS/MS acquisitions followed by exclusion of the same precursor ion for 2 min. Maximum ion injection times were set to 300 ms for MS and 100 ms for MS/MS. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set to 1xe6 for MS and 5000 for MS/MS. Charge state screening was enabled to discard +1 and unassigned charge states. Technical duplicate data for each of the MOAC elutions (ammonium hydroxide and pyrrolidine) and triplicate data for the phosphotyrosine immunoprecipitation samples were acquired. RAW files were converted to mzXML using msconvert and searched against the Swissprot Human protein database (2013-Jan release) appended with common proteomics contaminants and reverse sequences as decoys. Searches were performed with X!Tandem (version 2010.10.01.1) using the k-score plugin. For all searches the following search parameters were used: Parent monoisotopic mass error of 50 ppm; fragment ion error of 0.8 Daltons; allowing for up to 2 missed tryptic cleavages. Variable modifications were oxidation of Methionine (+15.9949@M), carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.0214@C), and phosphorylation of Serine, Threonine, and Tyrosine (+79.9663@[STY]). The search results were then post-processed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Deregulation of signaling pathways controlled by protein phosphorylation underlies the pathogenesis of hematological malignancies; however, the extent to which deregulated phosphorylation may be involved in B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma (B-NHL) pathogenesis is largely unknown. To identify phosphorylation events important in B-NHLs, we performed mass spectrometry-based, label-free, semiquantitative phosphoproteomic profiling of 11 cell lines derived from three B-NHL categories: Burkitt lymphoma, follicular lymphoma, and mantle-cell lymphoma. In all, 6579 unique phosphopeptides, corresponding to 1701 unique phosphorylated proteins, were identified and quantified. The data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000658. Hierarchical clustering highlighted distinct phosphoproteomic signatures associated with each lymphoma subtype. Interestingly, germinal center-derived B-NHL cell lines were characterized by phosphorylation of proteins involved in the B-cell receptor signaling. Of these proteins, phosphoprotein associated with glycosphingolipid-enriched microdomains 1 (PAG1) was identified with the most phosphorylated tyrosine peptides in Burkitt lymphoma and follicular lymphoma. PAG1 knockdown resulted in perturbation of the tyrosine phosphosignature of B-cell receptor signaling components. Significantly, PAG1 knockdown increased cell proliferation and response to antigen stimulation of these germinal center-derived B-NHLs. These data provide a detailed annotation of phosphorylated proteins in human lymphoid cancer. Overall, our study revealed the utility of unbiased phosphoproteome interrogation in characterizing signaling networks that may provide insights into pathogenesis mechanisms in B-cell lymphomas.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteome, Ms/ms, B-cell lymphoma

### Affiliations
Pathology

### Submitter
Damian Fermin

### Lab Head


