### Accession
PXD032822

### Title
Deubiquitinases that digest Met1 chains in Rice

### Description
Met1 type ubiquitination and deubiquitination are involved in the regulation of many fundamental processes such as inflammation and innate immunity, and their interference by pathogens can suppress immune responses in human cells. However, few plant-derived deubiquitinases (DUBs) against Met1 ubiquitin chains has been reported, and the selection mechanism for linkage-type of ubiquitin chains remains elusive, which greatly limits our understanding of the functions of plant-derived DUBs. Using a dehydroalanine (DHA)-bearing Met1 diubiquitin (Met1-diUb) suicide probe, synthesized in one-pot, we captured OTUB1 from Oryza sativa (OsOTUB1) and uncovered its ability to hydrolyze Met1 ubiquitin chains (Met1 activity). Further, by resolving the apo structure of OsOTUB1 and its complex with Met1-diUb, we found that Met1-specific motifs (N-handle motif and C-handle motif) in the S1’ pocket of OsOTUB1 confers its Met1 activity. Through large-scale sequence alignment and hydrolysis experiments, Met1-specific motifs in the S1' pocket of the OTUB subfamily (OTUBs) were found to determine the Met1 ability of OTUBs, regardless of species. Furthermore, by analyzing the species distribution of OTUBs capable of hydrolyzing Met1 ubiquitin chains, we found that whereas this activity does not exist in metazoans, it is conserved in green plants (Viridiplantae). This discovery may inform studies of the differentiation between primitive plants and animals.

### Sample Protocol
Each gel band was excised and digested in-gel with 2 ng/μL sequencing grade trypsin in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C. Prior to the addition of the enzyme, gel pieces were dehydrated in acetonitrile, incubated in 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 56℃ for 40 min, incubated in 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at ambient temperature for 1 hr in the dark, then dehydrated again. The resulting peptides were extracted twice with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile, then vacuum-centrifuged to dryness.  The samples were analyzed by an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), with an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific) using a C18 bulk material packed loading column (100 µm × 2 cm), and a C18 separating capillary column (75 µm × 15 cm). Peptides were re-suspended in buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water, v/v), loaded onto the pre-column, separated by the separating column with a linear gradient of 7-35% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, v/v) in buffer A during 60 min, and then subjected to CID (Collision induced dissociation)-based LC-MS/MS analysis. The data were acquired in data-dependent mode with a full MS scan (300–1700 M/z) in FT mode at a resolution of 120000 followed by CID MS/MS scans on the 15 most abundant ions with multiple charges in the initial MS scan. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 ions for Orbitrap scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. For dynamic exclusion, the following parameters were used: isolation window, 2 m/z; repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 25 s; and exclusion duration, 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was carried out using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 using the protein sequence database downloaded from The Rice Annotation Project (RAP) website (https://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp/, downloaded on 2016-08-05). PD carried out all database search with the following parameters: Carbamidomethyl (Cys) as static modification and Oxidation (Met) as variable modification. Mass tolerance was +/- 10 ppm for precursor ions and +/- 0.6 Da for fragment mass ions; Maximum missed cleavages was set as 2.

### Publication Abstract
Linear (Met1-linked) ubiquitination is involved inflammatory and innate immune signaling. Previous studies have characterized enzymes regulating the addition and removal of this modification in mammalian systems. However, only a few plant-derived deubiquitinases targeting Met1-linked ubiquitin chains have been reported and their mechanism of action remains elusive. Here, using a dehydroalanine-bearing Met1-diubiquitin suicide probe, we discover OTUB1 from Oryza sativa (OsOTUB1) as a Met1-linked ubiquitin chain-targeting deubiquitinase. By solving crystal structures of apo OsOTUB1 and an OsOTUB1/Met1-diubiquitin complex, we find that Met1 activity is conferred by Met1-specific motifs in the S1' pocket of OsOTUB1. Large-scale sequence alignments and hydrolysis experiments provide evidence that these motifs are a general determinant of Met1 activity in the OTUB subfamily across species. Analysis of the species distribution of OTUBs capable of hydrolysing Met1-linked ubiquitin chains shows that this activity is conserved in green plants (Viridiplantae) and does not exist in metazoans, providing insights into the evolutionary differentiation between primitive plants and animals.

### Keywords
Met1 chains, Deubiquitinase, Rice

### Affiliations
College of life sciences and technology,Guangxi University
Guangxi University

### Submitter
Li-Ning Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Lining Lu
College of life sciences and technology,Guangxi University


