### Accession
PXD021487

### Title
Lipid and protein profiles associated to human osteoarthritis type 2 diabetes phenotype

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a multifactorial pathology which comprises a wide range of distinct phenotypes. The characterization of the different molecular profiles associated to each phenotype can improve the classification of OA for a better personalized medicine. Within the metabolic syndrome phenotype, OA can co-exist with type 2 diabetes (TD2) disease. This study was undertaken to investigate lipidomic and proteomic differences between human OA and OA/TD2 cartilage through a multimodal mass spectrometry approach.

### Sample Protocol
5 µl of protein digests were injected for liquid-chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) analysis. The separation of the peptides was performed on a Thermo Fisher Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation ultrahigh-performance liquid-chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap C18 analytical column (2µm, 75µm*500 mm, 100Å). The samples were first trapped on an online C18 column for desalting. The peptides were then separated on the analytical column with a 180-min linear gradient from 5% to 45% acetonitrile /0.1% formic acid and a flow rate set at 300 nL/min. The HPLC system was coupled on-line to a high-mass resolution orbitrap MS Q-Exactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) with a nano-electrospray Flex ion source (Proxeon, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following settings: Full MS scan of the mass range m/z 250-1,250 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans for the fragmentation of the 10 most intense ions at a resolution of 17,500. The ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 30s. External calibration of the instrument was performed using a standard calibration solution for positive ion mode (Thermo Scientific).   For protein identification, raw files were processed within the Proteome Discoverer software version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) using the search engine Sequest with the Swiss-Prot human database Homo sapiens version 2020-02-10 (TaxID 9606). The following parameters were used for the database search: Carbamidomethylation of C for fixed modifications; oxidation of M and acetylation of protein N-term for variable modifications; trypsin for enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages; the precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm and the fragment tolerance at 0.02 Da; minimum and maximum peptide length of 6 and 144 amino acids, respectively. Normalization of the data was performed on the total peptide amount. Percolator was used for the decoy database search and the FDR was fixed at 1% maximum. For protein quantitation, the Minora Feature Detector node in the processing step and the Feature Mapper node combined with the Precursor Ions Quantifier node in the consensus step were used with default settings.

### Data Protocol
ANOVA test was performed within the Proteome Discoverer software to analyze the statistical significance of variation observed in protein abundance between the conditions. The proteins were considered modulated with an adjusted p-value≤0.05 and a fold change (FC) cut-off set at 1.5-fold. The modulated proteins were then imported within the EnrichR software [21] to display the top 10 pathways of down or up-regulated proteins ranked by the combined score. Wikipathways and KEGG were used as databases (version 2019, Human).

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a multifactorial pathology and comprises a wide range of distinct phenotypes. In this context, the characterization of the different molecular profiles associated with each phenotype can improve the classification of OA. In particular, OA can coexist with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). This study investigates lipidomic and proteomic differences between human OA/T2DM<sup>-</sup> and OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> cartilage through a multimodal mass spectrometry approach. Human cartilage samples were obtained after total knee replacement from OA/T2DM<sup>-</sup> and OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> patients. Label-free proteomics was employed to study differences in protein abundance and matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) for spatially resolved-lipid analysis. Label-free proteomic analysis showed differences between OA/T2DM<sup>-</sup> and OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> phenotypes in several metabolic pathways such as lipid regulation. Interestingly, phospholipase A2 protein was found increased within the OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> cohort. In addition, MALDI-MSI experiments revealed that phosphatidylcholine and sphingomyelin species were characteristic of the OA/T2DM<sup>-</sup> group, whereas lysolipids were more characteristic of the OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> phenotype. The data also pointed out differences in phospholipid content between superficial and deep layers of the cartilage. Our study shows distinctively different lipid and protein profiles between OA/T2DM<sup>-</sup> and OA/T2DM<sup>+</sup> human cartilage, demonstrating the importance of subclassification of the OA disease for better personalized treatments.

### Keywords
Human osteoarthritis type 2 diabete

### Affiliations
Human Biology
M4i Maastricht University

### Submitter
freek bouwman

### Lab Head
Dr Berta Cillero Pastor
M4i Maastricht University


