### Accession
PXD026495

### Title
THE INTRA-MITOCHONDRIAL O-GLCNACYLATION SYSTEM ACUTELY REGULATES OXPHOS CAPACITY AND ROS DYNAMICS IN THE HEART

### Description
O-linked N-acetylglucosamination (O-GlcNAcylation) of proteins is increasingly recognized as an important cellular regulatory mechanism. In the heart, nucleocytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylation is involved in the modulation of multiple pathophysiological processes. However, the mechanisms leading to O-GlcNAcylation in mitochondria and the consequences on their function remain poorly understood. In this study, we used an in vitro reconstitution assay to characterize the intra-mitochondrial O-GlcNAc cycling system without potential confounding effects of O-GlcNAcylation in other cellular compartments. We performed a comparative analysis of the O-GlcNAcylome of isolated cardiac mitochondria acutely (30 min) exposed to UDP-GlcNAc in presence/absence of NButGT, a specific O-GlcNAcylation inducer, and evaluated the impact on mitochondrial function. 412 O-GlcNAcylated mitochondrial proteins were identified by mass spectrometry analysis, with 189 (Q<0.05) displaying increased O-GlcNAcylation in response to NButGT. Among the O-GlcNAcylated pathways identified, oxidative phosphorylation was the main affected. These acute changes in protein O-GlcNAcylation were associated with enhanced Complex I (CI) activity, increased maximal respiration in presence of CI substrates, and a striking reduction of mitochondrial ROS release, which could be related to O-GlcNAcylation of subunits within the NADH dehydrogenase module of CI. In conclusion, our work underlines the existence of a dynamic mitochondrial O-GlcNAcylation system capable of rapidly modifying mitochondrial function.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of proteins – Isolated mitochondria pellets or 20 mg of freeze-clamped hearts were homogenized in 200 µL of RIPA lysis buffer (25 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS at pH 7.6) supplemented with a protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (ThermoFisher Scientific, #78446) and 1 µM of O-GlcNAc cycling enzyme inhibitors (Sigma-Aldrich, #A7413 and #A7229). 250 µg of proteins from the lysate were then precipitated using chloroform/methanol (MeOH) precipitation method as follows. 600 μL of MeOH were added to the 200 μL sample, followed by 150 μL of chloroform and 400 μL of 18 megaOhm water. Samples were then vortexed briefly and centrifuged for 5 min at 13,000×g. The upper aqueous phase was carefully removed and discarded. Additional 450 μL MeOH were added to pellet the protein after brief vortex and centrifugeation for 5 min at 13,000×g. The supernatant was then removed, and the pellet air dried for 5 min. Finally, proteins were resuspended in 40 µL of 1% SDS in 20 mM HEPES pH 7.9 and heated 5-10 min at 90°C to assure completely resuspension of proteins. Enzymatic labelling and purification of O-GlcNAcylated proteins – O-GlcNAc groups from proteins were labelled with tetramethylrhodamine azide (TAMRA) using the Click-iT® O-GlcNAc enzymatic labelling system kit (C33368) followed by the Click-iT® protein analysis detection kit (C33370) from Invitrogen according to the manufacturer's instructions. SDS was then quenched with NEFTD buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mMTris-HCl, 5 mM EDTA, 6% NP-40 at pH 7.4). Before immunoprecipitation of TAMRA labelled proteins, lysate was precleared with washed protein G sepharose beads to avoid non-specific binding of proteins on the beads. Afterwards, supernatant was incubated with pre-washed protein G sepharose beads (10 µL) coupled with anti-TAMRA antibody (10 µg, A6397, Invitrogen) for 1.5 h at 4°C. Following centrifugation (500×g, 1 min), the beads were washed once with NEFTD buffer (100 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 5 mM EDTA, 6% NP-40) and three times with NEFT buffer (NEFTD without NP-40). The beads were then boiled 5 min in Laemmli buffer (2 mM EDTA, 4% SDS, 20% Glycerol, 0.004% bromophenol blue, 50 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris at pH 6.8) to elute O-GlcNAc proteins. Proteins were then separated on 1 mm on SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Coomassie blue (Sigma-Aldrich).  In-Gel Digestion and identification of captured O-GlcNAc Proteins – Gels were cut in seven bands of equal size and in-gel digested with trypsin. Peptides separation was performed using a C18 reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000-nLC RSLC system. The peptides were subjected to Nano-Spray-Ionization source followed by tandem MS/MS in a tribrid Fusion Lumos Orbitap analyser coupled online to the nano-LC. Spectra were acquired by a data dependent scan routine with ion precursor detection in the Orbitrap and daughter ions in the Iontrap.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.4 against a rat protein database obtained from Uniprot (29 953 entries). Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine, carbamidomethyl on cysteine were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. The filtered Sequest HT output files for each peptide were grouped according to the protein from which they were derived and abundance was evaluated by label-free quantification within Proteome Discoverer from area under the curve of MS1 intensities. Following such procedure, we were able to identify 2510 putative O-GlcNAcylated proteins.  LC-MS/MS analysis – The analysis was conducted in R (R Core Team, 2020). The expression values were log2 transformed but not subjected to normalization given the data acquisition technique involving an enrichment of O-GlcNAc proteins prior to MS analysis. To maximize stringency, only proteins reliably detected in all experimental replicates (n=4) from control and NButGT-treated mitochondria were considered. Of the 835 proteins identified, mitochondrial proteins (412) were selected according to their mitochondrial status from the Mitominer database. Prior to differential expression analysis and based on exploratory analyses, NButGT-treated replicate n°3 was removed as it did not respond to treatment (assessed by O-GlcNAc immunoblotting). The differential expression between control and NButGT-treated groups was statistically assessed through linear models using empirical Bayes methods for variance modelling, as implemented in the Bioconductor limma package (Ritchie et al., 2015; Phipson et al., 2016) where the group effect was the only one included in the models. P-values for the group effect were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995). Proteins having a group effect with an adjusted p-value (q) < 0.1 and q < 0.05 were deemed deferentially expressed between control and NButGT-treated mitochondria with either high or very high confidence score, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Mitochondria, Oxidative phosphorylation, O-glcnac

### Affiliations
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium
Pole of cardiovascular research - Institute of Experimental and Clinical Research (IREC) Université catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Luc Bertrand
Pole of cardiovascular research - Institute of Experimental and Clinical Research (IREC) Université catholique de Louvain Brussels, Belgium


