### Accession
PXD018730

### Title
Synergistic effects between rutin and ascorbic acid in the protection of the proteome of 3D-cultured human skin fibroblasts from UVA radiation

### Description
This study demonstrates the cooperation of rutin and ascorbic acid in cytoprotective action against UVA induced changes in the context of proteins involved in gene expression, catalytic processes, antioxidant pathways, as well as signalling molecules including transmembrane channels. The main advantages of the work is application in research a three-dimensional (3D) cell culturing system providing the most epidermal-like conditions.

### Sample Protocol
3D cultured human skin fibroblasts following UVA irradaition have been incubated with rutin or/and ascorbic acid for 24h.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release 2019-04). Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da, and up to two allowed missed cleavages were used for protein identification. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and carboxymethylation, and methionine oxidation were set as dynamic modifications. Only proteins with at least three identified peptides longer than 6 amino acid residues and at least two unique peptides were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Daily exposure of the skin to UVA radiation causes oxidative modifications to cellular components and biomolecules. These include proteins involved in the metabolism and cytoprotection of fibroblasts, and their modification can contribute to the disruption of cell function and the development of skin disorders. Therefore, there remains a need for highly active cytoprotective compounds with antioxidant properties. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of ascorbic acid on the activity of rutin against UVA-induced changes in the proteome of human fibroblasts. All analyses were carried out on fibroblasts cultured in a three-dimensional system exposed to UVA radiation and incubated with rutin and ascorbic acid. Their proteomic profile was analyzed using nano-HPLC, which revealed 150 proteins whose expression was significantly altered between treatment conditions. UVA radiation led to changes in the expression of 82 proteins. However, some of these changes were mitigated by rutin and ascorbic acid separately (23 and 25 proteins, respectively) and rutin and ascorbic acid together (23 proteins). UVA radiation has led to the upregulation of proteins involved in gene expression, catalytic processes and antioxidant pathways, and downregulation of proteins with binding activity. Nevertheless, rutin and ascorbic acid used separately or together have countered these changes to varying degrees. Moreover, rutin and ascorbic acid stimulated fibroblasts irradiated by UVA to increase the expression of the signalling molecules responsible for the opening of the transmembrane channels. In the context of the results obtained, the observed cytoprotective effect of the cooperation of rutin and ascorbic acid results not only from the overlapping properties of the compounds. The effect of rutin alone is probably inhibited by its limited bioavailability. Therefore, its interaction with ascorbic acid increases membrane penetration and improves the cytoprotective effect on skin fibroblasts.

### Keywords
Skin fibroblasts; uva radiation; rutin; ascorbic acid; proteomics; 3d cell culture

### Affiliations
Department of Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Bialystok, Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland
Department of Analytical Chemistry,  Medical University of Bialystok;  Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland;

### Submitter
Agnieszka Gęgotek

### Lab Head
Dr Agnieszka Gegotek
Department of Analytical Chemistry,  Medical University of Bialystok;  Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland;


