### Accession
PXD002771

### Title
Proteomic analysis of prothoracic glands of the silkworm Bombyx mori

### Description
The project aim was to identify the cell membrane receptors that prothoracic gland cells use to decode and transduce information from the extracellular environment during the final larval stage of the model insect, Bombyx mori.

### Sample Protocol
Prothoracic glands from day 0 and day 6 (onset of wandering stage) of the 5th instar were used to analyze the protein expression profiles of B. mori PG cells. Larvae were anesthetized by submersion in water and PGs were dissected rapidly (~2 min/animal) from each larva in sterile saline (0.85% NaCl). The glands were pre-incubated in Grace’s medium (Invitrogen) for 15–30 minutes and meticulously cleared of any associated tissue or debris. Then, glands were pooled and successively transferred to gradually diminishing volumes of Grace’s medium drops (n=5) before being snap frozen in dry ice and stored at -80oC.  Each sample was dissolved in a buffer consisting of 6 M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 5mM Mg Acetate and 10mM Tris (pH 8.5). Samples were vortexed and sonicated 4 times for 30 sec with 2 min breaks on ice between pulses. Samples were then centrifuged at 10000xg and the supernatant was collected for protein separation on a 1D gel. 40 μl of sample were mixed with 5x concentrated loading buffer with addition of fresh DDT (1%) before being heated for 5 minutes at 95oC, cooled down and loaded (50 μl) on a Mini-Protean TGX gel (4-15%) (Bio-Rad). The gel was then fixed for 30 minutes (45% methanol, 1% acetic acid) and stained with colloidal coomassie overnight.  Each lane was cut into 16 gel slices and each slice was transferred into a 96-well PCR plate. Gel bands were cut into 1 mm2 pieces, destained, reduced with DTT then alkylated with iodoacetamide and subjected to enzymatic digestion with trypsin overnight at 37°C. After digestion, the supernatant was pipetted into a sample vial and loaded onto an auto-sampler for automated liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corp.) system and an LTQ Orbitrap Velos hybrid ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Separation of peptides was performed by reverse-phase chromatography using a Waters reverse-phase nano column (BEH C18, 75 μm i.d. x 250 mm, 1.7 μm particle size) at flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were initially loaded onto a pre-column (Waters UPLC Trap Symmetry C18, 180m i.d x 20 mm, 5 m particle size) from the nanoAcquity sample manager with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 l/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow the elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 5-40% B in 60 minutes. The LC eluant was sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of a nanospray source (New Objective). All m/z values of eluting ions were measured in the Orbitrap Velos mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 30000. Data dependent scans (Top 20) were employed to automatically isolate and generate fragment ions by collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap, resulting in the generation of MS/MS spectra. Ions with charge states of 2+ and above were selected for fragmentation.  Post-run, data was processed using Protein Discoverer (version 1.4., Thermo Scientific).  Briefly, all MS/MS data were converted to mgf files and sixteen files (representing the entire gel lanes per sample) were combined and submitted to the Mascot search algorithm (v2.3.02, Matrix Science, London UK) and searched against the UniProt B. mori sequence database (14788 sequences).

### Publication Abstract
Ecdysteroids secreted by the prothoracic gland (PG) cells of insects control the developmental timing of their immature life stages. These cells have been historically considered as carrying out a single function in insects, namely the biochemical conversion of cholesterol to ecdysteroids and their secretion. A growing body of evidence shows that PG cells receive multiple cues during insect development so we tested the hypothesis that they carry out more than just one function in insects. We characterised the molecular nature and developmental profiles of cell membrane receptors in PG cells of Bombyx mori during the final larval stage and determined what receptors decode nutritional, developmental and physiological signals. Through iterative approaches we identified a complex repertoire of cell membrane receptors that are expressed in intricate patterns and activate previously unidentified signal transduction cascades in PG cells. The expression patterns of some of these receptors explain precisely the mechanisms that are known to control ecdysteroidogenesis. However, the presence of receptors for the notch, hedgehog and wingless signalling pathways and the expression of innate immunity-related receptors such as phagocytosis receptors, receptors for microbial ligands and Toll-like receptors call for a re-evaluation of the role these cells play in insects.

### Keywords
Ecdysteroids, Halloween genes, Bombyx mori, Insect, Steroidogenic tissue

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece

### Submitter
Skarlatos Dedos

### Lab Head
Dr Skarlatos G. Dedos
Department of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece


