### Accession
PXD021229

### Title
Fasnall induces atpically transient Stress Granules

### Description
Stress Granule formation has been linked to the resistance of some cancer cells to chemotherapeutic intervention. A number of studies have proposed that certain anti-tumor compounds promote cancer cell survival by inducing Stress Granules formation, leading to increased cellular fitness and apoptosis avoidance. Here we show that a potent fatty acid synthase inhibitor, fasnall, known for its anti-tumor capabilities, triggers the formation of non-canonical Stress Granules with a faster clearing and internal dynamics kinetics independently of fatty acid synthase inhibition. PABPC1 BioID interactomes in fasnall, and arsenite conditions were obtained.

### Sample Protocol
Cells expressing PABPC1-BirA(R118G)-GFP were grown to 80-90% confluency. SGs were induced with 100 μM arsenite, or fasnall. After 1 hour, cells were incubated with biotin (100μM) for 6 hours, SGs formation was visualized on the microscope. Lysis and affinity capture was done according to Roux et al. with minor modifications (Roux et al., 2012). Cells were washed with PBS and (subsequent steps at 4°C) lysed in the buffer (50mM Tris pH7.4, 500mM NaCl, 0.4%SDS, 5mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, and protease inhibitor cocktail (aprotinin, leupeptin, and PMSF, 10μg) with glass beads 425-600 μm (Sigma). After 1min of vortex Triton X-100 was added to 2% concentration, after second round of vortex equal amount of 50mM Tris pH7.4 was added. After third round of vortex and centrifugation 5min 13000 rpm 300μl of streptavidin-coated magnetic beads (NEB) were added to collected supernatants and incubated overnight at 4°C with agitation, 10% of the sample was collected for the Western Blot analysis. Beads were collected and (subsequent steps at room temperature) washed according to Roux et al.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.6.3.4 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA sequence database (downloaded 02.01.19). The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Protein identifications required at least three unique or razor peptides per protein group. Relative protein quantification in MaxQuant was performed using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Identified proteins were analyzed with Perseus software (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Stress Granule formation has been linked to the resistance of some cancer cells to chemotherapeutic intervention. A number of studies have proposed that certain anti-tumor compounds promote cancer cell survival by inducing Stress Granule formation, leading to increased cellular fitness and apoptosis avoidance. Here we show that a potent fatty acid synthase inhibitor, fasnall, known for its anti-tumor capabilities, triggers the formation of atypical Stress Granules, independently of fatty acid synthase inhibition, characterized by high internal mobility and rapid turnover.

### Keywords
Pabpc1, Stress granule, Fasnall

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen
University Medical Center Goettingen

### Submitter
Triana Amen

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Kaganovich
Department of Experimental Neurodegeneration, University Medical Center Goettingen


