### Accession
PXD027940

### Title
Tomato trifoliate mutant proteome

### Description
Tomato trifoliate 5 mutant exhibits high carotenoid and folate levels. However, the mechanisms governing high carotenoid and folate levels of the mutant are largely unknown. Therefore, a proteomic approach combined with metabolite profiling and gene expression was used to decipher the effect of mutation in tf-5 gene on carotenoid and folate contents in in S. lycopersicum, cv. Arka vikas (AV).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from fruit tissue were extracted using the protocol described in Kilambi et al. 2013. For proteome profiling, shotgun proteomic approach (GELC-MS) was followed as described in Kilambi et al., 2016 and 2017. Both wild type and mutant fruit samples were harvested at different ripening stages and were analyzed in parallel right from the protein extraction to LC-MS separation. In-gel digestion was carried out following the protocol described in Shevchenko et al. 2006. Eluted peptides after concentration in speedvac were desalted on in-house made micro columns packed with C18 material, aliquoted, dried, and stored at −80 °C. The trypsin digests were analyzed using Easy-nLC II coupled to LTQ Orbitrap-VelosPro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). For separation on nano-LC-MS/MS, an aliquot of dried peptides was re-suspended in solvent A (5% ACN+95% water (v/v)) and 300 ng of peptides were loaded onto a trap column (Integra Frit 100 µm x 2.5 cm, 5 µm, C18 New Objective, USA) and eluted on a Biobasic C18 picofrit column (75 µm x 10 cm, 5 µm, New Objective, USA) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min using solvent A (water/ACN (95/5) with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (ACN/water (95/5) with 0.1% formic acid). For tf-5 - AV fruit samples, the gradient was- 5%-30% B (0-100 min), 30%-95% B (101-103 min), 95% B hold (104-106 min), 95%-5% B (107-113 min), 5% B hold (114-118 min). Mass spectra were acquired using a data dependent method in positive mode with Xcalibur (version 3.1.0, Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was calibrated for both positive and negative modes with Pierce LTQ Velos positive and negative calibration solutions (Thermo Scientific). The survey scans were performed in Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 using a mass range of 350-1800. MS/MS spectra were obtained in ion trap (IT) using collision induced dissociation (CID) for top 20 peaks resulting from each survey scan. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion period was enabled with a repeat count of 1, and a lock mass of 445.120030 was used for mass accuracy. The top 20 peaks were fragmented by CID using normalized collision energy of 35% with an isolation window of 2 m/z. Automatic gain control targets (AGC) for full MS and MSn were set at 500,000 (Orbitrap) and 10,000 (IT). Full MS data were acquired in profile mode while the MS/MS data were acquired in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (PD versio 2.2, Thermo Scientific). Independent searches were performed for each fraction of an individual sample. Data obtained from the wild type and mutant were searched against the S. lycopersicum iTAG4.1 proteome sequence(ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG4.1_release/ITAG4.1_proteins.fasta), downloaded on August 28, 2020, 34430 sequences and 11584472 residues). Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. In Sequest search engine, trypsin was selected as a protease and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, deamidation of aspargine and glutamine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered for high confidence, and a minimum number of two matched peptides were considered for assigning protein IDs. Percolator tool was used to assess peptide confidence; peptides with q value ≤ 0.01 (equivalent to a power of 1 at a P <0.05) were selected, which was estimated based on the number of decoy hits. Label-free quantitation (Scaffold version 4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc) was used to identify the differentially expressed proteins in the mutant compared to wild type after passing stringent selection criteria (P value≤0.05, minimum 1.5-fold change (either up- or down-regulation), minimum two peptides for identification.

### Publication Abstract
In tomato (Solanum lycopersicum), mutations in the gene encoding the R2R3-MYB117 transcription factor elicit trifoliate leaves and initiate the formation of axillary meristems; however, their effects on fruit ripening remain unexplored. The fruits of a new trifoliate (tf) mutant (tf-5) were firmer and had higher &#xb0;Brix values and higher folate and carotenoid contents. The transcriptome, proteome, and metabolome profiling of tf-5 reflected a broad-spectrum change in cellular homeostasis. The tf-5 allele enhanced the fruit firmness by suppressing cell wall softening-related proteins. tf-5 fruit displayed a substantial increase in amino acids, particularly &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid, with a parallel reduction in aminoacyl-tRNA synthases. The increased lipoxygenase protein and transcript levels seemingly elevated jasmonic acid levels. In addition, increased abscisic acid hydrolase transcript levels coupled with reduced precursor supply lowered abscisic acid levels. The upregulation of carotenoids was mediated by modulation of methylerythreitol and plastoquinone pathways and increased the levels of carotenoid isomerization proteins. The upregulation of folate in tf-5 was connoted by the increase in the precursor p-aminobenzoic acid and transcript levels of several folate biosynthesis genes. The reduction in pterin-6-carboxylate levels and &#x3b3;-glutamyl hydrolase activity indicated that reduced folate degradation in tf-5 increased folate levels. Our study delineates that in addition to leaf development, MYB117 also influences fruit metabolism. The tf-5 allele can be used to increase &#x3b3;-aminobutyric acid, carotenoid, and folate levels in tomato.

### Keywords
Mature green, Carotenoids and folates., Breaker and red ripe stages of ripening, Tomato fruit proteome

### Affiliations
Associate Professor at University of Hyderabad
Department of plant sciences, RTGR, University of Hyderabad

### Submitter
Yellamaraju Sreelakshmi

### Lab Head
Dr DR. Y. Sreelakshmi
Department of plant sciences, RTGR, University of Hyderabad


