### Accession
PXD042108

### Title
Identification of Potential BiomarkersRelated to Mesenchymal Stem Cell Response in Patients with Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Background: Preclinical studies showed thatmesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) ameliorate tau phosphorylation, amyloid-betaaccumulation, and inflammation in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) mouse models viasecretion of neurotrophic factors and cytokines. We aimed to identify CSFbiomarkers that can be used to predict or monitor the response to MSCs inpatients with AD. Methods: AD patients were injected withhuman umbilical cord blood-MSCs (n=22) or placebo (n=12). The cerebrospinalfluid (CSF) samples were collected at baseline, one day after the firstinjection, and one day after the third injection. The patients injected withMSCs were classified into good responder (GR) or poor responder (PR) groupsbased on the rate of changes in the ratio of total-tau and phosphorylated-tauin the CSF. We selected three typical participants in each group, and their CSFprotein levels were analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem massspectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Results: In the LC-MS/MS analysis 1,667proteins were identified. 11 proteins showed significant differences betweenthe typical GR and PR at baseline. Based on their significance level and knownfunctions two proteins, reticulocalbin-3 (RCN3) and follistatin-related protein3 (FSTL3), were selected as potential biomarkers to predict MSC response. 173proteins showed significant change one day after the third injection comparedto the baseline in typical GR. We excluded 45 proteins that showed significantchange after the third injection compared to the baseline in the typical PR.Based on their significance level and known function, four proteins,scrapie-responsive protein 1 (SCRG1), neural proliferation and differentiationcontrol protein (NPDC1), apolipoprotein E (ApoE), and cystatin C (CysC), wereselected as potential biomarker to monitor MSC response. Additionally,functional analysis revealed that the increased CSF proteins after the thirdinjection compared to the baseline in the typical GR were associated withsynaptogenesis. Conclusions: This study identified twoproteins (RCN3 and FSTL3) that may be potential biomarkers for predicting MSCresponse and four proteins (SCRG1, NPDC1, ApoE, CysC) that may be potentialbiomarkers for monitoring MSC response in patients with AD. Further studies areneeded to validate our results.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were collected at baseline, oneday after the first injection, and one day after the third injection from ADpatients. The CSF was obtained via the Ommaya reservoir and aliquoted into 1 mLpolypropylene tubes and stored in a deep freezer at -80 °C. The top 14 abundant proteins were depletedusing a MARS14 column (Agilent, CA, USA). For this, the mixture was diluted 1:1with a proprietary Buffer A and loaded onto a MARS14 column on an Agilent 1100 seriesHPLC system (Agilent). The unbound fraction was buffer exchanged into 8 M urea in 50 mM Tris (pH 8) and concentrated throughultrafiltration using an Amicon Ultra-0.5 mL 3 kDa cutoff filter (Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) to approximately50 μL. Samples were treated with 5 µL of 50 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 25 °C for 1 h and further treated with 5 µL of 150 mM iodoacetamide at 25 °C for 1 h in the dark. Urea concentration was diluted to 0.8 M with 50 mM Tris prior to trypsin digestion (Promega,Madison, WI, USA) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h on a shaker at 600 rpm. Formic acid was then added at a final concentration of 0.2% tostop the digestion reaction. The peptides were desalted using an Oasis HLB 1 ccVac cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and dried with a vacuum centrifuge(miVac Duo Concentrator; Genevac, Suffolk, UK). The dried peptides wereresuspended in labeling buffer (0.1 M triethylammoniumbicarbonate buffer, Sigma Aldrich), and the peptide concentration wasdetermined using the quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo FisherScientific, Waltham, MA, USA). An aliquot equivalent to 25 μg (100 μL) of each sample was immediately labeled with 0.8 mg of each tandem mass Tag (TMT) channel, except for TMT 126, whichwas prepared according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The control samplewas labeled with TMT channel 126 for normalization. Following incubation atroom temperature for 1 h, the reaction was quenched withhydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v). The TMT-labeled sampleswere combined and dried in vacuo. The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated bybasic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LCSystem using an Agilent 1290 Infinity LC System (Agilent). Chromatography wasperformed using an XBridge BEH130 C18 column (4.6-μm i.d. × 250mm length; poresize of 130 Å and particle size of 3.5 μm; Waters Corporation,Milford, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. The mobilephases were 10 mM NH4HCO2 (pH 10) as phase A and 10 mM NH4HCO2 (pH 10) in 90% ACN (pH 10) as phase B. The peptides weredissolved in 110 μL of mobile phase A and then injected into a 100-μL sample loop. The gradient was 5% B for 10 min, 5–40% B for 40 min, 40–70% B for 15 min, 70% B for 10 min, and 70-5% B for15 min. Fractionation was performed by collecting 84 tubes (0.8 min/tube) throughout the chromatographic run. Eighty-four fractionswere pooled to obtain 12 concatenated fractions and dried in vacuo.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometricdata were loaded onto the Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2.0.388) software.Protein identification was performed using the Human UniProtKB database(released in June 2020). The integration of reporter ion tolerance was selectedas 20 ppm, precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the fragment mass tolerancewas 0.02 Da. Search parameters included two missed trypsin cleavage sites,cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da), and lysine TMT-label (+229.163) asfixed modifications, methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da) and N-terminal proteinacetylation (+42.0106 Da) as variable modifications. The false discovery rate(FDR) was set to 0.01 for proteins and peptides and was determined by searchinga reverse database. For protein identification, one peptide was requiredas the minimum number of razor and unique peptides in a protein group. In LC-MS/MS analyses,the protein intensity of a sample was calculated in reference to the controlsample (TMT-126).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Biomarker, Alzheimer’s disease, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Sungho Shin

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Korea Institute of Science and Technology


