### Accession
PXD022987

### Title
The Ubiquitin-Specific Protease USP36 Promotes Small Nucleolar Ribonucleoprotein Group SUMOylation and is Essential for Ribosome Biogenesis

### Description
SUMOylation plays a crucial role in regulating diverse cellular processes including ribosome biogenesis. Proteomic analyses and experimental evidence showed that a number of nucleolar proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis are modified by SUMO. However, how these proteins are SUMOylated is less understood. Here, we report that USP36, a nucleolar deubiquitinating enzyme (DUB), promotes nucleolar SUMOylation. Overexpression of USP36 enhances nucleolar SUMOylation, whereas its knockdown or genetic deletion reduces the levels of SUMOylation. USP36 interacts with SUMO2 and Ubc9 and directly mediates SUMOylation in cells and in vitro. We show that USP36 promotes the SUMOylation of the small nucleolar ribonucleoprotein (snoRNP) components Nop58 and Nhp2 in cells and in vitro and their binding to snoRNAs. It also promotes the SUMOylation of snoRNP components Nop56 and DKC1. Functionally, we show that knockdown of USP36 markedly impairs rRNA processing and translation. Thus, USP36 promotes snoRNP group SUMOylation and is critical for ribosome biogenesis and protein translation.

### Sample Protocol
H1299 cells transfected with His-SUMO2 with or without Flag-USP36 were lysed in 8M urea lysis buffer (8M Urea, 100 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4 pH 8.0, 10 mM Trish-HCl pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 5% glycerol, 0.1% Triton X-100, 10 mM imidazole) and total SUMOylated proteins were purified using a Ni2+-NTA agarose bead pulldown. The eluted proteins were analyzed by mass spectrometry to identify the SUMOylated proteins. Briefly, samples were run into a SDS-PAGE gel for 6 minutes, the gel stained, protein bands at the top of the gel excised, reduction and alkylation of cysteines performed using dithiothreitol and iodoacetamide, respectively, and proteins in-gel trypsinized. Dried peptides were then dissolved in 5% formic acid, injected onto a 75 μm x 250 mm nano C18 column via a peptide trap, and data-dependent MS/MS data for peptides were acquired using a LTQ Velos linear ion trap using a 7.5 – 30% acetonitrile gradient over 195 minutes.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data was then searched using SEQUEST vs. 28 (rev. 12) against a human database containing both Swissprot and TrEMBL sequences, plus 179 common contaminates and the reversed forms of all those proteins (269,858 total sequences). A static modification +57 was specified on Cys, and a dynamic modification of +16 on Met. Average parent ion mass tolerance was 2.5 Da, and monoisotopic fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.0 Da, with trypsin specified as the enzyme. A linear discriminant transformation was then used to improve the identification sensitivity from the SEQUEST analysis, score histograms of forward and reverse sequence entries generated, and matches to forward sequence proteins filtered to a protein false discovery rate under 1%. After removal of contaminates, this resulted in the identification of 203 proteins. Estimation of protein abundance differences in the His-SUMO2 pulldowns with or without Flag-USP36 was performed using the numbers of assigned MS/MS spectra to each protein across the two samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deubiquitinating enzyme, Ribosome biogenesis, Sumo, Usp36, Sumoylation, Ltq velos, Homo sapiens, Spectral count, Co-ip, Nucleolus

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics  Oregon Health & Science University
OHSU

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Mu-Shui Dai
Department of Molecular & Medical Genetics  Oregon Health & Science University


