### Accession
PXD015357

### Title
Proteome dynamics of the developing açaí berry pericarp (Euterpe oleracea Mart.)

### Description
A quantitative proteome analysis of four developmental stages of pericarp tissues of the açaí berry (Euterpe oleracea Mart.) was performed by the isobaric labeling of peptides with iTRAQ® 4-plex, HILIC pre-fractionation of labeled peptides and high-performance mass spectrometry analysis. This analysis resulted in the identification of 4286 proteins, of which 476 presented differential abundance between the stages. The differential abundance of these proteins was seen to be coordinated with the metabolic demands during cell division, lignification, and cell expansion at developmental stages 1 and 2, as well phenolic acids accumulation and metabolic changes in the fruit maturation, at developmental stages 3 and 4. The distinct accumulation of anthocyanins observed in the pericarp at developmental stage 4 was correlated with the increase in abundance of some key biosynthetic enzymes, such as leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase, anthocyanidin O-3-glycosyltransferase and UDP-glycosyltransferase. Here evidence is also provided for the presence in the açaí berry of secondary metabolites not previously described in açaí, such as pterostilbene, matairesinol and furaneol. Together, these results will pave the way for studies aimed at the genetic improvement of the nutritional properties of this important fruit crop.

### Sample Protocol
60 μg of proteins were subjected to reduction with 10 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) for 1 hour at 30 ° C, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodo acetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Then dilution with 100 mM TEAB (1:9 v/v) followed by trypsin (Promega Corp. Madison, WI, USA) was added for controlled proteolytic cleavage of the proteins, at a ratio of 1:50 (μg/μg) for 18 hours at 37 ° C 17. The trypsinization was quenched with application of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, 10%) to reduce to pH 2 approximately. After the trypsinization, the initial cleaning was carried out in order to separate the SDC from the sample, by centrifugation at 10,000 g, for 10 min and transfer the supernatant to a new tube. The supernatant was applied stage tips columns made with Poros R2 resin (Applied Biosystems), for elution of the salts and concentration of the peptides by means of a gradient of acetonitrile (ACN, 50 and 70%). The peptides were dried, resuspended in a standardized manner with 15 μL 20 mM TEAB and quantified again with QubitTM protein assay kit. Peptides were labelled using iTRAQ® 4-plex reagent (AB Sciex), according to the recommendations of the manufacturer. In the labeling, the reagents corresponding to the different reporter ions of 114, 115, 116 and 117 Da were distributed in the samples of S1, S2, S3 and S4, respectively (x3 biological replicates). After the application, the reaction was incubated for one hour at room temperature and then the solutions were clustered into three groups concerning the biological replicates, finally the reaction was terminated with application of 200 μL of 10% TFA and the volume was reduced under vacuum to approximately 10 μL. Subsequently, each mixture was diluted in 100 μL of miscible organic solution (90% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and fractioned through hydrophilic liquid chromatography (HILIC) to fractionate the sample and eliminate iTRAQ reagent excess. The fractionation process was performed on a Shimadzu UFLC chromatograph equipped with a HILIC column (Cromatec, 2.0 mm x 15 cm, 3 μm, TKSgel Amide-80). The gradient applied started with 100% of organic solvent (mentioned above) for 5 min, followed by progressive increase of aqueous solution (0.1% TFA), reaching 10 % at 10 min, 20% at 55 min, 100% at 60 min and reducing at 0% at 65 min, under a flow of 0.2 mL min-1. Elution of the peptides was monitored by means of absorbance readings at wavelengths of 216 and 280 nm. After fractionation, the fractions were grouped with care to keep separate the highest intensity peaks, resulting in seven peptide fractions for each biological replicate. These fractions were dried under vacuum, resuspended in 16 μL formic acid (FA) 0.1% and transferred to the vials for application in nLC-MS. The pooled fractions were analyzed in technical triplicates by nano-liquid chromatography (Easy-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to hybrid mass spectrometer Quadropolo-Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Sample were loaded in C18 trap column (3 cm x 100 μm internal diameter, 5 μm ReproSil-Pur resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and the peptides was separated by C18 column (30 cm x 75 μm internal diameter, ReproSil-Pur resin, 3 μm Dr. Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The experimental spectra obtained were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific). Identification of peptides by Peptide Spectrum Match (PSM) was performed with the Sequest HT algorithm, against a protein database of the Arecaceae family combined with Arabidopsis, available from the National Center for Biotechnology Information - https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/), respectively. The search was made obeying the following criteria: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance; mass tolerance of 0.1 Da fragments in MS2; cleavage by trypsin, with maximum limit of two missed cleavages; as methionine oxidation (+ 15.995 Da), iTRAQ 4plex (+144.102 Da in lysine, tyrosine and N-terminus) and fixed modification to cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da). To estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) the Target Decoy PSM Validator tool was used, which processes the data against a reverse database and estimates the FDR. Only proteins identified with at least one single peptide, high confidence and present in two or three biological replicates were considered.  The quantitative analysis of the reporter ions was performed using PatternLab software (PatternLab for Proteomics 4.0), with the Isobaric Analyzer tool of program according to the recommendations proposed by the software designer 18. Differentially abundant proteins were those that met the following parameters: quantification of two or more single peptides per protein; p-value cutoff of <0.05, based on the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure; and fold change value ≤ 0.6 and ≥ 1.5. This analysis was performed for all combinations of fruit development stages (S2/S1, S3/S1, S3/S2, S4/S1, S4/S2 and S4/S3), in which the reported fold change (in Napierian logarithm).  This result was used in some cases to plot graphs showing the average fold change of abundance changes during pericarp development, in which zero value was assigned to S1 as initial pattern.

### Publication Abstract
Quantitative proteome analysis of four developmental stages of pericarp tissues of the a&#xe7;a&#xed; berry (<i>Euterpe oleracea</i> Mart.) was performed by the isobaric labeling of peptides with iTRAQ 4-plex, hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography pre-fractionation of labeled peptides, and high-performance mass spectrometry analysis. This analysis resulted in the identification of 4286 proteins, of which 476 presented differential abundance between the stages. The differential abundance of these proteins was seen to be coordinated with the metabolic demands during cell division, lignification, and cell expansion at developmental stages 1 and 2 as well as phenolic acid accumulation and metabolic changes in the fruit maturation at developmental stages 3 and 4. The distinct accumulation of anthocyanins observed in the pericarp at developmental stage 4 was correlated with the increase in abundance of some key biosynthetic enzymes, such as leucoanthocyanidin dioxygenase, anthocyanidin <i>O</i>-3-glycosyltransferase, and UDP-glycosyltransferase. Here, evidence is also provided for the presence in the a&#xe7;a&#xed; berry of secondary metabolites not previously described in a&#xe7;a&#xed;, such as pterostilbene, matairesinol, and furaneol. Together, these results will pave the way for studies aimed at the genetic improvement of the nutritional properties of this important fruit crop.

### Keywords
Açaí berry, Anthocyanins biosynthetic pathway, Arecaceae, Euterpe oleracea, Secondary metabolism

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro


