### Accession
PXD042238

### Title
ZC3H11A interacts with PABPN1 and alters polyadenylation of viral transcripts

### Description
Nuclear mRNA metabolism is regulated by multiple proteins, which either directly bind to RNA or form multi-protein complexes. The RNA-binding protein ZC3H11A is involved in nuclear mRNA export, and NF-κB signaling and is essential during mouse embryo development. Furthermore, previous studies have shown that ZC3H11A is important for nuclear-replicating viruses. However, detailed biochemical characterization of the ZC3H11A protein has been lacking. In this study, we established the ZC3H11A protein interactome in human and mouse cells. We demonstrate that the nuclear poly(A)-binding protein PABPN1 interacts specifically with the ZC3H11A protein and controls ZC3H11A localization into nuclear speckles. We report that ZC3H11A specifically interacts with the human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV-5) capsid mRNA in a PABPN1-dependent manner. Notably, ZC3H11A uses the same zinc finger motifs to interact with PABPN1 and mRNA, with a single zinc finger motif responsible for these functions. Further, we demonstrate that the lack of ZC3H11A alters the polyadenylation of HAdV-5 capsid mRNA. Taken together, our results suggest that the ZC3H11A protein acts as a novel regulator of polyadenylation of nuclear mRNA.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free co-IP of ZC3H11A-Flag was performed by transfecting HeLa cells grown on 100 mm tissue plates with pcDNA3 (control) or with pcDNA-ZC3H11A(wt)Flag plasmids. About 24 h post-transfection cells were lysed in 500 μl of Pierce IP lysis buffer supplemented with Halt protease inhibitors and Benzonase nuclease (Sigma, final concentration 25 U/ml). Flag-tagged ZC3H11A was immunopurified with anti-Flag(M2) magnetic beads (Sigma) overnight at 4°C. Beads were washed four times in lysis buffer (lacking Benzonase and protease inhibitors). Proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads using 4X Laemmli sample buffer. Eluted proteins were loaded on to a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast gel (BioRad) and run approximately 2 cm in. The gel lanes were cut into two pieces (fractions), and proteins were reduced in-gel with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), and thereafter alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ABC, and finally digested with 17 ng/μl sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) in 25 mM ABC, using a slightly modified in-gel digestion protocol. Generated peptides were eluted from the gel pieces using 1% (v/v) FA in 60% (v/v) ACN, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge (Thermo Savant SPD SpeedVac), and finally dissolved in 1% (v/v) FA. All peptideswere desalted using Stage Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the instructions from the manufacturer, and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) FA in H2O (solvent A) prior to LC-MS analyses. The desalted peptides were separated on an EASY-nLC 1000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (2 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled in line with an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 reversed-phase column (50 cm x 75 μm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column was heated to 35°C and equilibrated with solvent A. A 2-40% gradient of solvent B (0.1% (v/v) FA in ACN) was run at 250 nl/min for 3 hours. Eluted peptides were injected and analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) controlled by the Xcalibur software (version 4.4.16.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and run at Top Speed data-dependent acquisition mode, a spray voltage of 2.4 kV, and an ion-transfer tube temperature of 275°C. MS full scan spectra (m/z 400-2000) at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 were collected in profile mode and analyzed in the Orbitrap with an automatic gain control target (AGC) of 2.0e5, and a maximum injection time of 100 ms. Peptides with an intensity above 5.0e3 were selected for fragmentation utilizing collisioninduced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy setting of 30%. Peptide fragments were analyzed in the linear ion trap with an AGC of 1.0e4, and a maximum injection time of 40 ms, with the data acquired in centroid mode. A dynamic exclusion period of the peptides chosen for fragmentation was set to 60 s. Quality control of the instrument setup was monitored using the Promega 6x5 LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix (Promega) and analyzed with the PReMiS software (version 1.0.5.1, Promega).

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometric raw files was performed using the MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package (version 2.1.0.0), including the Andromeda search engine. The search was performed with cysteine methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, SILAC co-IP and GFP co-IP) or cysteine carbamidomethylation (label-free co-IP) as a static modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. MS1 Orbitrap tolerance was set to 20 ppm, and MS2 ion trap tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Match between runs enabled identifying peptides where only MS1 data was available in one of the two fractions of each sample for the label-free co-IP, and re-quantify was set to on for the SILAC experiment, in case only one of the partners of a label pair was detected. Peaks were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640, version 2022-04-28), and a maximum of two trypsin mis-cleavages per peptide was allowed. The MaxQuant potential contaminants database was also searched. A decoy search was made against the reversed database, with both peptide and protein false discovery rates set to 1%. Proteins identified with at least two peptides of at least seven amino acids in length were considered reliable. The MaxQuant output was filtered by removing reversed database hits, proteins only identified by site, and potential contaminants. Proteins with more than one missing value in the three replicates were also filtered out. Normalization of LFQ intensity values was performed using the variance stabilization transformation (VSN) method, followed by imputation of missing values using the deterministic minimal value (MinDet) approach. The normalized intensities were fitted to a linear model. The significance of differentially enriched (DE) proteins was calculated using empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics, utilizing the DEP package for Bioconductor and R (version 1.6.0). P-values of the DE proteins were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear mRNA metabolism is regulated by multiple proteins, which either directly bind to RNA or form multiprotein complexes. The RNA-binding protein ZC3H11A is involved in nuclear mRNA export, NF-&#x3ba;B signaling, and is essential during mouse embryo development. Furthermore, previous studies have shown that ZC3H11A is important for nuclear-replicating viruses. However, detailed biochemical characterization of the ZC3H11A protein has been lacking. In this study, we established the ZC3H11A protein interactome in human and mouse cells. We demonstrate that the nuclear poly(A)-binding protein PABPN1 interacts specifically with the ZC3H11A protein and controls ZC3H11A localization into nuclear speckles. We report that ZC3H11A specifically interacts with the human adenovirus type 5 (HAdV-5) capsid mRNA in a PABPN1-dependent manner. Notably, ZC3H11A uses the same zinc finger motifs to interact with PABPN1 and viral mRNA. Further, we demonstrate that the lack of ZC3H11A alters the polyadenylation of HAdV-5 capsid mRNA. Taken together, our results suggest that the ZC3H11A protein may act as a novel regulator of polyadenylation of nuclear mRNA.

### Keywords
Adenovirus, Polyadenylation, Zinc finger protein, Pabpn1, Zc3h11a

### Affiliations
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
Uppsala University

### Submitter
Mårten Larsson

### Lab Head
Dr Tanel Punga
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden


