### Accession
PXD037430

### Title
Revealing the changes in saliva and serum proteins of pigs with meningitis caused by Streptococcus suis : A complementary proteomic approach

### Description
The objective of this study was to assess the changes in the salivary proteome profile of piglets with meningitis and compare them with the serum proteome. The LC-MS/MS TMT proteomic approach was used to analyze saliva and serum samples from twenty male piglets: ten with meningitis and ten healthy.

### Sample Protocol
Saliva was collected using a sponge clipped to a flexible thin metal rod approximately 20 cm in length. Pigs had thoroughly moisten the sponge by chewing , and then, the sponges were placed into Salivette® tubes (Sarstedt, Aktiengesellschaft & Co. D-51588 Nümbrecht, Germany).  After saliva collection, blood samples were obtained by the puncturing the jugular vein, and collected into the vacuum plain tubes (BD Vacutainer, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA).  All samples were kept at 4−8 °C until arrival at the laboratory, where the vacutainer and the Salivette tubes were centrifuged at 3000g and 4 °C for 10 minutes to obtain serum and saliva supernatant. Then, the aliquots were transferred into the Eppendorf tubes and stored at – 80 0C until the analysis.  Proteomic analysis Proteomic analysis of saliva and serum samples was performed by a TMT-based quantitative approach as described previously (Horvatic et al., 2018). Briefly, saliva samples were centrifuged (13000 g, 10 min, 4 °C), and the proteins precipitated overnight by ice-cold acetone (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA). The pellet was resuspended in 1% SDS in 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA),. The total protein concentrations in saliva and serum were measured with the commercial bicinchoninic acid based reagent (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). The amount of 35 µg of the samples (saliva or serum) and internal standards (a pool of equal protein amount from all saliva or serum samples) were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), after which followed alkylation with iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and overnight precipitation with ice-cold acetone. The protein pellets were collected via the centrifugation (9000 x g, 4 °C, 15 min) and dissolved in 0.1 M TEAB prior to digestion with trypsin (Trypsin Gold, Promega; 1 mg/mL; trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:35, at 37 °C overnight). The next step was TMT (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) labelling, according to the manufacturer's instructions. The 19 μl of the specific TMT label was mixed with the each sample. Following the labelling for 60 min at room temperature, the reaction was stopped with 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). A mixture of the five randomly chosen TMT-labeled samples  and the internal standard was prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis. The modular system integrating the Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) and the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) was used  for LC-MS/MS analysis.Following their dissolution in the loading solvent (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in water), the labeled peptides were loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm). After that, the separation on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) followed. For achieving the separation gradient, we used two mobile phases, mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water)and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile). The separation of the proteins was achieved by using  the linear gradient of 5–55% mobile phase B over 120 min, followed by 55% to 95% for 1 min, 2 min at 95% for, and decrease to 5% B during 20 min under the flow rate of 300 nL/min. The nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the 10 μm-inner diameters SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA) was used for ionization. The MS was operated as following: positive ion mode using the DDA Top8 method, full-scan in the range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0, resolution 70,000, 120 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, isolation window ± 2.0 Da, and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. The conditions for HCD fragmentation were stepped collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and an AGC target of 2×105. The criteria to exclude the precursor ions from fragmentation were the unassigned charge state, or the charge states +1 and higher than +7 were excluded from.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, we employed the SEQUEST algorithm with the Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.3., ThermoFisher Scientific), searching against Sus scrofa FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot database on December 2nd, 2020, 150,392 sequences). The identification parameters were: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT six-plex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 5%, as calculated with the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow. Only the confidently identified proteins (at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR) entered the bioinformatics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum, Meningitis, Tmt, Piglets, Saliva

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


