### Accession
PXD002209

### Title
iTRAQ-Facilitated Proteomic Profiling of Cotton Anthers

### Description
Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is an important economic crop, used mainly for the production of textile fiber. Using a space mutation breeding technique, a novel photosensitive genetic male sterile mutant CCRI9106 was isolated from the wild-type upland cotton cultivar CCRI040029. To use CCRI9106 in cotton hybrid breeding, it is of great importance to study the molecular mechanisms of its male sterility. Here, histological and iTRAQ-facilitated proteomic analyses of anthers were performed to explore male sterility mechanisms of the mutant. Scanning and transmission electron microscopy of the anthers showed that the development of pollen wall in CCRI9106 was severely defective with a lack of exine formation. At the protein level, 6,121 high-confidence proteins were identified and 365 of them showed differential expression patterns between mutant and wild-type anthers. The proteins up- or down-regulated in MT anthers were mainly involved in exine formation, protein degradation, calcium ion binding and etc. These findings provide valuable information on the proteins involved in anther and pollen development, and contribute to elucidate the mechanism of male sterility in upland cotton.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, TCA–acetone (trichloroacetic acid) method was selected. In brief, ~1.5 g of frozen anther was ground with 10% polyvinyl polypyrrolidone (w/w) in liquid nitrogen using a mortar and pestle. The resulting fine powder was mixed with 10% (w/v) TCA in cold acetone containing 0.07% (w/v) 2-mercaptoethanol for at least 2 h and subsequently centrifuged at 12,000 g for 1 h at 4°C. The pellet was washed first with cold acetone containing 0.07% (w/v) 2-mercaptoethanol and then with 80% cold acetone and finally was suspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 20 mM dithiothreitol, 2% EDTA-free protease-inhibitor). The supernatant was centrifuged at 120,000 g for 90 min at 4°C and used for further assays. Next, the purified proteins underwent a reductive alkylation reaction. The concentration of the protein solution was determined with the 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare, USA) with bovine serum albumin as a standard. The supernatants were stored at –80°C until required.

### Data Protocol
A splitless nanoACQuity (Waters, USA) system coupled with Triple TOF was used for analytical separation. Data acquisition was performed with the AB SCIEX Triple TOF 5600 System (Concord, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (Concord, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, USA). Data was acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 15 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150 ℃. The MS was operated with a RP greater than or equal to 30,000 FWHM for TOF MS scans. For IDA, survey scans were acquired in 250 ms and as many as 30 product ion scans were collected if exceeding a threshold of 120 counts per second (counts/s) and with a 2+ to 5+ charge-state. Total cycle time was fixed to 3.3 s. Q2 transmission window was 100 Da for 100%. Four time bins were summed for each scan at a pulser frequency value of 11 kHz through monitoring of the 40 GHz multichannel TDC detector with four-anode/channel detection. A sweeping collision energy setting of 35 ± 5 eV coupled with iTRAQ adjust rolling collision energy was applied to all precursor ions for collision-induced dissociation. Dynamic exclusion was set for 1/2 of peak width (18 s), and then the precursor was refreshed off the exclusion list. Protein identification and quantification were simultaneously performed using the Mascot 2.3.02 software (Matrix Science, Boston, USA). The search parameters were set as follows: trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed; the fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation were set as Cys, and variable modifications of oxidation as Met; peptide tolerance was set as 0.05 Da, and MS/MS tolerance was set as 0.1 Da. The peptide charge was set as Mr, and monoisotopic mass was chosen. An automatic decoy database search strategy was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). The FDR was calculated as the false positive matches divided by the total matches. In the final search results, the FDR was less than 1.5%. The iTRAQ 8-plex was chosen for quantification during the search. For protein identification, only peptides with significant scores (≥20) at the 99% confidence interval were used, and each confident protein included at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, “median” was chosen for the protein ratio type, only unique peptides were used to quantify proteins. The median intensities were set as normalization.

### Publication Abstract
Male sterility is a common phenomenon in flowering plants, and it has been successfully developed in several crops by taking advantage of heterosis. Cotton (Gossypium hirsutum L.) is an important economic crop, used mainly for the production of textile fiber. Using a space mutation breeding technique, a novel photosensitive genetic male sterile mutant CCRI9106 was isolated from the wild-type upland cotton cultivar CCRI040029. To use CCRI9106 in cotton hybrid breeding, it is of great importance to study the molecular mechanisms of its male sterility. Here, histological and iTRAQ-facilitated proteomic analyses of anthers were performed to explore male sterility mechanisms of the mutant. Scanning and transmission electron microscopy of the anthers showed that the development of pollen wall in CCRI9106 was severely defective with a lack of exine formation. At the protein level, 6121 high-confidence proteins were identified and 325 of them showed differential expression patterns between mutant and wild-type anthers. The proteins up- or down-regulated in MT anthers were mainly involved in exine formation, protein degradation, calcium ion binding,etc. These findings provide valuable information on the proteins involved in anther and pollen development, and contribute to elucidate the mechanism of male sterility in upland cotton.

### Keywords
Anther, Cotton, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese  Academy  of Agricultural  Sciences,  Anyang  455000,  Henan Province, China.
State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang 455000, Henan Province, China

### Submitter
Ji Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Chaoyou Pang
State Key Laboratory of Cotton Biology, Institute of Cotton Research, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Anyang 455000, Henan Province, China


