### Accession
PXD020734

### Title
Peli1-mediated TSC1 ubiquitination site

### Description
Metabolic fitness of T cells is crucial for immune responses against infections and tumorigenesis. Both the T cell receptor (TCR) signal and environmental cues contribute to the induction of T cell metabolic reprogramming, but the underlying mechanism is incompletely understood. Here we identified the E3 ubiquitin ligase Peli1 as an important regulator of T cell metabolism and antitumor immunity. Peli1 ablation profoundly promotes tumor rejection, associated with increased tumor-infiltrating CD4 and CD8 T cells. The Peli1-deficient T cells display markedly stronger metabolic activities, particularly glycolysis, than wildtype T cells. Peli1 controls the activation of a metabolic kinase, mTORC1, stimulated by both the TCR signal and growth factors, and this function of Peli1 is mediated through regulation of the mTORC1-inhibitory proteins, TSC1 and TSC2. Peli1 mediates non-degradative ubiquitination of TSC1, thereby promoting TSC1-TSC2 dimerization and TSC2 stabilization. These results establish Peli1 as an important regulator of T cell metabolism and antitumor immunity and suggest a novel mechanism that controls mTORC1 activation.

### Sample Protocol
293 cells were transfected with HA-ubiquitin and Flag-TSC1 in the presence or absence of ETag-Peli1. After 48 h, TSC1 was isolated by immunoprecipitation using anti-Flag and fractionated by SDS-PAGE. The gel was stained with Coomassie Blue, and the ubiquitinated Flag-TSC1 (a large molecular smear) was excised from the gel and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis in the Mass Spectrometry Facility of Harvard University. Briefly, the gel bands were reduced with 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide, and then subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion as described. Peptides were extracted and subjected to liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.

### Data Protocol
Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein or translated nucleotide databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest. The modification of 114.0429 mass units to lysine was included in the databas searches to determine ubiquitin modified peptides. All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered toa one percent or lower peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peli1; tsc1; ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, MD Anderson Cancer Center
Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 7455 Fannin Street, Box 902, Houston, Texas, USA

### Submitter
Chun-Jung Ko

### Lab Head
Dr Shao-Cong Sun
Department of Immunology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, 7455 Fannin Street, Box 902, Houston, Texas, USA


