### Accession
PXD020450

### Title
Evaluation of antifungal activity of Naja pallida and Naja mossambica venoms against three Candida species

### Description
In contrast to comprehensively investigated antibacterial activity of snake venoms, namely crude venoms and their selected components, little is known about antifungal properties of elapid snake venoms. In the present study, the proteome of two venoms of red spitting cobra Naja pallida (NPV) and Mozambique spitting cobra Naja mossambica (NMV) was characterized using LC-MS/MS approach and the biological activity of crude venoms against three Candida species was established.

### Sample Protocol
Two African cobra species were considered: red spitting cobra (Naja pallida - Tanzania) and Mozambique spitting cobra (Naja mossambica – South Africa). Venom samples were diluted 500 times in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Total protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit. Proteins were reduced using 5 mM tris-2-carboxyethyl-phosphine (TCEP) and then blocked using 10 mM S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS). Trypsin (1:25 v/v ratio) was added for digestion. Peptide identification and absolute quantitation were performed using liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoACQUITY UPLC system was used. Samples were applied to the nanoACQUITY UPLC Trapping Column using water containing 0.1% formic acid as the mobile phase and then to the nanoACQUITY UPLC BEH C18 Column using an acetonitrile gradient (5–35% acetonitrile for 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% formic acid using a flow rate of 250 nl/min. HCD fragmentation was applied. Up to 12 MS/MS events were considered per each MS scan and the spectrometer resolution was set to 17500. Samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis in Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (ver. 1.6.7.0). Protein identification was conducted according to UniProtKB Serpentes database (release 9/2019) using Andromeda engine. Fixed modifications: Methylthio (C); Variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term). Initial MS search mass tolerance: 20 ppm; Main MS search mass tolerance: 4.5 ppm; MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm. Trypsin with full specificity and maximum two missed cleavages was applied for enzyme properties. PSM and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1%. Hits that were identified only by site, found in decoy or contaminant lists were subsequently filtered out. Minimum two peptides were prerequisite for protein identification and only proteins that were identified in at least three venom samples of the same species were subjected to further quantitative and qualitative proteome analysis.All hits were manually revised for proteins that were unlikely to be the components of snake venoms and filtered out. iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification) values of razor and unique peptides were used for the calculation of the amount of particular protein in the sample. Non-zero iBAQ values from three to six samples were averaged and attributed to specific proteins. Then, the proteins were assigned to different protein groups and the percentage of each protein groups was calculated by dividing the summed iBAQ values of proteins assigned to the group by the summed iBAQ values of all quantified proteins identified in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
In contrast to comprehensively investigated antibacterial activity of snake venoms, namely crude venoms and their selected components, little is known about antifungal properties of elapid snake venoms. In the present study, the proteome of two venoms of red spitting cobra <i>Naja pallida</i> (NPV) and Mozambique spitting cobra <i>Naja mossambica</i> (NMV) was characterized using LC-MS/MS approach, and the antifungal activity of crude venoms against three <i>Candida</i> species was established. A complex response to venom treatment was revealed. NPV and NMV, when used at relatively high concentrations, decreased cell viability of <i>C. albicans</i> and <i>C. tropicalis</i>, affected cell cycle of <i>C. albicans</i>, inhibited <i>C. tropicalis</i>-based biofilm formation and promoted oxidative stress in <i>C. albicans</i>, <i>C. glabrata</i> and <i>C. tropicalis</i> cells. NPV and NMV also modulated ammonia pulses during colony development and aging in three <i>Candida</i> species. All these observations provide evidence that NPV and NMV may diminish selected pathogenic features of <i>Candida</i> species. However, NPV and NMV also promoted the secretion of extracellular phospholipases that may facilitate <i>Candida</i> pathogenicity and limit their usefulness as anti-candidal agents. In conclusion, antifungal activity of snake venoms should be studied with great caution and a plethora of pathogenic biomarkers should be considered in the future experiments.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Naja pallida, Cobra venoms, Naja mossambica

### Affiliations
Rzeszow University of Technology
Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszów, Poland

### Submitter
Konrad Hus

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Bocian
Faculty of Chemistry, Rzeszow University of Technology, Rzeszów, Poland


