### Accession
PXD042365

### Title
Secretome profiling of Artemisia absinthium extract loaded polymeric nanoparticles-treated MCF-7 and MDA MB-231 cell lines.

### Description
Temperature and pH-sensitive, self-assembled polymeric nanoparticles, made of N-isopropyl acrylamide (NIPAAM), N-vinyl pyrrolidone (VP), and acrylic acid (AA) are biocompatible and have been used in the past with several drugs for site-specific delivery of different formulations. In the present study, the nano LC-MS/MS proteomic approach was employed to compare the secretome of Artemisia absinthium extract loaded polymeric nanoparticles-treated MCF-7 and MDA MB-231 cell lines targeted against the tumor microenvironment and comparison with corresponding untreated cell lines as a control to identify potential therapeutic targets and easily-accessible biomarkers among differentially expressed secretory proteins.

### Sample Protocol
The conditioned media were collected and centrifuged for removing debris. The supernatants were concentrated by lyophilization and the protein was quantified by Bradford’s method. Samples were dissolved 6 M Gn-HCl (50mM TRIS, pH 8.8) buffer. 50 µg sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP and further alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. It was further digested with Trypsin (1:50, Trypsin/lysate ratio) for 16 h at 37 °C. Digests were cleaned using a C18 silica cartridge to remove the salt and dried using a speed vac. The dried pellet was resuspended in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). All the experiments were performed quantitatively using RSLC Nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Thermo Fisher-QExactive Plus equipped with Nano electrospray ion source. 1 µg was loaded on C18 column 50 cm, 3.0μm Easy-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted with a 0–40% gradient of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min) and injected for MS analysis. LC gradients were run for 100 minutes.  MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 70,000 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was employed for 10 s excluding all charge states for a given precursor. MS2 spectra were acquired at 17500 resolutions. All the processed samples were subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Raw files containing mass/charge values were produced for each of the samples. Then these raw files were analysed through Thermo Proteome Discoverer (v2.2) against Uniprot Human database. For Sequest and Amanda search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The protease used to generate peptides, i.e., enzyme specificity was set for trypsin/P (cleavage at the C terminus of “K/R: unless followed by “P”) along with maximum missed cleavages value of two. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation N terminus both were considered as Variable modifications for database search. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR. Based on Uniprot accession number Pfam, KEGG pathways and GO annotations were assigned for the list of identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Artemisia absinthium, Mcf-7, Polymeric nanoparticles, Mda mb-231, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062, India
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062.

### Submitter
SAIMA WAJID

### Lab Head
Dr Saima Wajid
Department of Biotechnology, School of Chemical & Life Sciences, Jamia Hamdard, Hamdard Nagar, New Delhi, 110062, India


