### Accession
PXD038403

### Title
Temporal landscape of mitochondrial proteostasis governed by the UPRmt

### Description
When mitochondrial proteostasis breaks down, quality control pathways including the UPRmt and PINK1/Parkin mitophagy are activated in response. However, beyond the upregulation of chaperones and proteases, we have a limited understanding of how the UPRmt remodels and restores damaged mito-proteomes. Here, we have developed a functional proteomics framework, termed MitoPQ (Mitochondrial Proteostasis Quantification), to dissect the UPRmt’s role in maintaining proteostasis during stress. We discover essential roles for the UPRmt in both protecting and repairing proteostasis, with oxidative phosphorylation metabolism being a central target of the UPRmt. Transcriptome analyses together with MitoPQ reveal that UPRmt transcription factors drive independent signaling arms that act in concert to maintain proteostasis. Unidirectional interplay between the UPRmt and PINK1/Parkin mitophagy was found to promote oxidative phosphorylation recovery when the UPRmt failed. Collectively, this study defines the network of proteostasis mediated by the UPRmt and highlights the value of functional proteomics in decoding stressed proteomes.

### Sample Protocol
After equilibrating to room temperature, samples were solubilized by adding 2x SDS-solubilization buffer to a final concentration of 1x (2x SDS-solubilization buffer: 10% w/v SDS, 200 mM HEPES pH 8.5). Each sample was sonicated in a waterbath sonicator for 10 min. TCEP (Pierce) to a final concertation of 10 mM and chloroacetamide (Sigma) to a final concentration of 40 mM were added to each lysate, and samples were incubated at 37 C standing for 45 min. Lysates were then acidified by adding phosphoric acid to a final concentration of 1.2%/sample. Binding buffer (100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (Sigma), 90% v/v methanol, pH 7.1 with phosphoric acid (Sigma)) was added to each sample at a ratio of 1 : 7 sample volume to binding buffer. Samples were loaded onto S-Trap Mini columns (Protifi) and centrifuged at 6500x g for 30 sec, repeating until the total sample was loaded with the flow-through discarded between each spin. Columns were washed by adding 400 L binding buffer and centrifuging at 6500x g for 30 sec. Wash steps were repeated for a total of 4 washes. Following the final wash, columns were moved to LoBind microfuge tubes (Eppendorf) and 125 L digestion buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate; TEAB) supplemented with sequencing grade Trypsin (Promega) at a concentration of 1 g trypsin : 50 g equivalent starting sample protein was added directly to each column filter. Samples were centrifuged at 1000x g for 30 sec, and the digestion buffer flowthrough was pipetted directly back onto each column filter. Columns in their collection tubes were then sealed with parafilm and incubated statically at 37 C for 16 hours. Digested peptides were then eluted from each column through adding to each sample 80 L digestion buffer (no trypsin) and centrifuging samples at 3200x g for 60 sec, adding 80 L of 0.2% v/v formic acid (FA) and centrifuging samples at 3200x g for 60 sec, and adding 80 L of 50% v/v acetonitrile/0.2% v/v FA and centrifuging samples at 6500x g for 60 sec. Each sequential eluate was pooled together within each sample, and sample were lyophilized and stored at -80 C for downstream TMT-labelling.  Lyophilized peptide pellets were reconstituted in 100 mM TEAB and concentration estimates were performed spectroscopically using a Nanodrop 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each sample, 10 g of peptides was aliquoted into a Lo-Bind microfuge tube (Eppendorf) and diluted to a total volume of 100 L/sample in 100 mM TEAB. For the pooled batch control, 0.79 g of each sample was combined in the same microfuge tube to total 100 g peptides and diluted to 100 L total volume in 100 mM TEAB. 10-plex TMT labels to a final quantity of 1.6 mg/label were reconstituted in acetonitrile as per manufacturer’s instruction, and 5.86 L of the appropriate label was added to each sample according to the batch layout specified in Supplementary Table 6, while the total label volume was added to the batch control sample. Labelling reactions were performed as per manufacturer’s instructions. Labelled samples in each batch (Supplementary Table 6) were combined into a single tube, lyophilized, and stored at -80 C. Lyophilized samples were reconstituted in 300 L of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and loaded onto High pH Reversed Phase Fractionation columns (Pierce). Samples were fractionated as per manufacturer’s instructions using a modified elution gradient (Supplementary Table 4). After elution, fractions were concatenated in an equidistant manner to generate 6 sample fractions per batch sample. Concatenated samples were lyophilized and stored at -80 C.

### Data Protocol
Raw instrument files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17 with the Andromeda search, searching against the Uniprot human database containing reviewed and canonical isoform variants in the FASTA format (2021), with the recombinant Ag85A sequence added as an entry in the human database. All raw data files were analyzed using the MaxQuant proteomics data analysis workflow using the Andromeda search engine with modifications. In brief, LC-MS run was set to “Reporter ion MS” and TMT11-plex labels were set as isobaric labels with a reporter ion mass tolerance of 0.003 Da. Trypsin/P cleavage specificity was used with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. A search tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for ms1 and 20 ppm was used for ms2 matching. False discovery rates (FDR) were determined through the target-decoy approach and set to 1% for both peptides and proteins. The ‘Match between runs’ option was enabled, with an FDR of 1% and a mass bin size of 0.0065 Da. Minimum unique and razor peptides was set to 1, and label min. ratio count was set to 2. Data from the proteinGroups.txt output table was then normalized according to methods described previously (Plubell et al. 2017). The internal spiked control (Ag85A) intensities were averaged across each reporter ion channel, and this value was used to generate scaling factors for each channel to normalize reporter ion intensities for each protein to the relative starting intensities in each sample at the time of Ag85A addition. After normalization, data was imported into Perseus v1.6.15 and ‘only identified by site’, ‘reverse’ and ‘potential contaminant’ identifications were removed. For the TMT-labelled mass spectrometry data in Figure 1, cleaned files from Perseus were imported into R (v4.0.3) where the QRILC method of imputation was performed using the impute.LCMD package for proteins that were absent in one batch of either ‘soluble’ or ‘insoluble’ fraction groups (v2.0; Lazar C, 2015) .Cleaned data was then filtered according to a database of mitochondrial associated proteins, to only include mitochondrial proteins for downstream analysis. Computationally derived total intensities were then generated for each protein in each sample through the addition of soluble and insoluble sample fraction intensities. A percentage of total protein that was in the insoluble fraction was then calculated using the computationally derived total intensity. Aggregation index (AI) analysis was performed by calculating the average percentage of protein that is insoluble across a defined process group of mitochondrial proteins. Solubility shifts were not calculated for proteins that were only detected in the soluble or insoluble protein fractions.

### Publication Abstract
Breakdown of mitochondrial proteostasis activates quality control pathways including the mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPR<sup>mt</sup>) and PINK1/Parkin mitophagy. However, beyond the up-regulation of chaperones and proteases, we have a limited understanding of how the UPR<sup>mt</sup> remodels and restores damaged mitochondrial proteomes. Here, we have developed a functional proteomics framework, termed MitoPQ (Mitochondrial Proteostasis Quantification), to dissect the UPR<sup>mt</sup>'s role in maintaining proteostasis during stress. We find essential roles for the UPR<sup>mt</sup> in both protecting and repairing proteostasis, with oxidative phosphorylation metabolism being a central target of the UPR<sup>mt</sup>. Transcriptome analyses together with MitoPQ reveal that UPR<sup>mt</sup> transcription factors drive independent signaling arms that act in concert to maintain proteostasis. Unidirectional interplay between the UPR<sup>mt</sup> and PINK1/Parkin mitophagy was found to promote oxidative phosphorylation recovery when the UPR<sup>mt</sup> failed. Collectively, this study defines the network of proteostasis mediated by the UPR<sup>mt</sup> and highlights the value of functional proteomics in decoding stressed proteomes.

### Keywords
Mitochondria; metabolism; oxphos; proteostasis; uprmt; mitophagy; pink1; parkin

### Affiliations
Monash 
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, co-affiliated with Monash University

### Submitter
Joel Steele

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lazarou
Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, co-affiliated with Monash University


