### Accession
PXD038716

### Title
Quantitative mass spectrometry analysis of 70S ribosomes from iSAT

### Description
The ribosome is one of the largest and the most complicated enzymes in cells, making up 25% of the bacterial cell’s dry mass, and is responsible for protein synthesis in all organisms on earth. In 2013, Jewett et al. reported an in vitro system named integrated rRNA synthesis, ribosome assembly, and translation (iSAT) reaction, which provided a defined system for ribosome biogenesis in a near-physiological environment.In this project, the r-protein composition in 30S and 50S ribosomeal subunits assembled in the iSAT reaction was quantified by mass spectrometry compared to 15N labeled 70S ribosomes.

### Sample Protocol
To quantify the protein composition of iSAT ribosomes, ribosomal proteins were prepared as previously described. In brief, 50 pmol of N-14 labelled iSAT ribosomes were mixed with an equal amount of N-15 labelled WT ribosomes purified from E. coli MRE600 cells. Proteins were precipitated in 13 % trichloroacetic acid (TCA) overnight at 4 °C, pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was washed once in 700 μL cold 10% TCA and once in 700 μL cold acetone. The air-dried pellet was re-dissolved in 40 μL 100 mM NH4HCO3, 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 5 mM DTT and incubated at 65 °C for 10 minutes. Subsequently, 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and the sample was incubated at 30 °C for 30 minutes in the dark. The proteins were digested by 0.2 μg modified grade porcine trypsin (Promega, Co., Madison, WI) during overnight incubation at 37 °C. The next day, peptides were purified using Pierce C18 Spin column (Thermo scientific) following the manufacturers protocol. Peptides were eluted from the column by adding 60 μL of 70 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid and the eluent was dried in a Speed-Vac concentrator. Prior to MS analysis, the samples were re-dissolved in 10 μL MS Buffer (5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and centrifuged for 10min at high speed. 4 μL sample were mixed with 1 pmol of a retention time calibration mixture (IRT, Pierce).

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS was acquired on a Sciex 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent nano-LC 400 system. Using the auto sampler, peptides were injected onto a SB-C18 Nano HPLC column (0.5 x 150 mm, Agilent Zorbax), and resolved using a 120min gradient from 5-45% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. SWATH data-independent acquisition was obtained in positive ion mode over the 400-1200 m/z range. The mass spectral data analysis and r-protein quantification against the 15N-labeled reference was performed using Skyline.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the assembly principles of biological macromolecular complexes remains a significant challenge, due to the complexity of the systems and the difficulties in developing experimental approaches. As a ribonucleoprotein complex, the ribosome serves as a model system for the profiling of macromolecular complex assembly. In this work, we report an ensemble of large ribosomal subunit intermediate structures that accumulate during synthesis in a near-physiological and co-transcriptional in vitro reconstitution system. Thirteen pre-50S intermediate maps covering the entire assembly process were resolved using cryo-EM single-particle analysis and heterogeneous subclassification. Segmentation of the set of density maps reveals that the 50S ribosome intermediates assemble based on fourteen cooperative assembly blocks, including the smallest assembly core reported to date, which is composed of a 600-nucleotide-long folded rRNA and three ribosomal proteins. The cooperative blocks assemble onto the assembly core following defined dependencies, revealing the parallel pathways at both early and late assembly stages of the 50S subunit.

### Keywords
Ribosome, Lc-ms/ms, 70s, In vitro

### Affiliations
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, Department of Chemistry, and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.
Scripps Research Institute

### Submitter
Xiyu Dong

### Lab Head
Dr James R. Williamson
Department of Integrative Structural and Computational Biology, Department of Chemistry, and The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA.


