### Accession
PXD023201

### Title
Proteogenomic pathogenesis and classification of acute myeloid leukemia (Discovery cohort)

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia is a clinically and genetically heterogenous disease characterized by bone marrow infiltration with immature leukemic blasts that cause bone marrow failure. Patient age, comorbidities and genomic disease characteristics have a profound impact on patient outcome. Here, we present an integrated Multi-Omics analysis of protein and gene expression as well as cytogenetics and mutations to capture the rewiring of intracellular protein networks that is most likely caused by genomic aberrations. Because protein networks are downstream of genomic aberrations, we hypothesized that our Multi-Omics approach may add to the current AML classification by identifying proteomic AML subtypes with specific clinical and molecular features that could identify therapeutic vulnerabilities and aid in the identification of predictive biomarkers

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 1% SDC buffer (1% SDC, 100mM Tris pH8.0, 10mM CAA, 40mM TCEP pH7.0), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and cooled on ice for 20 mins. Followed by 10 cycles of sonication for 10 minutes (Branson probe sonifier output 3-4, 50% duty cycle, 10x 30 sec) and heated again at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentration was estimated by BCA assay and 20µg from each samples were digested with LysC (1:100) and Trypsin (1:100) overnight using thermoshaker 1200 rpm at 37°C. To stop the digestion, 5x volume isopropanol/1% TFA was added and vortexed vigorously. The peptides were desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips, washed once with isopropanol/1%TFA and once with 0.2% TFA. The peptides were eluted with 60µl of elution buffer (80%, 1.25% NH4OH). The dried eluates were resuspended in MS loading buffer (3%ACN, 0.3% TFA) and stored at -20°C until MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
For DIA analysis, the Thermo Xcalibur (3.0.63) software was used for Q Exactive HF-X instrument respectively. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated with scan range set to 350-1450 m/z at a resolution of 60,000. The AGC was set to 3e6 at a maximum injection time of 54 ms. HCD (NCD 27%) was used for precursor fragmentation and fragment ions were analyzed in 32 DIA windows at a resolution of 30,000, while the AGC was kept at 3e6. DIA raw files were analyzed using Spectronaut Pulsar software (Biognosys, version 13.10.191212) using the default settings for targeted DIA analysis. A project-specific spectral library from cell lines encompassing 170,667 precursors, corresponding to 8198 protein groups or patient samples encompassing 65,914 precursors, corresponding to 6551 protein groups was generated utilizing pulser against the human Uniprot reference proteome database (version August 2018, containing 21,039 entries) and used. Data export was filtered by ‘No Decoy’ and ‘Quantification Data Filtering’ for peptide and protein quantifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Label free proteome, Aml, Dia

### Affiliations
MaxPlanck Insitute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal transduction
Dept Proteomics and Signal Transduction, MaxPlanck Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ashokkumar Jayavelu

### Lab Head
Dr Prof.Matthias Mann
MaxPlanck Insitute of Biochemistry Department of Proteomics and Signal transduction


