### Accession
PXD005464

### Title
SIN3A Acetylation Complex -  Fam60a defines a variant Sin3a-Hdac complex in embryonic stem cells required for self-renewal

### Description
Sin3a is the central scaffold protein of the prototypical Hdac1/2 chromatin repressor complex, crucially required during early embryonic development for the growth of pluripotent cells of the inner cell mass. Here, we explore the endogenous composition of the Sin3a-Hdac complex in pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) and differentiated cells. To do this, we established an endogenous double immunoprecipitation strategy coupled with quantitative mass spectrometry (ENDIP-MS) allowing us to define the precise composition of the Sin3a complex in multiple cell types. We identify the Fam60a subunit as a key defining feature of a variant Sin3a complex present in ES cells, but not in differentiated cells. Fam60a co-occupies H3K4me3 positive promoters with Sin3a and is essential to maintain it on chromatin. Consistent with this, Fam60a depletion phenocopies the loss of Sin3a, leading to decreased proliferation, an extended G1-phase and the deregulation of genes associated with differentiation. Taken together, our data characterise Fam60a as an essential core subunit of a variant Sin3a complex in ES cells required to promote rapid proliferation and to prevent unscheduled differentiation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were treated with trypsin and digested in 2M urea, 20mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8. Peptide samples were introduced into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Dionex) coupled to a packed C18 fused silica emitter (75 μm I.D.) Parent ion spectra (MS1) were measured at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6. Tandem mass spectra (MS2; up to 8 scans per duty cycle) were obtained at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, collision energy of 25.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 using the human UniProt database (release 2016_09; 70,902 entries). The following search parameters were used: Fixed Mod: cysteine carbamidomethylation; Variable Mods: methionine oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme; Missed Cleavage: 2; Precursor mass tolerances 6 ppm; Fragment ion mass tolerances 20 ppm; Peptide FDR 5%; Protein FDR 5%. ‘Label-Free Quantitation; LFQ’, ‘iBAQ’, and ‘Match Between Run’ settings were selected. Reverse hits and contaminants were filtered out .

### Publication Abstract
Sin3a is the central scaffold protein of the prototypical Hdac1/2 chromatin repressor complex, crucially required during early embryonic development for the growth of pluripotent cells of the inner cell mass. Here, we compare the composition of the Sin3a-Hdac complex between pluripotent embryonic stem (ES) and differentiated cells by establishing a method that couples two independent endogenous immunoprecipitations with quantitative mass spectrometry. We define the precise composition of the Sin3a complex in multiple cell types and identify the Fam60a subunit as a key defining feature of a variant Sin3a complex present in ES cells, which also contains Ogt and Tet1. Fam60a binds on H3K4me3-positive promoters in ES cells, together with Ogt, Tet1 and Sin3a, and is essential to maintain the complex on chromatin. Finally, we show that depletion of Fam60a phenocopies the loss of Sin3a, leading to reduced proliferation, an extended G1-phase and the deregulation of lineage genes. Taken together, Fam60a is an essential core subunit of a variant Sin3a complex in ES cells that is required to promote rapid proliferation and prevent unscheduled differentiation.

### Keywords
Self-renewal, Embryonic stem cell, Fam60a, Sin3a complex

### Affiliations
UCD
Group Leader School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science Room F058, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, IRELAND

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Gerard Cagney
Group Leader School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science Room F058, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, IRELAND


