### Accession
PXD029188

### Title
Tear proteomics of young patients wearing glasses, orthokeratology lenses, and soft contact lenses

### Description
Contact lens-related ocular surface complications occur more often in teenagers and young adults. The purpose of this study was to determine changes in tear proteome of young patients wearing glasses (GL), orthokeratology lenses (OK), and soft contact lenses (SCL). Twenty-two young patients (10-26 years of age) who were established (> 3 years) GL (n=10), OK (n=6), and SCL (n=6) wearers were recruited. Tears were collected via Schirmer strips.  Proteomic data were collected using a data-independent acquisition-parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (diaPASEF) workflow. Tear proteome composition and abundance were compared across different correction groups and between the children (age <18 years) and young adults (age 18 years) GL wearers. We identified 3406 protein groups in tears. Among proteins identified in 80% of tear samples, 8 proteins were upregulated, and 11 proteins were down-regulated in the SCL group compared to the OK group. Eighty-two proteins were differentially expressed in children and young adults GL wearers, among which 67 proteins were upregulated, and 15 proteins were downregulated in children. These 82 proteins were involved in 1 inflammation, 9 immune, and 1 glycoprotein metabolic biological processes. As teenagers and young adults have the highest risk of developing contact lens-related complications, this work highlights the importance of understanding ocular responses to contact lens wear across different ages.

### Sample Protocol
Each Schirmer strip sample was cut into pieces using a sterile blade and immersed into 100 ul of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution in a 1.5 mL tube. The reduction and alkylation reactions were carried out by adding 5 mM dithiothreitol at 37 ºC for 1 h and 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark, respectively. Trypsin (1/40, w/w) was then added and incubated at 37 ºC overnight. The reaction was stopped by adding TFA. After centrifugation, the digested peptides were cleaned up using a C18 Ziptip and vacuum dried using a CentriVap (Labconco). The dried sample was resuspended in 2% ACN with 0.1% FA for LC-MS analysis. To analyze tear Schirmer strip samples, a diaPASEF scheme with 64 m/z and ion mobility windows was used. The electrospray voltage was 1.4 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 180 °C. Full MS scans were acquired over the range m/z of 150–1700. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 27 eV at 1/K0 = 0.85 Vscm-2 to 45 eV at 1/K0 = 1.3 Vscm-2 .

### Data Protocol
Software Spectronaut v15 (Biosynosis, Switzerland) was used with default settings. The spectral library contained normalized retention time iRT values for all peptides. The UniProt-SwissProt database (Homo Sapiens, updated on 01/30/2020, 42,383 entries) was used to build the spectral library. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was listed as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation as variable modifications. This library was used for peptide and protein identification in this study. The false discovery rate was controlled at <1% at both peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Contact lens-related ocular surface complications occur more often in teenagers and young adults. The purpose of this study was to determine changes in tear proteome of young patients wearing glasses (GL), orthokeratology lenses (OK), and soft contact lenses (SCL). Twenty-two young subjects (10-26&#xa0;years of age) who were established GL, OK, and SCL wearers were recruited. Proteomic data were collected using a data-independent acquisition-parallel accumulation serial fragmentation workflow. In total, 3406 protein groups were identified, the highest number of proteins identified in Schirmer strip tears to date. Eight protein groups showed higher abundance, and 11 protein groups showed lower abundance in the SCL group compared to the OK group. In addition, the abundance of 82 proteins significantly differed in children compared to young adult GL wearers, among which 67 proteins were higher, and 15 proteins were lower in children. These 82 proteins were involved in inflammation, immune, and glycoprotein metabolic biological processes. In summary, this work identified over 3000 proteins in Schirmer Strip tears. The results indicated that tear proteomes were altered by orthokeratology and soft contact wear and age, which warrants further larger-scale study on the ocular surface responses of teenagers and young adults separately to contact lens wear. SIGNIFICANCE: In this work, we examined the tear proteomes of young patients wearing glasses, orthokeratology lenses, and soft contact lenses using a data-independent acquisition-parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (diaPASEF) workflow and identified 3406 protein groups in Schirmer strip tears. Nineteen protein groups showed significant abundance changes between orthokeratology and soft contact lens wearers. Moreover, eighty-two protein groups significantly differed in abundance in children and young adult glasses wearers. As a pilot study, this work provides a deep coverage of tear proteome and suggests the need to investigate ocular responses to contact lens wear separately for children and young adults.

### Keywords
Human, Orthokeratology, Schirmer strip, Soft contact lens, Tears

### Affiliations
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA
University of Houston

### Submitter
Guoting Qin

### Lab Head
Dr Guoting Qin
University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA


