### Accession
PXD002570

### Title
The extracellular vesicles of the helminth pathogen, Fasciola hepatica: biogenesis pathways and cargo molecules involved in parasite pathogenesis

### Description
We reveal that whilst the molecular “machinery” required for EV biogenesis is constitutively expressed across the intra-mammalian development stages of the parasite, the cargo molecules packaged within the EVs are regulated, most likely to facilitate the parasites migration through host tissue and to counteract host immune attack.

### Sample Protocol
Cysteine residues were reduced (except for sample A1) by 2 mM DTT (DL-Dithiothreitol) in 50 mM ABC at 60ºC for 20 min. Sulfhydryl groups were alkylated with 5 mM IAM ( iodoacetamide) in 50 mM ABC in the dark at r.t. for 30 min.  Sample was subjected to trypsin digestion with 500 ng (100ng/µl) of sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ABC at 37ºC overnight. The reaction was stopped with TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) at a final concentration of 0.1%.  Samples were cleaned and concentrated by SCX ZipTip (Millipore) according to the manufacturer instructions. The digestion mixture was dried in a vacuum centrifuge, re suspended in 10 µL of 0.1% TFA. 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75umx15cm ; Eksigen) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 2µl/min during  10 min.  The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ  C18-CL, 75umx25cm, Eksigen) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5a35% B in A for 30min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300nl/min. Peptides were analyzed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). The tripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a 0.25-s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z, was performed, followed by 0.05-s product ion scans from 100–1500 m/z on the 50 most intense 2-5 charged ions. A BPC (base peak chromatogram) is generated for every sample.

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed on  (NCBInr_20130115). Searches were done with tryptic specificity allowing one missed cleavage and a tolerance on the mass measurement of 75 ppm in MS mode and 0.6 Da for MS/MS ions. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was used as a fixed modification (except A1)  and oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn and Gln as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) released by parasites have important roles in establishing and maintaining infection. Analysis of the soluble and vesicular secretions of adult Fasciola hepatica has established a definitive characterization of the total secretome of this zoonotic parasite. Fasciola secretes at least two subpopulations of EVs that differ according to size, cargo molecules and site of release from the parasite. The larger EVs are released from the specialized cells that line the parasite gastrodermus and contain the zymogen of the 37 kDa cathepsin L peptidase that performs a digestive function. The smaller exosome-like vesicle population originate from multivesicular bodies within the tegumental syncytium and carry many previously described immunomodulatory molecules that could be delivered into host cells. By integrating our proteomics data with recently available transcriptomic data sets we have detailed the pathways involved with EV biogenesis in F. hepatica and propose that the small exosome biogenesis occurs via ESCRT-dependent MVB formation in the tegumental syncytium before being shed from the apical plasma membrane. Furthermore, we found that the molecular "machinery" required for EV biogenesis is constitutively expressed across the intramammalian development stages of the parasite. By contrast, the cargo molecules packaged within the EVs are developmentally regulated, most likely to facilitate the parasites migration through host tissue and to counteract host immune attack.

### Keywords
Helminth, Exosome, Transcriptomics, Fasciola, Proteomics, Secretome, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Departmento de Bioquíimica y Biologíia Molecular, Universitat de Valèencia,  Burjassot, Valencia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Marcilla
Departmento de Bioquíimica y Biologíia Molecular, Universitat de Valèencia,  Burjassot, Valencia, Spain


