### Accession
PXD006676

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of Caenorhabditis elegans larval development

### Description
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans (C. elegans) is often used as a model organism to study cell and developmental biology. Quantitative mass spectrometry has only recently been performed in C. elegans and, so far, most studies have been done on adult worm samples. Here we use quantitative mass spectrometry to characterise protein level changes across the four larval developmental stages (L1-L4) of C. elegans, in biological triplicate. In total, we identify 4,130 proteins and quantify 1,541 proteins that were identified across all four stages in all three biological repeats with at least 2 unique peptides per protein. Using hierarchical clustering and functional ontological analyses, we identify 21 protein groups containing proteins with similar protein profiles across the four stages, and highlight the most overrepresented biological functions in each of these protein clusters. In addition, we use the dataset to identify putative larval stage specific proteins in each individual developmental stage, as well as in the early and late developmental stages. In summary, this dataset provides a system-wide analysis of protein level changes across the four C. elegans larval developmental stages, which serves as a useful resource for the worm development research community.

### Sample Protocol
To synchronise the population of C. elegans used, embryos were isolated and grown in M9 buffer overnight, and hatched larva were arrested at L1 stage until provided with food. L1, L2, L3 and L4 stage nematodes were sampled 6 h, 24 h, 32 h and 48 h post-feeding, respectively. At each time point, C. elegans were washed off the plates with M9 buffer, and washed 3 times in M9 buffer to minimize any bacterial contamination. C. elegans were lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer (6M urea/2M thiourea + 10mM HEPES pH 8.0) and sonicated at 4'C using a Bioruptor at high energy setting (30 cycles each of 30 sec on, 10 sec off). Proteins were dissolved at room temperature for 1 h followed by centrifugation (13,000 g, 4'C, 5 min) to pellet undissolved proteins. Protein concentration was measured using the Bradford method and 100 µg of protein was collected. Heavy and light lysine-labeled samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio at this point. Proteins were reduced in 1 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, followed by addition of 5 mM 2-chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were diluted 4 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, digested with LysC (1:100, 1 µg LysC per 100 µg protein) overnight at 37'C, acidified with 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and centrifuged (2,000 g, 5 min) to clarify. Digested peptides were desalted using C18 columns. Columns were first activated with methanol, washed with 80% CH3CN and 0.1% formic acid (FA), followed by two washes with 3% CH3CN and 1% TFA. 10 µg of peptides were loaded on the column, followed by two washes with 0.1% FA.  Each sample was run unfractionated as a single-shot fraction on a Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer. For each run peptide was loaded onto a 50-cm C18 reverse-phase analytical column (Thermo EasySpray ES803) using 100% Buffer A (0.1% Formic acid in water) at a pressure of 720 bar using the Thermo EasyLC 1000 uHPLC system in a single-column setup, and the column oven operating at 45'C. Peptides were eluted over a 4-h gradient ranging from 6% to 60% of a solution containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The Q- Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was run using the DD-MS2 top10 method. Full MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 70,000, with an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3 × 10^6 or a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a scan range of 300–1750 m/z. The MS2 spectra were obtained at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target value of 1 × 10^6 or a maximum injection time of 60 ms, a normalized collision energy of 25% and an underfill ratio of 0.1%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 45 s, and ions with a charge state of <2 or unknown were excluded. MS performance was verified for consistency by running complex cell lysate quality-control standards, and chromatography was monitored to check for reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectra were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.1.2 software and searched against the CAEEL reference proteome UP000001940 6239 available at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/reference_proteomes. Peptides identified with a false-discovery rate of <1.0% were assembled into identified proteins. MS/MS spectra searches allowed for K8 heavy labeled Lysine, carbamidomethylation of cysteines and possible acetylation of N-termini as fixed/mix modifications. Allowed variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, pyroglutamic acid modification at N-terminal glutamine and hydroxyproline. To ensure high-confidence identifications and quantification, a MaxQuant score of >50 and a minimum of two unique peptides per protein detected by MS were required.

### Publication Abstract
The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is widely used as a model organism to study cell and developmental biology. Quantitative proteomics of C. elegans is still in its infancy and, so far, most studies have been performed on adult worm samples. Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize protein level changes across the four larval developmental stages (L1-L4) of C. elegans. In total, we identified 4130 proteins, and quantified 1541 proteins that were present across all four stages in three biological replicates from independent experiments. Using hierarchical clustering and functional ontological analyses, we identified 21 clusters containing proteins with similar protein profiles across the four stages, and highlighted the most overrepresented biological functions in each of these protein clusters. In addition, we used the dataset to identify putative larval stage-specific proteins in each individual developmental stage, as well as in the early and late developmental stages. In summary, this dataset provides system-wide analysis of protein level changes across the four C. elegans larval developmental stages, which serves as a useful resource for the C. elegans research community. MS data were deposited in ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository with the primary accession identifier PXD006676.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Caenorhabditis elegans, Larvae, Development

### Affiliations
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Garvan Institute of Medical Research, The Kinghorn Cancer Centre, Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Thomas Cox

### Lab Head
Dr Janine T Erler
Biotech Research and Innovation Centre (BRIC), University of Copenhagen (UCPH), Ole Maaløes Vej 5, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


