### Accession
PXD014547

### Title
PepSAVI-MS reveals proline-rich antimicrobial peptide in Amaranthus tricolor

### Description
PepSAVI-MS, a mass spectrometry-based peptidomics pipeline, was implemented for antimicrobial peptide (AMP) discovery in the medicinal plant Amaranthus tricolor. This investigation revealed a novel 1.7 kDa AMP, deemed Atr-AMP1. Initial efforts to determine the sequence of Atr-AMP1 utilized chemical derivatization and enzymatic digestion to provide information about specific residues and post-translational modifications. EThcD (electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation) produced extensive backbone fragmentation and facilitated de novo sequencing, the results of which were consistent with orthogonal characterization experiments. Additionally, multistage HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) facilitated discrimination between isobaric leucine and isoleucine. These results revealed a positively-charged proline-rich peptide present in a heterogeneous population of multiple peptidoforms, possessing several post-translational modifications including a disulfide bond, methionine oxidation, and proline hydroxylation.

### Sample Protocol
Amaranthus tricolor seeds purchased from Strictly Medicinal Seeds (Williams, OR) were planted in nutrient rich soil and grown under controlled temperature (63.5 - 68.5°F) and light cycle (14-hr light) conditions. Plants (~100) were grown to mature rosette stage (~8 weeks) and harvested in November 2018 with immediate flash freezing and stored at -80° C until subsequent extraction. Briefly, 200 g plant material was extracted in an acetic acid solution, size exclusion steps were performed to remove large proteins (>30 kDa) and small molecules (<1 kDa), and the crude extract was concentrated to a final volume of 2 mL. Neutral and negatively charged molecules were removed using SCX chromatography. SCX eluate was recombined, desalted using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge dried via vacuum centrifugation, and fractionated via reversed-phase chromatography. 0.5 minute fractions were collected across the chromatogram to create the final peptide library.   The peptide library was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis to profile peptide abundance across fractions. Active fractions were subjected to reduction and alkylation (iodoacetamide and dithiothreitol), methyl esterification (methanolic HCl), demethylation (formaldehyde and sodium cyanoborohydride), trypsin digestion, and chymotrypsin digestion prior to LC-MS/MS analysis to facilitate sequence characterization of Atr-AMP1.

### Data Protocol
De-isotoped peak lists for each fraction were generated using Progenesis QI for Proteomics software (Nonlinear Dynamics, v.2.0). Data was exported “peptide ion data”. Additionally, Database searching was performed with Mascot v2.5.0, de novo sequencing was performed in PEAKS software (BSI, Waterloo, Canada), and bioinformatics was performed in R using the PepSAVI-MS statistical analysis package (https://cran.r-project.org/package=PepSAVIms).

### Publication Abstract
Traditional medicinal plants are a rich source of antimicrobials; however, the bioactive peptide constituents of most ethnobotanical species remain largely unexplored. Herein, PepSAVI-MS, a mass spectrometry-based peptidomics pipeline, was implemented for antimicrobial peptide (AMP) discovery in the medicinal plant <i>Amaranthus tricolor</i>. This investigation revealed a novel 1.7 kDa AMP with strong activity against <i>Escherichia coli</i> ATCC 25922, deemed Atr-AMP1. Initial efforts to determine the sequence of Atr-AMP1 utilized chemical derivatization and enzymatic digestion to provide information about specific residues and post-translational modifications. EThcD (electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation) produced extensive backbone fragmentation and facilitated de novo sequencing, the results of which were consistent with orthogonal characterization experiments. Additionally, multistage HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation) facilitated discrimination between isobaric leucine and isoleucine. These results revealed a positively charged proline-rich peptide present in a heterogeneous population of multiple peptidoforms, possessing several post-translational modifications including a disulfide bond, methionine oxidation, and proline hydroxylation. Additional bioactivity screening of a simplified fraction containing Atr-AMP1 revealed activity against <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> LAC, demonstrating activity against both a Gram-negative and a Gram-positive bacterial species unlike many known short chain proline-rich antimicrobial peptides.

### Keywords
Hydroxyproline, Antimicrobial peptides, Peptidomics, Amaranthus tricolor, Mass spectrometry, E. coli, Pepsavi-ms

### Affiliations
UNC-CHAPEL HILL
Department of Chemistry, Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill

### Submitter
Tessa Bartges

### Lab Head
Dr Leslie Hicks
Department of Chemistry, Univeristy of North Carolina at Chapel Hill


