### Accession
PXD006494

### Title
Proteomic profiling of TGFBIp-null mouse corneas reveals minor changes in the extracellular matrix composition supportive of TGFBI knockdown as therapy against TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies

### Description
TGFBIp is a constituent of the extracellular matrix in many human tissues including the cornea, where it is one of the most abundant proteins expressed. TGFBIp interacts with type I, II, IV, VI and XII collagens as well as several members of the integrin family, suggesting that it plays an important role in maintaining structural integrity and possibly corneal transparency as well. More than 60 point mutations in the TGFBI gene have been described in four types of corneal dystrophies (granular, lattice, Thiel-Behnke and Reis-Bückler). These defects are characterized by aberrant protein folding, leading to TGFBIp aggregation in the cornea and resulting in severe visual impairment and blindness. Several studies have focused on targeting TGFBIp expression in the cornea as a therapeutic approach to treat TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies, but the effect of this approach on corneal homeostasis and integrity remained unknown. In the current study, we evaluated the histological and proteomic profiles of corneas from TGFBI-deficient mice as well as potential redundant functions of the paralogous protein periostin. The absence of TGFBIp in mouse corneas did not grossly affect the collagen scaffold, and periostin was unable to compensate for TGFBIp. However, a proteomic comparison of wild-type and TGFBI-/- mice revealed that 11 other proteins were differentially regulated, including type VI and XII collagens. Hence, the complete elimination of TGFBIp in the cornea as a treatment for TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies may cause unintended consequences at the molecular level that are not evident at the macroscopic or functional levels.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of corneas for mass spectrometry Eyes from TGFBI+/+ control mice and TGFBI-/- mice (n = 6 eyes from each genotype) were removed and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. The corneas were subsequently excised using a 2-mm biopsy needle (Miltex, Tuttlingen, Germany) and washed three times in 200 µL of ice cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and once in 1 mL of PBS. The corneas from two mice were pooled, resulting in three biological replicates within each group, and lyophilized in a Speed-Vac concentrator (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) for 18 h. Proteins were then chemically cleaved by adding 100 µL of 0.66 M CNBr in 70% trifluoroacetic acid and incubating at 23 °C for 20 h. The digest was then lyophilized and washed twice in 500 µL of Milli-Q H2O with intermittent drying in the Speed-Vac. The washed samples were then dissolved in 100 µL of 8 M urea, 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, and the peptide concentrations were determined using a 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom). Disulfide bridges were reduced by incubating with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 23 °C. The reduced cysteines were then alkylated by adding 30 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for 1 h in the dark at 23 °C. The samples were then diluted five times in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.3, and 10 µg was incubated overnight at 37 °C with 200 ng of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI). The samples were centrifuged for 5 min at 17,000 x g to remove precipitates, and the supernatants were desalted using POROS R2 C8/C18 resin (Life Technologies, Paisley, UK) packed in 200-µL gel-loading pipet tips.  iTRAQ labeling and strong cation exchange (SCX) fractionation For each biological sample, 2.5 µg of desalted peptide was pooled in a reference “master mix” to be labeled with iTRAQ 114, and 7.5 µg of each sample was dissolved in 25 µL of iTRAQ dissolution buffer (Life Technologies). The samples were labeled with 4plex iTRAQ (115, 116, or 117) reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol, resulting in two iTRAQ sets to be analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Briefly, each iTRAQ label was diluted with 50 µL of ethanol, mixed with the sample and incubated for 2 h at 23 °C. The samples were then mixed, lyophilized and desalted using POROS R2 C8/C18 resin as described above. The two iTRAQ sets were then applied to an SCX column (PolyLC Inc., Columbia, MD) equilibrated in 30% acetonitrile, 5 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.7 and eluted with a linear gradient from 0 mM to 500 mM KCl in 30% acetonitrile, 5 mM KH2PO4, pH 2.7. Eluted peptides were collected in 12 fractions including the flow-through for each iTRAQ set. Each fraction was desalted using POROS R2 micro purification and lyophilized.  LC-MS/MS of iTRAQ samples Samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS/MS on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex). The samples were loaded on a 0.1x21 mm C18 trap column and a 0.075x100 mm C18 analytical column (NanoSeparations, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands). Peptides were eluted and electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer using a 50-min gradient from 5-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The data were acquired using an ion spray voltage of 2.3 kV, a curtain gas setting of 30 and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C.

### Data Protocol
Processing of iTRAQ data All 12 wiff files generated for either iTRAQ set 1 or 2 were searched simultaneous against the SwissProt Mus musculus database (2016_8) using ProteinPilot v.4.5 (Sciex, Framingham, MA) and the Paragon algorithm v. 4.5.0.0. Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme, allowing up to 5 missed cleavages. Iodoacetamide was entered as a fixed modification of cysteine, and the default standard workup modification set was used as the variable modifications. The instrument setting was specified as TripleTOF 5600, defining the default charge state and mass accuracy of the instrument, and the iTRAQ 4plex (peptide labeled) protocol was selected as the sample type. Quantitative data were normalized using the bias and background corrections to correct for any experimental and technical bias. Thorough ID and false discovery rate (FDR) analysis were both selected. The searches were imported to and parsed using MS Data Miner v. 1.3.0, using a 1% global FDR at the protein level. To find significantly regulated proteins, Student’s t-test with a significance threshold of 0.01 was performed for proteins quantified in all 3 biological replicates of both the TGFBI+/+ and TGFBI-/- groups. Proteins with a p-value less than 0.01 and a minimum fold change of 0.5 on the log2 scale were considered up- or downregulated in TGFBI-/- mice. TGFBIp was excluded from the data processing, as it is not possible to obtain a ratio between TGFBI+/+ and TGFBI-/- samples.  Targeted MS analysis of periostin – LC-SRM-MS The selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay was developed using Skyline 1.4.0.4421 and based on the optimization of 4 stable isotope-labeled periostin analog peptides (SpikeTides, JPT Peptide Technologies GmbH, Germany) (DQGPNVCALQQILGTK (+2), NGVIHLIDEVLIPDSAK (+2), LLYPADIPVGNDQLLELLNK (+2), and IIDGVPVEITEK (+2)). The final optimized assay included 4 transitions per peptide monitored, including both light and heavy peptide variants. New digests of TGFBI+/+ and TGFBI-/- corneas were prepared as described above. The LC-SRM-MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC II system (Thermo Scientific) connected in-line to a Qtrap 6500 mass spectrometer (Sciex) equipped with a NanoSpray III source (AB Sciex) and operated under Analyst 1.6.1 control. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 12-min gradient from 5% to 35% phase B (0.1% formic acid and 90% acetonitrile), followed by re-equilibration for 10 min to the starting conditions. The Qtrap 6500 was used in positive ion mode with an ion spray voltage of 25 kV, a curtain gas setting of 30, an ion source gas setting of 5 and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The eluted peptides were measured with a scheduled (3-min window) SRM method using a 20-ms dwell time for all transitions (32 in total) and a target scan time of 0.8 s.

### Publication Abstract
TGFBIp is a constituent of the extracellular matrix in many human tissues including the cornea, where it is one of the most abundant proteins expressed. TGFBIp interacts with Type I, II, IV, VI, and XII collagens as well as several members of the integrin family, suggesting it plays an important role in maintaining structural integrity and possibly corneal transparency as well. Significantly, more than 60 point mutations within the TGFBI gene have been reported to result in aberrant TGFBIp folding and aggregation in the cornea, resulting in severe visual impairment and blindness. Several studies have focused on targeting TGFBIp in the cornea as a therapeutic approach to treat TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies, but the effect of this approach on corneal homeostasis and matrix integrity remained unknown. In the current study, we evaluated the histological and proteomic profiles of corneas from TGFBI-deficient mice as well as potential redundant functions of the paralogous protein POSTN. The absence of TGFBIp in mouse corneas did not grossly affect the collagen scaffold, and POSTN is unable to compensate for loss of TGFBIp. Proteomic comparison of wild-type and TGFBI<sup>-/-</sup> mice revealed 11 proteins were differentially regulated, including Type VI and XII collagens. However, as these alterations did not manifest at the macroscopic and behavioral levels, these data support partial or complete TGFBI knockdown as a potential therapy against TGFBI-linked corneal dystrophies. Lastly, in situ hybridization verified TGFBI mRNA in the epithelial cells but not in other cell types, supportive of a therapy directed specifically at this lineage.

### Keywords
Cornea, Tgfbip, Periostin, Lc-ms/ms, Itraq, Ecm

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Aarhus Univerity Denmark
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics

### Submitter
Ebbe Toftgaard Poulsen

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Aarhus Univerity Denmark


