### Accession
PXD009969

### Title
RNA instability in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) share key features, including accumulation of the RNA binding protein TDP-43. TDP-43 regulates RNA homeostasis, but it remains unclear whether RNA stability is affected in these disorders. We use Bru-seq and BruChase-seq to assess genome-wide RNA stability in ALS patient-derived cells, demonstrating profound destabilization of ribosomal and mitochondrial transcripts. This pattern is recapitulated by TDP-43 overexpression, suggesting a primary role for TDP-43 in RNA destabilization, and in post-mortem samples from ALS and FTD patients. Proteomics and functional studies illustrate corresponding reductions in mitochondrial components and compensatory increases in protein synthesis. Collectively, these observations suggest that TDP-43 deposition leads to targeted RNA instability in ALS and FTD, and may ultimately cause cell death by disrupting energy production and protein synthesis pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry  After routine passage, iPSC cultures were grown for 5-6 d in 60 mm dishes. After application of 0.5 mM EDTA for 2 min, colonies were washed off the plate using 1.5ml of phosphate buffered saline (no Ca/Mg, Gibco/ThermoFisher). Colonies were pelleted by centrifugation and stored at -80°C until lysis. Cell pellets were lysed using 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich) with 0.1% SDS by passing the lysate through a 28.5 gauge needle, following by sonication and centrifugation at 6000xg for 5 m at 4°C. The supernatant was saved and protein concentration determined by the BCA assay (Pierce).  For mass spectroscopy (MS), tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling was performed using the TMT-10plex isobaric labeling kit (Lot#SA239882A; ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, with minor modifications. A master mix containing equal amount of protein from each sample was created.  65 µg of protein from each sample and the master mix were reduced with DTT (5 mM) at 45 C for 1 h followed by alkylation with 2-chloroacetamide (15 mM) at room temperature for 30 m. Proteins were precipitated by adding 6 volumes of ice cold acetone and incubating overnight at -20C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation at 8000xg for 10 m at 4C. The supernatants were discarded, and the pellets resuspended in 100 µl of 100 mM TEAB, then digested overnight at 37 C by adding 1.1 µg of sequencing grade, modified porcine trypsin (Promega, V5113).  TMT reagents were reconstituted in 41 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile and digested peptides were transferred to the TMT reagent vial and incubated at room temperature for 1 h.  The TMT channels for each of the samples are provided below. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% hydroxylamine and incubating for another 15 m.  The appropriate samples and master mix (9 samples + 1 master mix) were combined and dried. Sample ID Set TMT Channel C1, repl. 1 A 126 C1, repl. 2 A 127N C1, repl. 3 A 128N C9A2, repl. 1 A 129N C9A2, repl. 2 A 130N C9A2, repl. 3 A 127C SA2, repl. 1 A 128C SA2, repl. 2 A 129C SA2, repl. 3 A 130C Master Mix A 131 C4, repl. 1 B 126 C4, repl. 2 B 127N C4, repl. 3 B 128N C9A4, repl. 1 B 129N C9A4, repl. 2 B 130N C9A4, repl. 3 B 127C SA4, repl. 1 B 128C SA4, repl. 2 B 129C SA4, repl. 3 B 130C Master Mix B 131   Prior to MS analysis, two-dimensional separation of the samples was performed. For the 1st dimension, an aliquot from each sample mix (100 µg) underwent offline fractionation using a high pH reverse phase fractionation kit, following the manufacturer’s protocol (Pierce, Cat #84868). Fractions were dried and reconstituted in 10 µl of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile).    Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis To increase accuracy and confidence in protein abundance, a multinotch-MS3 method was employed for analyzing MS data76. Raw data were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion (ThermoFisher) and RSLC Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC (Dionex). 2 µl from each fraction was resolved in the 2nd dimension on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 75 m i.d. x 50 cm, ThermoFisher) using a 0.1% formic/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min (2-22% acetonitrile in 150 min; 22-32% acetonitrile in 40 m; 20 m wash at 90% followed by 50 m re-equilibration) and directly sprayed on to Orbitrap Fusion using EasySpray source (ThermoFisher). The mass spectrometer was set to collect one MS1 scan (Orbitrap; 120K resolution; AGC target 2x105; max IT 100 ms) followed by data-dependent, “Top Speed” (3 seconds) MS2 scans (collision induced dissociation; ion trap; NCD 35; AGC 5x103; max IT 100 ms). For multinotch-MS3, the top 10 precursors from each MS2 scan were fragmented by HCD followed by Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55; 60K resolution; AGC 5x104; max IT 120 ms, 100-500 m/z scan range).

### Data Protocol
For MS data analsyis, we used Proteome Discoverer (v2.1; ThermoFisher).  MS1 and MS2 spectra were queried against the SwissProt human protein database (release 2016-11-30; 42054 sequences) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. A percolator algorithm (PD2.1) was used to determine the FDR and proteins/peptides with FDR ≤ 0.01 were retained for further analysis.  Relative quantitation using TMT reporter ions was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 10 and <40% isolation interference).

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) share key features, including accumulation of the RNA-binding protein TDP-43. TDP-43 regulates RNA homeostasis, but it remains unclear whether RNA stability is affected in these disorders. We use Bru-seq and BruChase-seq to assess genome-wide RNA stability in ALS patient-derived cells, demonstrating profound destabilization of ribosomal and mitochondrial transcripts. This pattern is recapitulated by TDP-43 overexpression, suggesting a primary role for TDP-43 in RNA destabilization, and in postmortem samples from ALS and FTD patients. Proteomics and functional studies illustrate corresponding reductions in mitochondrial components and compensatory increases in protein synthesis. Collectively, these observations suggest that TDP-43 deposition leads to targeted RNA instability in ALS and FTD, and may ultimately cause cell death by disrupting energy production and protein synthesis pathways.

### Keywords
Tmt 10plex, Stability, Rna, Stem cells, Lc-ms/ms, Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Frontotemporal dementia

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Assistant Professor of Neurology and Angela Dobson and Lyndon Welch Professor of Neurology Department of Neurology | University of Michigan Health System 109 Zina Pitcher Place, 5015 BSRB | Ann Arbor, MI | 48109

### Submitter
Sami Barmada

### Lab Head
Dr Sami Barmada
Assistant Professor of Neurology and Angela Dobson and Lyndon Welch Professor of Neurology Department of Neurology | University of Michigan Health System 109 Zina Pitcher Place, 5015 BSRB | Ann Arbor, MI | 48109


