### Accession
PXD006652

### Title
Identification and quantification of HDA14-dependent substrates in the Arabidopsis thaliana thylakoid acetylome

### Description
Lysine acetylation is a common post-translational modification in eukaryotes and prokaryotes which is known to be involved in the regulation of various cellular processes, such as transcriptional activation, metabolic signaling, and energy homeostasis. Nevertheless, its role in plant primary metabolism, and photosynthesis in particular, is not well understood. Lysine acetylation is catalyzed by acetyltransferases (KATs) and removed by corresponding deacetylases (KDACs). The Arabidopsis thaliana genome encodes for at least 16 KATs and 18 KDACs, belonging to seven different gene families. The cellular functions of these enzymes have been explored only partially, describing effects of single enzymes and their interaction with specific targets. HDA14 is a KDAC expressed primarily in chloroplasts which suggests an involvement in the regulation of photosynthesis or related metabolic processes. In this dataset we aimed to identify substrates of the histone deacetylase 14 in a global manner by comparing the lysine acetylome on leaf thylakoids isolated from hda14 KO plants and wild-type plants, respectively. Proteins were extracted and digested using an adapted FASP procedure, peptides were dimethyl-labeled, and lysine-acetylated peptides were antibody-enriched. Peptide identification and quantitative data analysis was carried out using MaxQuant.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from isolated thylakoids with SDT lysis buffer. SDS removal, cysteine alkylation and protein digestion were achieved using an adapted filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al., Nature Methods, 2009; Lassowskat et al., 2017). Peptides were dimethyl labeled. Acetylated peptides were enriched using an acetyl lysine antibody (ImmuneChem Pharmaceuticals). Total proteome (input) and acetyl lysine enriched samples were subjected to LC-MS analysis after fractionation on SDB-RPS tips (3 fractions each). Peptides were separated with an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher) on a 16 cm C18 column (3 µm bead size) with a 120 min segmented linear gradient. Peptides were analyzed with a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with a Top15 method.

### Data Protocol
The resulting mass spectrometry data were analyzed with MaxQuant (1.5.2.8). MS/MS spectra were searched with the integrated Andromeda search engine against the TAIR10 proteome (35,386 entries) and 248 common contaminant proteins. Light and medium dimethylation of lysines and peptide N-termini were set as labels. Trypsin specificity was required and a maximum of two or four missed cleavages allowed for total proteome and enriched samples, respectively. Minimal peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Acetylation of lysines was added as a variable modification for the enriched samples. Allowed mass deviation was 4.5 ppm for peptides and 20 ppm for fragments. Peptide-spectrum-matches and proteins were retained if they were below a false discovery rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylases have central functions in regulating stress defenses and development in plants. However, the knowledge about the deacetylase functions is largely limited to histones, although these enzymes were found in diverse subcellular compartments. In this study, we determined the proteome-wide signatures of the RPD3/HDA1 class of histone deacetylases in <i>Arabidopsis</i> Relative quantification of the changes in the lysine acetylation levels was determined on a proteome-wide scale after treatment of <i>Arabidopsis</i> leaves with deacetylase inhibitors apicidin and trichostatin A. We identified 91 new acetylated candidate proteins other than histones, which are potential substrates of the RPD3/HDA1-like histone deacetylases in <i>Arabidopsis</i>, of which at least 30 of these proteins function in nucleic acid binding. Furthermore, our analysis revealed that histone deacetylase 14 (HDA14) is the first organellar-localized RPD3/HDA1 class protein found to reside in the chloroplasts and that the majority of its protein targets have functions in photosynthesis. Finally, the analysis of HDA14 loss-of-function mutants revealed that the activation state of RuBisCO is controlled by lysine acetylation of RuBisCO activase under low-light conditions.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis, Lysine acetylation, Rubisco activase, Photosynthesis, Histone deacetylases

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Plant Breeding Research
Plant Physiology Group Westfälische WIlhelms-Universität Münster Germany

### Submitter
Katharina Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Iris Finkemeier
Plant Physiology Group Westfälische WIlhelms-Universität Münster Germany


