### Accession
PXD028579

### Title
Cryo-EM structures of Gid12-bound GID E3 reveal steric blockade as a mechanism inhibiting substrate ubiquitylation

### Description
Protein degradation, a major eukaryotic response to cellular signals, is subject to numerous layers of regulation. In yeast, the evolutionarily conserved GID E3 ligase mediates glucose-induced degradation of fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (Fbp1) and other gluconeogenic enzymes. “GID” is a collection of E3 ligase complexes; a core scaffold, RING-type catalytic core and supramolecular module along with interchangeable substrate receptors select targets for ubiquitylation. However, knowledge of additional cellular factors directly regulating GID-type E3s remains rudimentary. Here, we structurally and biochemically characterize Gid12 as a modulator of the GID E3 ligase complex targeting Fbp1. Our collection of cryo-EM reconstructions shows that Gid12 forms an extensive interface sealing the substrate receptor Gid4 onto the scaffold, and remodeling the degron binding site. Gid12 also sterically blocks a recruited Fbp1 from the ubiquitylation active sites. Our analysis of the role of Gid12 establishes principles that may more generally underlie E3 ligase regulation.

### Sample Protocol
For reduction and alkylation of the bound proteins, previously washed anti-FLAG M2 resins or the anti-HA magnetic resins were incubated with SDC buffer containing 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC, Sigma-Aldrich), 40 mM 2-cloroacetamide (CAA, Sigma-Aldrich), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 100 mM Tris, pH 8.0 at 37 °C. After incubation for 20 min at 37 °C, the samples were diluted 1:2 with MS grade water (VWR). Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with 0.5 µg trypsin (Promega). The beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was collected. Additionally, the beads were washed with 100 µL of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (Roth) in MS grade water (VWR)), followed by centrifugation and collection of the supernatant. The combined supernatants were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Merck) to a final concentration of 1%. Precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation and the peptide mixture was desalted via SCX StageTips56. Samples were vacuum dried and re-suspended in 10 µl of buffer A.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were loaded in buffer A (A (0.1% formic acid) onto a 30-cm column (inner diameter: 75 microns; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-micron beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH) via the autosampler of the Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 60 °C and eluting peptides were directly sprayed either onto the mass spectrometer Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or the mass spectrometer timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics). For data acquisition on the Orbitrap Exploris 480 coupled to the Easy-nLC, peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 30% over 40 minutes followed by a ramp to 95% over 10 minutes and finally the percentage of buffer B was maintained at 95% for another 10 minutes. For data acquisition on the timsTOF Pro coupled to the Easy-nLC, peptides were separated at a flow rate of 400 nL/min by a gradient of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 8% to 30% over 35 min followed by a ramp to 35% over 10 minutes, then to 58% over the next 5 minutes, 95% over the next 5 min and maintained at 95% for another 5 min.  The mass spectrometer Orbtrap Exploris 480 was operated in a data-dependent mode with survey scans from 300 to 1650 m/z (resolution of 60000 at m/z =200), and up to 15 of the top precursors were selected and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD with a normalized collision energy of value of 30). MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15000 (at m/z = 200). AGC target for MS1 and MS2 scans were set to 3x106 and 1x105 respectively within a maximum injection time of 25 and 28 ms for MS and MS2 scans respectively.  Data acquisition on the mass spectrometer timsTOF Pro was performed using OtofControl 6.2. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent PASEF mode with one survey TIMS-MS and ten PASEF MS/MS scans per acquisition cycle. Analysis was performed in a mass scan range from 100-1700 m/z and an ion mobility range from 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 0.6 Vs cm-2 using equal ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer of 100 ms each at a spectra rate of 9.43 Hz. Suitable precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in a window of 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700 by rapidly switching the quadrupole position in sync with the elution of precursors from the TIMS device. The collision energy was lowered as a function of ion mobility, starting from 59 eV for 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs cm-2 to 20eV for 0.6 Vs cm-2. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded with a polygon filter mask and further m/z and ion mobility information was used for ‘dynamic exclusion’ to avoid re-sequencing of precursors that reached a ‘target value’ of 20,000 a.u.. The ion mobility dimension was calibrated linearly using three ions from the Agilent ESI LC/MS tuning mix (m/z, 1/K0: 622.0289, 0.9848 Vs cm-2; 922.0097 Vs cm-2, 1.1895 Vs cm-2; 1221.9906 Vs cm-2, 1.3820 Vs cm-2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gid, E3 ligase complex, Crzoem

### Affiliations
MPI of Biochemistry
Department of Molecular Machines and Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Barbara Steigenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Brenda A. Schulman
Department of Molecular Machines and Signaling, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152, Martinsried, Germany


