### Accession
PXD015616

### Title
Deep proteome of aging skeletal muscles reveals Smoc2 as a modulator of satellite cell regenerative capacity

### Description
During aging, the number and functionality of muscle stem cells (MuSCs) decreases leading to impaired regeneration of aged skeletal muscle. In addition to intrinsic changes in aged MuSCs, extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins deriving from other cell types, e.g., fibrogenic-adipogenic progenitor cells (FAPs), contribute to the aging phenotype of MuSCs and impaired regeneration in the elderly. So far, no comprehensive analysis on how age-dependent changes in the whole skeletal muscle proteome affect MuSC function have been conducted. Here, we investigated age-dependent changes in the proteome of different skeletal muscle types by applying deep quantitative mass spectrometry. We identified 183 extracellular matrix proteins that show different abundances in skeletal muscles of old mice. By integrating single cell sequencing data, we reveal that transcripts of those ECM proteins are mainly expressed in FAPs, suggesting that FAPs are the main contributors to ECM remodelling during aging. We functionally investigated one of those ECM molecules, namely Smoc2, which is aberrantly expressed during aging. We show that Smoc2 levels are elevated during regeneration and that its accumulation in the aged MuSC niche causes impairment of MuSCs function through constant activation of integrin/MAPK signaling. In vivo, supplementation of exogenous Smoc2 hampers the regeneration of young muscles following serial injuries, leading to a phenotype reminiscent of regenerating aged skeletal muscle. Taken together, we provide a comprehensive resource of changes in the composition of the ECM of aged skeletal muscles, we pinpoint the cell types driving these changes, and we identify a new niche protein causing functional impairment of MuSCs thereby hampering the regeneration capacity of skeletal muscles.

### Sample Protocol
Muscle samples were digested in SDC buffer. Reduction with 10 mM DTT (30 min, 37 °C) was followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were precipitated overnight at 20 °C after addition of a 8x volume of ice-cold acetone. The following day, the samples were centrifuged at 20800x g for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatant got carefully removed.  Pellets were washed twice with 300 μl ice-cold 80% (v/v) acetone in water, then centrifuged at 20800x g at 4 °C. The pellets were air-dried before addition of 15 µL of digestion buffer (3M Urea, 100 mM HEPES, pH8). LysC (Wako) was added at 1:100 (w/w) enzyme:protein and digestion proceeded for 4h at 37 °C with shaking (1000 rpm for 1h, then 650 rpm). Samples were then diluted 1:1 with MilliQ water and trypsin (Promega) added at the same enzyme to protein ratio. Samples were further digested overnight at 37 °C with shaking (650 rpm). The following day, digests were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted with Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in the presence of a slow vacuum, according to manufacturer instructions. The eluates were dried down with the speed vacuum centrifuge before peptide labelling with TMT and subsequent high pH fractionation and LC-MS, which is described in detail in Buczak et al, MCP 2018.  Briefly, peptides were resuspended in HEPES buffer (100mM, pH 8,5) and subsequently labelled with TMT-10plex isobaric mass tags (Thermo) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Equal amounts of the labelled peptides were mixed, desalted and pre-fractionated into 24 fractions using high pH reverse phase fractionation on an Agilent Infinity 1260 HPLC, before each fraction was measured individually by nano-LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos employing SPS-MS3 data acquisition. For the total proteome experiment comparing different muscles at different ages, the respective young muscles were used as reference

### Data Protocol
TMT-10plex data were processed using Proteome Discoverer v2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data were searched against the relevant species-specific fasta database (Uniprot database, Swissprot entry only, release 2016_01 for mouse) using Mascot v2.5.1 (Matrix Science) with the following settings:  Enzyme was set to trypsin, with up to 1 missed cleavage. MS1 mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS2 to 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Methionine as variable.  Other modifications included the TMT-10plex modification from the quantification method used.  The quantification method was set for reporter ions quantification with HCD and MS3 (mass tolerance, 20 ppm). The false discovery rate for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) was set to 0.01 using Percolator (Brotsch, JPR 2009).  Reporter ion intensity values for the PSMs were exported and processed with procedures written in R (version 3.4.1), as described in (Heinze et al., BMC Biol 2018). Briefly, PSMs mapping to reverse or contaminant hits, or having a Mascot score below 15, or having reporter ion intensities below 1 x 103 in all the relevant TMT channels were discarded. TMT channels intensities from the retained PSMs were then log2 transformed, normalised and summarised into protein group quantities by taking the median value. At least two unique peptides per protein were required for the identification and only those peptides with one missing values across all 10 channels were considered for quantification. Protein differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Ritchie, et al., NAR 2015). Differential expression was evaluated using the limma package (Smyth et al., Bioinformatics 2005) and q values calculated using fdrtool (Strimmer et al., Bioinformatics 2008).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Regeneration, Proteomics, Aging, Extracellular matrix, Satellite cell, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging
FLI Jena, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Ori

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
FLI Jena, Germany


