### Accession
PXD044588

### Title
Apical annuli are specialised sites of post-invasion secretion of dense granules in Toxoplasma

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is an intracellular parasite that causes the disease toxoplasmosis in humans. It is a member of the phylum Apicomplexa that also includes significant human pathogens such as Plasmodium spp. and Cryptosporidium spp. causing malaria and diarrheal disease, respectively. These parasites use a programmed sequence of secretory events to find, invade, and then reengineer their host cells to enable parasite growth and proliferation. After invasion, Toxoplasma secretes proteins for host cell remodelling and manipulation from dense granules. The site(s) of dense granule exocytosis, however, has been unknown. In Toxoplasma gondii, small subapical annular structures that are embedded in the inner membrane complex have been observed, but the role or significance of these apical annuli to plasma membrane function has also been unknown. We have identified four integral membrane proteins of the plasma membrane that occur specifically at these apical annular sites. These proteins are an LMBR-domain containing protein TgLMBD3, and three SNARE proteins TgStxPM, TgNPSN, and TgSyp7. Using widefield-microscopy, we discovered that depletion of each of these proteins results in reduced secretion of dense granule proteins, implicating the apical annuli as a site of exocytosis in Toxoplasma. To further understand the role of these proteins and the impact of their depletion on the parasite, we performed whole-cell quantitative proteomics in control and knockdown cell lines. Several hundred proteins have been identified and quantified in three biological replicates for every knockdown cell line and the untreated control line. The majority of enriched proteins in the knockdown cell lines are those packaged in dense granules, indicating their failure to be secreted outside the cell. The apical annuli are therefore sites of SNARE-mediated exocytosis of dense granules in Toxoplasma.

### Sample Protocol
We generated four cell lines in which each of the apical annuli proteins (TgLMBD3, TgStxPM, TgNPSN, TgSyp7) were fused to mini auxin induced degron cassette to deplete these proteins upon the addition of an auxin such as 3-indolacetic acid (IAA). Intracellular tachyzoites were pre-treated with or without IAA prior to egress to deplete annuli proteins individually. These were then harvested through needle-passage with 27G needle, seeded onto T175 flasks and allowed to proliferate for further 24 hours with or without continued IAA treatment. Approximately 40 million parasites were then harvested by needle-passage into Endo buffer (44.7 mM K2SO4, 10 mM MgSO4, 106 mM sucrose, 5 mM glucose, 20 mM Tris-H2SO4, 3.5 mg/ml BSA, pH 8.2) to mimic intracellular conditions. Host cell debris was removed by filtration through a 3 μm filter and tachyzoites were harvested by centrifugation at 1500xg for 10 minutes. Pellets were lysed in 8M urea, 20 mM HEPES buffer and sonicated for 5 cycles (50s ON, 50s OFF). Proteins were reduced in 5mM DTT for 30 minutes at 37°C and alkylated in 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteins were digested with trypsin/LysC mix at of 25:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w) for 4 hours at 37°C. The reaction was then 8-fold diluted with 20 mM HEPES, pH 8 to reduce the concentration of urea to 1M, and incubation at 37°C was continued overnight. Peptide digestion was terminated with 1% trifluoracetic acid. Particulate material was pelleted by centrifugation at 21000x g, 4°C, 10 minutes, and the peptide supernatant desalted using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Column. Peptide amount was measured using the Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay. From each sample, 17 μg peptide was dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac SPD 1030) and then re-suspended in 100 μl of 100 mM TEAB solution, pH 8.5.  TMT-labelling was done using TMTpro 16 plex Label Reagent (ThermoFisher: A44520; LOT# VJ313476). Each TMT reagent vial containing 0.5 mg of the labelling reagents was brought to room temperature and dissolved in 40 µl of LCMS-grade acetonitrile immediately before use. The TMT reagents were then split to two sets and 20 µl of the TMT reagents were added to each peptide sample. After 1 hour incubation at room temperature, 5 μl of 5% hydroxylamine (v/v) was added to quench the reaction for 15 mins. The TMT-labelled fractions were combined and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (SpeedVac SPD 1030). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoUPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA) system and a Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA, USA). Dried, TMT-labelled peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5mm particle size, 100Å pore size, 300 mm i.d. x 5mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 auto-sampler with 0.1% formic acid for 3 minutes at a flow rate of 10 μL/min. After this period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Separation of peptides was performed by C18 reverse-phase chromatography at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using a Thermo Scientific reverse-phase nano Easy-spray column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 2mm particle size, 100A pore size, 75 mm i.d. x 50cm length). Solvent A was water + 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 20% water + 0.1% formic acid. The linear gradient employed was 2-40% B in 105 minutes. (Total LC run run time was 120 min including a high organic wash step and column re-equilibration). The eluted peptides from the C18 column LC eluant were sprayed into the mass spectrometer by means of an Easy-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). All m/z values of eluting peptide ions were measured in an Orbitrap mass analyzer, set at a resolution of 120,000 and were scanned between m/z 380-1500 Da. Data dependent MS/MS scans (Top Speed) were employed to automatically isolate and fragment precursor ions by collision-induced dissociation (CID, Normalised Collision Energy (NCE): 35%) which were analysed in the linear ion trap. Singly charged ions and ions with unassigned charge states were excluded from being selected for MS/MS and a dynamic exclusion window of 70 seconds was employed. The top 10 most abundant fragment ions from each MS/MS event were then selected for a further stage of fragmentation by Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) MS3 (McAlister et al 2014) in the HCD high energy collision cell using HCD (High energy Collisional Dissociation, (NCE: 65%). The m/z values and relative abundances of each reporter ion and all fragments (mass range from 100-500 Da) in each MS3 step were measured in the Orbitrap analyser, which was set at a resolution of 50,000. This was performed in cycles of 10 MS3 events before the Lumos instrument reverted to scanning the m/z ratios of the intact peptide ions and the cycle continued.

### Data Protocol
Both raw files  were analysed in a single workflow using Proteome Discoverer (PD) v3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a SPS MS3 TMT reporter ion-based quantification workflow. A reference proteome for Toxoplasma gondii ME49 was retrieved from ToxoDB (Amos et al. 2021) and used together with a swissprot human proteome and a database of common contaminants (Frankenfield et al 2022). In the processing workflow part, SequestHT was used as a search engine with set mass tolerances for peptide precursor and fragment ions of 10 ppm, and 0.5 Da, respectively. The SequestHT nodes was followed by an INFERYS rescoring node. Tryptic peptides were allowed to have 2 missed cleavage sites. Mass shifts were set up as either static modification for cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) and lysine TMTpro label (+304.207 Da) or as dynamic modification for methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and peptide N-terminal TMTpro label (304.207 Da). Percolator was used for false discovery rate (FDR) estimations with a fixed target FDR of 1%. All peptide-spectrum matches  (PSM) up to delta Cn value of 0.05 were initially considered and only high-confidence peptides were retained. Contaminant proteins were removed. Quantification of peptides at the MS3 level was performed using Most Confident Centroid as integration method (tolerance of 20 ppm). Reporter Abundance was based on signal-to-noise (S/N) values and corrected for isotopic impurities of TMT reagents according to manufacture specifications (TMTpro 16plex LOT #VJ313476). Protein grouping was carried out applying the strict parsimony principle and proteins with high (q ≤ 0.01) and medium (q ≤ 0.05) confidence retained. The PD PSM output file was filtered and aggregated manually using R Bioconductor packages. PSMs were filtered for uniqueness (Number.of.Protein.Groups = 1), rank (Concatenated.Rank = 1), ambiguity (Unambiguous+Selected), isolation interference (≤75%), average S/N (≥10), and SPS mass match percentage (≥70%) and aggregated to protein level applying robustSummary. Global protein abundances between samples were median aligned to account for slight variabilities due to peptide loading per TMT channel.  Differential protein abundance between control and treated cell lines for TgLMBD3, TgStxPM, TgNPSN, and TgSyp7 was determined by implementing the Bioconductor package limma (Ritchie et al., 2015), using a mean reference model (Law et al. 2020) with the lmFit and eBayes functions. Proteins with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 (Benjamini-Hochberg correction) after moderated t-tests were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexans are ubiquitous intracellular parasites of animals. These parasites use a programmed sequence of secretory events to find, invade, and then re-engineer their host cells to enable parasite growth and proliferation. The secretory organelles micronemes and rhoptries mediate the first steps of invasion. Both secrete their contents through the apical complex which provides an apical opening in the parasite's elaborate inner membrane complex (IMC) - an extensive subpellicular system of flattened membrane cisternae and proteinaceous meshwork that otherwise limits access of the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane for material exchange with the cell exterior. After invasion, a second secretion programme drives host cell remodelling and occurs from dense granules. The site(s) of dense granule exocytosis, however, has been unknown. In <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i>, small subapical annular structures that are embedded in the IMC have been observed, but the role or significance of these apical annuli to plasma membrane function has also been unknown. Here, we determined that integral membrane proteins of the plasma membrane occur specifically at these apical annular sites, that these proteins include SNARE proteins, and that the apical annuli are sites of vesicle fusion and exocytosis. Specifically, we show that dense granules require these structures for the secretion of their cargo proteins. When secretion is perturbed at the apical annuli, parasite growth is strongly impaired. The apical annuli, therefore, represent a second type of IMC-embedded structure to the apical complex that is specialised for protein secretion, and reveal that in <i>Toxoplasma</i> there is a physical separation of the processes of pre- and post-invasion secretion that mediate host-parasite interactions.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Apical annuli, Dense granules, Secretion, Lmbd, Exocytosis, Snare

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry
University of Cambridge
University of Cambridge Department of Biochemistry Hopkins Building Downing Site Tennis Court Road Cambridge CB2 1QW

### Submitter
Thomas Krueger

### Lab Head
Dr Ross Waller
University of Cambridge Department of Biochemistry Hopkins Building Downing Site Tennis Court Road Cambridge CB2 1QW


