### Accession
PXD032071

### Title
Lung fibroblasts from chinese hamster cell line V79 and the effects of e-cigarettes liquids

### Description
Although still considered a safer alternative to classical cigarettes, growing body of work point to harmfull effects of e-cigarettes affecting range of cellular processes. The biological effect of e-cigarettes needs to be investigated in more detail considering their widespread use.  In this study, we treated V79 lung fibroblasts with sub-cytotoxic concentration of e-cigarette liquids, with and without nicotine. Mutagenicity was evaluated by HPRT assay, genotoxicity by comet assay and the effect on cellular communication by metabolic cooperation assay. Additionally, comprehensive proteome analysis was performed via high resolution, parallel accumulation serial fragmentation-PASEF mass spectrometry.  E-cigarette liquid concentration used in this study showed no mutagenic or genotoxic effect, however it negatively impacted metabolic cooperation between V79 cells. Both e-cigarette liquids induced significant depletion in total number of proteins and impairment of mitochondrial function in treated cells. The focal adhesion proteins were upregulated, which is in accordance with the results of metabolic cooperation assay. Increased presence of posttranslational modifications (PTMs), including carbonylations and direct oxidative modifications, was observed.  Our study revealed impairment of metabolic cooperation as well as significant proteome and PTMs alterations in V79 cells treated with e-cigarette liquid warranting future studies on e- cigarettes health impact.

### Sample Protocol
For the shotgun in-gel digestion,  cells were lysed with RIPA buffer and diluted extracts (30 μg or proteins per well) were resolved in reducing, one dimension, 12% sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel (1D SDS-PAGE), only to a point to enter the separating gel up to 5 mm path.  Proteomes in excised gel bands were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with proteomics-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich, Taufkirchen, Germany) in a 1:30 enzyme to substrate ratio, overnight at 37℃ (Shevchenko, Tomas, Havlis, Olsen, & Mann, 2006). Trypsin digests were cleaned and desalted with HyperSep tips C18 (Thermo Scientific, Rockwood, TN, USA), evaporated and reconstituted in 30 μL of 0.1% trifluoro-acetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides, 2 μg from each samples (15 µL injection volume) were chromatographically separated with U3000 RSLC-nano online (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), coupled to a TimsTOF mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany). Peptides samples were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18; 100 µm × 2 cm) in 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5 min, the pre-column was switched in line with the main column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18; 75 μm × 50 cm) and peptides were separated using a 130 min binary gradient ranging from 3-38% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 60°C and a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation - data dependent acquisition (PASEF-DDA) mode, with duty cycle at 100%, accumulation time of 1.1 sec and 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per top-N acquisition cycle. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded from m/z 100 to 1700. A polygon filter was applied to the m/z and ion mobility plane to select features most likely representing peptide precursors rather than singly charged background ions. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700, and the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility: 0.6 to 1.6 1/K0[V-s/cm3] – 20 to 59%.

### Data Protocol
V79 proteins were identified using the PEAKS X Pro platform (Bioinformatics Solution Inc., Ontario, Canada) and its PTM algorithm against a UniProtKB database (http://www.uniprot.org/) of Criteculus griseus species (taxon ID 10029, 56575 sequences, accessed 22/08/2021) and contamination database as common Repository of Adventitious Protein entries (http://www.thegpm.org/, 116 sequences, accessed 18/10/2019). The list of all identified V79 proteins (Table S1, Supplementary material) consists of protein groups, with at least two unique peptides, contaminant hits filtered out and protein false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.5%.  The PEAKS X Pro platform included 313 post-translational and chemical modifications in the search space regularly updated from the Unimod web-based database. The quantity of identified V79 proteins was compared by label free quantification (LFQ) using the PEAKS Q algorithm. The term “PTM profiling” means relative extent of the modifications within a single sample. Relative profiling of PTMs and label free relative quantification of proteins in 4 groups with one sample per group was done as described previously (Smiljanic et al., 2019). Briefly, in LFQ section, cut off filter criteria for defining confident differently regulated proteins were significance score of 20 (-10logP, p<0.01), 2-fold change in log2 up/down ratio and at least one used peptide, affecting any of the 3 treatments in respect to the control group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Posttranslational modifications, Metabolic cooperation, E-cigarettes liquid, Lung fibroblast, V79, Nicotine

### Affiliations
Senior Research Associate at University of Belgrade-Faculty of Chemistry, Center of Excellence for Molecular Food Sciences
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11, Dortmund, Germany.  Medizinische Fakultät, Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany. Department of Chemistry, College of Physical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB243FX Scotland, UK.

### Submitter
Katarina Smiljanic

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Sickmann
Leibniz-Institut für Analytische Wissenschaften - ISAS - e.V., Bunsen-Kirchhoff-Straße 11, Dortmund, Germany.  Medizinische Fakultät, Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, 44801 Bochum, Germany. Department of Chemistry, College of Physical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB243FX Scotland, UK.


