### Accession
PXD008644

### Title
The archaeal ATPase PINA interacts with the helicase Hjm via its carboxyl terminal KH domain remodeling and processing replication fork and Holliday junction

### Description
PINA is a novel ATPase and DNA helicase highly conserved in archaea, the third domain of life. The PINA from Sulfolobus islandicus (SisPINA) forms a hexameric ring, promotes Holliday junction (HJ) migration, and physically and functionally interacts with Hjc, the HJ specific endonuclease. Here, we show that SisPINA has strong physical interaction with Hjm (Hel308a), a helicase presumably targeting replication forks. In vitro biochemical analysis revealed that Hjm, Hjc, and SisPINA are able to coordinate HJ migration and cleavage in a concerted way. Deletion of the carboxyl 13 amino acid residues abolishes the interaction between SisPINA and Hjm. Crystal structure analysis showed that the carboxyl 70 amino acid residues fold into a type II KH domain which, in other proteins, functions in binding RNA and ssDNA. The KH domain not only mediates the interactions of PINA with Hjm and Hjc but also regulates the hexameric assembly of PINA. Our results collectively suggest possible mechanisms for SisPINA, Hjm, and Hjc to work together in replication fork regression, HJ formation, and HJ cleavage.

### Sample Protocol
Construction of the strain encoding a chromosomally-coded N-terminal 6 × His-tagged SisPINA The SisPINA gene was amplified by PCR using the S. islandicus REY15A genomic DNA as a template and SisPINA-MluI Forward and SisPINA-SalI Reverse as the primers (Table S1). The gene fragment was then cloned into pSeSD (39) at the MluI/SalI sites, and the plasmid was named as pSeSD-SisPINA-1. A fragment containing the arabinose promoter, the partial SisPINA gene, and the sequence encoding a 6 × His tag was amplified by PCR using the pSeSD-SisPINA-1 as a template and SisPINA-NcoI Forward and SisPINA-XhoI Reverse as the primers (Table S1). Then the fragment was cloned into pMID plasmid at the NcoI/XhoI sites (40), and the plasmid was named as pMID-SisPINA-1. The down-stream fragment of SisPINA was amplified and then cloned into pMID-SisPINA-1 at the SalI/MluI sites, and the resultant plasmid was named as pMID-SisPINA-N-His. pMID-SisPINA-N-His was linearized by digestion with SalI/XhoI. The fragment contained pyrEF-lacs was utilized to transform S. islandicus E233S cells by electroporation as previously described (40). The screening procedure of chromosomally-coded N-terminal 6 × His-tagged SisPINA strain (pMID-SisPINA-in-situ-N-His-T) was the same as for pMID-SisPINA-T (38).  Expression, purification, and identification of N-terminal 6 × His-tagged SisPINA and its co-eluted proteins in S. islandicus The cells pMID-SisPINA-in-situ-N-His-T were cultured in 2,000 ml rich MTSV medium until O.D.600 reached 0.4. The cells were collected by centrifugation at 6,300 x g for 10 minutes, resuspended in 60 ml lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol (v/v)), and disrupted by sonication. The sample was centrifuged at 13,500 x g for 40 min. The supernatant was treated with ammonium sulfate at a final concentration of 600 mg/ml. The sample was centrifuged at 13,500 x g for 20 minutes and the precipitant was resuspended in 30 ml lysis buffer and dialyzed against buffer A (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and 200 mM NaCl). The sample was loaded onto the nickel affinity column pre-equilibrated with buffer A. The column was washed with buffer B (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, and 40 mM imidazole), then SisPINA and its associated proteins were eluted in buffer C (25 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 200 mM NaCl, and 400 mM imidazole). The elution fractions from the nickel affinity column were pooled and analyzed by SDS-PAGE. The proteins of the specific bands were identified by LC-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry/Mass Spectrometry) by Hangzhou Jingjie Biotechnology Limited Company (Hangzhou, China).     Gene cloning and construction of plasmid for protein expression in E. coli   SisPINA and SisHjc expression vectors were constructed as previously described in Zhai et al (38). The SisHjm expression vector was constructed as described in Song et al (41). The gene encoding SisPINA (1-492) was amplified by PCR using pET15bm-SisPINA as a template and SisPINA-NdeI-Forward and SisPINA (1-492)-SalI-Reverse as primers. The fragment was digested by NdeI and SalI, and cloned into the NdeI/SalI sites of pET15bm. The resultant plasmid was named pET15bm-SisPINA (1-492) and used for the expression of SisPINA (1-492) without any tag. The plasmid used to express the site-directed mutant SisPINA-R206A was constructed by overlap PCR using the site-specific primers. Unexpectedly, during amplification of the SisPINA-R206A fragment by PCR, two mutant sites were introduced: R147K and I199S. This plasmid was named pET22b-SisPINA-R206A/R147K/I199S and used to express the specific mutant without any tag.  Expression and purification of recombinant proteins in E. coli  SisPINA and SisHjc were expressed and purified as described in Zhai et al (38). SisHjm was expressed as described in Song et al (41), except the final concentration of IPTG was 0.3 mM. The purification of SisHjm was almost the same as SisPINA, but the ammonium sulfate precipitation saturation was 80%. Similar procedures were used to purify SisPINA (1-492) except the heat-resistant supernatant was precipitated by 60% saturated ammonium sulfate. The procedures for the culture and expression of   SisPINA-R206A/R147K/I199S were similar to those for SisPINA while the purification of SisPINA-R206A/R147K/I199S was the same as SisHjc (38).

### Data Protocol
Crystallization and structure solution of SisPINA-R206A/R147K/I199S The sitting drop vapor diffusion method was used to screen crystal growth conditions. 1 μl of purified SisPINA-R2016A/R147K/I199S (8 mg/ml) was mixed with an equal volume of stock solution and kept at 18oC. Original crystals of SisPINA-R206A/R147K/I199S were observed in a buffer containing 0.1 M Bis-Tris, pH 6.5, and 20% PEG monomethyl ether 5000. High quality crystals were obtained in the original well and directly used for data collection. The crystals were immersed into reservoir solution containing 20% (v/v) ethylene glycol as a cryoprotectant, then plunged into liquid nitrogen and placed in pucks for transportation to the synchrotron at cryogenic temperature. Diffraction data were collected on beamline 17U at 100K at Shanghai Synchrotron Radiation facility (SSRF). The raw data collected were then indexed, integrated and scaled with HKL-2000 (42). The structure was solved by molecular replacement (MR) with PDB ID 5F4H as a search model with Phaser (43). ARP/wARP was used to build the initial structure (44). Density modification was carried out via DM (45). Coot and Refmac5 were used for manual building and refinement, respectively (46,47). Final structural validation statistics were determined via SFCHECK (48). The statistics of data and structure refinement are detailed in Table 1. Docking Hjm with SisPINA and Hjc From available models in the PDB, the Pyrococcus furiosus Hjm (PDB ID: 2ZJ8) and Archaeoglobus fulgidus Hjc (PDB ID: 2WCW) models were selected, considering their high resolution and model completeness, and subsequently mutated in Coot (46) to reflect the sequence of S. islandicus Hjm (gene id: SiRe_0250) and Hjc (gene id: SiRe_1431), respectively. Molecular docking of SisPINA and mutated Hjm, along with mutated Hjm and mutated Hjc monomer, was carried out with the Zdock server (49). Resultant docked models were analyzed using the Proteins, Interfaces, Structures, and Assemblies (PISA) server (50). All structural figures were generated with PyMOL (http://www.pymol.org/) and the UCSF Chimera packages (51). Amino acid charge calculations for electrostatic surface images were generated by the PDB2PQR server (52,53), using protonation state prediction by PROPKA (54,55) and PARSE force field parameters (56,57). Poisson-Boltzmann (PB) calculations were carried out by the Adaptive Poisson-Boltzmann Solver (APBS) server (58).

### Publication Abstract
PINA is a novel ATPase and DNA helicase highly conserved in Archaea, the third domain of life. The PINA from Sulfolobus islandicus (SisPINA) forms a hexameric ring in crystal and solution. The protein is able to promote Holliday junction (HJ) migration and physically and functionally interacts with Hjc, the HJ specific endonuclease. Here, we show that SisPINA has direct physical interaction with Hjm (Hel308a), a helicase presumably targeting replication forks. In vitro biochemical analysis revealed that Hjm, Hjc, and SisPINA are able to coordinate HJ migration and cleavage in a concerted way. Deletion of the carboxyl 13 amino acid residues impaired the interaction between SisPINA and Hjm. Crystal structure analysis showed that the carboxyl 70 amino acid residues fold into a type II KH domain which, in other proteins, functions in binding RNA or ssDNA. The KH domain not only mediates the interactions of PINA with Hjm and Hjc but also regulates the hexameric assembly of PINA. Our results collectively suggest that SisPINA, Hjm and Hjc work together to function in replication fork regression, HJ formation and HJ cleavage.

### Keywords
Holliday junction, Replication fork, Sulfolobus islandicus, The archaeal atpase pina

### Affiliations
PTM Biolabs Inc.
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbiology and Biotechnology Institute, Shandong University

### Submitter
Rachel  Green

### Lab Head
Dr Yulong Shen
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbiology and Biotechnology Institute, Shandong University


