### Accession
PXD040894

### Title
Exercise Training Remodels Inguinal White Adipose Tissue Through Adaptations in Innervation, Vascularization and the Extracellular Matrix

### Description
Inguinal white adipose tissue (iWAT) is essential for the beneficial effects of exercise   training on metabolic health. The underlying mechanisms for these effects are not fully   understood and here, we test the hypothesis that exercise training results in a more favorable   iWAT structural phenotype. Using biochemical, imaging, and multi-omics analyses we find   that 11-days of wheel running in male mice causes profound iWAT remodeling including   decreased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition, increased vascularization and   innervation. We identify adipose stem cells as one of the main contributors to training-induced ECM remodeling, show that the PRDM16 transcriptional complex is necessary for   iWAT remodeling and beiging, and discover neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) as a link   between PRDM16 and neuritogenesis. Moreover, we find that training causes a shift from   hypertrophic to insulin-sensitive adipocyte subpopulations. Exercise training leads to   remarkable adaptations to iWAT structure and cell-type composition that can confer   beneficial changes in tissue metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation - Secretome Secretome samples were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min, alkylated with 10 mM Iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark and quenched with 10 mM DTT for 15 mins. Protein was TCA-precipitated prior to protease digestion.  The pellet was re-suspended in 200mM EPPS, 8 M Urea (pH 8.0) by vortexing. The samples were digested shaking overnight at room temperature with Lys-C protease (Wako, 129-02541, 2 mg/mL Stock) at a 50:1 protein-to-protease ratio. Trypsin (Pierce, 90305, 1 mg/mL stock) was then added at a 50:1 protein-to-protease ratio, and the reaction was incubated on a shaker for 6 h at 37°C.  The digestion process was quenched with TFA. Acidified digested peptide were desalted over C18 stagetip. Each samples was reconstituted with 200 mM EPPS buffer, pH 8.0 and labelled with a unique TMT reagent. The labeling reactions were performed for 1 hours at room temperature. Excess TMT was quenched by the addition of 5% hydroxyl amine for 15 minutes and the reaction was quenched with 0.5% TFA. Samples were combined, further desalted over stage-tip, dried in a speedvac and reconstituted with 5% Acetonitrile-5% TFA for MS analysis.   Sample Preparation for Mass Spectrometry Samples for protein analysis were prepared essentially as previously described [PMIDs: 29734811, 33900084]. Proteomes were extracted using a buffer containing 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 8M urea, and protease inhibitors. Following lysis, each sample was reduced with 5 mM TCEP. Cysteine residues were alkylated using 10 mM iodoacetimide for 20 minutes at RT in the dark. Excess iodoacetimide was quenched with 10 mM DTT. 100 µg of each proteome was precipitated and re-solubilized in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5. Samples were digested with Lys-C (1:50) overnight at RT and subsequently with trypsin (1:100) for 6 hours at 37°C. Anhydrous acetonitrile was added to each sample to achieve a final concentration of 33% acetonitrile. 50 µg of peptides from each sample were labeled with TMTPro reagents (Thermo-Fisher) for 2hrs at room temperature. Labeling reactions were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine and acidified with formic acid. Acidified peptides were combined and desalted by Sep-Pak (Waters).

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis – Secretome  MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Mouse database with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment bin tolerance of 0.02, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.1629 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion. Proteins with <200 summed signal-to-noise across all channels and <0.5 precursor isolation specificity were excluded from the final dataset. Data Analysis – Proteome MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Mouse database with both the forward and reverse sequences. Database search criteria are as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion tolerance of 1.0005, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMTPro labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (+304.2071 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion. Proteins with <200 summed signal-to-noise across all channels and <0.5 precursor isolation specificity were excluded from the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Inguinal white adipose tissue (iWAT) is essential for the beneficial effects of exercise training on metabolic health. The underlying mechanisms for these effects are not fully understood, and here, we test the hypothesis that exercise training results in a more favorable iWAT structural phenotype. Using biochemical, imaging, and multi-omics analyses, we find that 11&#xa0;days of wheel running in male mice causes profound iWAT remodeling including decreased extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and increased vascularization and innervation. We identify adipose stem cells as one of the main contributors to training-induced ECM remodeling, show that the PRDM16 transcriptional complex is necessary for iWAT remodeling and beiging, and discover neuronal growth regulator 1 (NEGR1) as a link between PRDM16 and neuritogenesis. Moreover, we find that training causes a shift from hypertrophic to insulin-sensitive adipocyte subpopulations. Exercise training leads to remarkable adaptations to iWAT structure and cell-type composition that can confer beneficial changes in tissue metabolism.

### Keywords
Exercise training, Sedentary, Cold exposure

### Affiliations
Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Laurie Goodyear
Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA USA


