### Accession
PXD036467

### Title
Differential histone deacetylase inhibitor-induced perturbations of the global proteomic landscape in the setting of high-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Description
this project carried out a global mass spectrometry analysis in a panel of HGSOC cell lines analyzing proteomic perturbations following HDACi treatment

### Sample Protocol
cell were washed, harvested and lysed with 9M urea lysis buffer. lysed cells were quantified using a BCA assay, then reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA, overnight trypsin digested and acidified to stop digest. Peptide desalting was carried out with C18 SepPak cartridges, desalted peptides were dried and then TMT labeled. TMT labeling was checked for >99% labeling efficiency, and remainder of samples were quenched and pooled. C18 stage tip desalting was then carried out and data acquisition was carried out using an Orbitrap Fusion

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.5.0.400 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched with SEQUEST HT against a Homo sapiens database (SwissProt downloaded May 2021).  Dynamic modifications included  methionine oxidation. Protein terminus dynamic modifications included acetyl, met-loss, met-loss + acetyl. Static modifications included TMTpro (static and peptide N-terminus), and cysteine carbamidomethylation.. The cleavage enzyme was trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed. The fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.6 Da, and the precursor mass tolerance was set to10 ppm.. The results from PD searches were filtered for high protein and peptide FDR confidence (<0.01) . Peptides were also filtered for abundances > 0 across all samples and filtered for 2 peptides per protein.  Peptide abundances were log2 transformed and normalized based on the median value of each treatment condition for each sample. The relative abundance was calculated by dividing the grouped abundances/reference of the treatment condition by the grouped abundance/reference of the DMSO/reference no treatment condition. . Peptides with CVs ≥ 30% across replicates within each condition were removed from the overall dataset. Protein quantitation was obtained by median averaging the peptides and their abundances.

### Publication Abstract
High-grade serous ovarian cancer (HGSOC) is the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in women. Its low survival rate is attributed to late detection, relapse, and drug resistance. The lack of effective second-line therapeutics remains a significant challenge. There is an opportunity to incorporate the use of histone deacetylase inhibitors (HDACi) into HGSOC treatment. However, the mechanism and efficacy of HDACi in the context of BRCA-1/2 mutation status is understudied. Therefore, we set out to elucidate how HDACi perturb the proteomic landscape within HGSOC cells. In this work, we used TMT labeling followed by data-dependent acquisition LC-MS/MS to quantitatively determine differences in the global proteomic landscape across HDACi-treated CAOV3, OVCAR3, and COV318 (BRCA-1/2 wildtype) HGSOC cells. We identified significant differences in the HDACi-induced perturbations of global protein regulation across CAOV3, OVCAR3, and COV318 cells. The HDACi Vorinostat and Romidepsin were identified as being the least and most effective in inhibiting HDAC activity across the three cell lines, respectively. Our results provide a justification for the further investigation of the functional mechanisms associated with the differential efficacy of FDA-approved HDACi within the context of HGSOC. This will enhance the efficacy of targeted HGSOC therapeutic treatment modalities that include HDACi.

### Keywords
Histone deacetylase, Histone deacetylase inhibitor, High-grade serous ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
lab medicine and pathology, university of minnesota
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
Jolene Duda

### Lab Head
Dr Stefani Thomas
lab medicine and pathology, university of minnesota


