### Accession
PXD029359

### Title
Proteomic analyses of human entorhinal cortex in Alzheimer's disease

### Description
This project aims to characterize the proteomic profile of human entorhinal cortex regarding Alzheimer's disease by SWATH-MS technique.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were obtained from tissue samples, and proteins were precipitated with TCA/acetone to remove contaminants and resuspended in 0.2%RapiGest SF (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The total protein concentration was measured with a Qubit fluorimetric protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), and 40μg of protein from each sample were subjected to trypsin digestion and massive protein relative quantitation following a sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) approach, as described in a previous study [46]. Briefly, the protocol and proteomic analysis were provided and carried out at Instituto Maimonides de Investigación Biomédica de Córdoba IMIBIC Proteomic Facility.

### Data Protocol
The peptide solutions were analyzed using a shotgun data-dependent acquisition approach with nano-LC-MS/MS to build the MS/MS spectral libraries. Pooled vials were prepared consisting of equal mixtures of the original samples to obtain a good representation of the peptides and proteins present in all 30 samples. One microgram of the pooled samples (2μl was injected into an Ekspert nLC415 nano-LC system (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75μm×25 cm, 3μm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Water and ACN, both containing 0.1%formic acid, were used as solvents A and B, respectively. The gradient run consisted of 5%to 25%B for 90 min, 10 min at 90%B and 15 min at 5%B for column equilibration.  As the peptides eluted, they were directly injected into a Triple TOF 5600 + hybrid quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA) operated with a ‘top 65’ data-dependent acquisition system in positive ion mode. A NanoSpray III ESI source (Sciex) was used for the interface between nLC and MS, with an application voltage of 2,600 V. The acquisition mode consisted of a 250 ms survey MS scan from 350 to 1,250 m/z followed by an MS/MS scan from 230 to 1,700 m/z (60 ms acquisition time, rolling collision energy) of the top 65 precursor ions from the survey scan for a total cycle time of 4.2 s. The fragmented precursors were then added to a dynamic exclusion list for 15 s; any singly charged ions were excluded from the MS/MS analysis. Additionally, each pooled sample was also run on a gas-phase fractionation basis to increase the number of peptides and proteins identified: six runs with the same LC and MS parameters as described above, but using a ‘top 50’ method consisting of a 250 ms survey MS scan in the m/z ranges 349 to 450, 449 to 550, 549 to 650, 649 to 750, 749 to 900, or 899 to 1200 (one range for each run), followed by an MS/MS scan from 230 to 1,700 m/z (90 ms acquisition time, rolling collision energy) of the top 50 precursor ions from the survey scan.  Peptides and proteins were identified using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with a human Swiss-Prot concatenated target-reverse decoy database (downloaded in July 2019) containing 20,416 target protein sequences, specifying iodoacetamide as Cys alkylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. The MS/MS spectra of the identified peptides were then used to generate the spectral library for SWATH peak extraction using the add-in for PeakView Software (version 2.1, Sciex) MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0, Sciex). Peptides with a confidence score greater than 99%(as obtained from the Protein Pilot database search) were included in the spectral library.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomics, Entorhinal, Alzheimer

### Affiliations
Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha
Neuroplasticity and Neurodegeneration Laboratory, CRIB, Ciudad Real Medical School, University of Castilla-La Mancha, 13071 Ciudad Real, Spain.

### Submitter
Daniel Saiz-Sanchez

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Saiz-Sanchez
Neuroplasticity and Neurodegeneration Laboratory, CRIB, Ciudad Real Medical School, University of Castilla-La Mancha, 13071 Ciudad Real, Spain.


