### Accession
PXD001727

### Title
Use of hide glue in 4th millennium BC Europe

### Description
To test whether hide or fish glue was used to fix  bark decorations to the body of a wood bow (of a different species) found during the archaeological excavation of at the site “Parkhaus-Opéra” in Zurich (Switzerland), dated by dendrochronology to 3175 - 3157 BC, we attempted extraction of collagen residues from wood flakes collected from two areas of the bow surface under the bark and their identification by on-line nanoflow reversed-phase C18 liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Immediately after unearthing the object, small wood flakes from two areas underneath two different bark strips, lifted from the body of the bow just after excavation, were carefully removed using a razor blade. Since the sampled area had been covered by the bark for over 5000 years, chances of contamination before or during sample collection can be considered extremely limited. A negative control prepared following exactly the same procedure adopted for the archaeological samples, except for the initial addition of no ancient material, was processed together with the samples. Each of the two samples, approximately 15 mg, was then transferred in a protein LoBind 1.5mL tube (Eppendorf, Germany). Each sample was processed independently as follows. Each sample was re-suspended in 500µL of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate solution at pH 8.00, it was shaken vigorously for 1min and it was pelleted by centrifugation at 14000g for 5 mins. The supernatant was discarded. This step was performed two times in total. The pellet was re-suspended in 1mL 1.2M HCl and incubated at 4˚C for 24h. It was then pelleted by centrifugation at 14000g for 10mins. The supernatant was collected and dried in a centrifugal evaporator for 20mins at room temperature. The pellet generated after evaporation was re-suspended in 200µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.00. The sample was reduced by incubation for 1h at 60˚C with 5 mM final concentration of dithiothreitol (VWR-BDH, England) dissolved immediately before use. The reduced cysteines were then alkylated by incubating for 45 min in the dark at room temperature with 15 mM final concentration chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, Denmark) dissolved immediately before use. The pH was then checked using pH-indicator strips, adjusted to 8.00 with concentrated ammonium hydroxide and digestion was started adding 4µL of 0.5µg/µL sequencing grade trypsin solution (Promega, Nacka Sweden) and incubating at 37˚C overnight. The following morning, 2µL of fresh trypsin were added and digestion was extended for 6 additional hours. Digestion was quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.2-0.8% to reach pH < 2.00. After centrifugation at 14000g for 10mins, to precipitate any eventual insoluble residue, the tryptic peptides in the supernatant were immobilised on C18 stage tips as previously described. Peptide mixtures were analysed by online nanoflow reversed-phase C18 liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated during spectra acquisition were searched on a workstation using the MaxQuant (MQ) algorithm, v. 1.4.1.2 , and the Andromeda peptide search engine initially against a target/reverse custom-made list of all the mammalian Alpha-1 type I, Alpha-2 type I and Alpha-1 type III collagen sequences publicly available in UniProt and nrNCBI, as well as the complete list of collagen sequences available in NCBI RefSeq after restriction to the Actinopterygii taxon. Subsequently, the raw files were also searched against the target/reverse protein list in reference proteomes or extended proteins lists available in NCBI RefSeq for the following species: Homo sapiens (human, reference proteome -including isoforms- downloaded from UniProtKB on Dec. 31 2012), Bos taurus (caw, reference proteome Oct. 24 2012), Equus caballus (horse, reference proteome downloaded on April 23 2014), Ovis aries (sheep, 22752 accessions, downloaded on Jan. 8, 2013), Capra hircus (goat, 31461 accessions, downloaded on Dec. 2, 2013) and Sus scrofa (pig, 33148 accessions, downloaded on Jan. 26 2013), Oryctolagus cuniculus (rabbit, 21150 accessions, downloaded July 22 2014) and Oncorhynchus mykiss (Rainbow trout, 3839 accessions, downloaded July 22 2014). In every search, spectra were also matched against the common contaminants, such as keratin and porcine trypsin sequences, downloaded from Uniprot. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M and P), deamidation (N and Q), acetylation (K), G→pyro-Glu (N-term Q), and E→pyro-Glu (N-term E) were selected as variable amino-acid modifications. Carbamidomethylation (C) was selected as fixed modification. Default values were used for precursor (6 ppm) and fragment (20 ppm) ions mass tolerance. False-discovery rate was set at 1% and minimum peptide-score and peptide sequence length were set at 70 and 7 respectively. The amount of random matches was evaluated performing MaxQuant search against reversed sequences. For the identification of species-diagnostic peptides, possible environmental contaminants, such as actin, tubulin, keratins and keratin-associated proteins, as well as proteins commonly used in mass spectrometry facilities as standards or calibrants and proteins highly conserved, such as histones, were excluded from further investigation. A minimum of two unique peptides was required for confidently calling proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ancient proteins, Collagen, Neolithic europe, Domestic animals

### Affiliations
Centre for GeoGenetics
Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Enrico Cappellini

### Lab Head
Dr Enrico Cappellini
Centre for GeoGenetics, Natural History Museum of Denmark, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350, Copenhagen, Denmark


