### Accession
PXD021381

### Title
Hybrid QconCAT-based Targeted Absolute and Data-independent Acquisition-based Label-free Quantification Enables In-depth Proteomic Characterization of Wheat ATI Extracts

### Description
In this study, we present a novel hybrid data-independent acquisition LC-MS approach, combining QconCAT technology with short microflow LC gradients and DIA and apply the method towards the quantitative proteome analysis of ATI extracts from wheat flour. The novel method is fast, robust and reproducible and provides accurate QconCAT-based absolute quantification of major ATI proteins while simultaneously quantifying the non-targeted proteome by DIA-based label-free quantification. Using a set of 120 samples of full kernel flour derived from 60 varieties of common wheat grown in replication, we assess the repeatability and accuracy of the workflow for the quantification of ATI at the peptide and protein level. Applying the method to analyze different wheat species (i.e. common wheat, spelt, durum wheat, emmer and einkorn) and comparing the results to published data, we validate inter-laboratory and cross-methodology reproducibility of ATI quantification, which are essential in the context of large-scale breeding projects. Additionally, we apply our workflow to assess environmental effects on ATI expression, analyzing ATI content and proteome of wheat species grown at different locations. Finally, we explore the potential of combining QconCAT-based absolute quantification with DIA-based untargeted proteome analysis and LFQ for the generation of new hypotheses or assay development.

### Sample Protocol
- Generation of globulin/albumin extracts from wheat flours, - Spike-in of isotope-labeled QconCAT containing standard peptides for the quantification of ATI, - In-solution trypsin digestion + C18 desalting, - Microflow LC-MS using 20 min-gradients and data-independent acquisition using MSE.

### Data Protocol
- Raw data processing using ProteinLynx Global Server (PLGS), - Targeted data extraction of isotopically labeled peptides and unlabeled forms, followed by abs. quantification at the MS1 level using Skyline, - Untargeted discovery proteomics analysis, followed by label-free quantification (LFQ) using ISOQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat amylase/trypsin inhibitors (ATIs) have gained significant relevance as inducers of intestinal and extra-intestinal inflammation. In this study, we present a novel hybrid data-independent acquisition (DIA) liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) approach, combining QconCAT technology with short microflow LC gradients and DIA and apply the method toward the quantitative proteome analysis of ATI extracts. The presented method is fast, robust, and reproducible and provides precise QconCAT-based absolute quantification of major ATI proteins while simultaneously quantifying the proteome by label-free quantification (LFQ). We analyzed extracts of 60 varieties of common wheat grown in replication and evaluated the reproducibility and precision of the workflow for the quantification of ATIs. Applying the method to analyze different wheat species (i.e., common wheat, spelt, durum wheat, emmer, and einkorn) and comparing the results to published data, we validated inter-laboratory and cross-methodology reproducibility of ATI quantification, which is essential in the context of large-scale breeding projects. Additionally, we applied our workflow to assess environmental effects on ATI expression, analyzing ATI content and proteome of same varieties grown at different locations. Finally, we explored the potential of combining QconCAT-based absolute quantification with DIA-based LFQ proteome analysis for the generation of new hypotheses or assay development.

### Keywords
Triticum, Microflow lc-ms, Absolute quantification, Ati, Amylase-trypsin inhibitor, Wheat, Dia, Qconcat, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Mainz
Institute for Immunology University Medical Center Mainz Langenbeckstr. 1 55131 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology University Medical Center Mainz Langenbeckstr. 1 55131 Mainz, Germany


