### Accession
PXD010087

### Title
A SWATH LABEL-FREE PROTEOMICS INSIGHT INTO THE FAAH-/- MOUSE LIVER

### Description
Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) is an important enzyme for lipid metabolism and an interesting pharmacological target, given its role in anandamide breakdown. The FAAH-/- genotype is the most widely used mouse model to  achieve complete abolition of this enzyme. In this paper we explore, by means of label-free SWATH proteomics, the changes in protein expression occurring in the liver of FAAH-/- mice. We identified several altered biological  processes and pathways, like fatty acid synthesis and glycolysis, which explain the observed phenotype of this mouse. We also observed the alteration of other proteins, like carboxylesterases and S-methyltransferases,  apparently not immediately related to FAAH, but known to have important biological roles.

### Sample Protocol
Liver samples were weighed and homogenized in 5ml of RIPA buffer containing cocktail of protease inhibitors. An additional brain sample from a WT animal was homogenized and analyzed to build the ion library. Tissue homogenate  was centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 minutes. The supernatant was collected and total protein was quantified using BCA assay. 50ug protein from each sample was used for downstream processing. In-solution digestion of the  homogenized tissues was performed. Briefly: protein content was reduced with 5mM TCEP in water, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide and precipitated overnight using cold acetone (-20 °C). The resulting pellet was then  resuspended in a 50mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH 8)  and digested overnight at 37°C by using a mixture of Lys C and Trypsin (Promega) in 1:50 w/w ratio with protein (protocol recommended by the vendor).

### Data Protocol
To build the qualitative ion library of MS/MS assays needed for SWATH protein quantification [23] a preliminary DDA acquisition step was performed. Tryptic peptides from a mouse liver and a brain were fractionated offline (8  fractions each) with a high pH/low pH strategy [55]. Peptides from each fraction were analyzed on a 5600+ TripleToF instrument (SCIEX) coupled to a NanoAcquity LC system (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and working in nanospray  mode. DDA spectra were collected over a two hours acetonitrile gradient (3 to 45%, flow rate 300 nL/min). A Picofrit 75 m X 250 mm column (New Objective, USA) was used for peptide separation. Peptides with charge states 2+ to  5+ and showing an intensity higher than 150 counts were selected as precursors for MS/MS acquisition. A survey spectrum (400-1250 m/z) was acquired for 250 ms, followed by 40 DDA MS/MS experiments (100-1500 m/z, 100 ms  accumulation time each). The following slope and intercept values were used for the dynamic collision energy calculation (as CE=(slope)*(m/z)+intercept): 0.0625 for all charge states and -3,-5,-6,-6 intercept values from 2+ to  5+ respectively. The same collision energy values were used for both DDA and DIA analyses. DDA Raw data were analyzed with ProteinPilot software (SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm [27]. Spectra were searched against the  reviewed Mus Musculus reference proteome downloaded as FASTA file from Uniprot (Proteome ID: UP000000589) in June 27, 2017, reporting 16966 proteins. Search was performed against both target and decoy databases to calculate a  global 1% FDR. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (CAM) was set as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation was the only allowed variable post translationa modificiation. This search, done using the FDR calculation protocol  described by Tang in 2008 [28] returned 5935 proteins and 72031 distinct peptides at a FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) is an important enzyme for lipid metabolism and an interesting pharmacological target, given its role in anandamide breakdown. The FAAH<sup>-/-</sup> genotype is the most widely used mouse model to investigate the effects of a complete pharmacological inhibition of this enzyme. In this paper, we explore, by means of label-free SWATH proteomics, the changes in protein expression occurring in the liver of FAAH<sup>-/-</sup> knockout (KO) mice. We identified several altered biological processes and pathways, like fatty acid synthesis and glycolysis, which explain the observed phenotype of this mouse. We also observed the alteration of other proteins, like carboxylesterases and S-methyltransferases, apparently not immediately related to FAAH, but known to have important biological roles. Our study, reporting more than 3000 quantified proteins, offers an in-depth analysis of the liver proteome of this model.

### Keywords
Faah, Liver proteomics, Swath

### Affiliations
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Fondazione Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia

### Submitter
Andrea Armirotti

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Armirotti
Analytical Chemistry Lab, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia


