### Accession
PXD017350

### Title
Changes in bovine Lymphocyte proteome after stimulation with pokeweed mitogen

### Description
A new vaccine against bovine viral diarrhea (BVD) induced unwanted immune reactions with production of alloreactive antibodies in 5–10% of vaccinated cows. Transfer of these antibodies via colostrum caused bovine neonatal pancytopenia (BNP) in calves, with a lethality rate of 90%. The exact immunological mechanisms behind the onset of BNP are not fully understood to date, however, an immune deviant phenotype of immune cells is assumed. To gain deeper insight into disease onset and pathogenesis, we analyzed the lymphocyte (PBL) proteome from alloreactive antibody producers (BNP cows) and non-responders (controls) after stimulation with PWM.

### Sample Protocol
We isolated primary PBL from bovine venous whole blood through density gradient centrifugation. PBL from each group (2 controls, 2 BNP cows) were divided into two aliquots of 2.2 x 10^7 cells (in PBS). Per sample, one aliquot was stimulated with PWM (5µg/ml) for 48h at 37°C and 5% CO2. The second aliquot was used as untreated control. After stimulation, cells underwent fractionation for proteome analysis. Fractionation was carried out as previously described (Grosche et al, MCP, 2016, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183). Briefly, cells were washed and surface proteins were labeled with biotin. After lysis, cells were scraped and cytosolic and nuclear proteins were separated through differential centrifugation while surface proteins were pulled down with Strep-Tactin Superflow Beads (IBA, Göttingen, Germany). Protein concentration of the different fractions (except surface proteins) was measured with Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany). Secreted, nuclear, and cytoplasmic proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin with a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure as previously described (Grosche et al, MCP, 2016, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183; Wisniewski et al. 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.ab.2010.12.004). Biotinylated and affinity enriched surface proteins were digested with trypsin and PNGaseF directly on the streptavidin beads (Grosche et al, MCP, 2016, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183). LC–MSMS mass spectrometry was performed as previously described (Grosche et al, MCP, 2016, doi: 10.1074/mcp.M115.052183). Briefly, the digested peptides were loaded automatically to a HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano trap column (100 μm ID x 2 cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18, 5μm, 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in 95% buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in HPLC-grade water) and 5% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC-grade water) at 30µl/min. After 5 min, the peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (75µm IDx15cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18, 3µm 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) by a gradient of 5% to 50 % of buffer B at 300 nl/min flow over 140 min followed by a 5 min gradient from 50% to 100% buffer B. The eluting peptides were analyzed online in a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the HPLC system with a nano spray ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 200 to 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with high-resolution (60000 full-width half maximum).  The method used allowed sequential isolation of the most intense ions (up to ten), depending on signal intensity, for fragmentation on the linear ion trap using collisional induced dissociation at a target value of 35. Target peptides already selected for MS MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were imported into Progenesis software (version 2.5) separately for each subcellular fraction. After feature alignment and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and searched against the bovine Ensembl database (version 70, 22,118 sequences) with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.4.1) with the following search parameters: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation, and asparagine or glutamine deamidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of <1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p. Peptide assignments were re-imported into the Progenesis QI software and the analyses of the subcellular fractions were combined into a multifraction experiment. The abundances of all unique peptides allocated to each protein were summed up. The resulting normalized abundances of the individual proteins were used for calculation of protein ratios between PWM stimulated cells and untreated controls for BNP and control samples separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pokeweed mitogen; polyclonal cell stimulation; immune reaction, Cow

### Affiliations
LMU Munich, Veterinary Sciences, Chair of Physiology, Lena-Christ-Straße 48, 82152 Planegg/Martinsried,  Germany
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich

### Submitter
Roxane Degroote

### Lab Head
Dr Cornelia Annette Deeg
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich


