### Accession
PXD035324

### Title
The antigenic landscape of multiple myeloma: mass spectrometry (re)defines targets for T-cell–based immunotherapy

### Description
Direct analysis of HLA-presented antigens by mass spectrometry provides a comprehensive view on the antigenic landscape of different tissues/malignancies and enables the identification of novel, pathophysiologically relevant T-cell epitopes. Here, we present a systematic and comparative study of the HLA class I and II presented, nonmutant antigenome of multiple myeloma (MM). Quantification of HLA surface expression revealed elevated HLA molecule counts on malignant plasma cells compared with normal B cells, excluding relevant HLA downregulation in MM. Analyzing the presentation of established myeloma-associated T-cell antigens on the HLA ligandome level, we found a substantial proportion of antigens to be only infrequently presented on primary myelomas or to display suboptimal degrees of myeloma specificity. However, unsupervised analysis of our extensive HLA ligand data set delineated a panel of 58 highly specific myeloma-associated antigens (including multiple myeloma SET domain containing protein) which are characterized by frequent and exclusive presentation on myeloma samples. Functional characterization of these target antigens revealed peptide-specific, preexisting CD8+ T-cell responses exclusively in myeloma patients, which is indicative of pathophysiological relevance. Furthermore, in vitro priming experiments revealed that peptide-specific T-cell responses can be induced in response-naive myeloma patients. Together, our results serve to guide antigen selection for T-cell–based immunotherapy of MM.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and II molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification as described (DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-218-6_12) using the pan-HLA class I–specific mAb W6/32, the pan-HLA class II–specific mAb Tü39, and the HLA-DR–specific mAb L243 (produced in-house). HLA ligand extracts were analyzed in 5 technical replicates as described previously (DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1416389112). In brief, peptide samples were separated by nanoflow high-performance liquid chromatography (RSLCnano; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 50 μm × 25 cm PepMap rapid separation liquid chromatography column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a gradient ranging from 2.4% to 32.0% acetonitrile over the course of 90 minutes. Eluting peptides were analyzed in an online-coupled LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a top 5 collision-induced dissociation fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed as described previously(DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1416389112). In brief, the Mascot search engine (Mascot 2.2.04; Matrix Science) was implemented to search the human proteome as comprised in the Swiss-Prot database (20 279 reviewed protein sequences, September 2013) without enzymatic restriction. Potential mutated HLA ligands were searched implementing a database containing the human proteome concatenated with proteins containing single amino acid variants listed in the COSMIC database (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic/). Only recurrent single amino acid variants described in 2 or more samples of hematologic origin were included. Oxidized methionine was allowed as a dynamic modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the Percolator algorithm (DOI: 10.1038/nmeth1113) and set to 5%. Peptide lengths were limited to 8 to 12 aa for HLA class I and 12 to 25 aa for HLA class II. Protein inference was disabled, allowing for multiple protein annotations of peptides. HLA annotation was performed using SYFPEITHI or an extended in-house database. Experimental validation of peptide identifications and HLA annotations was performed by mass spectrometric and functional characterization of synthetic peptides for a subset of peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Direct analysis of HLA-presented antigens by mass spectrometry provides a comprehensive view on the antigenic landscape of different tissues/malignancies and enables the identification of novel, pathophysiologically relevant T-cell epitopes. Here, we present a systematic and comparative study of the HLA class I and II presented, nonmutant antigenome of multiple myeloma (MM). Quantification of HLA surface expression revealed elevated HLA molecule counts on malignant plasma cells compared with normal B cells, excluding relevant HLA downregulation in MM. Analyzing the presentation of established myeloma-associated T-cell antigens on the HLA ligandome level, we found a substantial proportion of antigens to be only infrequently presented on primary myelomas or to display suboptimal degrees of myeloma specificity. However, unsupervised analysis of our extensive HLA ligand data set delineated a panel of 58 highly specific myeloma-associated antigens (including multiple myeloma SET domain containing protein) which are characterized by frequent and exclusive presentation on myeloma samples. Functional characterization of these target antigens revealed peptide-specific, preexisting CD8(+) T-cell responses exclusively in myeloma patients, which is indicative of pathophysiological relevance. Furthermore, in vitro priming experiments revealed that peptide-specific T-cell responses can be induced in response-naive myeloma patients. Together, our results serve to guide antigen selection for T-cell-based immunotherapy of MM.

### Keywords
Antigens, T-lymphocytes, Peptides, Immunotherapy, Human leukocyte antigens, Multiple myeloma, Ligands, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany
Clinical Collaboration Unit Translational Immunology, German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Department of Internal Medicine, University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Jens Bauer

### Lab Head
Dr Juliane Walz
Department of Peptide-based Immunotherapy, University and University Hospital Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany


