### Accession
PXD039495

### Title
Dynamic landscape of histone H3 modifications during SSC differentiation by PRM

### Description
To elucidate the specific histone modification alterations that occur during SSC differentiation, we collected cells from three differentiation stages for targeted histone modification identification by PRM.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted histone was derivatized via propionylation and digested with trypsin. Each sample was combined with the isotope-labeled peptides and injected into an easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 95 min gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 5 sec, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34 min 50 sec, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 38% to 100% buffer B for 5 sec, and 100% buffer B for 8 min). Analysis was performed using a scheduled method on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with the following settings: higher-energy collisional at 30 eV. AGC target at 5.0E4, scan range (m/z) at 150–2,000.

### Data Protocol
PRM data were processed using the Skyline Daily software. At least four transitions per precursor were used to quantify the targeted peptides in the samples. The quantification of modifications was calculated as the ratio of the endogenous to the heavy peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic regulation, particularly post-translational modifications (PTMs) of histones, participates in spermatogonial stem cell (SSCs) differentiation. However, there is a lack of systemic studies of histone PTM regulation during the differentiation of SSCs due to its low number in vivo. Herein, we quantified dynamic changes of 46 different PTMs on histone H3.1 by targeted quantitative proteomics using mass spectrometry during SSCs differentiation in vitro, in combination with our RNA-seq data. We identified seven histone H3.1 modifications to be differentially regulated. In addition, we selected H3K9me2 and H3S10ph for subsequent biotinylated peptide pull-down experiments and identified 38 H3K9me2-binding proteins and 42 H3S10ph-binding proteins, which contain several transcription factors, such as GTF2E2 and SUPT5H, which appear to be crucial for epigenetic regulation of SSC differentiation.

### Keywords
Ssc, Prm, Quantification，histone h3 modifications

### Affiliations
nanjing medical university
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University

### Submitter
xiangzheng zhang

### Lab Head
Dr xuejiang guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University


