### Accession
PXD028949

### Title
Machine learning for grading and prognosis of esophageal dysplasia using mass spectrometry and histological imaging

### Description
Background: Barrett’s esophagus (BE) is a precursor lesion of esophageal adenocarcinoma and may progress from non-dysplastic through low-grade dysplasia (LGD) to high-grade dysplasia (HGD) and cancer. Grading BE is of crucial prognostic value and is currently based on the subjective evaluation of biopsies. This study aims to investigate the potential of machine learning (ML) using spatially resolved molecular data from mass spectrometry imaging (MSI) and histological data from microscopic haematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained imaging for computer-aided diagnosis and prognosis of BE. Methods: Biopsies from 57 patients were considered, divided into non-dysplastic (n=15), LGD non-progressive (n=14), LGD progressive (n=14), and HGD (n=14). MSI experiments were conducted at 50x50 μm spatial resolution per pixel corresponding to a tile size of 96x96 pixels in the co-registered H&E images, making a total of 144,823 tiles for the whole dataset. Results: ML models were trained to distinguish epithelial tissue from stroma with area-under-the-curve (AUC) values of 0.89 (MSI) and 0.95 (H&E)) and dysplastic grade (AUC of 0.97 (MSI) and 0.85 (H&E)) on a tile level, and low-grade progressors from non-progressors on a patient level (accuracies of 0.72 (MSI) and 0.48 (H&E)). Conclusions: In summary, while the H&E-based classifier was best at distinguishing tissue types, the MSI-based model was more accurate at distinguishing dysplastic grades and patients at progression risk, which demonstrates the complementarity of both approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Patient material Formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) esophagus tissue biopsies were retrieved from the archives of the Department of Pathology of the Amsterdam UMC, location Meibergdreef. A total of 57 biopsy samples from 57 patients were collected and covered the complete spectrum of BE, ranging from NDBE (n=15) to LGD (n= 28) and HGD (n=14). Based on the patients' follow-up LGD samples were sub-classified into LGD non-progressors (n=14, no progression to HGD or EAC within a period of two years) and LGD progressors (n=14, developed HGD or EAC within 2 years). All samples were anonymized for further use and did not require approval from the relevant Institutional Ethics Committee under applicable local regulatory law (‘Code of conduct’, FEDERA).  Mass spectrometry imaging experiments For this unique dataset, FFPE esophagus tissue samples were cut at 5 μm thickness and randomly distributed on a total of 19 indium tin oxide-coated conductive glass slides (Delta Technologies). For MSI peptide measurements, samples were prepared as previously described by Vos et al. in [9]. Briefly, samples were deparaffinised with xylene, exposed to antigen-retrieval and on-tissue tryptic digest using the Antigen Retriever 2100 (Aptum Biologics, UK) and a SunCollect pneumatic sprayer (SunChrom GmbH, Germany), respectively. After a 17h long incubation, alphacyano- 4-hydroxycinnamic acid was applied using the same SunCollect sprayer. Before MSI, optical images of the glass slides were taken with a high-quality film scanner (Nikon LS-5000) with a true optical resolution of 4000 dpi (i.e. one pixel is 6.35 μm) in order to define the measurement region. This image therefore acts as anchor image and is later also used to co-register high-resolution H&E images to the MSI data. MSI experiments were performed at 50 μm lateral pixel size (40x40 μm laser beam scan range) on a rapifleX MALDI-ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) in reflectron and positive-ion mode within an m/z range of 800–3000. The instrument was calibrated beforehand using Red Phosphorus. Line scan sequence was non-random (i.e. spectra are acquired sequentially from upper left to lower right). Random walk within one pixel was deactivated and 700 spectra were averaged per pixel with a MALDI laser repetition rate of 10 kHz. All individual spectra underwent on-the-fly smoothing (Savitzky-Golay 5%) and baseline subtraction (TopHat). Digitization rate was 1.25 Gs/sec resulting in 55,000 data points per spectrum (i.e. per MSI pixel), which was reduced to 80% of its original size in FlexImaging (Bruker Daltonics). MSI datasets contained on average 4,500 MSI pixels (min=1,370; max=11,647) and were exported separately as imzML files from FlexImaging.  Hematoxylin and Eosin staining The same tissue sections analysed by MSI were concurrently stained with H&E to minimize possible staining differences. For this, the matrix was first washed-off from the slides using 70% ethanol for 2–3 minutes, followed by a 3-minute wash with Milli Q water. Slides were stained with hematoxylin (3 minutes), washed for 3 minutes with tap water to remove excess hematoxylin, then stained with eosin (30 seconds), washed again with tap water for 3 minutes to remove excess eosin, followed by a 1- minute ethanol wash and a 30 seconds xylene wash before attaching coverslips to the slides using Entellan as a mounting medium. The stained slides were scanned with a digital slide scanner at 20x magnification (Mirax Desk, Carl Zeiss MicroImaging, Göttingen, Germany). Tissue scans were exported using Pannoramic Viewer (3DHistech, Hungary) in JPG file format (at 90% quality compression and at original resolution), resulting in pixel sizes of 0.52x0.52 μm2. The images were superposed to the MALDI-MSI data in FlexImaging using a 3-control-point coregistration of previously applied fiducial markers. Stained tissue sections were annotated by an expert pathologist according to the tissue type (epithelial/stroma) and BE grade (File: “Patients_and_files.xlsx”).

### Data Protocol
MSI data pre-processing A recalibration was performed in Flex Analysis v3.4 using the lock masses m/z 842.510 and 1045.564 with a peak assignment tolerance of 500 ppm and m/z 1303.615, 1508.750, 1833.954, 1835.957, 2104.190, 2105.190, 2106.190 with a tolerance of 250 ppm. All recalibrated MSI data, coregistered H&E images, and annotations were imported to SCiLS Lab (Bruker Daltonik) where each spectrum was normalized to its total- ion-count (TIC). From SCiLS Lab, the overall spectra from on- and off-tissue regions were exported to mMass (http:// www.mmass.org/) for peak picking using the following parameters: (1) Baseline correction precision=40; (2) Peak-picking: S/N 5.0; Picking height=90; (3) Deisotoping: maximum charge=1, isotope mass tolerance m/z=0.15, isotope intensity tolerance=70%, isotope mass shift=0.0. The peak picking lists from on- and off-tissue were subsequently compared with a tolerance of 0.2 Da and common peaks were removed from the on-tissue peak list after visual inspection and confirmation (File: “On-tissue_peaklist.txt”). This final peak list was then imported, together with the imzML files and the histological images of every patient, in Python 3.7.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Deep learning, Barrett’s esophagus, Mass spectrometry imaging, Machine learning, H&e staining

### Affiliations
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging institute (M4i), Maastricht University, The Netherlands
Maastricht University

### Submitter
Benjamin Balluff

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Balluff
Maastricht MultiModal Molecular Imaging institute (M4i), Maastricht University, The Netherlands


