### Accession
PXD008205

### Title
Contractile work contributes to maturation of energy metabolism in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes

### Description
Energy metabolism is a key aspect of cardiomyocyte biology. Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CM) are a promising tool for biomedical application, but they are immature and have not undergone metabolic shift related to early postnatal development. Cultivation of hiPSC-CM in 3D engineered heart tissue (EHT) format leads to morphological maturation. This study compared the mitochondrial and metabolic state of hiPSC-CM in standard 2D culture and the EHT format and determined the influence of contractile activity. HiPSC-CM in EHTs showed ~2-fold higher number of mitochondria (electron microscopy), mitochondrial mass (mitotracker), DNA (Mt-ND1, Mt-ND2), and protein abundance (proteome) than in 2D culture. While hiPSC-CM exhibited the principal ability to use glucose, lactate and fatty acids as energy substrates irrespective of culture format, hiPSC-CM in 3D performed more oxidation of glucose, lactate and fatty acid, and less anaerobic glycolysis. The increase in mitochondrial mass and DNA in 3D was diminished by pharmacological inhibition of contractile force, suggesting that contractile work participates in mitochondrial development hiPSC-CM. In conclusion, contractile work in the EHT format contributes to metabolic maturation of hiPSC-CM.

### Sample Protocol
HiPSC-CM were cultured in either 2D (2x106 cells/6-well; coating: 0.1% gelatin, 1 h) or 3D (0.8x106 cells/EHT) for 21 days in parallel. Finally, cells were washed twice with PBS and digested with collagenase II (in HBSS, 200 U/ml; Worthington) for 4-5 h, reaction was stopped with fetal calf serum, centrifugated at 100 g for 15 min and washed twice with PBS. Cells of one 6-well or cells of 2 EHTs were snap frozen in 100 μl M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent plus phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Thermo Scientific). Frozen human heart samples were cut into pieces and lysed in an ice-cold buffer containing sucrose 300 mM, HEPES-NaOH 250 mM, EDTA 1 mM, pH 8, plus EDTA-free protease inhibitor (Roche). The tissue was homogenized using a tissue disruptor (Precellys 24, setting 6500-2x20-020) at 4°C and the samples were incubated for 15 min on ice. Insoluble cell debris was pelleted (14,000 rcf for 20 min) and the resulting supernatant was used for analysis. Protein concentrations in all sample groups were measured with a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce). 100 μg of each sample lysate was used for acetone precipitation of proteins by adding the 8x volume of acetone (-20 °C, overnight). The next day, precipitated proteins were pelleted (high speed spin, 12 °C, 10 min). The acetone was removed and the dry protein pellet was dissolved in guanidine hydrochloride (8 M, solution ready to use, Sigma G9284). The protein pellet was subjected to an in-solution-digestion. Briefly, the mixture was reduced using dithiothreitol (10 mM, DDT, Sigma 43815) in 25 mM TEA-Bic solution (25 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, Sigma T7408) for 1 h at 60°C. Samples were subjected to alkylation (30 mM iodoacetamide, Sigma I1149) in 25 mM TEA-Bic solution for 1 h at 37 °C in the dark. The reaction was quenched with DTT (10 mM, Sigma 43815). Afterwards, the samples were diluted with 25 mM TEA-Bic solution to a concentration of guanidine hydrochloride <1 M. The samples were digested over night at 37°C in digestion buffer containing Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin (1 μg/μl, protein:enzyme ratio of approximately 20:1; Promega v5111). The next day, the tryptic peptides were acidified with 100% of formic acid to pH < 3. The samples were desalted and concentrated with ZipTip Pipette Tips (Millipore, ZTC18S096) filled with a C-18 column as described in the manufacturer’s instructions. The collected eluents were vacuum-dried by SpeedVac and resolubilized in 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
MS2 spectra were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Briefly, the data was searched against the Swiss Prot (Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics) database, taxonomy “Homo sapiens [human]” using the Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine with precursor mass tolerance at 20 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance at 0.8 Da, trypsin enzyme with 2 miscleavages with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification and deamidation of glutamine and asparagine, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. The resulting data file was loaded into the Scaffold software (version scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) to filter and quantify the peptides and proteins. For protein identification, filters were set to a 90% protein probability threshold and a 90% peptide probability threshold, which resulted in a final decoy FDR of less than 0.1%. For protein identification, at least 2 peptides per protein had to be recognized. Data analysis and clustering was performed in the Scaffold software. In general, relative quantification was done in a label-free approach by the setting Quantitative Value (Normalized Total Spectra). For comparison, the total number of spectral counts identified for each proteins were visualized and compared to the counterpart. For statistical analysis only proteins identified in 3/3 samples were used for comparative analysis. For a quantitative analysis of specifically unique peptides to precisely distinguish between protein isoforms, the measured peak areas from Proteome Discoverer were analyzed using Scaffold and the Multiplex Quantitation method. Protein FDR was set to 1.0% and Peptide FDR to 0.1% with a minimum of 2 peptides. Quantitative analysis was performed by adjusting the reference group to the 2D samples. To display the comparison the setting was adjusted to fold change ratio. No minimal fold change threshold was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Energy metabolism is a key aspect of cardiomyocyte biology. Human induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes (hiPSC-CMs) are a promising tool for biomedical application, but they are immature and have not undergone metabolic maturation related to early postnatal development. To assess whether cultivation of hiPSC-CMs in 3D engineered heart tissue format leads to maturation of energy metabolism, we analyzed the mitochondrial and metabolic state of 3D hiPSC-CMs and compared it with 2D culture. 3D hiPSC-CMs showed increased mitochondrial mass, DNA content, and protein abundance (proteome). While hiPSC-CMs exhibited the principal ability to use glucose, lactate, and fatty acids as energy substrates irrespective of culture format, hiPSC-CMs in 3D performed more oxidation of glucose, lactate, and fatty acid and less anaerobic glycolysis. The increase in mitochondrial mass and DNA in 3D was diminished by pharmacological reduction of contractile force. In conclusion, contractile work contributes to metabolic maturation of hiPSC-CMs.

### Keywords
Human, Ipsc, Engineered heart tissue, Cardiomyocyte

### Affiliations
Karolinska Institutet
Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, Cardiovascular Research Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrea Stoehr

### Lab Head
Dr Arne Hansen
Department of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology, Cardiovascular Research Center, University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany


