### Accession
PXD033359

### Title
Human prostate cancer cell TUBB4A LC-MS

### Description
Human tubulin beta class IVa (TUBB4A) is a member of the β-tubulin family. In most normal tissues, expression of TUBB4A is little to none, but it is highly expressed in human prostate cancer. Here we show that high expression levels of TUBB4A are associated with aggressive prostate cancers and poor patient survival, especially for African-American men. Additionally, in prostate cancer cells, TUBB4A knockout (KO) reduces cell growth and migration but induces DNA damage through increased γH2AX and 53BP1. Furthermore, during constricted cell migration, TUBB4A interacts with MYH9 to protect the nucleus, but either TUBB4A KO or MYH9 knockdown leads to severe DNA damage and reduces the NF-κB signaling response. Also, TUBB4A KO retards tumor growth and metastasis. Functional analysis reveals that TUBB4A/GSK3β binds the N-terminal of MYH9, and TUBB4A KO reduces MYH9-mediated GSK3β ubiquitination and degradation, leading to increased activation of GSK3β/β-catenin signaling and to the epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Likewise, prostate-specific deletion of Tubb4a reduces spontaneous tumor growth and metastasis via inhibition of NF-κB, cyclin D1, and c-MYC signaling activation. Our results suggest an oncogenic role of TUBB4A and provide a potentially new actionable therapeutic target for prostate cancers with TUBB4A overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
The samples immunoprecipitated with TUBB4A antibody (ab222822, 1:200) and input control samples were used for agarose gel electrophoresis. Afterwards, the gel was put into 500 mL Coomassie Blue solution and shaken for 20 hours at 37℃. The Coomassie-stained and excised bands were de-stained in a solution containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile and were equally divided for overnight. Dithiothreitol (25 mM) was used to reduce the disulfide bonds at 50°C for 30 min, and then alkylation of free thiols with iodoacetamide (55 mM) was accomplished in the dark for 30 min at 37℃. The gel pieces were evaporated to dryness after removal of excess alkylating agents, placed in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and further digested overnight with trypsin. The peptides were then extracted and evaporated to dryness. For mass spectrometry analysis, the samples were suspended on 0.1% formic acid in ddH2O. An aliquot (5 µL) of each digest was loaded onto a Nano cHiPLC (Eksigent, USA) at the speed of 2 µL/min using an Eksigent 415 LC system autosampler. After the cartridge was washed for 10 min, the bound peptides were rinsed onto a Nano cHiPLC column for 35 min at 1000 nL/min. The column was washed for 5 min and re-balanced for an additional 10 min. A SCIEX 5600 Triple-Tof mass spectrometer (Sciex, Canada) with ion spray voltage of 2300v and declustering potential of 80v was used to analyze the protein digestion products, and ion spray and curtain gases were set separately at 10 psi and 25 psi. Time-of-flight survey scan with m/z value from 400 to 1250 implemented eluted peptides test to detect the most intense 20 ion during processing. To obtain the tandem mass spectra, product ion time-of-flight scans of 50 ms were accomplished, and spectra were then de-isotoped and centroided by Analyst software. A β-galactosidase trypsin digest was performed to find and verify the precision.

### Data Protocol
Tandem MS data processing provides protein identifications using a Protein Pilot 4.5 search engine and a trypsin/chymotrypsin co-digestion parameter. Significant proteins were selected on the criteria of having at least two peptides detected with a confidence score of at least 95% using the Paradigm method.

### Publication Abstract
Human tubulin beta class IVa (TUBB4A) is a member of the &#x3b2;-tubulin family. In most normal tissues, expression of TUBB4A is little to none, but it is highly expressed in human prostate cancer. Here we show that high expression levels of TUBB4A are associated with aggressive prostate cancers and poor patient survival, especially for African-American men. Additionally, in prostate cancer cells, TUBB4A knockout (KO) reduces cell growth and migration but induces DNA damage through increased &#x3b3;H2AX and 53BP1. Furthermore, during constricted cell migration, TUBB4A interacts with MYH9 to protect the nucleus, but either TUBB4A KO or MYH9 knockdown leads to severe DNA damage and reduces the NF-&#x3ba;B signaling response. Also, TUBB4A KO retards tumor growth and metastasis. Functional analysis reveals that TUBB4A/GSK3&#x3b2; binds to the N-terminal of MYH9, and that TUBB4A KO reduces MYH9-mediated GSK3&#x3b2; ubiquitination and degradation, leading to decreased activation of &#x3b2;-catenin signaling and its relevant epithelial-mesenchymal transition. Likewise, prostate-specific deletion of Tubb4a reduces spontaneous tumor growth and metastasis via inhibition of NF-&#x3ba;B, cyclin D1, and c-MYC signaling activation. Our results suggest an oncogenic role of TUBB4A and provide a potentially actionable therapeutic target for prostate cancers with TUBB4A overexpression.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Tubb4a, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
University of Alabama at Birmingham

### Submitter
Lizhong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Lizhong Wang
University of Alabama at Birmingham


