### Accession
PXD015582

### Title
Methyltransferase METTL5 interactome

### Description
Cellular RNAs are covalently modified and these modifications can impact on all biological processes and hence are implicated in different types of diseases. Amongst RNA modifications, N6-methyladenosine (m6A) is one of the most widespread and has been found on messenger (mRNA), ribosomal (rRNA), non-coding and spliceosomal RNAs.  We undertook a systematic screen to uncover new RNA-methyltransferases. We demonstrate that the methyltransferase-like 5 protein (METTL5) is an 18S rRNA specific methyltransferase and interacts specifically with Trmt122.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa-FRT cells inducibly expressing GFP-METTL constructs were cultured in high glucose DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin−streptomycin (Life Technologies, Inc.). Cells, at a confluency of 80%, were treated with doxycycline at a final concentration of 1 μg/ml dox for 16h to induce expression of the GFP fusion proteins. Cells were then harvested, extensively washed with PBS and lysed by adding 5 cell pellet volumes of lysis buffer (1% NP40, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% Glycerol, 0.5 mM DTT and 1 × Complete Protease Inhibitors (Roche)). Cells were vortexed for 30 s and then incubated for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotation wheel. Samples were then transferred to 2ml Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 21000 x g for 15 min, after which soluble whole cell extracts (WCEs) were aliquoted and snap frozen until further usage. The protein concentration of the lysates was determined using the Bradford assay. For each label free affinity purification, 3 mg of WCE was incubated with 7,5 ul GFP nanobody sepharose beads (Chromotek) in a total volume of 600μl RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCL, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5 mM DTT and 1X Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail) supplemented with 50 μg/ml ethidium bromide for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotation wheel. Pull-downs from GFP-METTL and WT cells were performed in triplicate from one batch of extract to facilitate ANOVA based statistics. After incubation, beads were washed twice with 1 ml of RIPA buffer containing 300mM NaCl, twice with 1 ml PBS with 1% NP40 and finally three times with 1 ml PBS. After the last wash, all liquid was carefully removed from the beads using a 30 G syringe. GFP-METTL and WT control samples were prepared on the same day and analysed by LC-MS/MS sequentially. Affinity purifications with nuclear extracts were done essentially as described. Purified proteins on beads were denatured and eluted in elution buffer (2 M Urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5 and 10 mM DTT) for 20 min at RT in a shaking incubator (1000 rpm). Iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM, and samples were then incubated in the dark for 10 min with shaking at 1000 rpm. 0.35 μg of trypsin (Promega) was then added and samples were digested overnight at RT. Digested peptides were acidified with 10% TFA and then desalted and stored on C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometry analyses. Samples were measured on an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo) connected online to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Fusion mass spectrometer from Thermo, using a 114 min gradient of acetonitrile (7-32%) followed by brief washes at 50% and then 90% acetonitrile, for 140 min of total data collection. Scans were recorded in data-dependent top-speed mode (HCD fragmentation) of a 3-s cycle with dynamic exclusion set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched against the curated UniProt human proteome database (release December 2015) with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 and its integrated search engine Andromeda. Cysteine carbamidomethyl was used as a fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were used as variable modifications. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm, and mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. Additional options Match between runs, LFQ and iBAQ were also selected. The generated “proteingroups.txt” table was filtered for contaminants, reverse hits, number of unique peptides (>0) in Perseus 1.5.0.15 (from MaxQuant package). For interactor identification, the logarithm (log2) of the LFQ values were taken, resulting in a Gaussian distribution of the data. This allowed imputation of missing values by normal distribution (width=0.3, shift=1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit. Statistical outliers for the GFP pull-down of the METTLgfpHeLa compared to HeLa WT were then determined using two-tailed t-test. Multiple testing correction was applied by using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) method in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Covalent chemical modifications of cellular RNAs directly impact all biological processes. However, our mechanistic understanding of the enzymes catalyzing these modifications, their substrates and biological functions, remains vague. Amongst RNA modifications N<sup>6</sup>-methyladenosine (m<sup>6</sup>A) is widespread and found in messenger (mRNA), ribosomal (rRNA), and noncoding RNAs. Here, we undertook a systematic screen to uncover new RNA methyltransferases. We demonstrate that the methyltransferase-like 5 (METTL5) protein catalyzes m<sup>6</sup>A in <i>18S</i> rRNA at position A<sub>1832</sub> We report that absence of <i>Mettl5</i> in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) results in a decrease in global translation rate, spontaneous loss of pluripotency, and compromised differentiation potential. METTL5-deficient mice are born at non-Mendelian rates and develop morphological and behavioral abnormalities. Importantly, mice lacking METTL5 recapitulate symptoms of patients with DNA variants in <i>METTL5</i>, thereby providing a new mouse disease model. Overall, our biochemical, molecular, and in vivo characterization highlights the importance of m<sup>6</sup>A in rRNA in stemness, differentiation, development, and diseases.

### Keywords
Hela, Interactome, Rna methyltranferase

### Affiliations
Radboud University
Institute of Functional Epigenetics Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH) Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Pascal Jansen

### Lab Head
Dr Robert Schneider
Institute of Functional Epigenetics Helmholtz Zentrum Muenchen Deutsches Forschungszentrum fuer Gesundheit und Umwelt (GmbH) Ingolstaedter Landstr. 1 85764 Neuherberg, Germany


