### Accession
PXD025986

### Title
Human PDR Vitreous Variability Study, TMT-MS

### Description
Control (n=27) and proliferative diabetic retinopathy (n=23) vitreous samples were treated as biologically distinct individuals or pooled together and aliquoted into technical replicates. Quantitative mass spectrometry with tandem mass tag labeling was used to identify proteins in individual or pooled control samples to determine technical and biological variability. To determine effect size and perform power analysis, control and proliferative diabetic retinopathy samples were analyzed across four 10plexes. Pooled samples were used to normalize the data across plexes and generate a single data matrix for downstream analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were obtained from human patients in the operating room during clinically indicated pars plana vitrectomy. Prior to MS analysis, vitreous samples were thawed on ice and spun at 17,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was transferred to new tube. Each sample was run on SDS-PAGE to assess its integrity. Hemoglobin and bilirubin concentrations were measured via assays (AbCam, Cambridge, United Kingdom) in all PDR samples to assess whether these factors contributed to the variably tinted gross appearance of a subgroup of sample. Total protein concentration was measured via DC Protein Assay Reagents (5000116, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) before and after abundant protein depletion. Samples for protein assay were prepared as following: 2.5 μL protein sample, 0.5 μL 10x RIPA buffer (9806, Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA), and 2 μL H2O were mixed and incubated on ice for 30 min. Abundant proteins were depleted using a PierceTM Top 12 protein depletion spin column (85165, Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA) to avoid masking proteins present in lower amounts; 250 µg of protein were loaded onto the column and incubated with gentle end-over-end mixing for 2 h at RT. Filtrate and wash fractions were combined and concentrated to ~40ul using Amicon Ultra-0.5 Centrifugal Filter Device (NMWL 3K, UFC500396, MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) by spinning at 14,000 g at 4 °C. The depleted and concentrated vitreous was recovered by spinning the column upside down at 1,000 g for 2 min at 4 °C. The samples were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were converted into open mzML format using msconvert utility of Proteowizard software suite. MS/MS spectra were searched using the MSFragger database search tool (Kong et al., 2017) against a Uniprot - SwissProt protein sequence database, appended with an equal number of decoy sequences, downloaded on February 02, 2020. MS/MS spectra were searched using a precursor-ion mass tolerance of 20 p.p.m., fragment mass tolerance of 0.6 Da, and allowing C12/C13 isotope errors (-1/0/1/2/3). Cysteine carbamylation (+57.0215) and lysine TMT labeling (+229.1629) were specified as fixed modifications, and methionine oxidation (+15.9949), N-terminal protein acetylation (+42.0106), and TMT labeling of peptide N-terminus and serine residues were specified as variable modifications. The search was restricted to fully tryptic peptides, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. The search results were further processed using the Philosopher pipeline (22). First, MSFragger output files (in pepXML format) were processed using PeptideProphet (23) (with the high–mass accuracy binning and semi-parametric mixture modeling options) to compute the posterior probability of correct identification for each peptide to spectrum match (PSM). The resulting pepXML files from PeptideProphet (or PTMProphet) from all 23 TMT 10-plex experiments were then processed together to assemble peptides into proteins (protein inference) and to create a combined file (in protXML format) of high confidence proteins groups and the corresponding peptides assigned to each group. The combined protXML file, and the individual PSM lists for each TMT 10-plex, were further processed using the Philosopher filter command. Each peptide was assigned either as a unique peptide to a particular protein group or assigned as a razor peptide to a single protein group with the most peptide evidence. The protein groups assembled by ProteinProphet (24) were filtered to 1% protein-level False Discovery Rate (FDR) using the chosen FDR target-decoy strategy and the best peptide approach (allowing both unique and razor peptides) and applying the picked FDR strategy (25). In each TMT 10-plex, the PSM lists were filtered using a stringent, sequential FDR strategy keeping only PSMs with PeptideProphet probability of 0.9 or higher (which in these data corresponded to less than 1% PSM-level FDR) and mapped to proteins that also passed the global 1% protein-level FDR filter. For each PSM passing these filters, MS1 intensity of the corresponding precursor-ion was extracted using the Philosopher label-free quantification module based on the moFF method (26) (using 20 p.p.m mass tolerance and 0.4 min retention time window for extracted ion chromatogram peak tracing). For all PSMs corresponding to a TMT-labeled peptide, ten TMT reporter ion intensities were extracted from the MS/MS scans (using a 0.002 Da window). The precursor ion purity scores were calculated using the sequenced precursor ion’s intensity and other interfering ions observed in MS1 data (within a 0.7 Da isolation window). All supporting information for each PSM, including the accession numbers and names of the protein/gene selected based on the protein inference approach with razor peptide assignment, and quantification information (MS1 precursor-ion intensity and the TMT reporter ion intensities) were summarized in the output PSM tables.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Vitreous, Tmt-ms, Proliferative diabetic retinopathy

### Affiliations
Department of Ophthalmology, Penn State College of Medicine
Penn State College of Medicine

### Submitter
Sarah Weber

### Lab Head
Dr Jeffrey M. Sundstrom
Department of Ophthalmology, Penn State College of Medicine


