### Accession
PXD031529

### Title
Large-scale protein and phosphoprotein profiling to explore potato resistance mechanisms to Spongospora subterranea infection

### Description
Potato is one of the most important food crops for human consumption. The obligate biotrophic pathogen Spongospora subterranea infects potato roots and tubers, resulting in considerable loss of potato tuber yield and quality. A comprehensive understanding of how potato plants respond to S. subterranea infection is essential for the development of pathogen-resistant crops. Here we employed label-free proteomics and phosphoproteomics to quantify protein-level responses of the susceptible and resistant potato cultivars in response to S. subterranea. A total of 2669 proteins and 1498 phosphoproteins were quantified in the leaf samples of the different treatment groups. Following statistical analysis of the proteomic data, oxidoreductase activity, electron transfer, and photosynthesis were identified as significant processes that differentially changed upon infection specifically in the resistant cultivar and not in the susceptible cultivar. The phosphoproteomics results indicated increased activity of signal transduction and defence response functions in the resistant cultivar. In contrast, the majority of increased phosphoproteins in the susceptible cultivar were related to transporter activity and localisation. This study provides new insight into the molecular mechanisms involved in potato resistance to S. subterranea infection and has highlighted the critical roles of protein phosphorylation in the regulation of potato immune response.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen leaves were homogenised (150 mg leaves in 450 µL extraction buffer) using a Fast Prep-24 bead beater (Mp Biomedicals, Seven Hills, NSW, Australia) for 60 s. The extraction buffer was contained 100 mM NaCl, protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche Diagnostics, NSW, Australia), 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 5 mM EDTA and 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0. Extracts were then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min in the cold room (4 °C), and the supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was estimated using the Qubit protein assay kit (Invitrogen, Waltham, MA). For each sample, 250 g proteins were transferred to a new tube and precipitated by adding 9 vol of absolute acetone chilled to -20 °C and kept at -20 °C overnight. Samples were then centrifuged at 10,000 g for 8 min, and the pellet was washed using cold acetone. Protein pellets were resuspended in SDS buffer (5% SDS and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate). Subsequently, DTT was added to a final concentration of 20 mM, and proteins were reduced for 10 min at 90 °C followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. The samples were then digested using trypsin/LysC (Promega) at a ratio of 50:1 protein:enzyme using S-Trap™ mini columns (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions. Peptides were desalted using Pierce peptide desalting columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and the eluted peptides subsampled into separate Lo-bind Eppendorf tubes for total peptide analysis (30 l) and phosphopeptide enrichment (270 l) prior to evaporation using a SpeedVac concentrator. MagReSyn Ti-IMAC HP magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences, Gauteng, South Africa) were prepared for phosphopeptide binding using three washes in loading buffer (0.1M glycolic acid in acetonitrile/water/TFA (80:15:5)). Dried peptide samples were reconstituted in loading buffer then added to the beads, followed by sequential washing and elution of the phosphopeptide-enriched samples as per manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The data-independent acquisition (DIA) method used for both total peptide and phosphopeptide analysis has been previously described in Balotf et al. (2021). Raw MS files were processed using Spectronaut software (v15) using the directDIA approach. Spectral libraries were generated independently from the total peptide and phosphopeptide samples using the Pulsar search engine to search the Solanum tuberosum UniProt reference proteome (UP000011115) comprising 53,106 entries. Default search settings were used, with the exception that for phosphosite identification the PTM localization filter was activated (minimum threshold 0.75) and phospho (S/T/Y) was included as an additional variable modification.  Relative quantitation between samples at the proteome or phosphoproteome levels was then achieved by targeted re-extraction of DIA-MS2 spectra from respective total peptide or phosphopeptide libraries. Data were exported from Spectronaut as a PTM site report for the phosphopeptide data and a protein group pivot report for phosphopeptide and the proteomics datasetss, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Potato, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Spongospora subterranea, Powdery scab

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


