### Accession
PXD044643

### Title
Targeted RNase H-mediated Extraction of crosslinked RBPs (TREX) for assessing U1 RNA interactome

### Description
We used Targeted RNase H-mediated Extraction of crosslinked RBPs (TREX)to assess the endogenous binding partners of U1 small nuclear RNA (U1 snRNA) in human HCT116 cells. Extracted proteins from U1 digested and control cells (5 replicate per condition) were compared, using label-free (LFQ) Quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For a detailed step-by-step protocol for TREX, please visit: https://www.mardakhehlab.info/resources/trex  HCT116 cells were seeded on 150 mm TC-treated culture dishes and allowed to attach prior to being washed with ice-cold PBS and irradiated on ice with 200 mJ/cm2 of UV-C (254 nm). Cells were then lysed by direct addition of TRIZOL (1 ml per ~20 million cells). We used 10 million cells per biological replicate experiment for U1 TREX analysis, with a total of 5 replicates. Homogenized lysates were incubated for 5 min at room temperature, before the addition of chloroform (200 µl per 1 ml of lysate) and centrifugation for 15 min at 12,000 g at 4°C to induce phase separation. The aqueous and organic phases were subsequently discarded, and the interface was resolubilized in TRIZOL. Phase separation and resolubilization was repeated two more times to remove any non-crosslinked RNA or proteins. The isolated interface was then gently washed with TE buffer to remove any traces of TRIZOL, before being solubilized by resuspension in TE buffer supplemented with increasing concentrations of SDS, as described previously (Trendel et al., 2019). The RNA-protein crosslinks were then precipitated by adding NaCl (300 mM final concentration) followed by isopropanol (50% final concentration), and the pellet was washed with 70% ethanol, and resuspended in nuclease-free water. Genomic DNA was removed by treating the samples with TURBO DNase (2U per million cells) for 50 min at 37 °C, followed by a further round of isopropanol precipitation. The pellets were washed again with 70% ethanol and resuspended in probe hybridization buffer (50mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 100mM Tris HCl pH 7.0), before a pool of tiling antisense DNA oligonucleotides complementary to the full-length of U1 RNA was added to the mixture. The individual oligonucleotides used were non-overlapping, on average 60 nt long, and unmodified. Annealing was performed in a Thermomixer by first heating the samples to 95 °C for 2 min to denature all RNAs, followed by a gradient temperature drop of 2°C per minute, until the samples reached 50°C. DNA-hybridized RNA regions were subsequently digested following the addition of MgCl2 to neutralize the EDTA, followed by Thermostable RNase H (1 unit per million cells) to each reaction and further incubation at 50°C for 60 min. As control, samples were treated identically but no RNase H enzyme was added. Samples were then centrifuged at 12000 g for 3 min and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. 10% of each supernatant was aliquoted and taken for RNA extraction to analyze target depletion efficiency and specificity by RT-qPCR and RNA-sequencing, whilst the remaining 90% was subjected to a second round of organic phase separation by adding 900µl of TRIZOL LS to each sample, followed by 200 µl of chloroform, mixing, and centrifugation for 15 min at 12,000 g at 4°C. The released RBPs were recovered by taking the organic phase into a new tube. Ice-cold acetone was added to each sample (final concentration of 80%), followed by mixing and overnight incubation at −20°C in order to precipitate the released RBPs. The pellets were subsequently recovered and washed with 1 ml of 80% acetone, followed by centrifugation for 15 min at 16,000 g at 4°C. This step was repeated once, and the final pellet was air-dried for 5 min at room temperature.  Acetone precipitated proteins were subjected to in-solution digestion by Trypsin as described previously (Azman et al., 2023). Briefly, proteins were recovered in 200 μl of 2M Urea, 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) and reduced by adding DTT to a final concentration of 10 mM. After 30 minutes of incubation at RT, samples were alkylated by adding 55 mM iodoacetamide and Incubation for another 30 minutes at RT in the dark. Trypsin digestion was then performed using 2 µg of trypsin per sample. The next day, samples were desalted using Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al., 2003), and recovered in 0.1% TFA, 0.5% Acetic Acid, 2% Acetonitrile (A* buffer) for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described before (Azman et al., 2023), using a Q Exactive-plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoflow ultimate 3000 RSL nano HPLC platform (Thermo Fisher). ~90% of the total peptide mixture per each TREX sample was injected. Samples were resolved at flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50cm X 75 m RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher), using a 123 min gradient of 3% to 35 % of Buffer B (0.1% FA in Acetonitrile) against Buffer A (0.1% FA in LC-MS gradient water). LC-separated samples were infused into the MS by electrospray ionization (ESI). Spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV, and capillary temperature was set to 255°C. MS was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS2 scans (top 15 method). Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) were acquired with a 70,000 resolution for MS scans and 17,500 for the MS2 scans. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion was applied to all runs.

### Data Protocol
Maxquant (version 1.6.3.3) was used for all mass spectrometry search and quantifications (Tyanova et al., 2016a). Raw data files were searched against a FASTA file of the human proteome, excluding variants and isoforms, extracted from UNIPROT (2023). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin”, allowing up to two missed cleavages. Label-free quantification was enabled using LFQ intensity calculation with a minimum ratio count of two. Variable modifications were set at Oxidation (M), Acetylation (N-term), and Phosphorylation (ST). False discovery rates (FDR) were calculated using a reverse database search approach, and was set at 1% for identification of peptides, modifications, and proteins. “Match between runs”, “Re-quantify”, and “iBAQ” options were enabled. Default Maxquant parameters were used for all other settings. All downstream data analyses were performed by Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) (Tyanova et al., 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Trex; rbp; rna interactome; lc-ms/ms; quantitative proteomics

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.
Barts Cancer Institute

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell & Molecular Biology Barts Cancer Institute Queen Mary University of London Charterhouse Square London EC1M 6BQ U.K.


