### Accession
PXD003754

### Title
Global Membrane Protein Interactome Analysis using In vivo Crosslinking and MS-based Protein Correlation Profiling

### Description
We present a methodology using in vivo crosslinking combined with HPLC-MS for the global analysis of endogenous protein complexes by protein correlation profiling. Formaldehyde crosslinked protein complexes were extracted with high yield using denaturing buffers that maintained complex solubility during chromatographic separation. We show this efficiently detects both integral membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes, in addition to soluble complexes, allowing identification and analysis of complexes not accessible in native extracts. We compare the protein complexes detected by HPLC-MS protein correlation profiling in both native and formaldehyde crosslinked U2OS cell extracts. These proteome-wide datasets of both in vivo crosslinked and native protein complexes from U2OS cells are freely available via a searchable online database (www.peptracker.com/epd).

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture – Briefly, U2OS cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FCS, 100 U/L penicillin and 100 g/L streptomycin at 37°C in 10% CO2, and passaged at ~80% confluence. In vivo crosslinking and denaturing extraction for size exclusion chromatography - Each 15 cm dish (80% confluent) of adherent U2OS cells was washed three times with ice-cold PBS, on ice, with 20 mL used per wash. Plates were drained and 20 mL of freshly made 6% formaldehyde in PBS was added to crosslink proteins and slowly mixed for 30 min at room temperature. After draining, the crosslinked cells were quenched with 20 mL of 0.1 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl for 10 min at room temperature. After complete drainage of the dish, cells were scraped in 500 L of freshly prepared lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM NaCl, 10 mM NaPO4 pH 6.0, 25 mM TCEP, 50 mM N-ethylmaleimide) at room temperature. Cell lysates were sonicated for 30 seconds, three times in total, at 10% power at room temperature. Lysates were heated to 37oC for 30 min prior to centrifugation at 17,000 g for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were filtered through 0.45 m Ultrafree-MC centrifugal filter units. Denaturing size exclusion chromatography, protein digestion and peptide clean-up - Using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Bio-RS UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific), lysates were injected (100 μL per injection) onto a BioBasic SEC1000 column (300 x 7.8 mm, 5 m particles, 1000Å pores) equilibrated with 0.2% SDS, 100 mM NaCl and 10 mM NaPO4 pH 6.0 at 30oC. The flow rate was 0.2 ml min-1 and for each sample two injections were performed. For each injection 48 × 125 μL fractions were collected separately using a 96-well thin-walled PCR plate (Eppendorf) and heated to 95oC for 30 min in a PCR machine, using a heated lid, to break all crosslinks. After heat reversal of crosslinks, samples were transferred to a 96-well low protein binding deepwell plate (Eppendorf) and Tris-HCl (1 M pH 8.0) was added to each fraction to a final concentration of 0.1 M to adjust the pH to 8.0. Proteins in each fraction were digested to peptides using either LysC alone (injection 1), or LysC and trypsin (injection 2), which were diluted in 0.1 M Tris-HCl and added at a ratio of 1:50 by weight, based upon an EZQ protein assay of the fractions, then incubated for 18 h at 37°C. LC-MS/MS and analysis of spectra – Using a Thermo Fisher Scientific Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC, peptides in 5% (vol/vol) formic acid (final volume ~10 μL) were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column. After washing with 2% (vol/vol) acetonitrile, 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 50 cm × 75 μm C18 EasySpray reverse phase analytical column with integrated emitter over a gradient from 2% acetonitrile to 35% acetonitrile over 220 min with a flow rate of 200 nL min−1. The peptides were ionized by electrospray ionization at +2.0 kV. Tandem mass spectrometry analysis was carried out on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using HCD fragmentation. The data-dependent acquisition method used acquired MS/MS spectra on the top 30 most abundant ions at any one point during the gradient.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data produced by the mass spectrometer were analysed using the MaxQuant quantitative proteomics software package (22) (http://www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.1.3). The MaxQuant output has also been uploaded to the ProteomeXchange Consortium under the same identifier given above. This version of MaxQuant includes an integrated search engine, Andromeda (23). Peptide and Protein level identification were both set to a false discovery rate of 1% using a target-decoy based strategy. The database supplied to the search engine for peptide identifications was the Human Swissprot database downloaded on the 17th April 2015, containing 20,197 protein sequence entries. The mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and MS/MS mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm. Enzyme was set to either LysC (cleavage C-terminal to lysine) or trypsin (cleavage C-terminal to lysine and arginine) with up to 2 missed cleavages. Deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, pyro-Glu (with peptide N-term Gln), phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. N-ethylmaleimide on Cys was searched as a fixed modification. The output from MaxQuant provided peptide level data as well as protein group level data. We used the protein groups as defined by the Maxquant package (22).

### Publication Abstract
We present a methodology using in vivo crosslinking combined with HPLC-MS for the global analysis of endogenous protein complexes by protein correlation profiling. Formaldehyde crosslinked protein complexes were extracted with high yield using denaturing buffers that maintained complex solubility during chromatographic separation. We show this efficiently detects both integral membrane and membrane-associated protein complexes,in addition to soluble complexes, allowing identification and analysis of complexes not accessible in native extracts. We compare the protein complexes detected by HPLC-MS protein correlation profiling in both native and formaldehyde crosslinked U2OS cell extracts. These proteome-wide data sets of both in vivo crosslinked and native protein complexes from U2OS cells are freely available via a searchable online database (www.peptracker.com/epd). Raw data are also available via ProteomeXchange (identifier PXD003754).

### Keywords
Membrane protein; interactome analysis, Proteomics; protein complexes; protein crosslinking; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
School of Life Sciences

### Submitter
Vackar Afzal

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
University of Dundee


