### Accession
PXD035863

### Title
Schizophrenia Proteome Research

### Description
Despite of multiple systematic studies of schizophrenia pathogenesis, reconstruction of the mechanism established on proteomics, metabolomics, and genome-wide significant loci is still a challenging task. We suggested that advanced data for quantitative proteomics, metabolomics, and genome-wide association study (GWAS) may enhance the current evidence and fundamental knowledge about molecular pathogenesis of schizophrenia. Liquide chromatography and ultra-high-resolution mass-spectrometry were utilized for proteomic and metabolomic assay, and high throughput genotyping for the GWAS study. Proteomic and metabolomic results were quantitatively evaluated and overlayed on the GWAS data. After statistical analysis using R-package, the resulting features were associated in a multilayer mode with adjusted biological processes in a reconstructed unified map of molecular events. We have identified 20 DFE proteins that were validated on an independent cohort of patients that are significant for schizophrenia, including ALS, A1AG1, PEDF, VTDB, CERU, APOB, APOH, FASN, GPX3, etc. Almost half of them are new for schizophrenia. The metabolomic survey revealed 18 compounds most of which were the part transformation of tyrosine and steroids with the incline to androgens (androsterone sulfate, thyroliberin, thyroxine, dihydrotestosterone, androstenedione, cholesterol sulfate, metanephrine, dopaquinone, etc.) which were extracted as group-specific determinants that permits to isolate patients with schizophrenia. The GWAS assay revealed 52 loci were integrated into proteome-metabolome data as significantly implicated in schizophrenia. We integrated three layers of omics science (proteomics, metabolomics and GWAS) and quantitative analysis utilized systematic approach to reconstruct the proposed map of molecular events associated with the considered psychopathology. The resulting interplay between different layers emphasized strict implication of lipids metabolism, oxidative stress, imbalance in steroidogenesis and associated impartments of thyroid hormones and sex hormones interconnection. The proposed interplay map can give opportunity in the understanding how the regulation of distinct metabolic axis is achieved and what happens in proteome arrangements to produce a schizophrenia-specific pattern of pathology condition.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected for participating subjects in the morning between 08 am to 10 am in EDTA-2K+ vacuum tubes (Becton Dickinson; Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). Totally, up to 8 mL of blood was withdrawn from each subject. Tubes were gently mixed end-over-end (approximately 10 times). Blood cells were sedimented in a pre-chilled centrifuge for 10 minutes at 2,200 g at 8oC. Plasma was poured off in a clean PES cryotubes and frozen immediately below -80oC until use. The total proteins concentration was measured using a modified BCA Assay Kit (Pierce/Thermo Scientific) according manufacturer recommendations on a Nano Drop™ 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). The final concentrations ranged between 39 mg/mL to 52 mg/mL, median concentration was 48.2 mg/mL across the studied populations. We used 100 μg of the measured proteins (approximately 2 μL; volume is flexible on the certain sample) for processing. Plasma samples (2 μL) were diluted in five folds (to 10 μL) by freshly prepared solution comprised of 1% deoxycholic acid sodium salt, 300 mM sodium chloride, 5 M urea, 6% acetonitrile and 15 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride buffered by 75 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate, pH 8.0. The average estimated final concentration of protein in a sample nearly 10 mg/mL which is appropriate for chemical reducing of cysteine amino acid residues. The reaction was performed in support with strong reducing agent stable in a wide pH range (tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine) and lasted for 20 minutes at 40oC with continual vigorous shaking at 700 rpm. After reaction completed, samples were chilled at ambient temperature for 3-5 minutes and proceeded for chemical alkylation for protection of the reduced cysteine residues. Alkylation was performed using a freshly prepared solution of 1% 4-vinylpyridine (stabilized) in 30% propan-2-ol (the solution is a single use only and not for storage). For this purpose, 2 μL of alkylating solution was added to samples after reducing (to 0.2% concentration finally) and the reaction mixture incubated for 30 minutes at ambient temperature (20oC-22oC) in dark place. Plasma samples after alkylation were diluted 10 folds (to 100 μL) by 75 mM triethylammonium hydrogen carbonate solution (pH 8.0) and the estimated final concentration of proteins was nearly 1 mg/mL which is the most optimal and appropriate substrate concentration for enzymatic digestion. Digestion was performed with trypsin (modified; acetylated on lysine amino acid residues) stored in inhibiting solution of 30 mM acetic acid prior to use. Only half volume (50 μL) of the prepared sample was used for enzymatic digestion. The digestion was proceeded in two consequential steps: (1) initially 1 μg (or 5 μL) of trypsin (concentration 200 ng/μL) was added to achieve the estimated ratio to substrate as 1:50 (w/w); the reaction was incubated for 3 hours at 40oC; (2) next step, additional amount of trypsin (500 ng, or 2.5 μL) was added to achieve the final ratio to substrate as1:100 (w/w) and the reaction was again incubated at 40oC for the next 3 hours. The reaction (digestion) was quenched by 5 μL of 10% aqua formic acid (to 0.5% concentration finally) and centrifuged at 12,500 g for 10 minutes at 5oC to sediments to deoxycholic acid. The aqua layer with peptides was collected and transferred into the new clean capillary-tubes with protected/deactivated glass to proceed high-resolution/high-accuracymass spectrometry analysis.  • The analysis of proteome was accomplished on an ultrahigh-resolution Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher; Bremen, Germany) equipped with an NSI ions source adopted for the nanoflow rate. The instrument was operated in a positive electrostatic ionization mode. The capillary voltage of system was set at -1900 V and the S-lens electrodynamic voltage was adjusted to 70% normalized value. The ion source was heated with a dry nitrogen at 240oC. Precursor ions were surveyed and collected in C-trap within a maximum integration time of 7 ms., or until the acquisition gain control reached 3e6 ions. Ions were surveyed in a “top-speed” mode with a normalized (normalization to m/z=524 with z=2+) resolution of R=70K and isolated by quadrupole within ±1 Th and offset of +0.25 Th. The collected precursor ions if fallen within charge states range from z=2+ to z=5+ (ions with charge state z=1+ and uncertain charge were excluded) were triggered for the tandem MS/MS scanning. Triggered ions were decomposed in a linear ions-trap (LIT) and fragmentation was supplied by a mix of helium/nitrogen collision gas (25%/75%). Fragment ions were obtained in HCD (high-energy collision dissociation) mode after applying the normalized activation energy (27% normalization) in a stepwise manner (ramping within ±20%).

### Data Protocol
We used Dynamic Universal Proteomic Standard UPS-2™ (Sigma; Saint Louis, MO, USA) specifically designed and developed on 2006 year in collaboration with the Association of Biomolecular Resource Facilities (ABRF) for the large-scale proteomic quantitative analysis. The UPS-2™ comprises of 48 different proteins ranged in amounts between 0.5 fmoles to 50,000 fmoles in a single tube. The total content of tube is 10.6 μg. Aspect information about the proteins listed in the UPS-2™, including their sequences, amount in the tube, possible post-translational modifications and sources, is accessible in the following link: http://www.sigma.com/ups. Calibration was accomplished using a set of UPS-2™ standard which has been spiked into matrix to the final concentration the targeted proteins 0.025 fmoles/μL to 2500 fmoles/μL, while the total concentration of matrix proteins was estimated as 500 ng/μL and a volume of 2μL (or 1 μg) of the fortified matrix has been taken for the analysis. Matrix solution was prepared from the non-human proteins, thence, initially 1e6 cells of Escherichia coli (strain K12) was chosen for this purpose to avoid possible interference with (a) endogenous human proteins and (b) customized UPS-2™ proteins. The matrix was prepared exactly in the same way as described for the assayed samples including type of the selected alkylation by 4-vinylpyridine. Analysis was performed on a high-resolution mass spectrometer as described for the assayed samples in the section “Liquide chromatography/high resolution mass spectrometry analysis for proteomic assay”. Matrix sample fortified with the UPS-2™ standard was analyzed in 10 replicates and the analysis was completely repeated on another UPS-2™ tube to estimate accuracy and reproducibility. Obtained raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Max Quant software (version 1.6.13) with support of proprietary FASTA-file appropriate for the UPS-2™ standard provided by vendor. The protein was accounted as confidently detected if it recognized by at least three different unique peptides and mass error did not exceed 5 ppm (±2.5 ppm) for the unmodified peptide and 3 ppm (±1.5 ppm) for the modified counterpart (if applicable). Only peptides with complete cleavage were considered (no missed cleavages were allowed) and maximum of two fixed/flexible modifications were allowed. Peptide should be covered on at least 70% by fragmentation spectra and mass error of the detected fragments should not exceed 0.005 Da (±0.0025 Da). The protein was included in the calibration plot if detected in at least 6 replicates of 10 and the standard deviation of estimated iBAQ (intensity-based absolute quantification approach) value within calibration point did not exceed 20%. Linear regression model was considered for the calibration plot; since the dynamic range of concentration covers five orders of magnitude, weighting factor of 1/x was applied to fit calibrating points with linear regression. Data analysis was performed in the Max Quant environment (version 1.6.13). Three-dimensional peaks (intensity, m/z value and retention time) were detected for the data-dependent analysis. The total number of fragment ions per 100 m/z scale was limited to 20 for the high complexity protein mixtures. Estimated precursor ion masses were associated with probable fragment ion masses on the basis of a cosine correlation value of at least 0.8. Search was performed in Max Quant against the human indexing database for amino acid sequences of proteins obtained as a FASTA-file from the UniProt KB (release March 2020 (26,549 reviewed entries) to which concatenated decoy sequences in a reverse fashion were added. For calibrating purposes, a small database consisting only of the UPS-2™ proteins as described above in subsection “5. Quantitative proteomic data analysis”. The search was performed with an initial precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.001 Da. We included S-pyridilethylation, as a fixed modification and oxidized methionine and Q/N deamidation as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was fixed to 8 amino acids, and we allowed up to one missed cleavage. For peptide and protein identifications, the 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was determined by accumulating the reverse database hits. If the identified peptide was not undoubtedly linked to a specific protein isoform, all isoforms were grouped as one protein. To avoid apparent misidentifications that are only due to protein name discrepancies, gene names and UniProt IDs were manually examined.

### Publication Abstract
Despite of multiple systematic studies of schizophrenia based on proteomics, metabolomics, and genome-wide significant loci, reconstruction of underlying mechanism is still a challenging task. Combination of the advanced data for quantitative proteomics, metabolomics, and genome-wide association study (GWAS) can enhance the current fundamental knowledge about molecular pathogenesis of schizophrenia. In this study, we utilized quantitative proteomic and metabolomic assay, and high throughput genotyping for the GWAS study. We identified 20 differently expressed proteins that were validated on an independent cohort of patients with schizophrenia, including ALS, A1AG1, PEDF, VTDB, CERU, APOB, APOH, FASN, GPX3, etc. and almost half of them are new for schizophrenia. The metabolomic survey revealed 18 group-specific compounds, most of which were the part of transformation of tyrosine and steroids with the prevalence to androgens (androsterone sulfate, thyroliberin, thyroxine, dihydrotestosterone, androstenedione, cholesterol sulfate, metanephrine, dopaquinone, etc.). The GWAS assay mostly failed to reveal significantly associated loci therefore 52 loci with the smoothened p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;10<sup>-5</sup> were fractionally integrated into proteome-metabolome data. We integrated three omics layers and powered them by the quantitative analysis to propose a map of molecular events associated with schizophrenia psychopathology. The resulting interplay between different molecular layers emphasizes a strict implication of lipids transport, oxidative stress, imbalance in steroidogenesis and associated impartments of thyroid hormones as key interconnected nodes essential for understanding of how the regulation of distinct metabolic axis is achieved and what happens in the conditioned proteome and metabolome to produce a schizophrenia-specific pattern.

### Keywords
Schizophrenia; data integration; pathway analysis; quantitative analysis; translational metabolomics;

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Group of Biobamking, Department of Proteomic Research; 119121 Moscow, 10 Pogodinskaya str., bld. 8, Russian Federation

### Submitter
Arthur Kopylov

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Anna L. Kaysheva
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Group of Biobamking, Department of Proteomic Research; 119121 Moscow, 10 Pogodinskaya str., bld. 8, Russian Federation


