### Accession
PXD000294

### Title
Novel insights into the metabolic and biochemical underpinnings assisting dry-season survival in female malaria mosquitoes of the Anopheles gambiae complex

### Description
The mechanisms by which mosquitoes survive the desiccating conditions of the dry season in West African savannahs and are able to readily transmit malaria as soon as the rains start remain largely unknown. Thus, we examined the degree to which the physiology of 1 h- and 24 h-old female An. gambiae M and S is altered at the onset of the dry season (“ods”) by examining their metabolic fingerprints and protein expression, which were compared to those of females exposed to the rainy season (“rs”) conditions. Three amino acids (phenylalanine, tyrosine and valine) that play a pivotal role in cuticle hardness were significantly decreased from the 1 h- to 24 h-old females, regardless of the experimental conditions. These amino acids were present in higher amounts in 1 h-old female An. gambiae M reared under “ods”; such a seasonal difference was not reported in the female S molecular form. Together with the increased expression of cuticular proteins 70 and 117(spots 67 and 65, respectively), our data suggest that the cuticle thickness, rigidity and permeability were adjusted at the onset of the dry season. Evident signs of energetic metabolism adjustments were found in both of the molecular forms at the onset of the dry season. Moreover, 1 h-old females of An. gambiae S were characterised by elevated amounts of glycogen phosphorylase, isocitrate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase, suggesting an increase of their metabolic activity at the onset of the dry season. This study presents novel insights into drought resistance in the mosquitoes of utmost medical importance.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which Anopheles gambiae mosquitoes survive the desiccating conditions of the dry season in Africa and are able to readily transmit malaria soon after the rains start remain largely unknown. The desiccation tolerance and resistance of female An. gambiae M and S reared in contrasting environmental conditions reflecting the onset of dry season ("ods") and the rainy season ("rs") was determined by monitoring their survival and body water loss in response to low relative humidity. Furthermore, we investigated the degree to which the physiology of 1-h and 24-h-old females is altered at "ods" by examining and comparing their quantitative metabotypes and proteotypes with conspecifics exposed to "rs" conditions. Results showed that distinct biochemical rearrangements occurred soon after emergence in female mosquitoes that enhance survival and limit water loss under dry conditions. In particular, three amino acids (phenylalanine, tyrosine, and valine) playing a pivotal role in cuticle permeability decreased significantly from the 1-h to 24-h-old females, regardless of the experimental conditions. However, these amino acids were present in higher amounts in 1-h-old female An. gambiae M reared under "ods" whereas no such seasonal difference was reported in S ones. Together with the 1.28- to 2.84-fold increased expression of cuticular proteins 70 and 117, our data suggests that cuticle composition, rigidity and permeability were adjusted at "ods". Increased expression of enzymes involved in glycogenolytic and proteolytic processes were found in both forms at "ods". Moreover, 1-h-old S forms were characterised by elevated amounts of glycogen phosphorylase, isocitrate dehydrogenase, and citrate synthase, suggesting an increase of energetic demand in these females at "ods".

### Keywords
Proteomics; rr-2 cuticular protein; metabolic fingerprint; amino acid; sugar; tricarboxylic acid cycle enzyme

### Affiliations
ECOBIO

### Submitter
Hidalgo Kevin

### Lab Head


