### Accession
PXD038007

### Title
Toxicoproteomics reveals an effect of Clozapine on autophagy in human liver spheroids

### Description
Clozapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug used to treat treatment-resistant schizophrenia. Its side effects, including liver enzyme abnormalities, experienced by many patients preclude its more common use as a first-line therapy for schizophrenia. Toxicoproteomic approaches have been demonstrated to effectively guide the identification of toxicological mechanisms. Here, to further our understanding of the molecular effects of clozapine, we performed a data-independent acquisition (DIA)-based quantitative proteomics investigation of clozapine-treated human liver spheroid cultures. In total, we quantified 4,479 proteins across the five treatment groups (vehicle; 15 µM, 30 µM, and 60 µM clozapine; and 10 ng/mL TNFα + IL-1β). Clozapine (60 µM) treatment yielded 36 differentially expressed proteins (FDR < 0.05). Gene-set enrichment analysis indicated perturbation of several gene sets, including interferon gamma signaling (e.g., interferon gamma receptor 1) and prominent autophagy-related processes (e.g., upregulation of sequestosome-1 (SQSTM1), MAP1LC3B/LC3B2, GABARAPL2, and nuclear receptor coactivator 4). The effects of clozapine on autophagy were confirmed by targeted mass spectrometry and western blotting using conventional SQSTM1 and LC3B markers. Combined with prior literature, our work suggests a broad contribution of autophagy to both the therapeutic and side effects of clozapine. Overall, this study demonstrates how proteomics can contribute to the elucidation of physiological and toxicological mechanisms of drugs.

### Sample Protocol
HepaRG spheroids were treated with 20 µM chloroquine; or vehicle control for 24 h (n = 3). For each replicate, 20 spheroids, corresponding to 100,000 initial cells in the spheroid preparation (see above), were washed with PBS, pooled, and stored at −80 °C until further processing.  Proteins were resuspended in 50 µL of Preomics Lyse (Martinsried, Germany) buffer and sonicated for 10 s at 10% amplitude to allow the complete resuspension of the pellet. Then, 7 µg of protein extract was processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Preomics) with trypsin digestion conducted for 3 h. Next, 3 µg of peptide digest was injected on to a 50 cm Easy-nanoLC (AcclaimPepMap C18, 75 μm × 500 mm, 100 Å, particle size 2 μm) on an Easy nLC 1200 instrument coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer in DIA mode. Peptides were separated using a 110 min gradient from 0% buffer B to 40% buffer B (buffer A: 1% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, and buffer B: 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The Q-Exactive HF was operated in DIA mode using 23 variable windows.

### Data Protocol
DIA data analysis was performed in DirectDIA mode using Spectronaut software (version 14.3.200701.47784, Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) with factory settings and the Homo sapiens Swissprot database from February 2019.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Drug-induced liver injury; data-independent acquisition; clozapine; proteomics; systems toxicology

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International
PMI R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, CH-2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland

### Submitter
catherine Nury

### Lab Head
Dr Bjoern Titz
PMI R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, CH-2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland


### SDRF
- organism: homo sapiens
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: HepaRG
- disease: Chloroquine_20uM, Untreated
- label: label free
- instrument: Q Exactive HF

