### Accession
PXD008473

### Title
Shotgun proteomic profiling of head kidney of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss

### Description
The objective of this study was to identify and quantify proteomic profiles of head kidney of rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss. Specific pathogen free rainbow trout (mean length 15 ± 1 cm) were maintained in recirculating de-chlorinated water at 19±1 °C. Prior to the experiment, fish were distributed between 9 aquaria, 18 fish per aquarium. The test groups were infected by immersion of Yersinia ruckeri strains: CSF007-82 (biotype 1) and 7959-11 (biotype 2). The control group was immersed similar with sterile broth medium. There were 3 aquaria per each group (CSF007-82-infected, 7959-11-infected and control). Nine fish from infected and control fish groups were anaesthetized with MS-222 at 3, 9 and 28 days post exposure and sampled aseptically. Each head kidney was washed three times with sterile phosphate-buffered saline containing a cocktail of mammalian protease inhibitors. Head kidney samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at –80 °C.

### Sample Protocol
Details on sample preparation can be found in the publication. In brief, equal amounts of head kidney samples of all fish per time point and group were pooled resulting in three pools each consisting of three fish. After lysis, samples were digested according to the standard enhanced filter aided sample preparation protocol (Erde et al. 2014). Proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. On-filter digestion was performed with Trypsin/Lys-C mix in 4% sodium deoxycholate (Promega). Removal of sodium deoxycholate from extracted peptides was achieved with phase transfer with ethyl acetate prior to injection into LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an Eksigent NanoLC 425 system using a microflow pump module (Sciex). Sample pre-concentration and desalting were accomplished with a 5 mm YMC-Triart C18 precolumn. Separation of peptides was performed on a 15 cm YMC-Triart C18 column applying a 73 min gradient from 3% B (ACN with 0.1% FA) to 35% B. Mobile Phase A consisted of ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid. For mass spectrometric analysis, the LC was directly coupled to a high resolution quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Triple TOF 5600+, Sciex).  For information dependent data acquisition (IDA runs) MS1 spectra were collected applying a Top-40 method (details in the publication). Quantification was performed based on MS2 spectra using SWATH acquisition. The HPLC system was operated by Eksigent Control Software version 4.2 (Sciex) and the MS by Analyst Software 1.7.1 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were processed with ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 (Sciex) for re-calibration and database searches. The database consisted of UniProt entries of following taxonomies: Oncorhynchus (taxonomy id: 8016; entries: 51947), Salmo salar (taxonomy id: 8030; entries: 10025) and Yersinia ruckeri (taxonomy id: 29486; entries: 5300) [Released 2016_07] as well as cRAP (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins, downloaded: ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid recalibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. The following sample parameters were applied: trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, search effort set to rapid ID. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was performed using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot and was set to <1% on protein level as well as on peptide. IDA identification results were used to create the SWATH ion library with the MS/MS (ALL) with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 (both Sciex). Peptides were chosen based on a FDR rate <1%, excluding shared and modified peptides. Up to 6 peptides per protein and up to 6 transitions per peptide were selected by software. Calculation of peak areas of SWATH samples after retention time alignment and normalization using total area sums was performed with MarkerView 1.2.1 (Sciex).  To determine differentially expressed proteins in infected samples, statistical evaluation was performed in R programming language (R Core Team 2015). Raw peak areas after normalization to total area sums were log2-transformed to approach normal distribution. On a logarithmic scale, technical replicates were aggregated by arithmetic mean before application of statistical tests. Differential expression of proteins was assessed using one-way ANOVA for each protein. To adjust for multiple testing, the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) was used to control the FDR. Differences were considered significant if adjusted p-values were smaller than the significance level of α = 0.05. For those proteins, Tukey’s honest significant difference method was applied as a post hoc test to assess the significance of the pairwise comparisons. Protein expression was considered differential if the adjusted p-value was below α and the absolute fold change was at least two (fold change < −2 or > +2).

### Publication Abstract
The head kidney and spleen are major lymphoid organs of the teleost fish. The authors identify proteome profiles of head kidney and spleen of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) using a shotgun proteomic approach. Gene ontology annotation of proteins is predicted using bioinformatic tools. This study represents detailed proteome profiles of head kidney and spleen of rainbow trout, with a total of 3241 and 2542 proteins identified, respectively. It is found that lymphoid organs are equipped with a variety of functional proteins related to defense, receptor, signal transduction, antioxidant, cytoskeleton, transport, binding, and metabolic processes. The identified proteome profiles will serve as a template for understanding lymphoid organ functions in salmonids and will increase the amount of spectra information of rainbow trout proteins in the public data repository PRIDE. This data can be accessed via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD008473 and PXD008478.

### Keywords
Lc ms-ms, Rainbow trout, Head kidney, Proteome profile

### Affiliations
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna

### Submitter
Gokhlesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gokhlesh Kumar
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


