### Accession
PXD027597

### Title
Organ-specific metabolic pathways distinguish prediabetes, type 2 diabetes and normal tissues

### Description
Defects in pancreatic islets and the progression of multi-tissue insulin resistance in combination with environmental factors are the main causes of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Mass spectrometry-based proteomics of five key-metabolic tissues on a cohort of 42 multi-organ donors provided deep coverage of the proteomes of pancreatic islets, visceral adipose tissue (VAT), liver, skeletal muscle and serum. Enrichment analysis of gene ontology (GO) terms built a tissue-specific map of the chronological order of altered biological processes across healthy controls (CTRL), pre-diabetes (PD) and T2D subjects. This unique dataset allowed us to explore alterations of entire biological pathways and individual proteins in multiple tissues. We confirmed the significant decrease of the citric acid cycle and the respiratory electron transport in VAT and muscle of T2D and we provided a thorough visual representation of the complete set of downregulated proteins. Importantly, we found widespread novel alterations in relevant biological pathways including the increase in hemostasis in pancreatic islets of PD, the increase in the complement cascade in liver and pancreatic islets of PD and the elevation in cholesterol biosynthesis in liver of T2D. Overall, our findings suggest inflammatory, immune and vascular impairments in pancreatic islets as potentially causal factors of insufficient insulin production and increased glucagon levels in the early stages of T2D. In contrast alterations in lipid metabolism and mitochondrial function in the liver and VAT/muscle, respectively, became evident later in manifest T2D. This first multi-tissue proteomic map indicates the temporal order of tissue-specific metabolic dysregulation in T2D development.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletal muscle, VAT and liver samples were lysed in Sodium Deoxycholate containing lysis buffer (1% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) and 100 mM of Tris (pH 8.5)). The samples were homogenized with an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA). In case of the pancreatic islets extract, lysis buffer containing 10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) and 100 mM of Tris (pH 8.5) was used for protein extraction. For the serum samples, 1µl of serum was mixed with 24 µl of 1% SDC buffer. Samples were boiled at 95C for 10 min. Tissue samples were sonicated using a tip sonicator while serum samples were sonicated using water bath sonicator. Tissue lysates were then centrifuged at 16000g for 10 min and the supernatant was collected for protein digestion. Proteins were digested using the endoproteinases LysC and trypsin (1:100 w/w) at 37C overnight with shaking. Digested peptides were acidified using 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified using the StageTips containing SDB-RPS material and eluted in 1% ammonia and 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were concentrated, dried using Speed-vac and res-suspended in buffer containing 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files from the experiments measured in the DDA mode (pancreatic islets library & tissue samples from pilot experiments) were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (integrated into MaxQuant) against the decoy UniProt-human database (downloaded in December 2017) with forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor, mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated for peptides and proteins individually using a target-decoy approach allowing a maximum of 1% false identifications from a revered sequence database. Raw files acquired in the DIA mode were processed using Biognosys Spectronaut software version 13 (Bruderer et al., 2015). A single peptide library was generated in Spectronaut using the combined MaxQuant search results for the DDA runs from the pancreatic islets sample. The experimental DIA runs were then analyzed in Spectronaut using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Environmental and genetic factors cause defects in pancreatic islets driving type 2 diabetes (T2D) together with the progression of multi-tissue insulin resistance. Mass spectrometry proteomics on samples from five key metabolic tissues of a cross-sectional cohort of 43 multi-organ donors provides deep coverage of their proteomes. Enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology terms provides a tissue-specific map of altered biological processes across healthy, prediabetes (PD), and T2D subjects. We find widespread alterations in several relevant biological pathways, including increase in hemostasis in pancreatic islets of PD, increase in the complement cascade in liver and pancreatic islets of PD, and elevation in cholesterol biosynthesis in liver of T2D. Our findings point to inflammatory, immune, and vascular alterations in pancreatic islets in PD that are hypotheses to be tested for potential contributions to hormonal perturbations such as impaired insulin and increased glucagon production. This multi-tissue proteomic map suggests tissue-specific metabolic dysregulations in T2D.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Liver, Proteomics, Serum, Visceral adipose tissue (vat), Pancreatic islets, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Director of Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark and Director of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Germany
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Filip Mundt

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Director of Proteomics Program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Denmark and Director of Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry, Germany


