### Accession
PXD038278

### Title
RhoJ controls EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy

### Description
The resistance of cancer cells to therapy is responsible for the death of most cancer patients. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been associated with resistance to therapy in different cancer cells. However, the mechanisms by which EMT mediates resistance to therapy remain poorly understood. Here, using a mouse model of skin squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) undergoing spontaneous EMT during tumorigenesis, we found that EMT tumor cells were highly resistant to a wide range of anti-cancer therapy both in-vivo and in-vitro. Using gain and loss of function in vitro and in vivo, we uncovered that RhoJ, a small GTPase preferentially expressed in EMT cancer cells, controls resistance to therapy. Using genome-wide transcriptomic and proteomic profiling, we found that RhoJ regulates EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy by promoting DNA damage response and the formation of new replication forks allowing tumor cells to repair DNA lesions more rapidly and survive under the replicative stress induced by chemotherapy. Using affinity-purification followed by mass spectrometry, we found that RhoJ interacts with proteins regulating nuclear actin and the inhibition of actin polymerization sensitizes EMT tumor cells to chemotherapy induced cell death in a Rhoj dependent manner.  Altogether, our study uncovers the role and the mechanisms by which RhoJ acts as a key regulator of EMT associated resistance to chemotherapy.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation: a total of 12 samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis corresponding to 3 replicates of HA-tagged RhoJ transfected Epcam- tumor cells and 3 control empty vector Epcam- tumor cells treated for 12h with Cisplatin/5FU or with vehicle control (DMSO).  Immunoprecipitation of HA-tagged RhoJ was performed as follows. After 3 washes in ice- cold Tris-buffered saline, cells were harvested on ice by scraping in lysis buffer (150mM NaCL, 50mM HEPES pH=7,5, 2mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 1mM β-mercaptoethanol, 1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail (11836170001, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitor Cocktail 2(P5726, Sigma)), vortexed 3 times 30 sec with 2 minutes pause in between and then centrifuged 15 minutes at 13000 rpm. The total protein content of each sample was evaluated by using a Bradford assay and 1 mg of protein was used in every IP. 6µg of antibodies (rabbit HA tag Chip grade, ab9110, abcam) were incubated with 1 mg of lysate at 4 degrees under constant rotation overnight. Subsequently 25ul DynabeadsTM Protein G (10003D, ThermoFisher Scientific) were added and rotated at 4 degrees for 4 hours. The Dynabeads were washed once in wash buffer (150mM NaCL, 50mM HEPES pH=7,5, 2mM EDTA, 10% Glycerol, 1mM β-mercaptoethanol, 0,1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail and phosphatase inhibitor Cocktail) followed by three washes in MS-compatible buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2). Washed beads were re-suspended in 150 µl trypsin digestion buffer and incubated for 4 hours with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) at 37 ˚C. Beads were removed, another 1 µg of trypsin was added and proteins were further digested overnight at 37 ˚C. Peptides were purified on Omix C18 tips (Agilent) and dried completely in a rotary evaporator.  LC-MS/MS analysis: Peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl loading solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water/acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v/v)) of which 2 µl was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 2 min in loading solvent A on a 5 mm trapping column (Thermo scientific, 300 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads).  The peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation) kept at a constant temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 1% MS solvent B reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 60 min, 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 75 min, 99% MS solvent B in 90 minutes followed by a 10-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 12 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 12 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the mass spectrometry data was performed in MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) with mainly default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on PSM, peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the mouse proteins in the Reference proteins database (UP000000589, database release version of January 2022 containing 21,986 mouse protein sequences, downloaded from http://www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues, acetylation of protein N-termini. Matching between runs was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 minutes. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. A total of 126,976 peptide-to-spectrum matches (PSMs) were performed, resulting in 14,501 identified unique peptides, corresponding to 2,091 identified proteins. Further data analysis of the AP-MS results was performed with an in-house R script, using the proteinGroups output table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution centered around the detection limit (package DEP (please cite PMID: 29446774)), leading to a list of 1,381 quantified proteins in the experiment, used for further data analysis. To compare protein abundance between pairs of sample groups (RhoJHAuntreatedIPnocrosslink vs EVuntreatedIPnocrosslink, RhoJHAtreated12hchemoIPnocrosslink vs EVtreated12hchemoIPnocrosslink sample groups), statistical testing for differences between two group means was performed, using the package limma (PMID: 25605792). Statistical significance for differential regulation was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.05 and fold change of >2- or <0.5-fold (|log2FC| = 1).

### Publication Abstract
The resistance of cancer cells to therapy is responsible for the death of most patients with cancer<sup>1</sup>. Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) has been associated with resistance to therapy in different cancer cells<sup>2,3</sup>. However, the mechanisms by which EMT mediates resistance to therapy remain poorly understood. Here, using a mouse model of skin squamous cell carcinoma undergoing spontaneous EMT during tumorigenesis, we found that EMT tumour cells are highly resistant to a wide range of anti-cancer therapies both in vivo and in vitro. Using gain and loss of function studies in vitro and in vivo, we found that RHOJ-a small GTPase that is preferentially expressed in EMT cancer cells-controls resistance to therapy. Using genome-wide transcriptomic and proteomic profiling, we found that RHOJ regulates EMT-associated resistance to chemotherapy by enhancing the response to replicative stress and activating the DNA-damage response, enabling tumour cells to rapidly repair DNA lesions induced by chemotherapy. RHOJ interacts with proteins that regulate nuclear actin, and inhibition of actin polymerization sensitizes EMT tumour cells to chemotherapy-induced cell death in a RHOJ-dependent manner. Together, our study uncovers the role and the mechanisms through which RHOJ acts as a key regulator of EMT-associated resistance to chemotherapy.

### Keywords
Cell culture, Scc, Mus musculus (mouse), Ap-lc-ms/ms, Cancer

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
Université libre de Buxelles (ULB), Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium ; WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Bruxelles, Belgium

### Submitter
Sara Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Cédric Blanpain
Université libre de Buxelles (ULB), Laboratory of Stem Cells and Cancer, 808 route de Lennik, 1070 Brussels, Belgium ; WELBIO, Université Libre de Bruxelles (ULB), 1070 Bruxelles, Belgium


