### Accession
PXD018604

### Title
Differences and commonalities in plasma membrane recruitment of the two morphogenetically distinct retroviruses HIV-1 and MMTV

### Description
The targeting of retroviral Gag polyproteins to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane is mediated by the N-terminal matrix (MA) domain of Gag. Since retroviruses of different morphogenetic types assemble their immature particles in distinct regions of the host cell, the mechanism of plasma membrane targeting differs between distinct retroviral morphogenetic types. To address this, we have focused on possible mechanistic differences of the MA-plasma membrane targeting of the B type mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) and C type HIV-1, which assembles in the cytoplasm and at the plasma membrane, respectively. Molecular dynamic (MD) simulations together with surface mapping have indicated that MMTV uses, similarly to HIV-1, the myristic switch mechanism to anchor the MA to the membrane and electrostatically interacts with phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate to stabilize MA orientation. We have observed that the affinity of the MMTV MA to the membrane is lower than the affinity of the HIV 1 MA. This might be related to their different topology and the number of basic residues in the highly basic region, which probably reflects the requirement of C-type retroviruses for tighter membrane binding, essential for the assembly, in contrast to D/B-type retroviruses, assembling in the cytoplasm. Additionally, a comparison of the membrane topology of the HIV-1 MA using the surface mapping method and MD simulations has shown that the residues located at the C-terminus of the HIV-1 MA could be responsible for the stabilization of protein-protein interactions within the HIV-1 MA lattice at the plasma membrane.

### Sample Protocol
Covalent labeling of proteins The covalent labeling of proteins was performed like in an already published study (Junkova et al. 2016, Proteins 84). Here we labeled free HIV-1 and MMTV MAs in solution and both proteins bound to liposomes. The labeling of bound proteins was performed in the top fraction of the gradient obtained by LBA, containing only liposome-bound proteins. The labeling was performed directly after the LBA and the concentration of the MA in the top fraction was determined by the SDS-PAGE analysis of the LBAs previously performed under the same conditions. In the HIV-1 MA, tyrosine together with lysine residues were modified by the 600-fold molar excess of NAI in phosphate buffer, pH 6.5, at 25 °C for 1 h, whereas tryptophan residues were modified by the 120-fold molar excess of DHNBS in phosphate buffer at 25 °C for 15 min. In the MMTV MA, tyrosines and lysines were modified by the 600-fold molar excess of NAI and tryptophans by the 360-fold molar excess of DHNBS. The reaction conditions were the same as in the case of the HIV-1 MA. All reactions were terminated by the agent removal using Zeba Microspin desalting columns (Pierce). Protein digestion The modified proteins were digested by Pierce™ MS-grade trypsin in the reaction buffer with trypsin to the substrate ratio 1:20 (w/w) at 37 °C for 2 hours. The digestion was terminated by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the final concentration of 0.5% (v/v).  Nano-HPLC/nano-ESI-MS/MS The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by means of UHPLC Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano (Dionex) coupled with an ESI-Q-TOF Maxis Impact (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometer. Prior to the analysis, the peptides were purified and concentrated by ZipTip pipette tips (Millipore) containing C18 reversed phase. The peptides were eluted by 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoracetic acid, air-dried and dissolved in the solution of 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in water. Subsequently, they were loaded into the trap column, an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (100 µm × 2 cm, particle size 5 µm, Dionex), with a mobile-phase flow rate of 5 μLmin-1 of A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in water) for 5 min. The peptides were then separated in the Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm × 150 mm, particle size 2 µm, Dionex) and eluted with the mobile-phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) using the following gradient: 0–5 min 3 % B, 5–35 min 3–35 % B, 35–37 min 35–90 % B, 37–50 min 90 % B, 50–52 min 90–3 % B, 52–60 min 3 % B. The flow rate during the gradient separation was set to 0.3 μLmin-1. The peptides were eluted directly to the ESI source captive spray (Bruker Daltonics), where the capillary voltage was set to 1400 V, the flow of drying gas to 3 Lmin-1 and the temperature to 150 °C. All the measurements were performed in the positive ion mode using data-dependent analysis with precursor-ion selection in the range of 400–1400 Da; up to five precursor ions from each MS spectrum were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation. The preferred charge state of the precursors was 2–4, the dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s and the MS/MS spectra were recorded in the range of 50–2200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Peak lists were extracted from the raw data into an mgf file with the Data Analysis 4.1 software (Bruker Daltonics). The identification of the peptides of HIV-1 and MMTV MAs was performed by an in-house Mascot server 2.4.1, using a database containing sequences of the HIV-1 MA, the MMTV MA and the whole proteome of E. coli BL21(DE3) strain (downloaded from https://www.uniprot.org/ in March 2017), where MAs  were produced, together with a list of standard contaminants (downloaded from http://maxquant.org/contaminants.zip in May 2014). N-terminal myristoylation and the oxidation of methionines were set as a variable modification for all datasets and the acetylation of lysines and tyrosines or the modification of tryptophans by the 2-hydroxy-5-nitrobenzyl group were set as an additional variable modification when the datasets of modified proteins were evaluated. Trypsin was selected as a protease and three missed cleavage sites were set for the evaluation of the datasets of MMTV MA, while six missed cleavage sites were set for the evaluation of HIV-1 MA datasets. The tolerance of 10 ppm was used for MS spectra and the tolerance of 0.05 Da was utilized for MS/MS spectra. The significance threshold was set to 0.05 and the evaluation only included MS/MS spectra with an ion score greater than 15. Surface mapping evaluation The surface mapping of HIV-1 and MMTV MAs was evaluated qualitatively by a comparison of modified residues in proteins covalently labeled in solution (free proteins) and in the top fraction of the LBA gradient (liposome-bound proteins). All the experiments were performed in three replicas. When the lysine, tyrosine or tryptophan residues were modified in all three repetitions, the residue was marked as stably modified. If the residue was modified only in one or two repetitions, it was marked as weekly modified. When a non-modified residue was detected at least once within some identified peptide, it was marked as unmodified. If some residue was not detected within any of the identified peptides, it was marked as not detected.

### Publication Abstract
Retroviral Gag polyproteins are targeted to the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane through their N-terminal matrix (MA) domain. Because retroviruses of different morphogenetic types assemble their immature particles in distinct regions of the host cell, the mechanism of MA-mediated plasma membrane targeting differs among distinct retroviral morphogenetic types. Here, we focused on possible mechanistic differences of the MA-mediated plasma membrane targeting of the B-type mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) and C-type HIV-1, which assemble in the cytoplasm and at the plasma membrane, respectively. Molecular dynamics simulations, together with surface mapping, indicated that, similarly to HIV-1, MMTV uses a myristic switch to anchor the MA to the membrane and electrostatically interacts with phosphatidylinositol 4,5-bisphosphate to stabilize MA orientation. We observed that the affinity of MMTV MA to the membrane is lower than that of HIV-1 MA, possibly related to their different topologies and the number of basic residues in the highly basic MA region. The latter probably reflects the requirement of C-type retroviruses for tighter membrane binding, essential for assembly, unlike for D/B-type retroviruses, which assemble in the cytoplasm. A comparison of the membrane topology of the HIV-1 MA, using the surface-mapping method and molecular dynamics simulations, revealed that the residues at the HIV-1 MA C terminus help stabilize protein-protein interactions within the HIV-1 MA lattice at the plasma membrane. In summary, HIV-1 and MMTV share common features such as membrane binding of the MA via hydrophobic interactions and exhibit several differences, including lower membrane affinity of MMTV MA.

### Keywords
Covalent labeling-mass spectrometry, Hiv-1, Mmtv, Matrix protein

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic, Flemingovo nám. 2, 166 10 Prague

### Submitter
Petra Junková

### Lab Head
Dr Tomáš Ruml
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague, Technická 5, 166 28 Prague, Czech Republic


