### Accession
PXD019548

### Title
Identification of a Novel Glycan N-linked to the Archaellins and S-layer protein of the thermophilic methanogen, Methanothermococcus thermolithotrophicus

### Description
Motility in the Archaea domain is facilitated by a unique motility structure termed the archaellum. N-glycosylation of the major structural proteins (archaellins) is important for their subsequent incorporation into the archaellum filament. Here, we report the structure of the archaellin glycan from Methanothermococcus thermolithotrophicus, a methanogen which grows optimally at 65°C. Four archaellin genes (flaB1-4) have previously been identified. In gel digestion and LC-MS analysis revealed the identity of the upper band as FlaB1 and the lower band as FlaB3. Examination of the protein sequences for the four archaellins indicated multiple possible N-linked glycosylation sites in each. We observed using mass spectrometry that Mtc. thermolithotrophicus archaellins is posttranslationally modified at multiple sites with an N-linked branched oligosaccharide composed of 7 sugars (1414 Da). NMR analysis of the purified glycan determined the structure to be α-D-glycero-D-manno-Hep3OMe6OMe-(1-3)-[α-GalNAcA3OMe-(1-2)-]-β-Man-(1-4)-[-GalA3OMe4OAc6CMe-(1-4)--GalA-(1-2)-]-α-GalAN-(1-3)-β-GalNAc-Asn. A detailed investigation by HILIC-MS discovered the presence of several, less abundant glycan variants, related to but distinct from the main heptameric glycan.  In addition, we confirmed that the S-layer protein is modified with the same heptameric glycan suggesting a common N-glycosylation pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Mtc. thermolithotrophicus was grown on Balch medium III at 65 C in a CO2/H2 atmosphere. The archaella were sheared from the cells, purified and separated by SDS-PAGE. The archaellin bands were cut from the gel and in-gel digested with trypsin. The digests were analyzed by RPLC-MS/MS and HILIC-MS/MS on a Q-Tof mass spectrometer. The S-layer protein was silated from the membranes of the archaellin by SDS-PAGE and analyzed by RPLC-MS/MS in the same manner as for the archaella. For NMR analysis the archella were digested with proteinase K and purified by size exclusion chromatography and RPLC.

### Data Protocol
The RPLC-MS/MS spectra were searched against a custom database contining the suspected archaellin and S-layer sequences using the Mascot search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched manually for evidence of glycopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nmr, Rplc-ms, Methanothermococcus thermolithotrophicus, Ptm, Archaellin, Hilic-ms, Glycan

### Affiliations
Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council of Canada

### Submitter
John Kelly

### Lab Head
Dr John Francis Kelly
Human Health Therapeutics, National Research Council of Canada


