### Accession
PXD001133

### Title
Proteome of Saccharomyces cerevisiae extracellular matrix

### Description
Proteomic analysis of the extracellular matrix of Saccharomyces cerevisiae W303-1A Wt and the isogenic mutant strain gup1Δ during the development of multicellular overlays.

### Sample Protocol
The development of a uniform ±3 mm-thick homogenous yeast culture mat was obtained spreading evenly 1.5 ml of YPD batch cultures at OD600=1 in Ø 90 mm YPDa plates, and incubating for 7 days at 30 °C. The cellular biomass of 200 plates was gently transferred into 50 ml Falcon tubes. The suspension was washed with PBS buffer (NaCl 100 mM; KCl 2.7 mM; Na2HPO4.2H2O 10 mM; KH2PO4 20 mM; pH 7.4), supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail (PMSF 0.2 µg/ml; Aprotinin 0.32 µg/ml; Pepstatin 1 µg/ml; Leupeptin 1 µg/ml), and incubated for 10 min with constant rotation in a tube roller SRT1 (Stuart, Staffordshire, UK). The suspension, containing cells and ECM, was spun down for 10 min at 15,000 rpm and 4 °C in a Sigma 4-16K centrifuge (Sigma, Osterode, Germany). The supernatant was collected, filtered and freeze-dried. The proteins were precipitated using the chloroform/methanol protocol. Overnight batch cultures on liquid YPD with an air:liquid ratio of 2:1 were used as control, to assess the proteins secreted to the extracellular growth medium. These cultures were centrifuged for 10 min at 5,000 rpm, and the supernatants collected and processed in the same way as the ECM samples. Total protein extract (50 µg) was brought up to 40 µl with MilliQ water and mixed with loading buffer 5X. The samples were loaded and run at low voltage (25 V) until the migration front reached 2-3 mm above the resolving gel.  The bands containing protein total extract were excised and digested overnight at 37 °C with sequencing grade trypsin (Roche Biochemicals) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 85), 1 µg/20µg protein. After digestion, the supernatant from the excised protein bands were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The total extract samples (5 μl), in 0.1% formic acid for a final concentration of 1 μg/μl were loaded onto a C18-A1 ASY-Column 2 cm pre-column (Thermo Scientific) and then eluted onto a Biosphere C18 column (inner diameter 75 µm, 15 cm long, 3 µm particle size) (NanoSeparations). The proteins were separated using a gradient on a nanoEasy HPLC (Proxeon), coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon), at a flow-rate of 250 nl/min. The mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 2% ACN, and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in 100% ACN. A solvent gradient was applied for 140 min, from 0% to 35% phase B. Mass spectra were acquired on the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoScientific) in the positive ion mode. Full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400-1,800) were acquired with a target value of 1,000,000 at a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400 and the 15 most intense ions were selected for collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the LTQ with a target value of 10,000 and normalized collision energy of 38%. Precursor ion charge state screening, and monoisotopic precursor ion selection, were enabled. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were rejected. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30 ms. Proteome Discoverer 1.2 with MASCOT 2.3 was used as search engine to search in the Uniprot/Swissprot (taxonomy Saccharomyces cerevisiae) database (7,798 sequences). The search parameters used were the following: peptide tolerance - 10 ppm; fragment ion tolerance – 0.8 Da; missed cleavage sites – 2; fixed modification - carbamidomethyl cysteine, and variable modifications - methionine oxidation. Mascot ion score 20 and a 99% peptide confidence were set as filters.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast; ecm; colony; multicellular agregates

### Affiliations
University of Minho
CBMA - Univeristy of Minho

### Submitter
Fábio Faria-Oliveira

### Lab Head
Dr Cândida Manuel Ribeiro Simões Lucas
CBMA - Univeristy of Minho


