### Accession
PXD035153

### Title
Npl3 functions in mRNP assembly by recruitment of mRNP components to the transcription site and their transfer onto the mRNA

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control every RNA metabolic process by multiple protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions. Their roles have largely been analyzed by crude mutations, which abrogate several functions at once and likely impact the structural integrity of the large mRNP assemblies, these proteins often function in. Thus, the function of the RNA-binding activity of RBPs is often unknown. Using UV-induced RNA-protein crosslinking and subsequent mass spectrometric (MS) analysis, we first identified more than 100 in vivo RNA crosslinks in 16 nuclear mRNP components. For functional analysis, we chose Npl3, for which we identified crosslinks in its two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) as well as in the flexible linker connecting the two. Both RRM domains and the linker uniquely contribute to RNA recognition. Interestingly, mutations in each of these three regions cause different phenotypes, indicating distinct functions of the different RNA-binding domains of Npl3. Notably, the npl3-Linker mutant strongly impairs recruitment of some mRNP components to chromatin and the incorporation of other mRNP components into nuclear mRNPs, establishing a function of Npl3 in mRNP assembly. Taken together, we determined the specific function of the RNA-binding activity of a nuclear mRNP component, an approach that can be applied to many RBPs in any RNA metabolic process.

### Sample Protocol
yeast cells were grown in SDC-URA supplemented with 120 µM Uracil to OD600 = 0.8 before 4-thio-uracil was added to final concentration of 500 µM. Cells were pelleted at 7,000 g for 4 min when reaching OD600 ≈ 3. Cells were crosslinked by 365 nm UV light in a petri dish on a water bath with crushed ice using a Bio-Link BLX-365-UV-Crosslinker. Cells were pelleted again, suspended in 2.5 ml TAP-buffer (50 mM TRIS, pH 7.5, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 200 mM KCl, 0,15 % NP-40, 1 mM DTT) and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Cell beads were ground using a freezer mill 6870D (SPEX SamplePrep). Lysate was cleared at 165,000 g for 1 hour at 4°C. Supernatant was incubate with IgG bead-slurry (IgG Sepharose 6 Fast Flow, GE Healthcare) for 1.5 h at 4 °C. After washing TEV-protease was added to the beads and incubated for 1 h at 16°C for elution. 100 µg of affinity-purified eluate were further processed to enrich for crosslinked protein-RNA heteroconjugates as described elsewhere (Kramer et al., 2014; . The enriched samples were subjected to the same LC-MS system described below.

### Data Protocol
The specific MS settings for protein-RNA crosslinking identification are described elsewhere in detail (Kramer et al., 2014;). Briefly, enriched crosslinked peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% TFA before subjected to LC-MS analysis using a self-packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch GmbH, 1.9 µM pore size). All samples were analyzed on a 58-minute linear gradient, the effective peptide separation was achieved through a multi-step gradient with a flow rate of 0.3 uL/min.  Eluted peptides were analyzed by QExactive HF or Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS1 Spectra were acquired using Orbitrap mass analyzer at the resolution of 60,000. MS2 spectra were acquired in DDA mode using the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolution using either a Top20 or max speed methode for a cycle time of 3s.Spectra corresponding to peptide-RNA crosslinked species were analyzed and manually and validated using the OpenMS module RNPxl (Kramer et al., 2014; Veit et al., 2016) and the novel NuXL software (Urlaub laboratory, unpublished), version OpenMS-HEAD-3.0 .

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) control every RNA metabolic process by multiple protein-RNA and protein-protein interactions. Their roles have largely been analyzed by crude mutations, which abrogate multiple functions at once and likely impact the structural integrity of the large ribonucleoprotein particles (RNPs) these proteins function in. Using UV-induced RNA-protein crosslinking of entire cells, protein complex purification and mass spectrometric analysis, we identified &gt;100 in vivo RNA crosslinks in 16 nuclear mRNP components in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. For functional analysis, we chose Npl3, which displayed crosslinks in its two RNA recognition motifs (RRMs) and in the connecting flexible linker region. Both RRM domains and the linker uniquely contribute to RNA recognition as revealed by NMR and structural analyses. Interestingly, mutations in these regions cause different phenotypes, indicating distinct functions of the different RNA-binding domains. Notably, an npl3-Linker mutation strongly impairs recruitment of several mRNP components to chromatin and incorporation of other mRNP components into nuclear mRNPs, establishing a so far unknown function of Npl3 in nuclear mRNP assembly. Taken together, our integrative analysis uncovers a specific function of the RNA-binding activity of the nuclear mRNP component Npl3. This approach can be readily applied to RBPs in any RNA metabolic process.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Sr-like protein, Nmr, Xl-ms, Mrnp assembly, Npl3, Structure, Mrna, Gene expression, Rna-binding sites

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Max Planck for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Am Fassberg 11 37077 Gottingen

### Submitter
Alexander Wulf

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Max Planck for Multidisciplinary Sciences Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Am Fassberg 11 37077 Gottingen


