### Accession
PXD006317

### Title
A Temporal Proteomic Map of Epstein-Barr Virus Lytic Replication in B-cells

### Description
Epstein Barr virus (EBV) replication contributes to multiple human diseases, including infectious mononucleosis, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, B-cell lymphomas, and oral hairy leukoplakia. We performed systematic quantitative analyses of temporal changes in host and EBV proteins during lytic replication to gain novel insights into virus-host interactions, using conditional Burkitt lymphoma models of type I and II EBV infection. We quantified profiles of >8000 cellular and 69 EBV proteins, including >500 plasma membrane proteins, providing temporal views of the lytic B-cell proteome and EBV virome. Our approach revealed EBV-induced remodelling of cell cycle, innate and adaptive immune pathways, including upregulation of the complement cascade and proteasomal degradation of the B-cell receptor complex, conserved between EBV types I and II. Cross-comparison with proteomic analyses of human cytomegalovirus infection and of a Kaposi sarcoma associated herpesvirus immunoevasin identified host factors targeted by multiple herpesviruses. Our results provide an important resource for studies of EBV replication.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane profiling was performed as previously described (Weekes et al., Cell 2014) with minor modifications. FACS sorted cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS, followed by oxidation of sialic acid residues with sodium-meta-periodate. Plasma-membrane glycoproteins were selectively labelled with aminooxy-biotin. The reaction was quenched, cell numbers normalized then cells lysed in Triton-X-100. For whole proteome samples, cells were washed, lysed in 6M guanidine/50mM HEPES buffer then vortexed, sonicated and centrifuged. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA. TMT-based analysis was performed as described previously (Weekes et al., Cell 2014). Alkylated and reduced proteins were digested into peptides, which were labelled with TMT reagents, and fractions generated from combined peptide samples strong cation exchange (PM samples) or high pH reverse-phase HPLC. We performed mass spectrometry as described previously using an Orbitrap Fusion or Orbitrap Lumos (Weekes et al., Cell 2014), and quantified TMT reporter ions from the MS3 scan (McAlister et al., Anal Chem 2012, Ting et al., Nat Methods 2011). Peptides were identified and quantified using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline. A combined database was searched, consisting of human, P3HR1 and Akata strains of EBV, all open reading frames from six-frame translations of P3HR1 and Akata and common contaminants. Peptide-spectral matches were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate using linear discriminant analysis in conjunction with the target-decoy method (Huttlin et al., Cell 2010). The resulting data set was further collapsed to a final protein-level FDR of 1%. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony. Where all PSM from a given EBV protein could be explained either by a canonical gene or an ORF from the six-frame translation, the canonical gene was picked in preference. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching PSM after filtering based on isolation specificity. Reverse and contaminant proteins were removed, and protein quantitation values were exported for normalization and further analysis in Excel.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline as described previously (Weekes et al., Cell 2014). Briefly, MS spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. A combined database was constructed from (a) a combined human Uniprot and Trembl database (February 4th, 2014), (b) P3HR1 strain EBV, (c) Akata strain EBV (d) all open reading frames from a six-frame translation of P3HR1 strain EBV, (e) all open reading frames from a six-frame translation of Akata strain EBV and (f) common contaminants such as porcine trypsin and endoproteinase LysC. The combined database was concatenated with a reverse database composed of all protein sequences in reversed order. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm precursor ion tolerance. Product ion tolerance was set to 0.03 Th. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (229.162932 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.02146 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. To control the fraction of erroneous protein identifications, we used a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, Nat Methods 2007, Methods Mol Biol 2010). Peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were filtered to an initial peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with subsequent filtering to attain a final protein-level FDR of 1%. PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis, as described previously (Huttlin et al., Cell 2010), considering the following parameters: XCorr, DCn, missed cleavages, peptide length, charge state, and precursor mass accuracy. Protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Where all PSMs from a given EBV protein could be explained either by a canonical gene or an ORF from the six-frame translation, the canonical gene was picked in preference. Proteins were quantified by summing TMT reporter ion counts across all matching peptide-spectral matches using in-house software, as described previously (Pease et al., 2013). Briefly, a 0.003 Th window around the theoretical m/z of each reporter ion (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131) was scanned for ions, and the maximum intensity nearest to the theoretical m/z was used. We required every individual peptide used for quantitation to contribute sufficient TMT reporter ions (minimum of 1,250 per spectrum) so that each on its own provided a representative picture of relative protein abundance (McAlister et al., Anal Chem 2012). We additionally employed an isolation specificity filter to minimize peptide coisolation (Ting et al., J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 2011). Peptide-spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra (more than 9 TMT channels missing and/or a combined signal:noise ratio of less than 250 across all TMT reporter ions) or no MS3 spectra at all were excluded from quantitation. Protein quantitation values were exported for further analysis in Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) replication contributes to&#xa0;multiple human diseases, including infectious mononucleosis, nasopharyngeal carcinoma, B cell lymphomas, and oral hairy leukoplakia. We performed systematic quantitative analyses of temporal changes in host and EBV proteins during lytic replication to gain insights into virus-host interactions, using conditional Burkitt lymphoma models of type I and II EBV infection. We quantified profiles of &gt;8,000 cellular and 69 EBV proteins, including &gt;500 plasma membrane proteins, providing temporal views of the lytic B cell proteome and EBV virome. Our approach revealed EBV-induced remodeling of cell cycle, innate and adaptive immune pathways, including upregulation of the complement cascade and proteasomal degradation of the B cell receptor complex, conserved between EBV types I and II. Cross-comparison with proteomic analyses of human cytomegalovirus infection and of a Kaposi-sarcoma-associated herpesvirus immunoevasin identified host factors targeted by multiple herpesviruses. Our results provide an important resource for studies of EBV replication.

### Keywords
Viral evasion, Lytic replication, Quantitative proteomics, Epstein-barr virus, Tandem mass tag, Complement, Immune evasion, B-cell receptor, Host-pathogen interaction, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
Michael Weekes

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Weekes
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Hills Road, Cambridge, CB2 0XY


