### Accession
PXD036075

### Title
Clinical drug response and proteotype profiling elucidates targetable vulnerabilities of myelofibrosis

### Description
Myelofibrosis (MF) is a hematopoietic stem cell disorder belonging to the myeloproliferative neoplasms. MF patients frequently carry driver mutations in JAK2 and Calreticulin (CALR) and have limited therapeutic options. Here, we integrate ex vivo drug response and proteotype analyses across MF patient cohorts to discover targetable vulnerabilities and associated therapeutic strategies. Drug sensitivities of mutated and progenitor cells were measured in patient blood using high-content imaging and single-cell deep learning-based analyses. Integration with matched molecular profiling revealed three therapeutic vulnerabilities. First, CALR mutations drive BET and HDAC inhibitor sensitivity, particularly in the absence of high MAPK-Ras pathway protein levels. Second, an MCM complex-high proliferative signature corresponds to advanced disease and sensitivity to drugs targeting pro-survival signaling and DNA replication. Third, homozygous CALR mutations result in high ER stress, responding to ER stressors and UPR inhibition. Overall, our integrated analyses provide a molecularly-motivated roadmap for individualized MF patient treatment.

### Sample Protocol
For granulocyte proteotyping, cells were isolated from MPN patient or healthy donor blood by gradient centrifugation purification (Ficoll), after which erythrocytes were removed by hydrolysis (ACK). 1 million granulocytes were lysed in 0.5% SDS containing TCEP and CAA. SDS was removed with 8M Urea using the FASP procedure (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) in 96-well plates (PALL). Protein concentrates were solubilized and processed, digested, and cleaned in 96-well S-Trap plates (ProtiFi) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Dried peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys) and peptide concentrations were normalized. For HSPC and T-cell proteotyping, first PBMCs were isolated from MF patient blood by gradient centrifugation purification (Ficoll). Viably frozen PBMCs were thawed and HSPCs and T-cells were purified using CD34 and CD3 MACS bead isolation. Peptides were isolated from up to 1e6 cells of the respective samples using the iST 96x kit (PreOmics), using the manufacturer's protocol and a 3-hour digestion. Dried peptides were resuspended in LC-LOAD (PreOmics), and peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Peptide concentrations were normalized and supplemented with iRT peptides (Biognosys). For cell line proteotyping, cells were lysed and peptides were isolated using iST kits (PreOmics). For TMT-based quantification the TMT-NHS iST kit was used, after which labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated using high pH-RT fractionation.

### Data Protocol
For granulocyte proteotyping, a spectral library was built using DDA runs of peptides pooled from different samples, which were either unfractionated or subjected to high pH-RT fractionation. The spectral library was generated using ProteomeDiscoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific), in which the workflow included a first MSPepSearch scoring using the ProteomeTools HCD28 spectral library, after which low-scoring peptides by Percolator were subjected to a second Sequest HT search. DIA runs were converted to HTRMS using HTRMSConvedrter (Biognosys) and analyzed using the generated spectral library in Spectronaut 13.9 (Biognosys). For HSPC and T-cell proteotyping, raw files were directly imported into Spectronaut 15.0 (Biognosys), and features were extracted in a library-free method using directDIA. Protein quantification and subsequent statistical analyses on DIA features extracted from Spectronaut was for all proteotyping performed using MSStats (Choi et al., 2014) version 3.16.

### Publication Abstract
Myelofibrosis is a hematopoietic stem cell disorder belonging to the myeloproliferative neoplasms. Myelofibrosis patients frequently carry driver mutations in either JAK2 or Calreticulin (CALR) and have limited therapeutic options. Here, we integrate ex vivo drug response and proteotype analyses across myelofibrosis patient cohorts to discover targetable vulnerabilities and associated therapeutic strategies. Drug sensitivities of mutated and progenitor cells were measured in patient blood using high-content imaging and single-cell deep learning-based analyses. Integration with matched molecular profiling revealed three targetable vulnerabilities. First, CALR mutations drive BET and HDAC inhibitor sensitivity, particularly in the absence of high Ras pathway protein levels. Second, an MCM complex-high proliferative signature corresponds to advanced disease and sensitivity to drugs targeting pro-survival signaling and DNA replication. Third, homozygous CALR mutations result in high endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, responding to ER stressors and unfolded protein response inhibition. Overall, our integrated analyses provide a molecularly motivated roadmap for individualized myelofibrosis patient treatment.

### Keywords
Patient samples, T-cells, Myelofibrosis, Granulocytes, Proteotyping, Hspcs, Drug screening

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich / University Hospital Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Mattheus Wildschut

### Lab Head
Dr Berend Snijder
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland


