### Accession
PXD036988

### Title
Bacillus cereus biofilm formation with the aromatic amino acid L-tyrosine

### Description
The aim of this study was to identify and elaborate on the importance of the shikimate pathway, and specifically the aromatic amino acid L-tyrosine derived from it, for the formation of (air-liquid) biofilm of the food pathogen Bacillus cereus.

### Sample Protocol
B. cereus ATCC 14579 WT and bc2939 mutant cells were grown in Y1 defined media with glucose as the carbon source, both with and without added L-tyrosine. Cells were grown in a 96-well plate for 24h after which the supernatant and biofilm cells were harvested. Cells were pelleted, washed and re-suspended in 50 µl 100mM Tris buffer (pH 8) followed by sonification on ice for three times 15 seconds. Protein concentration was diluted to 5 µg/µL and reduced with 15 mM DTT, unfolded with 6 M urea and alkylated with 20 mM AcrylAmide. Proteins were gathered using two types of magnetic carboxylated modified particles (speedBeads) in a 1:1 ratio by adding acetonitrile up to 70 V/V%. Beads with captured proteins were washed (70% ethanol/30%water, 100% acetonitrile) and digested with 100 µl 5 ng/µl sequencing grade trypsin overnight, dried, and reconstituted into 50 µl 1 ml/l formic acid. Samples were analysed by injecting 5 µL into a nanoLC1000 - Q Exactive HF-X -MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus cereus is a food-borne pathogen capable of producing biofilms. Following analysis of biofilm formation by B.&#xa0;cereus ATCC 14579 transposon mutants in defined medium (DM), a deletion mutant of bc2939 (&#x394;bc2939) was constructed that showed decreased crystal violet biofilm staining and biofilm cell counts. In addition, &#x394;bc2939 also produced smaller colony biofilms with lower cell counts and loss of wrinkly morphology. The bc2939 gene encodes for Prephenate dehydrogenase, which converts Prephenate to 4-Hydroxy-phenylpyruvate (4-HPPA) in the l-tyrosine branch of the Shikimate pathway. While growth of the mutant and WT in DM was similar, addition of l-tyrosine was required to restore WT-like (colony) biofilm formation. Comparative proteomics showed reduced expression of Tyrosine-protein kinase/phosphatase regulators and extracellular polysaccharide cluster 1 (EPS1) proteins, aerobic electron transfer chain cytochrome aa3/d quinol oxidases, and iso-chorismate synthase involved in menaquinone synthesis in DM grown mutant biofilm cells, while multiple oxidative stress-related catalases and superoxide dismutases were upregulated. Performance in shaking cultures showed a 100-fold lower concentration of menaquinone-7 and reduction in cell counts of DM grown &#x394;bc2939 indicating increased oxygen sensitivity. Combining all results, points to an important role of Tyrosine-modulated EPS1 production and menaquinone-dependent aerobic respiration in B. cereus ATCC 14579 (colony) biofilm formation.

### Keywords
Shikimate pathway, Bacillus cereus, Air-liquid biofilm, Pathogen

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


