### Accession
PXD020462

### Title
Oxidative damage signatures in human bone collagen from Pompeii and Herculaneum.

### Description
In search of markers for protein aging, we used an extraordinary test case of human bones from the excavations sites of Pompei and Herculaneum (79 AD), analyzed by a shotgun proteomic approach using LC-MS/MS. Human bones from Scalandrone Bay (II sec AD, another volcanic area, yet not related to Vesuvius eruption were also analysed for the comparison of the PTMs provoked from a volcanic ground to an almost coeval standard burial condition. In addition, already published archaeological bones, approximately 17 centuries younger than the test case, were used as control samples. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine was examined as a now widely considered aging molecular marker. Deamidation profile was quite robust for samples with a similar age whereas the fewer proteins were detected, the more degraded the sample were found to be. Positional investigation of deamidation in the polypeptide sequence of collagen type I revealed that some zones are more susceptible to deamidation than others. Back bone cleavage analysis confirmed that some zones apart from deamidation are more susceptible to spontaneous hydrolysis too. Analysis of post-translational modifications showed higher advanced glycation products of lysine and arginines in the samples of Pompeii and Herculaneum. Furthermore, oxidative products of methionine, histidine and the conversion of ST to glycine were also detected. Interestingly, multiple oxidation products of proline and dehydration of hydroxyproline were detected for the first time, turning the scientific interest to this amino acid (P), which is usually ignored due to its natural conversion to hydroxyproline. As a matter of fact, we can observe that collagen degradation in bones from Pompeii and Herculaneum underwent different degradation processes.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, in order to prevent contamination, surfaces were removed from bone samples with sandpaper. Samples (30–50 mg) were wrapped in clean aluminium foil and fragmented into powder using a conventional hammer. The hammer was cleaned with bleach and ethanol, repeatedly. 300 μl of 0.5 M EDTA (pH 8.0) was added to the powdered bones, followed by incubation at 4 °C for 24–48 h with agitation. Every 24h fresh EDTA was added after the samples have been spinned down and the supernatants were separated from the pellet (EDTA fraction). Subsequently, pellets were washed three times with 100 μl 0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0) and the supernatants (Tris fraction) were combined to the previous fraction (EDTA fraction). The EDTA and Tris fraction were concentrated on an Amicon 3000 Da MWCO spin column, the flow through was discarded, and the retained sample was washed with 3ml of GuHCl 2M extraction solution, prepared with 8 M guanidinium hydrochloride (GuHCl), 0.5M Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 0.5M chloroacetamide ,100 mM Tris (pH 8.0) and water. Finally, the membrane was washed with 300 μl of GuHCL 2M extraction solution that were added to the protein pellet. The pH was adjusted to 8.0 and the mixture of proteins was heated at 80°C for 3 hours under agitation and cooled to room temperature. Without separating supernatants and the residual bone powder, samples were heated at 80 °C for 2 h, and cooled to room temperature LysC-Trypsin mix, 1/100 by amount of protein, was added to the samples for protein digestion. Mixed samples were incubated at 25 °C for 30 min then diluted to 2 M GuHCl with 25 mM Tris (pH 8.0), followed by incubation at 37 °C overnight under agitation. Digestion was terminated with 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1%. After centrifugation at 14 000 g for 10 min, the tryptic peptides in the supernatant were immobilized on C18 stage tips and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), and hydroxylation (P,K) were evaluated as variable modifications in standard MaxQuant searches. Additionally, MaxQuant’s “evidence.txt” file was used to calculate separate deamidation rates for Asparagine (N) and Glutamine (Q) for individual samples with a code that is freely available on GitHub (https://github.com/dblyon/deamidation). Also using both “evidence.txt” and “pepetides.txt”, positional evaluation of the relative deamidation (N,Q) and oxidation (M) was performed using code available on https://github.com/ismaRP/MSMSdeamidation. For each N or Q position, the values are calculated dividing the sum of intensities of the peptides containing the modification by the total intensity of the peptides containing that position. Backbone cleavage was assessed searching for semitryptic peptides allowing for one non specific end with trypsin enzyme. We utilize the concept of “dependent peptides” for unbiased, comprehensive analysis of diagenetically induced chemical modifications in collagen proteins. The “dependent peptides” are modified peptides identified in an unrestricted database search against a library of previously identified nonmodified “base peptides”, a peptide search feature integrated in MaxQuant with statistical analysis for validation of modified peptides. Mass shifts were ranked by their occurrence within the dataset and grouped on the aminoacid on which occurred. Alleged statistically relevant modifications for which a plausible chemical interpretation was given (“UNIMOD, protein modifications for mass spectrometry” http://www.unimod.org/modifications_list.php) were subsequently searched in separate run as variable modifications in order to map selected PTMs on all identified. To reduce the search space, we restricted the database to the most relevant identified protein sequences, i.e. type I collagen chains, namely Collagen alpha-1(I) chain and Collagen alpha-2(I), which are, as expected, largely overrepresented, with more than 58% of the total assigned spectra on average. Moreover, type I collagen chains α1 and α2 are the two polypeptidic chains identified in all the samples. Samples have been analysed either individually and as group dataset. More specifically, each dataset was analyzed separately and the distinct mass shifts, each representing a potential PTM were firstly evaluated by their occurrence within the dataset. Then in each dataset the most frequent mass shifts were determined. All relevant mass-shifts were checked for the elemental composition to determine the structure of the modification, manually inspected and only peptides with high probability modification site assignments (>70)were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pompeii, Human bones, Deamidation (nq), Paleoproteomics, Ages, Shotgun proteomics, Vesuvius, 79 ad herculaneum

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Federico II,Naples, Italy
University of Naples "Federico II"

### Submitter
Georgia Ntasi

### Lab Head
Dr Leila Birolo
Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Federico II,Naples, Italy


