### Accession
PXD006424

### Title
Biomechanical rigidity and quantitative proteomics analyses of segmental regions of the ocular trabecular meshwork at physiologic and elevated pressures

### Description
The extracellular matrix (ECM) of the ocular trabecular meshwork (TM) builds resistance to aqueous humor outflow, thereby regulating intraocular pressure (IOP). Glaucoma, a leading cause of blindness worldwide, is associated with changes in the ECM of the TM. The elastic modulus indicates glaucomatous TM is more rigid than age-matched normal TM; however, the biomechanical properties of segmental low (LF) and high flow (HF) TM regions in response to elevated pressure, are unknown. In this study, we measured the elastic modulus by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and measured protein expression differences in perfused human TM tissues by proteomics analyses. The elastic modulus of LF regions was 2.3-fold stiffer than HF regions at physiological (1x) pressure, and 7.4-fold or 3.5-fold stiffer than HF regions at elevated (2x) pressure after 24 or 72 hours, respectively. Quantitative proteomics using isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT), multi-notch isolation, high resolution, and extended multiplexing were used to compare protein expression levels between normal, LF, and HF regions at the two pressures. A total of 3730 proteins (2 peptides per protein) were identified from the ECM samples, and 2637 proteins were quantified. Statistically significant ECM proteins over expressed in LF compared with HF regions at 2x, and in HF regions at 1x compared with 2x pressure were determined. A sub-set of ECM proteins, including decorin, TGFβ-induced protein, keratocan, lumican, dermatopontin and thrombospondin 4, were common differential candidates in both comparisons. These data suggest a correlation between the biomechanical properties of TM regions and differential levels of specific ECM proteins in response to elevated pressure.

### Sample Protocol
Anterior Segment Perfusion Culture: Studies were approved by the OHSU Institutional Review Board and experiments were conducted in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. Human eye tissue was obtained from cadavers (Lions VisionGift, Portland, OR, USA) and required prior informed consent of donors. Length of time from death to stationary culture was 48 hours or less. Anterior segments were placed into serum-free stationary organ culture for 5-7 days to facilitate recovery post-mortem. The cadaver eye age range was 65 - 97 years and average age was 76 +/- 9 years (n = 14). Exclusion criteria were:  1) glaucomatous and glaucoma-suspect eyes were not included, and 2) perfused eyes whose flow rates were outside of the range of 1 - 9 ul/min (or whose facility was outside of the range of 0.125 - 1.0 ul/min/mm Hg) were excluded. Human anterior segments were perfused with serum-free Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) containing 1% Penicillin/Streptomycin/Fungizone, at constant pressure (8.8 mmHg) with an average flow rate of 1-9 ul/min, which is like normal physiological rate and pressures (minus episcleral venous pressure) in vivo. Anterior segments were perfused continuously either at normal (9 mmHg or “1x”) or at elevated (18 mmHg or “2x”) perfusion pressure for 72 hours. During the final stage of perfusion, fluorescently-labeled amine-modified microspheres or Cell Mask Orange (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) were diluted 1:1000 into PBS, vortexed vigorously, and 200 ul of was injected as a bolus directly in-line into the anterior segment organ culture and perfused for 1 hour. Perfusion was stopped and anterior segments were imaged en face using a Leica DM500 microscope (Leica Microsystems, Buffalo Grove, IL, USA) prior to cutting into radial wedges of high flow or low flow regions. High flow (HF) and low flow (LF) regions were separated based on relative fluorescence of the TM.   Tissue Lysis: TM tissues (4 sets of 4 samples: 1X LF, 1X HF, 2X LF, 2X HF) were transferred individually to a tared 2ml tube with 2.4 mm stainless steel beads and weighed. Samples were lysed by bead beating in 150 ul of 167 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) using a Omni Bead Ruptor 24 Homogenizer (Speed = 6.0, Cycles = 3, Cycle Time = 1.0 min, Dwell/Pause = 1.0 min) followed by addition of 100 ul of 10% SDS, 0.5% DCA to the lysate and bead beating repeated as above. Lysed samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 16000 x g at 4C and supernatant transferred to a 1.5 ml lowbind eppendorf tube. BCA assay (Thermo Fisher scientific) was performed to determine protein concentration. Protein recovery ranged from 0.4% to 2.3% of wet weight of tissue.   Digestion:  14 ug of protein from 8 samples and 2 pooled samples (1.75 ug x 8 samples) for each of two TMT experiment were e-FASP digested. Samples were reduced with 1M TCEP at 90C for 10 min, transferred to a 30 kDa Amicon filter (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) followed by buffer exchange into 8 M Urea, 0.2% deoxycholic acid (DCA), 100mM TEAB. Samples were alkylated with iodoactetamide at 37C for 1h, buffer exchanged into digestion buffer (0.2% DCA, 50 mM TEAB, pH 8) and digested with trypsin (1:35 enzyme:substrate) overnight. Samples were centrifuged, the filtrate extracted with ethyl acetate to remove DCA, dried and taken for TMT labeling.  TMT Labeling: Digested and dried samples (14 ug each) were dissolved in 25 ul of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled using TMT 10-plex reagents (Thermo Scientific). The manufacturer suggested protocol was used, except amounts were decreased by factors of 4. Briefly, TMT labeling was carried out on 14 ug of peptides from each individual sample and the two pooled samples per TMT experiment. TMT 10-plex labeling reagents (0.8 mg) were each dissolved in 52 ul anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). Each sample containing 14 ug of peptide in a 25 ul volume of TEAB buffer was combined with 12 ul of its respective 10-plex TMT reagent and incubated for 1h at room temperature. A pooled sample for normalization was prepared by combining 2 ul of each labeled sample, 2 ul of 5% hydroxylamine added, and the combined sample incubated for a further 15 min. The mixture was then dried down, dissolved in 5% formic acid, and 2 ug of peptide analyzed by a single 2 hour LC-MS/MS method. This run was done to normalize the total reporter ion intensity of each multiplexed sample and to check labeling efficiency. The remaining samples were quenched by addition of 2 ul of 5% hydroxylamine as above, then combined in equal ratios per TMT experiment (2 TMT experiments) based on total reporter ion intensities determined during the normalization run, and dried down for 2D-LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: TMT-labeled samples (46.3 ug per TMT experiment) were reconstituted in 20 ul of HPLC water and separated by 2D reverse-phase liquid chromatography (2D-LC) using a Dionex NCS-3500RS UltiMate RSLCnano UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each 20 ul biological sample (46.3 ug) was injected onto a NanoEase 5 um XBridge BEH130 C18 300 um x 50 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA USA) at 3 ul/min in a mobile phase containing 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9). Peptides were eluted by sequential injection of 20 ul volumes of 14, 17, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 35, 40, 50, and 90% ACN in 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 9) at 3 ul/min flow rate. Bound peptides (Acclaim PepMap 100 μm x 2 cm NanoViper C18, 5 μm trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific)) were diluted with mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 24 ul/min flow. After 10 min of loading, the trap column was switched in-line to a PepMap RSLC C18, 2 um, 75 um x 25 cm EasySpray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were then separated at low pH using a 7.5-30% ACN gradient over 90 min in mobile phase containing 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min flow rate. Each TMT experiment required 36 hours for completion. Tandem mass spectrometry data was collected using an Orbitrap Fusion configured with an EasySpray NanoSource (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Survey scans were performed in the Orbitrap (resolution = 120,000), and data-dependent MS2 scans performed in the linear ion trap using CID (collision energy = 35) following isolation with the instrument’s quadrupole. Reporter ion detection was performed in the Orbitrap (resolution = 60,000) using MS3 scans following synchronous precursor isolation (SPS) of the top 10 ions in the linear ion trap, and HCD in the ion-routing multipole (collision energy = 65). The MSn scans used default automatic gain control ion targets and variable numbers of MS2 scans between survey scans to optimize data collection. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded and dynamic exclusion settings were 10 PPM m/z tolerances for 30 s durations.   TMT data analysis: RAW files were processed using Proteome Discoverer v1.4.1.14 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each of the TMT experiments, the 18 fractions were merged and searched with SEQUEST HT using a human Swiss-Prot protein database (canonical sequences) downloaded from www.UniProt.org in July 2015 (20,193 entries). Searches were configured with static modifications for the TMT reagents (+229.163 Da) on lysines and N-termini, carbamidomethyl (+57.021 Da) on cysteines, dynamic modifications for oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da), parent ion tolerance of 1.25 Da, fragment mass tolerance of 1.0005 Da, monoisotopic masses, and trypsin cleavage (max 2 missed cleavages). Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery and identifications were validated by Percolator software.   Search results and TMT reporter ion intensities were exported from Proteome Discoverer and processed with in-house Python scripts. Only peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) matching a single protein entry with q scores < 0.05, delta masses within 10 PPM, and trimmed average reporter ion intensity greater than 500 were used for quantification. The reporter ion intensities from all PSMs were summed to create total protein intensities. We employed an experimental design and normalization procedure called internal reference scaling (IRS) to handle the two 10-plex TMT experiments. This method is described in [Plubell, Deanna L., et al. "Extended multiplexing of TMT labeling reveals age and high fat diet specific proteome changes in mouse epididymal adipose tissue." Molecular & Cellular Proteomics (2017): mcp-M116.].   Differential protein abundances were determined by comparing the IRS-normalized total reporter ion intensities between groups using the R package edgeR [Robinson, Mark D., Davis J. McCarthy, and Gordon K. Smyth. "edgeR: a Bioconductor package for differential expression analysis of digital gene expression data." Bioinformatics 26.1 (2010): 139-140.]. Additional data normalizations, Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing corrections, and calculation of false discovery rates were performed within edgeR. Protein annotations from UniProt Swiss-Prot database records for the quantified proteins were added using in-house scripts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Human, Biomechanical rigidity, Trabecular mesh, Quantitative proteomics, Extended multiplexing, Multi-notch isolation, High resolution mass spectrometry, Tandem mass tags

### Affiliations
OHSU
Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA

### Submitter
Phillip Wilmarth

### Lab Head
Dr Janice Vranka
Department of Ophthalmology, Casey Eye Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, USA


