### Accession
PXD027841

### Title
Targeted LC-MS/MS analysis of oSCRIB protein in HeLa cells.

### Description
LC-MS/MS analysis of small HeLa proteins (approximately 10–15 kDa) for detecting oSCRIB protein with Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) mode.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen HeLa cells were thawed on ice and lysed by ultrasonic treatment in a solution containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.9) and 500 mM NaCl. The cell extracts were applied to SDS-PAGE for protein separation.The protein bands that corresponded to endogenous HeLa proteins of approximately 10–15 kDa, which included oSCRIB protein, were excised from the SDS-PAGE gels. The small HeLa proteins in the gel slices were digested in-gel with trypsin at 37°C for 16 h and the resultant peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS for detecting oSCRIB protein with Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) mode.

### Data Protocol
A raw MS/MS file was converted into MGF files using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MGF files were submitted to an in-house Mascot Server 2.7.0 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and subjected to Peptide-Spectrum Matching (PSM) searches by the Mascot algorithm through Thermo Proteome Discoverer with the following parameters: variable modifications, acetyl (protein N-term), oxidation (M), and Gln to pyro-Glu conversion (N-term Q); static modification, carboxymethyl (C); maximum of three missed cleavages by trypsin digestion; precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 30 mmu.

### Publication Abstract
Intensive gene annotation has revealed many functional and regulatory elements in the human genome. Although eukaryotic protein-coding genes are generally transcribed into monocistronic mRNAs, recent studies have discovered additional short open reading frames (sORFs) in mRNAs. Here, we performed proteogenomic data mining for hidden proteins categorized into sORF-encoded polypeptides (SEPs) in human cancers. We identified a new SEP-encoding overlapping sORF (oORF) on the cell polarity determinant Scribble (SCRIB) that is considered a proto-oncogene with tumor suppressor function in Hippo-YAP/TAZ, MAPK/ERK, and PI3K/Akt/mTOR signaling. Reanalysis of clinical human proteomic data revealed translational dysregulation of both SCRIB and its oORF, oSCRIB, during carcinogenesis. Biochemical analyses suggested that the translatable oSCRIB constitutively limits the capacity of eukaryotic ribosomes to translate the downstream SCRIB. These findings provide a new example of cis-regulatory oORFs that function as a ribosomal roadblock and potentially serve as a fail-safe mechanism to normal cells for non-excessive downstream gene expression, which is hijacked in cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Lc-ms/ms, Prm

### Affiliations
RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science
Biomolecular Characterization Unit, RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan.

### Submitter
Yuhta Nomura

### Lab Head
Dr Naoshi Dohmae
Biomolecular Characterization Unit, RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, 2-1 Hirosawa, Wako, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan.


