### Accession
PXD019576

### Title
human liver CSCs LC-MSMS in sgTRMT6/61A and control

### Description
To identify proteins regulated by TRMT6/TRMT61A complex, we depleted TRMT6/TRMT61A in human liver CSCs, and compared the differential proteins with control CSCs by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
We depleted TRMT6/TRMT61A using CRISPR/Cas9 mediated gene editing. Then we lysed TRMT6/TRMT61A depleted and control CSCs.The cell samples were disrupted by the ultrasonic processor on ice in lysis buffer (8 M urea/0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) containing 1× Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). After centrifugation, the extracted proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 2 hr at room temperature followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. The protein solution was diluted 1:5 with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and digested with trypsin (1:50) at 37 °C overnight. The digestion was desalted on OASIS HLB column and peptides eluted with 60% acetonitrile were lyophilized via vacuum centrifugation. The dried peptides were dissolved with 100 mM TEAB buffer prior to label with Tandem Mass Tags (TMT). 100 ug of protein from each biological replicate of different experimental conditions was labeled with TMT six-plex® (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The cell samples were labeled as follows: TMT-126/-127/-128 was used for PLC/PRF/5 sgCtrl CSCs and TMT-129/-130/-131 for PLC/PRF/5 sgTRMT6/sgTRMT61A CSCs. High pH reversed phase HPLC fractionation: Before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis, samples were fractionated using a Waters X Bridge BEH130 C18 5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm column on an L-3000 HPLC System (Rigol) operating at 0.7 mL/min. All fractions were collected at 90s intervals and concatenated into 12 post-fractions. All nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). The labeled peptides were loaded onto a 100 μm id×2 cm fused silica trap column packed in-house with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 5 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and then separated on an a 75 μm id×20 cm C18 column packed with reversed phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). The peptides bounded on the column were eluted with a 78-min linear gradient. The solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water solution and the solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile solution. The segmented gradient was 5–8% B, 8 min; 8–22% B, 50 min; 22–32% B, 12 min; 32-95% B, 1 min; 95% B, 7min at a flow rate of 310 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
The MS analysis was performed with Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). With the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution 70,000 (m/z 200) across the mass range of 300–1600 m/z. The target value was 3.00E+06 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected from each MS full scan with isolation width of 2 m/z for fragmentation in the HCD collision cell with normalized collision energy of 32%. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17,500 at m/z 200. The target value was 5.00E+04 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The dynamic exclusion time was 40s. For nano electrospray ion source setting, the spray voltage was 2.0 kV; no sheath gas flow; the heated capillary temperature was 320 °C.  Protein Identification and quantification analysis: The raw data from Q Exactive were analyzed with Proteome Discovery version 2.2.0.388 using Sequest HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for FDR (false discovery rate) analysis. The Uniprot human protein database (updated on 10-2017) was used for searching the data from cell samples. Some important searching parameters were set as following: trypsin was selected as enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed for searching; the mass tolerance of precursor was set as 10 ppm and the product ions tolerance was 0.02 Da.; TMT 6plex (lysine and N-terminus of peptides) and cysteine carbamidomethylation were specified as fixed modifications; The methionine oxidation was chosen as variable modifications. FDR analysis was performed with Percolator and FDR <1% was set for protein identification. The peptides confidence was set as high for peptides filter. Proteins quantification was also performed on Proteome Discovery 2.2.0.388 using the ratio of the intensity of reporter ions from the MS/MS spectra. Only unique and razor peptides of proteins were selected for protein relative quantification. The co-isolation threshold was specified as 50% and average reporters S/N value should be above 10. The normalization mode was selected as total peptide amount to corrected experimental bias.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cscs, Human, Liver, Trmt6/trmt61a

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Yanying Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zusen Fan
CAS Key Laboratory of Infection and Immunity, CAS Center for Excellence in Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


