### Accession
PXD026243

### Title
Human primary endometrial stromal cells (proliferative vs secretory) LC-MSMS - proteins and phosphosites

### Description
Our study explores the phosphorylation pathways in decidualization, focussing on four major targets of interest – cAMP-dependent protein kinase, Rho-dependent protein kinase (ROCK), protein kinase B, and casein kinase 2. Our goal was to pinpoint the changes in protein kinase activity profile during decidualization in vitro and in vivo, and to establish how these changes are translated to the overall cellular phenotype and tissue morphology.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were suspended in 10 volumes of 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 100 mM DTT lysis buffer. Samples were heated at 95 °C for 5 min, followed by probe sonication (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany; 3× 20 s pulses, 50% intensity). Unlysed material was pelleted by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min.  For the full proteome analysis, 5 µg of protein was precipitated with 2:1:3 (v/v/v) mixture of methanol/chloroform/water. Protein pellets were suspended in 25 µL of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ABC, 2 mM methylamine solution, followed by disulphide reduction and cysteine alkylation with 5 mM DTT and 10 mM CAA for 30 min each at room temperature (rt). Proteins were pre-digested with 1:50 (enzyme to protein) Lys-C for 4 h, diluted 5 times with 100 mM ABC and further digested with trypsin overnight at rt. Peptides were desalted with in-house made C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For the phosphoproteome analysis, cells were lysed as described above. Sample preparation was carried out as described by the EasyPhos protocol (Humphrey et al., 2015). Samples were injected onto a C18 cartridge trap-column from where they were eluted to an analytical C18 column. Peptides were separated at 200 nL/min (for phosphopeptides: 250 nL/min) with a 5-40% eluent B 240 min gradient in eluent A. For the phosphopeptides, a 90 min two-step separating gradient was used, consisting of 5-15% 60 min and 15-30% 30 min steps. Eluent B was 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid and eluent A was 0.1% formic acid in water. Eluted peptides were sprayed to a quadrupole-orbitrap MS/MS using a nano-electrospray source and a spray voltage of 2.5 kV (liquid junction connection). The MS instrument was operated with a top-10 data-dependent acquisition strategy. One 350-1400 m/z MS scan (at a resolution setting of 70 000 at 200 m/z) was followed by a MS/MS (R=17 500 at 200 m/z) of the 10 most intense ions using higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation (normalized collision energies of 26 and 27 for regular and phosphopeptides, respectively). For the total proteome analysis, the MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 3×10^6 (50 ms) and 5×10^4 (50 ms), respectively. For phosphopeptides, the MS and MS/MS ion target and injection time values were 1×10^6 (60 ms) and 2×10^4 (60 ms), respectively. The dynamic exclusion time was limited to 45 s and 70 s for phosphopeptide and full proteome samples, respectively. Only charge states +2 to +6 were subjected to MS/MS, and for phosphopeptides, the fixed first mass was set to 95 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Three independent experiments were performed, from which one experiment used a pooled proliferative sample (ESCs from 2 patients) and a pooled secretory sample (ESCs from 2 patients); other experiments used 1 proliferative and 1 secretory sample each, whereas for all independent experiments, ESCs were isolated from samples obtained from different patients. For the MaxQuant identification and quantification of raw MS proteome data, UniProt human reference proteome database was used (European Bioinformatics Institute et al., 2020). Methionine oxidation, and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, while cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a fixed modification. Tryptic digestion rule (cleavages after lysine and arginine without proline restriction) was used for in silico digestion of the database. Only identifications with at least 1 peptide ≥ 7 amino acids long (with up to 2 missed cleavages) were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs based on accurate mass and retention time was enabled. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was also applied. Protein and LFQ ratio count (i.e., number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 1. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach. All other parameters were default. For enriched phosphoproteome samples, the signal intensity for each phosphopeptide in each independent experiment was normalized to the average signal intensity for the given run.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Endometrial stromal cell, Lc-msms, Endometrium, Decidualization

### Affiliations
University of Tartu
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, 14186 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
Darja Lavogina

### Lab Head
Dr Andres Salumets
Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Clinical Science, Intervention and Technology (CLINTEC), Karolinska Institutet, 14186 Stockholm, Sweden


