### Accession
PXD023892

### Title
LC-MSMS MDA-MB-231 with knockdown of ELOVL5 and IGFBP6 genes

### Description
Identification of changes in protein expression by label-free shotgun proteomics in breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells with knockdown of ELOVL5 and IGFBP6 genes in comparison with control MDA-MB-231 cells.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis cells were lysed with 3% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) solution in bicarbonate buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in water). The lysates were incubated for 15 minutes at 80 °C, followed by sonication. Then the disulfide bonds in the proteins were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA). The resulting protein mixture was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega) at 37 °C overnight. Then sodium deoxycholate was removed from the mixture by precipitation with trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting mixture of peptides was purified using ZipTips (Merck Millipore) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Then the samples were dried and dissolved in 0.1% vol. formic acid solution. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoHPLC-MS/MS system coupled with a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Separation was carried out with a reversed-phase C18 column in gradient elution mode, the duration of the gradient was 150 minutes. Fragment spectra were obtained using collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant 1.6 software. The iBAQ algorithm was used to quantify the protein content. Further data processing was carried out using Perseus 1.6 software and R 3.5 programming language with the RStudio 1.1 integrated development environment. To determine the statistical significance of the observed differences Student's t-test was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Elovl5, Lc-msms, Mda-mb-231, Igfbp6

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology and Biotechnologies, Higher School of Economics
Faculty of Biology and Biotechnologies, Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia

### Submitter
Sergey Nikulin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Grigorievich Tonevitsky
Faculty of Biology and Biotechnologies, Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia


