### Accession
PXD017114

### Title
Substrate Specificity of the TRAMP Nuclear Surveillance Complexes

### Description
During nuclear surveillance in yeast, the RNA exosome functions together with the TRAMP complexes. These include the DEAH-box RNA helicase Mtr4 together with an RNA-binding protein (Air1 or Air2) and a poly(A) polymerase (Trf4 or Trf5). To better determine how RNA substrates are targeted, we analyzed protein and RNA interactions for TRAMP components. Mass spectrometry identified three distinct TRAMP complexes formed in vivo. These complexes preferentially assemble on different classes of transcripts. Unexpectedly, on many substrates, including pre-rRNAs and pre-mRNAs, binding specificity was apparently conferred by Trf4 and Trf5. Clustering of mRNAs by TRAMP association showed coenrichment for mRNAs with functionally related products, supporting the significance of surveillance in regulating gene expression. We compared binding sites of TRAMP components with multiple nuclear RNA binding proteins, revealing preferential colocalization of subsets of factors. TRF5 deletion reduced Mtr4 recruitment and increased RNA abundance for mRNAs specifically showing high Trf5 binding.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins pull-down were extracted from strains expressing the bait protein tagged with a C-terminal HisX6-Tev cleavage site-Protein A (HTP) tag. A non tagged strain was used as a negative control. Protein purification has been made in 1 M NaCl conditions. For Trf4-HTP and Trf5-HTP, additional purification with lower stringency (150 mM NaCl) were performed in presence or absence of RNAse A. Extracts were separated by SDS–polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (NuPAGE Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris gel, Life Technologies, UK) and visualised using InstantBlueTM stain (Sigma Aldrich, UK). The stained gel bands were excised and de-stained with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and 100% (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma Aldrich, UK) and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 40 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 1 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). Samples were then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) both coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) assembled in an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) and operated at a constant temperature of 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% buffer B in 90 min, then to 95% in 11 min. For Q Exactive, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution and the top 10 most abundant peaks with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 2.0 Thomson were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (Olsen et al, 2007) with normalised collision energy of 27. The maximum ion injection time for the MS and MS2 scans was set to 20 and 60 ms respectively and the AGC target was set to 1 E6 for the MS scan and to 5 E4 for the MS2 scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. For Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™, FTMS spectra were recorded at 70,000 resolution and peptides with charge ≥ 2 and isolation window of 1.4 Thomson were selected and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalised collision energy of 30. The AGC target for MS1 was set at 4 E5 and for MS2 at 2.5 E4.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.6.1. 0 was used to process raw files and search was conducted against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae complete/reference proteome database (Uniprot, released in September, 2017), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). The first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the N-terminal were set as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications FDR was set to 1%. iBAQ (Intensity-based absolute quantification) values calculated by MaxQuant are the (raw) intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides. In that way, iBAQ values are proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins (Schwanhausser et al 2011).

### Publication Abstract
During nuclear surveillance in yeast, the RNA exosome functions together with the TRAMP complexes. These include the DEAH-box RNA helicase Mtr4 together with an RNA-binding protein (Air1 or Air2) and a poly(A) polymerase (Trf4 or Trf5). To better determine how RNA substrates are targeted, we analyzed protein and RNA interactions for TRAMP components. Mass spectrometry identified three distinct TRAMP complexes formed in vivo. These complexes preferentially assemble on different classes of transcripts. Unexpectedly, on many substrates, including pre-rRNAs and pre-mRNAs, binding specificity is apparently conferred by Trf4 and Trf5. Clustering of mRNAs by TRAMP association shows co-enrichment for mRNAs with functionally related products, supporting the significance of surveillance in regulating gene expression. We compared binding sites of TRAMP components with multiple nuclear RNA binding proteins, revealing preferential colocalization of subsets of factors. TRF5 deletion reduces Mtr4 recruitment and increases RNA abundance for mRNAs specifically showing high Trf5 binding.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Trf5, Nuclear surveillance, Trf4, Tramp complexes

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Clementine Delan-Forino

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
WCCB, University of Edinburgh


