### Accession
PXD025356

### Title
Secretory autophagy mediates mitochondria clearance in the absence of the mATG8-conjugation machinery

### Description
PINK1-Parkin mediated mitophagy, a selective form of autophagy, represents an important mechanism in mitochondrial quality control (MQC) via clearance of damaged mitochondria. Although it is well known that the conjugation of mammalian ATG8s to phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) is a key step in autophagy, its role in mitophagy remains controversial. In this study, we attempted to clarify the role of the mATG8-conjugation system in mitophagy by generating knockouts of the mATG8-conjugation machinery. Unexpectedly, we show that mitochondria could still be cleared in the absence of mATG8 lipidation, in a process that was found to be independent of lysosomal degradation. Instead, mitochondria were found to be cleared via a secretory autophagy pathway, resulting in the extracellular release of mitochondria, in a process we defined as autophagic secretion of mitochondria (ASM). Functionally, increased ASM promoted the activation of the innate immune cGAS-STING pathway in recipient cells. Overall, data from this study reveal ASM as a novel mechanism in MQC, especially when the cellular mATG8-conjugation machinery is dysfunctional.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labelling, cells were incubated in DMEM (-Arg, -Lys) medium containing 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo) supplemented with 42 mg/l 13C615N4 L-arginine and 73 mg/l 13C615N2 L-lysine (Cambridge Isotope) or the corresponding non-labeled amino acids, respectively. Successful SILAC incorporation was verified by in-gel trypsin digestion and MS analysis of heavy input samples in parallel to EV samples to ensure an incorporation rate of >98%. Samples were boiled at 95°C prior to separation on a 12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris precast gel (Thermo Scientific) for 10 min at 170 V in 1x MOPS buffer, followed by gel fixation using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Thermo Scientific). For in-gel digestion, samples were destained in destaining buffer (25 mM ammonium bicarbonate; 50% ethanol), reduced in 10 mM DTT for 1h at 56°C followed by alkylation with 55mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 45 min in the dark. Tryptic digest was performed in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer with 2 μg trypsin (Promega) at 37°C overnight. Peptides were desalted on StageTips and analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography on an EASY-nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a C18-reversed phase column (25 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch). The column was mounted on an Easy Flex Nano Source and temperature controlled by a column oven (Sonation) at 40°C. A 215-min gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.5% formic acid at a flow of 225 nl/min was used. Spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV. The Q Exactive HF was operated with a TOP20 MS/MS spectra acquisition method per MS full scan. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 at a maximum injection time of 20 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 75 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox & Mann 2008) version 1.5.2.8 with preset standard settings for SILAC labeled samples and the re-quantify option was activated. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results were removed and only proteins were kept that were quantified by SILAC ratios in both ‘forward’ and ‘reverse’ samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Autophagy

### Affiliations
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore

### Submitter
Dennis Kappei

### Lab Head
Dr Dennis Kappei
Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore, Singapore


