### Accession
PXD031202

### Title
Enrichment of complement, immunoglobulins, and autoantibody targets in the proteome of platelets from patients with Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE).

### Description
SLE is a complex disease characterized by autoimmunity towards apoptotic cells, excessive amounts of circulating immune complexes and complement activation. Decreased platelet size has been observed in SLE and their non-hemostatic functions may play an active role in the disease. Our main objective in this study was to find clues that could explain their decreased size and functional role, analyzing the entire platelet proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets were isolated from 23 patients with SLE. The five individuals with highest and lowest average platelet forward scatter were selected for further analysis and compared to platelets from five healthy controls. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS on a fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated in the positive data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed by Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptides were identified using SEQUEST HT against UniProtKB human database (release 2019-01-24).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Thrombocytes, Sle

### Affiliations
Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund University Faculty of Medicine, Lund, Skåne, Sweden
Dept. of Oncology, Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 221 85 Lund, Sweden

### Submitter
Charlotte Welinder

### Lab Head
Dr Petrus Linge
Department of Clinical Sciences Lund, Section of Rheumatology, Lund University Faculty of Medicine, Lund, Skåne, Sweden


