### Accession
PXD022266

### Title
The proteome dynamics of tomato plant in response to Phytophthora infestans infection

### Description
In this study, the dynamic proteome change in tomato from the early (biotrophic phase) to late stage (necrotrophic phase) P. infestans infection was analyzed by data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach. This approach enables the profiling of tomato proteome in a high-throughput manner, which facilitates the analysis of the dynamics of pathogenesis response of the plant.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of mock-treated (4, 8, 24 hpt) and P. infestans inoculated (4, 8, 24 hpi) leaves were prepared for the proteomics experiments. Total proteins were extracted modified from the phenol separation protocols (Saravanan & Rose, 2004; Faurobert et al., 2007; Wu et al., 2014). Proteins were proteolyed in-solution using the urea-based protocol and peptides were prepared as previous described (Fan et al., 2019). The pooled peptide sample of the mock and P. infestans-inoculated samples at each time point (as QC sample) was analyzed by LC-MS/MS with the DDA mode in order to construct the DIA spectral library. For the purpose of retention time calibration, the iRT-standard peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were mixed with the pooled sample or each individual sample with ratio of 1:10 in volume. The instrumentation of the nanoLC-MS/MS was set as our previous publication (Fan et al., 2019) and parameters for DDA and DIA analysis were referred to the previous studies using Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Scheltema et al., 2014; Bruderer et al., 2017). Two micrograms of the pooled and individual tryptic peptide samples were analyzed by DDA and DIA mode, respectively. For DDA analysis, the MS instrument was operated in the positive ion mode and two different DDA methods at MS2 level. In the first DDA method, full-MS was acquired with high resolution (R = 60000 at m/z 200 at an automatic gain control target of 3.0E6) and broadband mass spectra (m/z 350–1650 Da) with a maximum IT of 15 ms, and MS/MS events (R = 15000 at an automatic gain control target of 1.0E+05) with a dd-MS² IT of 45 ms when a precursor ion charge was 2+, 3+, 4+ and 5+ and minimum AGC target as 4.5E+03, isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z, was detected. The 20 most abundant peptide molecular ions, dynamically determined from the MS1 scan, were selected for MS/MS using stepped normalized collision energies (NCE) as 26.5%, 28%, and 29.5% with the MS/MS settings of dynamic exclusion as 25 s, peptide matched as preferred, isotopes excluded and apex triggered. The other DDA method was using 4 gas-phase separation with the range of 350-510 m/z, 500-710 m/z, 700-1060 m/z and 1040-1650 m/z and fixed NCE as 28% whereas the rest settings were the same as the first DDA method.  For DIA analysis, MS/MS proteome profiling, was analyzed by the same LC−MS/MS system. The instrument was operated in the positive ion mode and configured to collect high resolution (R = 120000 at m/z 200 at an automatic gain control target of 3.0E+06) broadband mass spectra (m/z 350–1650 Da) with a maximum IT of 60 ms, and MS/MS events (R = 30000 at an automatic gain control target of 3.0E+06) with an auto MS² IT, isolation window was set to 52.0 m/z, fixed first mass was set to 200 m/z. The 25 segments were selected for MS/MS using a relative higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) energy of 28%. The acquisition window covered a mass range from 350 to 1650 m/z through 25 consecutive isolation windows. In each DDA or DIA data, the iRT calibration was required with minimum R2 of 0.9 by manual check. During the DIA LC-MS/MS runs across the sequence of the instrument in the study, the coefficient of variation (CV) of iRT peptide retention time was monitored to be less than 3% and the CV of iRT peptide peak intensity to be less than 20% in the QC samples run in-between the DIA analysis of each sample.

### Data Protocol
With all the DDA data, the Mascot (ver. 2.3, http://www.matrixscience.com/) and X!Tandem (ver. 2013.06.15.1) (Craig & Beavis, 2004) were used to do a protein database search against a combined database of Solanum lycopersicum proteome (ver. 4.1, downloaded from the website ftp://ftp.solgenomics.net/tomato_genome/annotation/ITAG4.1_release/; 34688 entries; the reverse sequences generated as the decoy database), P. infestans proteome (released on April 2020, downloaded from the NCBI website ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/genbank/protozoa/Phytophthora_infestans/latest_assembly_versions/GCA_012295175.1_ASM1229517v1/; 20172 entries; the reverse sequences generated as the decoy database), sequences of PR-1b protein (Solyc00g174340) which is missing from the ITAG 4.1 database, the iRT standard peptides and BSA (SwissProt Accession: P02769). Search parameters were set as follows: MS tolerance as 10 ppm, allowing precursor monoisotopic mass isotope error (M+1), number of trypsin missed cleavage as 2, fragment mass tolerance as 0.1 Da, enzyme as trypsin/P, fixed modifications including carbamidomethyl cysteine (+57.021 Da), variable modifications including oxidative methionine (+15.995 Da) and acetyl protein N-terminus (+42.016 Da). Next the software on the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, ver. 5.2) (Deutsch et al., 2015) was used to combine the search result from different search engines and different repeats. In the constructed library, there were a total 65763 transitions, 53085 peptides and 11563 proteins. OpenMS (ver. 2.5) (Röst et al., 2016) was utilized for decoyed spectral library construction. To be included into the final spectral library, product ions were required to contain a minimum of 7 amino acids in peptide length and only the best 6 product ions were selected for each peptide. The DIA data were analyzed using OpenSWATH (ver. 2.4.0) (Röst et al., 2014) software against the constructed spectral libraries to identify and quantify peptides and proteins. The retention time alignment used the information of iRT transitions (RT tolerance was set as 7 min for DIA data). In addition to the chromatogram alignment, the spike-in iRT peptide standards were also used for the quality control of the DDA and DIA analyses. Parameters used for feature alignment were set as follows: peptide false-discovery rate (FDR) as 0.05; protein FDR as 0.01; alignment method as Local MST; re-alignment method as lowest; retention time (RT) difference as 30 sec and alignment score as 0.05. The ratios of protein quantitation between the P. infestans-inoculated and mock-treated sample in each replicate were normalized by the most-likely ration normalization principle as previously applied in the DIA study (Lambert et al., 2013).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant pathogenesis responses, Quantitative proteomics, Phytophthora infestans, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Wei-Hung Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Yet-Ran Chen
Academia Sinica


