### Accession
PXD004732

### Title
ProteomeTools -  Building ProteomeTools based on a complete synthetic human proteome

### Description
The ProteomeTools project aims to derive molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical and life science research. Here, we describe the generation and multimodal LC-MS/MS analysis of >350,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing nearly all canonical human gene products. This resource will be extended to 1.4 million peptides within two years and all data will be made available to the public in ProteomicsDB.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic peptides were individually synthesized by solid phase synthesis, combined into pools of ~1,000 peptides and measured on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. For each peptide pool, an inclusion list was generated to target peptides for fragmentation in further LC-MS experiments using five fragmentation methods (HCD, CID, ETD, EThCD, ETciD ) with ion trap or Orbitrap readout and HCD spectra were recorded at 6 different collision energies.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS runs were individually anaysed using MaxQuant 1.5.3.30.

### Publication Abstract
We describe ProteomeTools, a project building molecular and digital tools from the human proteome to facilitate biomedical research. Here we report the generation and multimodal liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis of &gt;330,000 synthetic tryptic peptides representing essentially all canonical human gene products, and we exemplify the utility of these data in several applications. The resource (available at http://www.proteometools.org) will be extended to &gt;1 million peptides, and all data will be shared with the community via ProteomicsDB and ProteomeXchange.

### Keywords
Synthetic, Spectral library, Peptides, Mrm, Proteometools, Prm, Human proteome, Srm

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universit채t M체nchen, Germany

### Submitter
Daniel Zolg

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, Technische Universit채t M체nchen, Germany


### SDRF
- Characteristics[organism: Homo sapiens
- Characteristics[organism part: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- fractionation method: no fractionation
- instrument: NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos;AC=MS:1002731
- separation: NT=High-performance liquid chromatography;AC=PRIDE:0000565
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed
- modification parameters.1: NT=Oxidation;AC=UNIMOD:35;MT=Variable;TA=M

