### Accession
PXD013431

### Title
In-depth proteomic analysis for discovery of response prediction markers in breast cancer chemotherpy using needle biopsy FFPE tissue

### Description
Breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed female cancer accounting for 23 % of the total cases and the second leading cause of cancer mortality in the world, particularly in western countries. Since GEPARDUO trial reported the therapeutic benefit of combined doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide regimen in sequential administration with docetaxel, the combination regimen has become a standard therapeutic strategy in neoadjuvant systemic therapy for patients with operable breast cancers regardless of an intrinsic subtype. Although approximately 70% of entire patients are currently receiving the chemotherapy regimen, pathologic complete response (pCR) rate is still low, ranging from 23% to 32.7% due to the high heterogeneity of breast cancers. Therefore, the need for a marker predictive of response to a particular cytotoxic regimen, especially before neoadjuvant chemotherapy, is becoming all the more necessary to optimize therapeutic efficacy and to avoid unnecessary complications caused by systemic therapy. In the study, here we generated the first high-coverage proteomic data for needle biopsy FFPE sample being characterized with identical clinical conditions including chemotherapeutic regimens and the stage classification.

### Sample Protocol
The FFPE 10um sections were deparaffinized using xylene. After extraction of protein using SDS buffer, extracted proteins were precipitated by adding chilled acetone at a volume ration of 1:5 buffer to acetone. 100ug of proteins per sample was digested using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. Eluted peptides were desalted and purified using C18 Stage-Tips.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system via a nano electrospray source. MS spectra were processed using Maxquant version 1.5.3.1. MS/MS spectra were searched through the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries) using the Andromeda search engine with a 6-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. Primary searches were performed using The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion. Peptides with a minimum length of six amino-acids and up to two missed cleavages were considered. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification level. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the ‘Match between Runs’option on the MaxQuant platform

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chemotherapy, Ffpe, Breast cancer, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


