### Accession
PXD001164

### Title
Active DNA demethylation during the vertebrate phylotypic period

### Description
The vertebrate body plan and organs are shaped during a highly conserved embryonic phase called the phylotypic stage, however the mechanisms that guide the epigenome through this transition and their evolutionary conservation remain elusive. Here we report widespread DNA demethylation of thousands of enhancers during the phylotypic period in zebrafish, Xenopus and mouse. These dynamic enhancers are linked to essential developmental genes that display coordinated transcriptional and epigenomic changes in the diverse vertebrates during embryogenesis. Phylotypic stage-specific binding of Tet proteins to (hydroxy)methylated DNA, and enrichment of hydroxymethylcytosine on these enhancers, implicated active DNA demethylation in this process. Furthermore, loss of function of Tet1/2/3 in zebrafish caused reduced chromatin accessibility and increased methylation levels specifically on these enhancers, indicative of DNA methylation being an upstream regulator of phylotypic enhancer function. Overall, our study reveals a novel regulatory module associated with the most conserved phase of vertebrate embryogenesis and uncovers an ancient developmental role for the Tet dioxygenases.

### Sample Protocol
Zebrafish embryos at dome (N = 100, 000) and 24 hpf (N = 25, 000) stages were collected and dechorionated. For nuclear extracts  preparation, a minimal 1:10 ratio of tissue:lysis buffer was ensured during every homogenization. The embryonic tissue was homogenized using a Dounce homogenizer (20 X lose pestle, 20 X tight pestle). Batches of nuclear extract were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C. Before proceeding with DNA-pulldowns, the extracts were defrosted and combined into a single tube, following a 20 min. centrifugation in a chilled (4°C) table top centrifuge. DNA pull-downs were performed with DNA immobilized on Streptavidin Sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Following incubations and washes, bound proteins were digested with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were desalted and concentrated using stage-tips and applied to nanoLC (Proxeon) coupled online to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 4 hour gradients (5% - 80% acetonitrile) were applied and the top 15 MS/MS spectra were recorded. Additionally to the DNA pulldowns, absolute proteome quantification of the nuclear extract was performed. 3.3 µg UPS2 standard (Sigma) was spiked in 10 µg nuclear extract. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed and the peptides were applied to LC-MS/MS. In parallel, 100 µg extract was digested using FASP and peptides were fractionated using strong anion exchange (SAX) in five fractions, which resulted in a deep-proteome.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using default settings and the options label-free quantification and match between runs enabled 45. The uniprot Danio Rerio database was used as reference proteome. The resulting ‘proteingroups.txt’ table was filtered for contaminants and reverse hits. Obtained label-free quantification (LFQ) intensities were log2 transformed and the proteins were filtered to have at least three valid values in one group (C, mC or hmC). For the resulting proteins, missing values were semi-random imputed by a normal distribution (width = 0.3 and shift = 1.8), based on the assumption that these proteins were under/close to the detection limit. To identify significant interactors, an adapted two-tailed t-test was performed (Persues software), which corrects for multiple testing by applying a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR). Volcano plots were made in R, in which the LFQ ratio ((h)mC / C) is plotted against the calculated FDR (-log10). The FDR and s0 significance-threshold values used are depicted in these volcano plots (Supplementary Fig. 3). The obtained significant (h)mC readers were clustered on their enrichments ratios in R. For the absolute quantification, linear regression was performed on the exact known amounts of the UPS2 standard proteins and their measured iBAQ intensities, followed by extrapolation of the absolute protein amounts for the zebrafish proteins. Proteins quantified in the single FASP sample were matched with the iBAQ intensities measured in the deep-proteome (SAX), which were used for linear regression and extrapolation of absolute quantification for all proteins in the measured proteome.

### Publication Abstract
The vertebrate body plan and organs are shaped during a conserved embryonic phase called the phylotypic stage. However, the mechanisms that guide the epigenome through this transition and their evolutionary conservation remain elusive. Here we report widespread DNA demethylation of enhancers during the phylotypic period in zebrafish, Xenopus tropicalis and mouse. These enhancers are linked to developmental genes that display coordinated transcriptional and epigenomic changes in the diverse vertebrates during embryogenesis. Binding of Tet proteins to (hydroxy)methylated DNA and enrichment of 5-hydroxymethylcytosine in these regions implicated active DNA demethylation in this process. Furthermore, loss of function of Tet1, Tet2 and Tet3 in zebrafish reduced chromatin accessibility and increased methylation levels specifically at these enhancers, indicative of DNA methylation being an upstream regulator of phylotypic enhancer function. Overall, our study highlights a regulatory module associated with the most conserved phase of vertebrate embryogenesis and suggests an ancient developmental role for Tet dioxygenases.

### Keywords
Dna methylation, Dna interactors, Development, Zebrafish, Proteome

### Affiliations
Radboud University Nijmegen
Department of Medical Oncology and Department of Molecular Cancer Research, Cancer Genomics Netherlands, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands

### Submitter
A.H. Smits

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Medical Oncology and Department of Molecular Cancer Research, Cancer Genomics Netherlands, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands


