### Accession
PXD000416

### Title
Y chromosome-located gene, lysine-specific demethylase 5D, associated with prostate cancer

### Description
The objective of Human Y Chromosome Proteome Project is to map and annotate all proteins encoded by genes on the MSY sequences. Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5D (KDM5D) is located on the AZFb region of Y chromosome and encode for a JmjC-domain-containing protein. Changes in KDM5D transcript level in prostate cancer have shown in various studies. To investigation the function of KDM5D in prostate cancer, we knocked down the expression of KDM5D in human prostate cancer cell (DU-145) using siRNA approach. Down-regulation of KDM5D was confirmed by qRT-PCR and western-blot analyses. Cell cycle analysis and MTS assay revealed that down-regulation of KDM5D induces cell proliferation. Furthermore, we observed that KDM5D down-regulation could effectively decrease apoptosis, as measured by the propidium iodide flow cytometric assay. To further our study, we investigated the dynamic of KDM5D protein network using shotgun label free quantitative proteomics approach in knockdown and control cell line. In summary, 102 down-regulated and 107 up-regulated proteins were detected from 894 total proteins. Up-regulated proteins mainly activated ribosome biogenesis whereas down-regulated genes were mainly involved in proteolysis, cell death and metabolic process.   The result raw files were converted to mzXML format and processed through the global proteome machine (GPM) software (version 2.1.1) of the X!Tandem algorithm (freely available at http://www.thegpm.org). The 16 gel fractions were processed serially for each experiment and the output files were generated as non-redundant, merged files with protein identifications with log (e) values less than -1, for each individual gel fraction.  A protein database compiled from NCBI (Homo sapien) was used in GPM to search the tandem mass spectra; the database also included common trypsin and human peptide contaminants.  False discovery rates (FDR) were evaluated by searching against a reversed sequence database. Search parameters included MS and MS/MS tolerances of +2 Da and +0.2 Da, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modifications, oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and tolerance of two missed tryptic cleavages and K/R-P cleavages.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
One of the major objectives of the Human Y Chromosome Proteome Project is to characterize sets of proteins encoded from the human Y chromosome. Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 5D (KDM5D) is located on the AZFb region of the Y chromosome and encodes a JmjC-domain-containing protein. KDM5D, the least well-documented member of the KDM5 family, is capable of demethylating di- and trimethyl H3K4. In this study, we detected two novel splice variants of KDM5D with lengths of 2650bp and 2400bp that correspond to the 100 and 80 kDa proteins in the human prostate cancer cell line, DU-145. The knockdown of two variants using the short interfering RNA (siRNA) approach increased the growth rate of prostate cancer cells and reduced cell apoptosis. To explore the proteome pattern of the cells after KDM5D downregulation, we applied a shotgun label-free quantitative proteomics approach. Of 820 proteins present in all four replicates of two treatments, the abundance of 209 proteins changed significantly in response to KDM5D suppression. Of these, there were 102 proteins observed to be less abundant and 107 more abundant in KDM5D knockdown cells compared with control cells. The results revealed that KDM5D knockdown altered the abundance of proteins involved in RNA processing, protein synthesis, apoptosis, the cell cycle, and growth and proliferation. In conjunction, these results provided new insights into the function of KDM5D and its splice variants. The proteomics data are available at PRIDE with ProteomeXchange identifier PXD000416.

### Keywords
Human y chromosome, Kdm5d, Label-free shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
chemistry and biomolecular science department

### Submitter
Mehdi mirzaei

### Lab Head


