### Accession
PXD018191

### Title
Metabolic Regulation of the Epigenome Drives Lethal Infantile Ependymoma

### Description
PFA ependymomas are a lethal glial malignancy of the hindbrain found in babies and toddlers. Lacking any highly recurrent somatic mutations, PFAs have been proposed as a largely epigenetically driven tumor type. An almost complete lack of model systems has inhibited discovery of novel PFA therapies. Both in vitro and in vivo, the PFA hypoxic microenvironment controls the availability of specific metabolites to diminish histone methylation, and to increase both histone demethylation and acetylation at H3K27. PFA ependymoma initiates from a cell lineage in the first trimester of human development where there is a known hypoxic microenvironment. Unique to PFA cells, transient exposure to ambient oxygen results in irreversible cellular toxicity. PFA tumors exhibit a low basal level of H3K27me3, and paradoxically inhibition of H3K27 methylation shows significant and specific activity against PFA. Targeting metabolism and/or the epigenome presents a unique opportunity for rational therapy for infants with PFA ependymoma.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, cells were lysed in denaturing urea buffer in the presence of protease and phosphatase inhibitors. Extracted proteins were digested into peptides with trypsin. Histone extraction, LC/MS, and data analysis are performed as described previously by Sidoli et al., 2016. Briefly, tissue and cell pellets of continuous culture were lysed to isolate nuclei using 0.3% NP-40 alternative supplemented nuclear isolation buffer. To the isolated nuclei, 0.4 N H2SO4 was added and incubated for 3hrs with constant rotation at 4ºC. Samples were then centrifuged and supernatant was collected. Chilled 100% trichloroacetic acid (w/v) was added to the supernatant in the ratio of 1:3(v/v) to get 33% final concentration of TCA and incubated on ice overnight to precipitate histones. Histone pellets were further rinsed with ice cold acetone containing 0.1% HCl followed by ice-cold acetone and air dried to evaporate acetone. To the resulting histones, double distilled water added and protein concentration estimated by Bradford assay. Samples (Histone extract -20ug) were resuspended in NH₄HCO₃ and derivatized with propionic anhydride followed by trypsin digestion. 250 fmol/mg of isotopically-labeled synthetic histone peptides was spiked in the samples and got derivatized with propionic anhydride.  C18 Stage tips was used to desalt of histone peptides before nanoLC-MS analysis. After desalting, peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry (MS, “1D separation”) using around 1 ug per injection. All analyses were performed on the latest generation of Orbitrap instrumentation (Orbitrap Fusion) using liquid chromatography (LC) gradients.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used for peptide identification, protein inference and label-free quantification. Subsequent data analysis steps were done in Perseus/R/STRING. Differential expression analysis between Hypoxia and Normoxia conditions was performed. Permutation-based FDR was calculated considering the entire dataset. Hits with FDR<5% were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Posterior fossa A (PFA) ependymomas are lethal malignancies of the hindbrain in infants and toddlers. Lacking highly recurrent somatic mutations, PFA ependymomas are proposed to be epigenetically driven tumors for which model systems are lacking. Here we demonstrate that PFA ependymomas are maintained under hypoxia, associated with restricted availability of specific metabolites to diminish histone methylation, and increase histone demethylation and acetylation at histone 3 lysine 27 (H3K27). PFA ependymomas initiate from a cell lineage in the first trimester of human development that resides in restricted oxygen. Unlike other ependymomas, transient exposure of PFA cells to ambient oxygen induces irreversible cellular toxicity. PFA tumors exhibit a low basal level of H3K27me3, and, paradoxically, inhibition of H3K27 methylation specifically disrupts PFA tumor growth. Targeting metabolism and/or the epigenome presents a unique opportunity for rational therapy for infants with PFA ependymoma.

### Keywords
H3k27 methylation and acetylation, Proteomics, Pfa ependymomas

### Affiliations
The Hospital for Sick Children
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Michael D. Taylor
The Hospital for Sick Children


