### Accession
PXD035158

### Title
Glycoproteomic analysis of Fut8 knock out/wild type mouse brain, Human IgG and Human Serum.

### Description
In this study, we provide a simple and straightforward method to distinguish core-fucosylated glycans from antenna-fucosylated glycans by systematically evaluating the extent of fucose migration based on the feature Y ions by using Fut8 knockout (Fut8−/−) mouse brain under HCD  energy of 20%. The method was further evaluated by multiple different approaches including validation by standard glycopeptides, evaluation in silico, comparison under the lower energy (15%), and applied to analyze core-fucosylated glycans in wide-type (Fut8+/+) mouse brain.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse brain tissues with FUT8-/- Mouse brain tissues with FUT8 knockout (FUT8 -/-) as well as wide-type control used in this study were kindly provided by Dr. Wenzhe Li (Dalian Medical University) and were generated as previously described [1]. Mice were maintained in a room illuminated for 12 hours (08:00 to 20:00) and kept at 24 ± 1°C with free access to food and water in the specific pathogen-free laboratory animal facility of Dalian Medical University, Dalian, China. All the animal works were approved by the Ethics Committee of Dalian Medical University (No. AEE17013).   Mouse brain tissue (to test the difference of Y1+Fuc/Y1 under 15, 20 and 33 energy) was dissected from three mice, strain C57BL/6, male, aged 3 months. Animal experiments were conducted in compliance with ethical regulations and approved by the ethics committee of Northwest University, China. Mice were housed at approximately 22 °C with 50–60% humidity, under a 12/12hour light–dark cycle. The mice were anesthetized with avertin and sacrificed for tissue collection after perfusion with 0.9 % NaCl. The collected tissues were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C before use.  Human Serum Human serum samples were collected from 3 healthy volunteers at the First Affiliated Hospital of Xian Jiaotong University, China, in 2020. The study was approved by Human Ethics Committee at the First Affiliated Hospital of Xian Jiaotong University. There participants were women with 60 and 63 years old. All serum samples were stored at -80°C before use. Protein extraction Protein extraction from all Mouse brain tissue. For protein extraction, 50 mg frozen tissue from each mouse was homogenized in 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3 buffer at 4 °C using a high-throughput tissue grinding machine followed by sonication until the solution was clear. The supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected after centrifugation at 16,000 g for 40 min at room temperature. Finally, protein concentration was measured by BCA reagent.  Protein extraction from Human serum. For protein extraction, 160 ul serum was homogenized in 9 M urea/1.125M NH4HCO3 buffer to a final concentration of 8 M urea/1M NH4HCO3 at 4 °C using a high-throughput tissue grinding machine (60 Hz, Shanghai Jing Xin, China) and sonicated by ultrasonic cell distribution system until the upper solution was clear. The supernatant containing extracted proteins was collected after centrifugation at 15,000 g for 15 min at room temperature. Finally, protein concentration was measured by BCA reagent.  Protein digestion  All samples were reduced by 5 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 h and then alkylated by 15 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding another 2.5 mM DTT and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The samples in 8 M urea/1 M NH4HCO3 buffer (Human IgG, Human serum and mouse brain glycopeptides) were first diluted 2-folds with deionized water and incubated with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; protein: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) at 37 °C for 2 hours with shaking. Then second trypsin digestion was performed overnight (protein: enzyme, 100:1, w/w) after the solutions were further diluted 4 times with deionized water.  Mouse brain glycopeptides and Human IgG were centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min to remove any particulate matter before purified by a C18/HLB solid-phase extraction. Peptides were eluted from the C18/HLB column in 60% ACN/0.1% TFA and the peptide concentrations were measured by BCA reagent. The peptides from human IgG glycoproteins with the same amount were pooled into one mixed sample for further use. Human serum was centrifuged at 15,000 g for 15 min to remove any particulate matter before purified by a C18 solid-phase extraction. Peptides were eluted from the C18 column in 50% ACN/0.1% TFA. The peptide concentrations were measured by UV absorbance at 215 nm using a DS-11 spectrophotometer (Denovix, Wilmington, DE, USA). Enrichment of glycopeptides The intact glycopeptides were enriched from serum samples using mixed anion-exchange columns (Oasis MAX SPE column, Waters). Briefly, the tryptic peptide mixtures eluted from C18 column were adjusted to a final concentration of 95% ACN/1% TFA. Peptides were loaded onto activated MAX cartridges twice and washed with 95% ACN/1% TFA for three times. Enriched glycopeptides were eluted in 400µL solution of 50% ACN/0.1% FA, dried by vacuum concentration with an RVC 2-18 CDplus concentrator (Christ, Osterode am Harz, Germany), and resuspended in 20µL of 0.1% FA solution for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Mixed peptides from FUT8-/-, wild type mouse brain, intact glycopeptides from standard human IgG underwent three LC-MS/MS runs on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), Human Serum underwent duplicate LC-MS/MS runs and peptides from mouse brain to test the difference of Y1+Fuc/Y1 under 15, 20 and 33 energy underwent one LC-MS/MS run. About 1 μg glycopeptides (1.5 μg for Human Serum sample) were separated by an Easy-nLC 1200 system with a 75 µm x 50 cm Acclaim PepMap-100 C18 separating column protected by a 75 µm x 2 cm guarding column. Mobile phase flow rate was 200 nL/min and consisted of 0.1% FA in water (A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (B).  The gradient profile for LC separation was set as follows: 3-40% B for 203 min, 40-68% B for 20 min, 68-99% B for 4 min, and 99% B for 13 min. The spray voltage (+) was set at 2300 V, spray voltage (-) was set at 600 V. Orbitrap spectra (AGC 4×105) were collected from 375-2000 m/z at a resolution of 60 K followed by oxonium ions triggered data-dependent HCD MS/MS at a resolution of 15 K using an isolation width of 0.7 m/z for 20% collision energy and 2 m/z for 33% collision energy (isolation width of 0.7 m/z for 15% collision, 0.7 m/z for 20%collision and 2 m/z for 33% collision energy were set to test the difference of Y1+Fuc/Y1 under 15, 20 and 33 energy).Charge state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged ions. A dynamic exclusion time of 20 s was used to discriminate against previously selected ions. Tune application (Thermo Fisher Scientific, v3.0.2041) and Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, v4.1.50) were used for instrument control and mass spectrometry data collection. Identification of intact glycopeptides by StrucGP.  The identification of intact glycopeptides was performed by StrucGP. Briefly, all MS data were first converted into ‘mzML’ format by the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP, v.5.0.0) [2]. The intact glycopeptide analyses were performed using the built-in glycan branch structure database from StrucGP and the following protein databases: (1) the human proteome database (UP000005640, downloaded on 8 May 2019) was used for the analysis of Human Serum and Human IgG samples. (2) the mouse proteome database (UP000000589, downloaded on 13 March 2018) was used for the analysis of mouse samples. The protein enzymatic digestion was set as trypsin (or Glu-C) with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and the potential glycosite-containing peptides were screened with the N-X-S/T motif (X is any amino acid except Proline). The carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215Da) was as a fixed modification, and oxidization (M, +15.9949Da) as a dynamic modification. The mass tolerances for MS1 and MS2 were set at 10 and 20ppm, respectively. For the Y ions determination, an optional mass shift of ±1 or 2Da was allowed in addition to the 20-ppm mass tolerance in MS2. Finally, both peptide and glycan portions required <1% FDR for the intact glycopeptide identification. Statistics.  All numbers of identified PSMs/intact glycopeptides used in the studies were counted as true positive PSMs/intact glycopeptides with less than 1% FDR. The count of intensity of Y ions (Y1-5+Fuc, Y1-Y5) and B ions (N1H1, N1H1F1, N1H2, N1H2F1, N1H1S1 and N1H1S1F1) in fucosylated glycopeptides spectra was achieved by the modified code of StrucGP.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human serum, Mouse brain, Fut8, Glycoproteomics, Human igg, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Northwest University
Northwest Uinversity

### Submitter
Zexuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Shisheng Sun
Northwest University


