### Accession
PXD019703

### Title
SMARCAD1 and TOPBP1 contribute to heterochromatin maintenance at the transition from the 2C-like to the pluripotent state

### Description
Chromocenters are established after the 2-cell (2C) stage during mouse embryonic development, but the factors that mediate chromocenter formation remain largely unknown. To identify regulators of 2C heterochromatin establishment, we generated an inducible system to convert embryonic stem cells (ESCs) to 2C-like cells. This conversion is marked by a global reorganization and dispersion of H3K9me3-heterochromatin foci, which are then reversibly formed upon re-entry into pluripotency. Profiling the chromatin-bound proteome (chromatome) by genome capture of ESCs transitioning to 2C-like cells, we uncover chromatin regulators involved in de novo heterochromatin formation. We identified TOPBP1 and investigated its binding partner SMARCAD1. SMARCAD1 and TOPBP1 associate with H3K9me3-heterochromatin in ESCs. Interestingly, the nuclear localization of SMARCAD1 is lost in 2C-like cells. SMARCAD1 or TOPBP1 depletion in mouse embryos lead to developmental arrest, reduction of H3K9me3 and remodeling of heterochromatin foci. Collectively, our findings contribute to comprehending the maintenance of chromocenters during early development. 

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol and alquilated with iodoacetamide. The resulting protein extract was digested in 2M urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate with endoproteinase LysC (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, o/n) and then trypsin (1:10 w:w, 37ºC, 8h) according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure.  After digestion, the peptide mixtures were acidified with formic acid and desalted with a MicroSpin C18 column. Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were loaded directly onto the analytical column and were separated by reversed-phase chromatography in a C18 50-cm column (75 μm) using a 90 minute chromatographic gradient. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with nanospray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. Ultramark 1621 was used for external calibration of the FT mass analyzer prior the analyses, and an internal calibration was performed using the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.1200. The acquisition was performed in data-dependent adquisition (DDA) mode and full MS scans with 1 micro scans at resolution of 120,000 were used over a mass range of m/z 350-1500 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer. Auto gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5 and charge state filtering disqualifying singly charged peptides was activated. In each cycle of data-dependent acquisition analysis, following each survey scan, the most intense ions above a threshold ion count of 10000 were selected for fragmentation. The number of selected precursor ions for fragmentation was determined by the “Top Speed” acquisition algorithm and a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. Fragment ion spectra were produced via high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at normalized collision energy of 28% and they were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. AGC was set to 1E4, and an isolation window of 1.6 m/z and maximum injection time of 200 ms were used. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the Mascot search engine v2.6 (Matrix Science ). The data were searched against a Swiss-Prot mouse database (as in October 2019) plus a list of common contaminants  and all the corresponding decoy entries. For peptide identification a precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for MS1 level, trypsin was chosen as enzyme, and up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da for MS2 spectra. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were used as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rate (FDR) in peptide identification was set to a maximum of 5%. The analysis of specific chromatin interactors was carried out with SAINT

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Esc, Chromatome

### Affiliations
UPF
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) University Pompeu Fabra (UPF)

### Submitter
Eva Borràs

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabido
Center for Genomic Regulation (CRG) University Pompeu Fabra (UPF)


