### Accession
PXD006525

### Title
Quantitative Proteomic Atlas Uncovering the widespread Ubiquitylation Regulation in the Embryo of Germinating Rice Seed

### Description
Using high affinity K-Ɛ-GG antibody integrating highly sensitive MS, we investigated the quantitative atlas of ubiquitylome as well as the proteome in the embryos of germinated rice seed. A list of 2576 lysine ubiquitinated sites in 1171 proteins,mainly involved in protein process, nucleic acid stability, hormonal regulation, and metabolism,were identified in the first 0, 12 and 24 hours after seed imbibition (HAI). The additional ubiquitin were more likely to attacked the lysine sites that located in the polar acidic other than basophilic regions. Of these modified proteins,1435 sites in 781 proteins were significantly changed in abundance (folds change> 2, P<0.05), most ubiquitinated sites were increased rapidly in the first 12 HAI.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins (∼10 mg) from 200 rice seed embryos at 0, 12 and 24 HAI with three biological replicates were reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide as previously described. After protein digestion, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH8.0) and incubated with prewashed anti-K-ε-GG beads (PTM-104) antibody cross-liked agarose beads (PTM Biolabs) for lysine ubiqutinated (Kub) peptides enrichment at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O, then were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. After desalting with C18 STAGE tips (Thermo, US) , the enriched peptides were vacuum-dried and redissolved in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for online nanoLC−MS/MS analysis using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific) connected to a Q-Exactive plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Three parallel MS loading analyses for each sample were performed E (i.e. three technical replicates).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). The significant changes in the abundance of ubiqutinated peptides between samples were analyzed by t-test (P < 0.05). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the rice annotation project database (http://rapdb.dna.affrc.go.jp, released at 8/5/2016) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The precursor ions search range was set as 5 ppm and the fragment ions was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys (+57.021Da) was specified as fixed modification and GlyGly on lysine (114.0429 Da), acetylation on protein N-terminal (+42.011 D) and oxidation on Met (+15.995 D) were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide, and modification site was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides score was set > 40. The max peptide mass was 4600. The peptide lengths ranged was 8 and 25. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set as default values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Embryo, Lysine ubiquitylation, Rice, Seed germination

### Affiliations
Aquatic Plant Genomics and Genetic Breeding, Wuhan Botanical Garden
Wuhan Botanic Garden

### Submitter
Dongli He

### Lab Head
Dr Pingfang Yang
Aquatic Plant Genomics and Genetic Breeding, Wuhan Botanical Garden


