### Accession
PXD003447

### Title
pig microbiota ob/le -  Intestinal Microbiota and Microbial Metabolites Are Changed in a Pig Model Fed a High-Fat/Low-Fiber or a Low-Fat/High-Fiber Diet

### Description
Feces samples from pigs with two different diets were analysed. Proteins from the microbiota was extracted and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Differences along the time and between the diets were observed.

### Sample Protocol
Feces samples were used to extract microbial proteins using a Histodenz-based protocol. Protein extracts were purifed via SDS-PAGE. In-gel tryptic digestion and C18 Zip-Tip procedure to desalt the peptide. Peptide mixtures were analysed on a an EasyLC nano-HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo). Separations of the peptide mixtures were done on a 15 cm fused silica emitter of 75 µm inner diameter (Proxeon Biosystems), in-house packed with reversed-phase ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were injected with solvent A (0.5 % acetic acid) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min and separated at 200 nL/min. Separation was performed using a linear 216 min gradient of 5-33 % solvent B (80 % ACN in 0.5 % acetic acid). Every sample was run as a technical triplicate. LTQ Orbitrap Elite was operated in the positive ion mode. Precursor ions were acquired in the mass range from m/z 300 to 2000 in the Orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 followed by MS/MS spectra acquisition. The 15 most intense precursor ions from the full scan were sequentially fragmented. High resolution HCD MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 and a target value of 40,000. The normalized collision energy was set to 35, activation time to 0.1 ms and the first mass to 120 Th. Fragmented masses were excluded for 60 s after MS/MS. The target values were 1E6 charges for the MS scans in the Orbitrap and 5000 charges for the MS/MS scans with a maximum fill time of 100 ms and 150 ms respectively.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS data were processed by Thermo Proteome Discoverer software (v.1.4.1.14), Mascot (v. 2.4) and the NCBInr databases (Nov. 2014) for bacteria and Sus scrofa. Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Precursor ion tolerance was defined at 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 0.02 Da. Furthermore, all peaks besides the top 12 peaks per 100 Da in each MS/MS were removed to de-noise spectra before identification. Using Thermo’s Proteome Discoverer, the default filter was set to one peptide per protein and a Mascot Significance threshold of 0.05. Protein grouping was enabled with a minimum peptide confidence of medium and a delta Cn better than 0.15. Strict maximum parsimony principle was applied.

### Publication Abstract
The intestinal microbiota and its metabolites appear to be an important factor for gastrointestinal function and health. However, research is still needed to further elaborate potential relationships between nutrition, gut microbiota and host's health by means of a suitable animal model. The present study examined the effect of two different diets on microbial composition and activity by using the pig as a model for humans. Eight pigs were equally allotted to two treatments, either fed a low-fat/high-fiber (LF), or a high-fat/low-fiber (HF) diet for 7 weeks. Feces were sampled at day 7 of every experimental week. Diet effects on fecal microbiota were assessed using quantitative real-time PCR, DNA fingerprinting and metaproteomics. Furthermore, fecal short-chain fatty acid (SCFA) profiles and ammonia concentrations were determined. Gene copy numbers of lactobacilli, bifidobacteria (P&lt;0.001) and Faecalibacterium prausnitzii (P&lt;0.05) were higher in the LF pigs, while Enterobacteriaceae were more abundant in the HF pigs (P&lt;0.001). Higher numbers of proteins affiliated to Enterobacteriaceae were also present in the HF samples. Proteins for polysaccharide breakdown did almost exclusively originate from Prevotellaceae. Total and individual fecal SCFA concentrations were higher for pigs of the LF treatment (P&lt;0.05), whereas fecal ammonia concentrations did not differ between treatments (P&gt;0.05). Results provide evidence that beginning from the start of the experiment, the LF diet stimulated beneficial bacteria and SCFA production, especially butyrate (P&lt;0.05), while the HF diet fostered those bacterial groups which have been associated with a negative impact on health conditions. These findings correspond to results in humans and might strengthen the hypothesis that the response of the porcine gut microbiota to a specific dietary modulation is in support of using the pig as suitable animal model for humans to assess diet-gut-microbiota interactions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003447.

### Keywords
Git microbiota, Pig

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim Institute of Animal Science
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim Institute of Animal Science


