### Accession
PXD027490

### Title
Induction of muscle atrophy by tumor and dexamethasone regulates a distinct set of proteins from atrophy caused by aging

### Description
To assess changes in the muscle proteome that due to tumor burden and dexamethasone treatments and compare proteomic changes that occur in atrophy due to tumor burden and dexamethasone treatment with atrophy caused by aging. Regulators of muscle atrophy induced by diseases such as cancer or drugs such as dexamethasone are largely unknown. We would therefore like to determine the proteomic signature of atrophying muscle caused by tumor burden (LLC cell injected mice) and dexamethasone treatment in order to examine possible biomarkers and regulators of muscle atrophy. We would also like to compared the proteomic signature of different modes of muscle atrophy to determine similarities and differences in the possible biomarkers and regulators.

### Sample Protocol
The tibialis anterior muscle from 6 month old C57BL6/J mice was excised following 20mg/kg dexamethasone IP injection daily for two weeks, and from LLC inoculated mice bearing tumors after 3 weeks and homogenized by mortar and pestle. Proteins were extracted from the resulting powdered tissue sample with 8M urea solution. In total, 16 samples were analyzed by the TMTpro 16-plex based LC-LC-MS/MS: 4 replicates for each condition used. The TMT labeled tryptic peptides were mixed equally and eluted into ~49 fractions by basic pH RPLC. The amount of ~1 µg peptides from every other faction were analyzed by the mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion, Thermo Scientific), for ~2 hours of acetonitrile gradient generated from buffer A (0.2% formic acid) and buffer B (0.2% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile).

### Data Protocol
The JUMP searching engine and the UniProt human database were used.  Searches were performed using 15 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions due to JUMP’s auto mass correction function and 15ppm for fragment ions, allowing up to two missed trypsin cleavage sites. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+304.2071453 Da) was used for static modifications and the dynamic modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da). The assigned peptides are filtered by minimal peptide length, maximum miscleavages, mass-to-charge accuracy and matching scores. The peptides are then divided into groups according to peptide length, trypticity, modification, miscleavage, and charge and then further filtered by matching scores to reduce protein FDR to below 1%. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matched PSMs using our in-house software.

### Publication Abstract
Skeletal muscle atrophy is a debilitating condition that occurs with aging and disease, but the underlying mechanisms are incompletely understood. Previous work determined that common transcriptional changes occur in muscle during atrophy induced by different stimuli. However, whether this holds true at the proteome level remains largely unexplored. Here, we find that, contrary to this earlier model, distinct atrophic stimuli (corticosteroids, cancer cachexia, and aging) induce largely different mRNA and protein changes during muscle atrophy in mice. Moreover, there is widespread transcriptome-proteome disconnect. Consequently, atrophy markers (atrogenes) identified in earlier microarray-based studies do not emerge from proteomics as generally induced by atrophy. Rather, we identify proteins that are distinctly modulated by different types of atrophy (herein defined as "atroproteins") such as the myokine CCN1/Cyr61, which regulates myofiber type switching during sarcopenia. Altogether, these integrated analyses indicate that different catabolic stimuli induce muscle atrophy via largely distinct mechanisms.

### Keywords
Atrophy, Sarcopenia, Proteomics, Aging, Cachexia, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Department of Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital

### Submitter
Zuo-Fei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Demontis
Department of Developmental Neurobiology St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


