### Accession
PXD036204

### Title
Identification of phosphorylation sites of HA-ORP8 immunoprecipitated from cells

### Description
To candidate phosphorylation sites of ORP8 in cells and the stoichiometric change of ORP8's phosphorylation when AMPK is activated,LC-MS/MS analysis of ORP8 immunoprecipitated from serum-starved cells and cells treated with AMPK activator AICAR was performed.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with HA-ORP8 and treated with or without 2 mM AICAR for 1 h or serum starvation for 24 h. HA-ORP8 was then immunoprecipitated from the cells using an anti-HA antibody and protein A agarose beads. On-bead digestion was performed with MS-grade trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37oC overnight. After desalting, digested peptides were analyzed by HPLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were analyzed against a UniProtKB human or E.coli containing target proteins using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 or PEAKS studio X. Precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to ±0.2 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.021 Da), oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of Serine\threonine\tyrosine was set as variable modifications. All identified proteins had a FDR of ≤1%, which was calculated at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Lipophagy, the selective engulfment of lipid droplets (LDs) by autophagosomes for lysosomal degradation, is critical to lipid and energy homeostasis. Here we show that the lipid transfer protein ORP8 is located on LDs and mediates the encapsulation of LDs by autophagosomal membranes. This function of ORP8 is independent of its lipid transporter activity and is achieved through direct interaction with phagophore-anchored LC3/GABARAPs. Upon lipophagy induction, ORP8 has increased localization on LDs and is phosphorylated by AMPK, thereby enhancing its affinity for LC3/GABARAPs. Deletion of ORP8 or interruption of ORP8-LC3/GABARAP interaction results in accumulation of LDs and increased intracellular triglyceride. Overexpression of ORP8 alleviates LD and triglyceride deposition in the liver of ob/ob mice, and Osbpl8-/- mice exhibit liver lipid clearance defects. Our results suggest that ORP8 is a lipophagy receptor that plays a key role in cellular lipid metabolism.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Orp8

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
maomao pu

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Liu
Department of Biochemistry and Department of Metabolic Medicine of the Fourth Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University School of Medicine, Hangzhou 310058, China.


