### Accession
PXD031000

### Title
Proteomes of the cold-adapted Baikal region amphipods exposed to heat shock

### Description
The proteomes of three amphipod species, a Holarctic species Gammarus lacustris and two Biakal species Eulimnogammarus verrucosus and Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, were received by LC-MS/MS with TMT-labeling. All animals were collected in August 2018. Before the exposition, animals were acclimated in 6C for 25 days. Three species of amphipods were exposed to heat stress (24.6 C for 24 h) and control temperature (6C for 24 h).

### Sample Protocol
For the effective protein extraction, animals of E. cyaneus and G. lacustris were pooled due to animal size; pools of E. cyaneus and G. lacustris contained 2-3 and 1-3 animals, respectively. Tandem mass tag (TMT)-labeling (TMT-10-plex, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) was applied to enable multiplexed protein identification and quantitative analysis of proteome. 20 ug of protein from each sample were used in the protocol. Sample preparation (reduction by 20 mM TCEP, alkylation by 34 mM IAA, and digestion with trypsin with 1:50 ratio of μg trypsin to μg of protein) and TMT labeling was performed on paramagnetic beads using SP3 protocol. Samples were analyzed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online via a chip-based ESI source (Nanomate, Advion, USA) to a mass spectrometer (QExactive, Thermo Scientific, USA). After trapping (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm×5 cm, Thermo Fisher, Germany), peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 3 μm, nanoViper, 75 μm × 25 cm, Thermo Fisher, Germany), applying a non-linear gradient of 150 min.

### Data Protocol
Obtained MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 with isobaric matching between runs and peptide-spectrum match level normalization (Yu, Kyriakidou, and Cox, 2020). The database search was performed against an artificial database based on the obtained transcriptome assemblies of all three species filtered with cd-hit v4.8.1 with sequence identity threshold parameter -c 1 to avoid redundant sequences. Only proteins with at least two identified peptides were included in the analysis. For the further analysis, corrected reporter ion intensities were used.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular heat shock response (HSR) comprises transcriptomic and proteomic reactions to thermal stress. It was here addressed, how the proteomic, together with the transcriptomic HSR, relate to the thermal sensitivities of three cold-adapted but differently thermo-sensitive freshwater amphipod species. The proteomes of thermosensitive Eulimnogammarus verrucosus and thermotolerant Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, both endemic to Lake Baikal, and of thermotolerant Holarctic Gammarus lacustris were investigated upon 24&#xa0;h exposure to the species-specific 10&#xa0;% lethal temperatures (LT10). Furthermore, correlations of heat stress induced changes in proteomes (this study) and transcriptomes (previous study with identical experimental design) were examined. Proteomes indicated that the HSR activated processes encompassed (i) proteostasis maintenance, (ii) maintenance of cell adhesion, (iii) oxygen transport, (iv) antioxidant response, and (v) regulation of protein synthesis. Thermo-sensitive E. verrucosus showed the most pronounced proteomic HSR and the lowest correlation of transcriptomic and proteomic HSRs. For proteins related to translation (ribosomal proteins, elongation factors), transcriptomic and proteomic changes were inconsistent: transcripts were downregulated in many cases, with levels of corresponding proteins remaining unchanged. In the Eulimnogammarus species, levels of hemocyanin protein but not transcript were increased upon heat stress, suggesting a HSR also directed to enhance oxygen transport. Thermosensitive E. verrucosus showed the most pronounced relocation of transcription/translation activity to proteostasis maintenance, which may indicate that the general species-specific stability of protein structure could be a fundamental determinant of thermotolerance. By combining transcriptomic and proteomic response data, this study provides a comprehensive picture of the cellular HSR components in the studied amphipods.

### Keywords
Tmt-labeling, Lc-msms, Amphipods, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Department of Endocrinology and Diabetology, Medical Faculty and University Hospital, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany
Department of Bioanalytical Ecotoxicology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research—UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Polina Lipaeva

### Lab Head
Dr Till Luckenbach
Department of Bioanalytical Ecotoxicology, Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research—UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


### SDRF
- organism: Gammarus lacustris, Eulimnogammarus cyaneus, Eulimnogammarus verrucosus
- cell type: nan
- organism part: nan
- disease: nan
- label: TMT126, TMT127N, TMT127C, TMT128N, TMT128C, TMT129N, TMT129C, TMT130N, TMT130C, TMT131
- instrument: nan

