### Accession
PXD040173

### Title
A Comparison of Quantitative Mass Spectrometric Methods for Drug Target Identification by Thermal Proteome Profiling

### Description
Benchmarking different LFQ-DIA approaches with traditional TMT-DDA for thermal proteome profiling.

### Sample Protocol
To provide a benchmark sample with a positive hit for thermal stabilisation, AML cells were treated with 1 µM losmapimod or vehicle for 1 h, then subjected to the thermal shift assay and lysed. Soluble fractions were digested, and each sample split in half for either 16-plex TMT-labelling, fractionation, DDA-MS3 quantification and analysis in MaxQuant or for label-free DIA analysis using library-free DirectDIA with Spectonaut and library-free mode DIA-NN or DDA library-based approaches. For library-generation, small volumes from remaining TPP samples were pooled and digested to provide a project-specific DDA-based library within Spectronaut, and a hybrid library was constructed of both DDA and DIA data. After data processing, thermal proteome profiling data analysis was performed in R and the five workflows compared.

### Data Protocol
TMT-DDA data was processed in Maxquant v1.6.10.43. DIA data was processed in Spectronaut (v16) or DIA-NN (v1.8.1)

### Publication Abstract
Thermal proteome profiling (TPP) provides a powerful approach to studying proteome-wide interactions of small therapeutic molecules and their target and off-target proteins, complementing phenotypic-based drug screens. Detecting differences in thermal stability due to target engagement requires high quantitative accuracy and consistent detection. Isobaric tandem mass tags (TMTs) are used to multiplex samples and increase quantification precision in TPP analysis by data-dependent acquisition (DDA). However, advances in data-independent acquisition (DIA) can provide higher sensitivity and protein coverage with reduced costs and sample preparation steps. Herein, we explored the performance of different DIA-based label-free quantification approaches compared to TMT-DDA for thermal shift quantitation. Acute myeloid leukemia cells were treated with losmapimod, a known inhibitor of MAPK14 (p38&#x3b1;). Label-free DIA approaches, and particularly the library-free mode in DIA-NN, were comparable of TMT-DDA in their ability to detect target engagement of losmapimod with MAPK14 and one of its downstream targets, MAPKAPK3. Using DIA for thermal shift quantitation is a cost-effective alternative to labeled quantitation in the TPP pipeline.

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition (dda), Tandem mass tag (tmt), Spectral library, Hybrid library, Target deconvolution, Thermal proteome profiling (tpp), Data-independent acquisition (dia), Acute myeloid leukaemia (aml)

### Affiliations
Newcastle University
Chair of Proteomics, Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Matthias Trost
Chair of Proteomics, Newcastle University Biosciences Institute, Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK


