### Accession
PXD037678

### Title
Genetically encoded photocatalytic protein labeling enables spatially-resolved profiling of intracellular proteome

### Description
Mapping the subcellular organization of proteins is crucial for understanding their biological functions. Herein, we report a reactive oxygen species induced protein labeling and identification (RinID) method for profiling subcellular proteome in the context of living cells. Our method capitalizes on a genetically encoded photocatalyst, miniSOG, to locally generate singlet oxygen that reacts with proximal proteins. Labeled proteins are conjugated in situ with an exogenously supplied nucleophilic probe, which serves as a functional handle for subsequent affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based protein identification. From a panel of nucleophilic compounds, we identify biotin-conjugated aniline and propargyl amine as highly reactive probes. As a demonstration of the spatial specificity and depth of coverage in mammalian cells, we apply RinID in the mitochondrial matrix, capturing 477 mitochondrial proteins with 94% specificity. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of RinID in various subcellular compartments, including the nucleus and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The temporal control of RinID enables pulse-chase labeling of ER proteome in Hela cells, which reveals substantially higher clearance rate for secreted proteins than ER resident proteins.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells stably expressing mito-V5-miniSOG (or V5-miniSOG-sec61b, or V5-H2B-miniSOG) or Hela cells stably expressing ss-HA-SOPP3-KDEL were cultured into 10 cm dishes. After reaching 90% confluence, DMEM and 10% FBS was discarded and cells were incubated with 20 mM probe 6 (10 mM for V5-H2B-miniSOG, 5 mM for SOPP3-KDEL Hela) in HBSS for 5 min at 37oC Labeling was triggered by 30 mW·cm-2 blue light for 15 min (5 min for SOPP3-KDEL Hela) at room temperature. Then the cells were scraped and collected by centrifugation at 300 g and 4oC for 5 min. The pellet was lysed on ice using 600 μL RIPA lysis buffer supplemented for 15 min. For SOPP3-KDEL Hela cells, after labeling, the cells were washed by 1 mL PBS for 3 times and then re-cultured in DMEM and 10% FBS at 37 oC for different times (0, 8, 16, 24 hours). Cells were then washed 2 times by PBS, scraped and collected from the dish by 600 μL RIPA and lysed on ice for 15 min. Lysate was centrifuged at 15,000 g at 4oC for 10 min. Excess small molecules were removed by protein precipitation in cold methanol at -80oC overnight. The protein samples were centrifuged at 3,000 g at 4oC for 10 min, and then discard the supernatant. The protein pellet was washed with cold methanol (-80oC) twice and then dissolved by 600 μL 0.5% SDS aqueous solution. 300 μL of click reaction reagents were added to each tube (final concentration: 100 μM N3-biotin, 667 μM CuSO4, 1.3 mM BTTAA and 2.5 mM sodium ascorbate) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h.  10 μL the protein sample mentioned in previous step of miniSOG labeling and click reaction section was added to 30 μL ddH2O and 10 μL 5× protein loading buffer, then boiled at 95oC for 10 min. Loading repeated for three times and the labeled protein was separated by 12% or 4-20% SDS-PAGE. Simultaneously, the remained samples was precipitated with cold methanol at -80oC overnight. Then the protein samples separated by SDS-PAGE were transferred to PVDF membrane (Bio-Rad) under 230 mA for 1 hour. The membrane was blocked with blocking buffer (5% BSA in TBST) at room temperature for 30 min. One of the membranes were then incubated with 0.4 μg/mL streptavidin-HRP dissolved in TBST at room temperature for 1 hour. The other two were incubated with primary antibody (mouse anti-V5 antibody at 1:5000 dilution and mouse anti-tubulin antibody at 1:5000 dilution respectively) overnight at 4oC. Antibodies used in this study can be found in Table S7. Blots were then washed with TBST buffer for 5 min three times. The blots were imaged by ChemiDoc MP Imaging System. The protein pellet was washed with cold methanol (-80oC) twice and then dissolved by 800 μL 0.5% SDS aqueous solution. The protein concentration was measured with BCA protein assay with PierceTM BCA Protein Assay kit (Thermo, 23227) before enrichment. After adjusting the concentration, 40 μL of the protein sample was taken as ‘input’. Thereafter, 50 μL streptavidin agarose resin (Thermo，20347) was washed by 1 mL PBS buffer once, and was incubated with the protein solution at 25oC for 3 h with gentle rotation. The agarose beads were centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min. 40 μL of supernatant was taken as ‘supernatant’ before discarding the supernatant. Then beads were washed once with 1 mL 0.5% SDS in PBS for 10 min with gentle rotation and six times with 1 mL PBS successively. 40 μL of 0.5% SDS washed supernatant was taken as ‘Wash 1’. Thereafter, the beads were centrifuged at 3000 g for 2 min before discarding the supernatant, and then were resuspended in 50 μL PBS and taken 20 μL as ‘elute’. After discarding the supernatant, the beads were resuspended by 500 μL 6 M urea in PBS buffer. 25 μL 200 mM dithiothreitol (sigma, D9163-5G) aqueous solution was added and incubated at 60oC for 15 min. The beads were cooled to 25oC. Then, 25 μL 400 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, I6125-5G) aqueous solution was added and incubate at 30oC for 30 min in the dark. Beads were washed twice with 1 mL 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (Sigma, T7408-100mL) and resuspended in 200 μL triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer. 1 μg sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, V5111) was added in each tube for the on-beads digestion by shaking at 1200 rpm and 37oC for 16 h. Thereafter, released peptides were collected from the supernatant by centrifugation at 15,000 g for 10 min, the pellet was discarded.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were interpreted using MaxQuant v1.6.10 software (samples of BSA in vitro labeling and the condition selection experiments of mitochondria proteomes didn’t have biological replicates and were not pre-fractionized; biological replicates for miniSOG labeled samples: 2 of mito-miniSOG (or V5-miniSOG-sec61b/V5-H2B-miniSOG) HEK293T cell lines with no blue LED irradiation as negative control, 2 of mito-miniSOG (or V5-miniSOG-sec61b/V5-H2B-miniSOG) HEK293T cell lines with wild type (miniSOG-NES for V5-miniSOG-sec61b/V5-H2B-miniSOG mediated labeling) HEK293T cells as negative control; sample from SOPP3-KDEL Hela cells are combined as one after TMT labeling, each time point has two replicates labeled by different TMT reagents), each biological replicate contains four peptide samples pre-fractionized by Pierce® High pH Reverse Phase Peptide Fractionation kit (Thermo, 84868). For protein ID identification, MS/MS spectra were searched against UP000005640 proteome database from uniprot (79052 human proteins in total). Half-tryptic termini and up to 1 missing trypsin cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation at cysteine (+57.0215 Da) and isotopic modifications (+28.0313 and +34.0631 Da for light and heavy labeling, respectively) at lysine/N-terminal were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation at methionine (+15.9949 Da) and acetylation of N-terminal (+42.0106 Da) were set as variable modifications. Each of the biologically replicates was analyzed separately. Contaminants and proteins identified as reverse hits were removed. For miniSOG labeled samples, proteins with unique peptides less than 2 or H/L ratio ‘NaN’ were also removed. The quantification of light/heavy ratios was calculated with precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm. For SOPP3 labeled samples, proteins with unique peptides less than 1 or any reporter ion intensity “0” were removed. The tolerance of the molecular weight of reporter ion on MS/MS is 0.003 Da. For all four proteomes we identified, we performed ROC analysis to determine the cut off ratios. For mitochondria matrix proteome, 1132 proteins in human MitoCarta 3.02 were defined as ‘true positive’, 2403 proteins used as non-mitochondria protein in TurboID work3 were defined as ‘true negative’. For ERM/ER lumen proteome, 11838 proteins with secretory annotation and 7421 proteins with non-secretory annotation in TurboID work were defined as ‘true positive’ and ‘true negative’, respectively. For nuclear proteome, 6710 proteins with nuclear annotation and 6815 proteins with non-nuclear annotation in TurboID work were defined as ‘true positive’ and ‘true negative’, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Mapping the subcellular organization of proteins is crucial for understanding their biological functions. Herein, we report a reactive oxygen species induced protein labeling and identification (RinID) method for profiling subcellular proteome in the context of living cells. Our method capitalizes on a genetically encoded photocatalyst, miniSOG, to locally generate singlet oxygen that reacts with proximal proteins. Labeled proteins are conjugated in situ with an exogenously supplied nucleophilic probe, which serves as a functional handle for subsequent affinity enrichment and mass spectrometry-based protein identification. From a panel of nucleophilic compounds, we identify biotin-conjugated aniline and propargyl amine as highly reactive probes. As a demonstration of the spatial specificity and depth of coverage in mammalian cells, we apply RinID in the mitochondrial matrix, capturing 477 mitochondrial proteins with 94% specificity. We further demonstrate the broad applicability of RinID in various subcellular compartments, including the nucleus and the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). The temporal control of RinID enables pulse-chase labeling of ER proteome in HeLa cells, which reveals substantially higher clearance rate for secreted proteins than ER resident proteins.

### Keywords
Minisog sopp3 proximity labeling photosensitive protein singlet oxygen

### Affiliations
Peking University
College of chemistry and molecular engineering, Peking University.

### Submitter
Zheng Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Peng Zou
College of chemistry and molecular engineering, Peking University.


