### Accession
PXD006479

### Title
Essential proteins' dynamics in Streptococcus sanguinis under antibiotic effect.

### Description
The current project investigates the proteomic profiles of essential genes, mass spectrometric analysis respectively, under impact of sub-inhibitory concentration of ampicillin (0.125 micro gm/ml), to elucidate the S. sanguinis stress response mechanisms on a temporal basis and define “pathogenesis signatures” as potential therapeutic targets. We further believe that the current findings will help characterize a bacterial model for studying the dynamics of essential genes under clinically relevant stress factors (antibiotic treatment) and assist in designing evidence-based guidelines for treatment in clinical settings.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were prepared from bacterial lysates as follows. Overnight cultures of S. sanguinis SK36 were diluted 100-fold into 50 ml BHI for 5 hours’ growth under micro-aerobic conditions to achieve an OD600 reading of 0.6. A triplicate of bacterial samples was left untreated as a control, while other triplicates were treated with sub-inhibitory dose of ampicillin (0.125 micro gm/ml) for 10, 20, or 30 minutes. All bacterial cells were centrifuged for 10 min at 4,000 rpm using a Sorvall Legend RT centrifuge (MN, USA) at 4 °C, washed twice with cold PBS, and mixed with lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma P8430). After 30 minutes on ice, the resuspended pellets were transferred into 2 ml Lysing Matrix B tubes. Cells were disrupted in a Fast Prep 24 for 40s at level 4.5 twice, and samples were cooled by ice for 5 min in between. Lysates were centrifuged for 15 min at 13,000 rpm at 4°C and the supernatant transferred into a new tube. Soluble protein was quantitated using Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit (Cat #23227, IL, USA) at 562 nm absorbance after 30 min incubation at 37°C with BSA as a standard. Aliquots were removed from each sample and subjected to acetone precipitation. To aid in digestion, the samples were resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate and Rapigest.  The samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 minutes. Then they were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate at room temperature for 30 minutes. The samples were digested with 1 µg trypsin twice overnight and then quenched with 5% (v:v) glacial acetic acid.         The injection volume was adjusted to achieve 100 ng protein on column per injection.  Each sample was run in triplicate. The samples were analyzed by a Waters Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer system with a nanospray ion source interfaced to a Waters M-Class C18 reversed-phase capillary column.  The peptides were injected onto the trap and analytical columns, and the peptides were eluted from the column by an acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid gradient at a flow rate of 0.4 µL/min over 60 minutes.  The digests were analyzed using the double play capability of the instrument acquiring full scan mass spectra at low collision energy to determine peptide molecular weights and product ion spectra at high collision energy to determine amino acid sequence.  Ion mobility mode was used to produce a third dimension of separation, maximizing the number of peptide identifications.

### Data Protocol
Progenesis QI software was used to perform label-free relative quantification, aligning chromatographic peaks, normalizing across samples, and then reporting out the proteins which had changed in abundance. The mascot algorithm (Matrix-science, USA) was used to identify peptide sequences present in a protein sequence database. Database search criteria were: taxonomy; target protein (hEC-SODf and hEC-SODtr), fixed modification; carboxyamidomethylated at cysteine residues; variable oxidation at methionine residues, maximum allowed missed cleavage of 2, MS tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.8 Da. The peptides were filtered with a significance threshold of P < 0.05. The data were analyzed by database searching using the PLGS search algorithm against Uniprot’s S. sanguinis SK36 database.

### Publication Abstract
The paradoxical response of Streptococcus sanguinis to drugs prescribed for dental and clinical practices has complicated treatment guidelines and raised the need for further investigation. We conducted a high throughput study on concomitant transcriptome and proteome dynamics in a time course to assess S. sanguinis behaviour under a sub-inhibitory concentration of ampicillin. Temporal changes at the transcriptome and proteome level were monitored to cover essential genes and proteins over a physiological map of intricate pathways. Our findings revealed that translation was the functional category in S. sanguinis that was most enriched in essential proteins. Moreover, essential proteins in this category demonstrated the greatest conservation across 2774 bacterial proteomes, in comparison to other essential functional categories like cell wall biosynthesis and energy production. In comparison to non-essential proteins, essential proteins were less likely to contain 'degradation-prone' amino acids at their N-terminal position, suggesting a longer half-life. Despite the ampicillin-induced stress, the transcriptional up-regulation of amino acid-tRNA synthetases and proteomic elevation of amino acid biosynthesis enzymes favoured the enriched components of essential proteins revealing 'proteomic signatures' that can be used to bridge the genotype-phenotype gap of S. sanguinis under ampicillin stress. Furthermore, we identified a significant correlation between the levels of mRNA and protein for essential genes and detected essential protein-enriched pathways differentially regulated through a persistent stress response pattern at late time points. We propose that the current findings will help characterize a bacterial model to study the dynamics of essential genes and proteins under clinically relevant stress conditions.

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Essential genes, Streptococcus sanguinis, Oral, Stress

### Affiliations
Oregon State University
Ping Xu, Professor  VCU Philips Institute for Oral Health Research Microbiology and Immunology Virginia Commonwealth University Phone: 804-827-6264 Fax: 804-828-0150

### Submitter
Fadi El-Rami

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
Ping Xu, Professor  VCU Philips Institute for Oral Health Research Microbiology and Immunology Virginia Commonwealth University Phone: 804-827-6264 Fax: 804-828-0150


