### Accession
PXD022690

### Title
Enabling Photoactivated Cross-linking Mass Spectrometric Analysis of Protein Complexes by Novel MS-cleavable Cross-linkers

### Description
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a powerful tool for studying protein-protein interactions and elucidating architectures of protein complexes. While residue-specific XL-MS studies have been very successful, accessibility of interaction regions non-targetable by specific chemistries remain difficult. Photochemistry has shown great potential in capturing those regions due to nonspecific reactivity, but low yields and high complexities of photocross-linked products have hindered their identification, limiting current studies predominantly to single proteins. Here, we describe the development of three novel MS-cleavable heterobifunctional cross-linkers, namely SDASO (Succinimidyl diazirine sulfoxide), to enable fast and accurate identification of photocross-linked peptides by MSn. The MSn-based workflow allowed SDASO XL-MS analysis of the yeast 26S proteasome, demonstrating the feasibility of photocross-linking of large protein complexes for the first time. Comparative analyses have revealed that SDASO cross-linking is robust and captures interactions complementary to residue-specific reagents, providing the foundation for future applications of photocross-linking in complex XL-MS studies.

### Sample Protocol
XL-MS Analysis of BSA and 26S Proteasomes Protein cross-linking was performed similarly to previous studies with some modifications {Gutierrez, 2018 #7531;Belsom, 2016 #7397}. Briefly, for SDASO cross-linking of BSA, 50 μL of 50 μM protein solution in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) was reacted in triplicate with SDASO-L, SDASO-M or SDASO-S in molar ratio of 1:50, respectively, for 1 h at 25oC in the dark. The NHS reactive ends were then quenched with the addition of ammonium bicarbonate at a 50-fold excess for 10 minutes at 25oC in the dark. Then NHS ester labeled proteins were transferred into Millipore Microcon Ultracel PL-30 (30-kDa filters) and washed 3 times with 300 µL PBS buffer. Diazirine cross-linking was activated by UV irradiation, which was carried out on ice ~5cm from the light source in an UV light chamber (Analytikjena™ UVP Cross-linker CL-1000L) and irradiated at 365 nm for 30 mins.  The yeast 26S proteasome was affinity purified as described {Wang, 2010 #2554} (Supplementary Method) and cross-linked by SDASO linkers similarly as described above. Specifically, 100 µg of the 26S proteasome in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) was cross-linked in triplicate with 20 mM SDASO-L, SDASO-M or SDASO-S, respectively. In addition, 100 µg of the yeast 26S proteasome in PBS buffer (pH 7.4) was cross-linked with 2.5 mM or 5 mM DSSO for 1 hr at 25oC temp similarly as described {Gutierrez, 2020 #7523}, and the reactions were quenched with the addition of ammonium bicarbonate at a 50-fold excess for 10 minutes. Then cross-linked proteins were transferred into Millipore Microcon Ultracel PL-30 (30-kDa filters) for digestion. Digestion of Cross-linked Proteins The resulting cross-linked products were subjected to enzymatic digestion using a FASP protocol {Wisniewski, 2009 #665}. Briefly, cross-linked proteins on the FASP filters were reduced/alkylated, and digested with Lys-C/trypsin or chymotrypsin as described {Kao, 2011 #4213;Gutierrez, 2020 #7523}. The resulting digests were desalted and cross-linked peptides were enriched by Size-exclusion chromatography prior to LC MSn analysis {Gutierrez, 2016 #5287}.  LC-MSn Analysis and Identification of Cross-linked Peptides Cross-linked peptides were analyzed by LC-MSn using a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex UltiMate 3000 system online coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ mass spectrometer {Gutierrez, 2020 #7523}. A 50 cm x 75 μm Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 column was used to separate peptides over a gradient of 1% to 25% ACN in 106 mins for BSA, and in 166 mins for the 26S proteasome at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 scans (375-1500 m/z, resolution at 120,000) was performed with the AGC target set to 4e5 in top speed mode with a cycle time of 5 s. For MSn analysis, 3+ and up charged ions were selected for MS2-CID in FT mode, followed by top 4 data-dependent MS3 acquisition method {Yu, 2016 #7245}. A targeted MS3 acquisition was also used for DSSO cross-linked peptides by utilizing the mass difference between alkene- and thiol-modified ion pairs (31.9721 Da) {Yu, 2016 #7245}. For MS2 scans, the resolution was set to 30,000, the AGC target 5e4, the precursor isolation width was 1.6 m/z, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms for CID. The CID-MS2 normalized collision energy was 25%. For MS3 scans, CID was used with a collision energy of 35%, the AGC target was set to 2e4, and the maximum injection time was set to 120 ms. MSn data were extracted using MSConvert (ProteoWizard 3.0.10738) and subjected to database searching using a developmental version of Protein Prospector (v.6.0.0). Cross-linked peptides were identified by the integration of MSn data with database search results using the in-house software xl-Tools {Yu, 2016 #7245} (Supplementary Method).

### Data Protocol
Identification of Cross-linked Peptides MSn data extraction and analysis were performed in the same way as previously described 5. MS3 data was subjected to a developmental version of Protein Prospector (v.6.0.0) for database searching, using Batch-Tag against limited to custom random concatenated databases. For BSA and the 26S proteasome data, the database consisted of BSA plus 493 Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins (494 entries) with mass tolerances for parent ions and fragment ions set as ±20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. For the UBR interaction searches, the database consisted of consisted modified sequences from hRpn2seq, hRpn13, hRpn10 and Ublqn2 (4 entries) with mass tolerances for parent ions and fragment ions set as ±20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin or Chymotrypsin was set as the enzyme with three or four maximum missed cleavages allowed, respectively. A maximum of four variable modifications were allowed, including cysteine carbamidomethylation, protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid. In addition, three defined modifications representing alkene on uncleaved lysines, thiol and sulfenic fragment moieties on any AAs were selected for each respective SDASO cross-linker. Specifically, for SDASO-L cross-links: alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C7H13NO2S; +175 Da), and thiol (C7H11NOS; +157 Da). For SDASO-M cross-links: alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C5H10OS; +118 Da), and thiol (C5H8S; +100 Da). For SDASO-S cross-links: alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C4H8OS; +104 Da), and thiol (C4H6S; +86 Da). For DSSO cross-links, three defined modifications on uncleaved lysines are: alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C3H4O2S; +104 Da), and thiol (C3H2SO; +86 Da)6. Initial acceptance criteria for SDASO peptide identification in MS3 required a peptide score above 5 and a reported expectation value below 1. Low confidence linkages were identified as those that had a score/length ratio < 0.75 and XL ppm < -10 or > 10ppm, these can be found in SI Appendix Table S1A and S2A. Initial acceptance criteria for DSSO peptide identification in MS3 required a peptide score above 5 and a reported expectation value below 0.2. Low confidence linkages were identified as those that had a score/length ratio < 0.75 and XL ppm < -10 or > 10ppm, these can be found in SI Appendix Table S2A. The in-house program xl-Tools, a revised version of the previously developed Xl-Discoverer, was used to validate and summarize cross-linked peptides based on MSn data and database searching 6,7. Following integration of MSn data, the DSSO, SDASO-Lc, SDASO-M and SDASO-S cross-link data did not contain decoy proteins while SDASO-L had a decoy rate 0f 0.08%. Raw data has been deposited at the PRIDE Archive proteomics data repository site: https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/ (XXX).

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) is a powerful tool for studying protein-protein interactions and elucidating architectures of protein complexes. While residue-specific XL-MS studies have been very successful, accessibility of interaction regions nontargetable by specific chemistries remain difficult. Photochemistry has shown great potential in capturing those regions because of nonspecific reactivity, but low yields and high complexities of photocross-linked products have hindered their identification, limiting current studies predominantly to single proteins. Here, we describe the development of three novel MS-cleavable heterobifunctional cross-linkers, namely SDASO (Succinimidyl diazirine sulfoxide), to enable fast and accurate identification of photocross-linked peptides by MS<sup>n</sup>. The MS<sup>n</sup>-based workflow allowed SDASO XL-MS analysis of the yeast 26S proteasome, demonstrating the feasibility of photocross-linking of large protein complexes for the first time. Comparative analyses have revealed that SDASO cross-linking is robust and captures interactions complementary to residue-specific reagents, providing the foundation for future applications of photocross-linking in complex XL-MS studies.

### Keywords
Bsa, 26s proteasome, Photocross-linking, Sdaso

### Affiliations
University of California, Irvine School of Medicine Depeartment of physiology and Biophysics
Huang Lab

### Submitter
Craig Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Lan Huang
University of California, Irvine School of Medicine Depeartment of physiology and Biophysics


