### Accession
PXD007229

### Title
Rat colon LC-MSMS -  Intake of Fish Oil Specifically Modulates Colonic Muc2 Expression in Middle-Aged Rats by Suppressing the Glycosylation Process

### Description
Dietary fats have been shown to affect gut microbiota composition and aging gene transcription of middle-aged rats at a normal dose, but little is known about such an effect on gut barrier. In colon, the main component of mucus layer is Muc2, produced by the goblet cells. This study investigated the changes in Muc2 expression, goblet cells proliferation, TLRs and inflammatory cytokines in the colon of middle-aged rats. Proteome technology was applied to explore the possible molecular mechanisms. The results indicated that intake of fish oil at a normal dose downregulated colonic Muc2 expression, and this negative effect of fish oil probably involved the suppression of mucin glycosylation process.

### Sample Protocol
Colonic proteins were extracted with lysis buffer I (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % CHAPS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Applied Science, Penzberg, Germany). Isolated proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin [49]. Six 6-plex TMT (Thermo St, Los Angeles, CA, USA) analyses were performed and the colonic samples were labeled with tags 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, and 131. Firstly, a common reference sample was prepared by pooling protein sample from all three groups, used for independent labeling with mass 131 and randomly assigned to 6 replicates. The colon tissue samples from the soybean oil, pork lard and fish oil groups were labeled with masses 126, 127, 128, 129 and 130, respectively. Labeled control and diet-specific samples were combined equivalently before sample fractionation. Combined samples were analyzed by high-resolution Orbitrap LC-MS/MS to identify peptides and quantify reporter ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by the Proteome Discoverer Software (version: 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein identification was performed using Sequest HT engine against the UniprotKB Rattus norvegicus database (http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/, Accessed on 14 Oct 2016). Pathway analysis was performed by using the OmicsBean (http://www.omicsbean.cn), which integrated Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Colon

### Affiliations
student
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yafang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Chunbao Li
Nanjing Agricultural University


