### Accession
PXD003874

### Title
TMT-based quantitative analysis of brain whole proteome of miR-137 mouse models

### Description
Recent genetic evidence has revealed microRNA-137 (miR-137) as a risk gene in schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorder (ASD), and the following cellular studies have demonstrated the importance of miR-137 in regulating neurogenesis. We have generated miR-137 knockout mice which display behaviors that resemble some symptoms of these two diseases. To investigate the underlying molecular mechanism, we performed comprehensive analyses of the entire RNA and protein molecules of the miR-137 mouse brains. The dataset uploaded here is the raw data of the mass spectrometry-based whole proteome analysis of the six miR-137 mouse brains: wild-type, heterozygous (miR-137+/–) and homozygous (miR-137–/–) from two different litters.  The tandem mass tag (TMT) methodology was employed in this proteomics analysis for the quantitation. The sample channels are: 128C (miR-137+/+, litter 1), 129N (miR-137+/–, litter 1),  129C (miR-137–/–, litter 1), 130N (miR-137+/+, litter 2), 130C (miR-137+/–, litter 2), and 131N (miR-137–/–, litter 2).

### Sample Protocol
The quantitative proteomics was performed by the TMT strategy as descried previously1. Brain cortical tissues were lysed in the buffer (8M urea, 50mM Hepes, pH 8.5). 200 µg proteins from each sample were taken for in-solution digestion by lysC and Trypsin sequentially. The resulting peptides were labeled with TMT reagents, and then mixed equally, cleaned by C18 desalting, and then fractionated by basic-pH reversed-phase chromatography. The collected 60 fractions were run individually without catenation on the mass spectrometer “Q Eactive HF” by a 2-hour’s gradient of acetonitrile in 1% formic acid and 5% DMSO, through a 30cm-long and 75 ID column packed with 1.9µm C18 beads.

### Data Protocol
The JUMP program was used to process the MS data2. About 1.8 million MS2 spectra were collected, among which almost 140,000 unique peptides were identified (FDR: 0.003%) and nearly 12,000 unique proteins were finally quantified (FDR: 0.03%).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mir-137, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Tmt, Mass spectrometry, Autism spectrum disorder

### Affiliations
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Proteomics

### Submitter
xusheng wang

### Lab Head
Dr Junmin Peng
St. Jude Children's Research Hospital


