### Accession
PXD046091

### Title
Human medulloblastoma ASNSD1 uORF KO LC-MSMS

### Description
A hallmark of high-risk childhood medulloblastoma is the dysregulation of RNA translation. Currently, it is unknown whether medulloblastoma dysregulates the translation of putatively oncogenic non-canonical open reading frames. To address this question, we performed ribosome profiling of 32 medulloblastoma tissues and cell lines and observed widespread non-canonical ORF translation. We then developed a step-wise approach using multiple CRISPR-Cas9 screens to elucidate non-canonical ORFs and putative microproteins implicated in medulloblastoma cell survival. We determined that multiple lncRNA-ORFs and upstream open reading frames (uORFs) exhibited selective functionality independent of the main coding sequence. A microprotein encoded by one of these ORFs, ASNSD1-uORF or ASDURF, was upregulated, associated with the MYC family oncogenes, and was required for medulloblastoma cell survival through engagement with the prefoldin-like chaperone complex. Our findings underscore the fundamental importance of non-canonical ORF translation in medulloblastoma and provide a rationale to include these ORFs in future studies seeking to define new cancer targets.

### Sample Protocol
1.5 million D425 cells or 2.0 million D283 cells were plated in each well of poly-lysine coated 6 well plates. Cells were allowed to attach for 3 hours and then subsequently transduced with 30uL of 10x concentrated lentivirus with 4ug/mL polybrene. Transductions were done in biological triplicate. Cells were grown for 24 hours and the 1.5ug/mL of puromycin was added. Cells were antibiotic-selected for 48 hours and then fresh media was added. Cells were grown for an additional 48 hours. At the 120 hour time point, cell media was aspirated and cells were washed in ice-cold PBS four times. Cells were scraped, counted, and aliquoted into 1 million cells for RNA-seq and 3 million cells for mass spectrometry.Cell pellets reserved for mass spectrometry were transferred to the Harvard Medical School ThermoFisher Center for Multiplexed Proteomics (TCMP) for total proteome analysis using TMT 10-plex or 15-plex. Protein lysates were subject to quantification, reduction and alkylation, precipitation and digestion followed by peptide quantification, TMT-labeling, LC-MS3 label check, basic reverse-phase HPLC fractionation (bRP-HPLC) and LC-MS3 analysis of 12 bRP-LC peptide fractions.

### Data Protocol
Database searching, filtering to 1% FDR at protein level, TMT reporter quantification, and data analysis were performed according to standard TCMP core facility pipelines as previously described. To identify downstream targets, significantly differentially-abundant proteins with a p < 0.01 were considered. Proteins that had statistically-significant changes in both PFDN2 and ASNSD1-uORF knockouts were tested for gene network modules using the NCBI DAVID Bioinformatics platform (https://david.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) on default settings.

### Publication Abstract
A hallmark of high-risk childhood medulloblastoma is the dysregulation of RNA translation. Currently, it is unknown whether medulloblastoma dysregulates the translation of putatively oncogenic non-canonical open reading frames. To address this question, we performed ribosome profiling of 32 medulloblastoma tissues and cell lines and observed widespread non-canonical ORF translation. We then developed a step-wise approach to employ multiple CRISPR-Cas9 screens to elucidate functional non-canonical ORFs implicated in medulloblastoma cell survival. We determined that multiple lncRNA-ORFs and upstream open reading frames (uORFs) exhibited selective functionality independent of the main coding sequence. One of these, ASNSD1-uORF or ASDURF, was upregulated, associated with the MYC family oncogenes, and was required for medulloblastoma cell survival through engagement with the prefoldin-like chaperone complex. Our findings underscore the fundamental importance of non-canonical ORF translation in medulloblastoma and provide a rationale to include these ORFs in future cancer genomics studies seeking to define new cancer targets.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Medulloblastoma, Knockout

### Affiliations
Princess Maxima Center for Pediatric Oncology
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Damon Hofman

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Prensner
Department of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology and Biological Chemistry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


