### Accession
PXD045118

### Title
Phosphorylation of Bcl-xL by ERK1

### Description
The anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-xL in the heart against reperfusion injury is diminished by K-Ras-Mst1-mediated phosphorylation of Ser14, which allows dissociation of Bcl-xL from Bax and promotes cardiomyocyte death. Here we show that Ser14 phosphorylation of Bcl-xL is also promoted by hemodynamic stress in the heart, through the H-Ras-ERK pathway. Our study suggests that phosphorylation of Bcl-xL at Ser14 in response to acute pressure overload plays an essential role in mediating compensatory hypertrophy by promoting calcium release, alleviating the negative constraint of Bcl-xL upon the IP3R-NFAT pathway.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant GST-tagged full-length Bcl-xL protein was generated using the pCold-GST-vector. Recombinant active ERK1 (Millipore Sigma #14-439) was incubated with recombinant GST-Bcl-xL-WT (1 mg) in a kinase buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4), 15 mM MgCl2 and 200 mM sodium vanadate) in the presence or absence of 100 mM ATP at 30°C for 15 min. Recombinant phosphorylated GST-Bcl-xL protein was separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel band of interest was excised for in-gel trypsin digestion. The gel bands of each sample were excised into ~1 cm3 peices, and washed four times with 1 μL each of a solution of 30% acetonitrile (ACN) and 70% of 100 mM NH4HCO3. Subsequently, 200 μL of 25 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) solution was used to reduce disulfides at 55 °C for 30 minutes, and 200 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide solution was then added to alkylate thiols at room temperature in the dark for 30 minutes. The resulting gel peices were dehydrated with 200 μL of ACN to remove both DTT and iodoacetamide. For in-gel trypsin digestion, 100 μL of trypsin solution (5 µg/mL in 50 mM NH4HCO3) was added into each sample, and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Resulting peptides were extracted, desalted with Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific), based on the manufacturer’s protocol, followed by Speed Vac prior to LC-MS/MS analysis on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS instrument. Peptides from each sample were reconstituted in Solvent A (consisting of 2% ACN in 0.1% formic acid, FA). Two microliters of peptides from each sample were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer coupled with an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC+ system (Thermo Scientific). The separation of peptides occurred on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm, 100 Å) with a 2-hour binary gradient ranging from 2% to 95% of Solvent B (85% ACN in 0.1% FA), at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into the MS system via a Nanospray Flex ion source with a spray voltage of 2 kV and a capillary temperature of 275 °C. MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode using Xcalibur (1.5). Full MS scans were obtained in an m/z range of 375 to 1500 in profile mode, with an AGC value of approximately 1E6. Subsequent to each full MS scan, the data-dependent MS/MS mode was enaged to analyze the ions with charge states ranging from 2+ to 7+. The isolation window of 2 m/z was used for MS/MS analysis and the higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30%. The AGC for MS/MS analysis was set to 5E4 and a dynamic exclusion time of 45 seconds was implemented.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot human database using the Sequest search engine on the Proteome Discoverer platform (PD V2.4.1.15). Trypsin was set as the enzyme with two miss cleavages. Methionine oxidation, STY phosphorylation were selected as variable modifications and C carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da.  The false discovery rate of protein identification is less than 1%, using Percolator embedded in PD 2.4.1.15. To estimate phosphorylation site localization probability, ptmRS (2.2) embedded in PD2.4.1.15 was used. Only phosphorylation sites with probabilities of 90% or more were considered as confidently mapped.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Bcl-2-like protein 1, Phosphorylation, Mitogen-activated protein kinase 3

### Affiliations
Rutgers
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences

### Submitter
Michinari Nakamura

### Lab Head
Dr Michinari Nakamura
Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Medicine, Rutgers New Jersey Medical School, Rutgers Biomedical and Health Sciences


