### Accession
PXD025142

### Title
Aird: A computation-oriented mass spectrometry data format enables a higher compression ratio and less decoding time

### Description
We describe "Aird", an opensource and computation-oriented format with controllable precision, flexible indexing strategies, and high compression rate. Aird provides a novel compressor called Zlib-Diff-PforDelta (ZDPD) for m/z data. Compared with Zlib only, m/z data size is about 55% lower in Aird on average. With the high-speed decoding and encoding performance brought by the Single Instruction Multiple Data(SIMD) technology used in the ZDPD, Aird merely takes 33% decoding time compared with Zlib. We used the open dataset HYE, which contains 48 raw files from SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 and TripleTOF6600. The total file size is 206GB as the vendor format. The total size increases to 854GB after converting to mzML with 32-bit encoding precision. While it takes only 189GB when using Aird. Aird uses JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) for metadata storage. Aird-SDK is written in Java and AirdPro is a GUI client for vendor file converting which is written in C#. They are freely available at https://github.com/CSi-Studio/Aird-SDK and https://github.com/CSi-Studio/AirdPro.

### Sample Protocol
We test the data on an open dataset with a normal desktop computer (CPU: i7 7700K 4.4GHz, Disk: 5900R HDD, Memory:16GB). 8 files from AB SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 and 8 files from Thermo QE Orbitrap are mixed for the test. The standard golden set and HYE datasets are also tested in the supplementary. The MSConvert version is 3.0.20196-20896b6b1 Metadata information is usually read into the memory for a quick preview of file information. Unlike MS data, metadata usually exists in memory for a long time, while MS data should be loaded into memory only during the calculation. Although metadata is usually less than 5MB, when loading a project contains hundreds of experimental files. It will also take up more than 500MB of memory. The JSON format can make file preview faster and reduce memory usage. XML and JSON formats are used to store the same content to compare the storage size of the two formats. Due to the elimination of redundant tag information in XML, the JSON format file is smaller than the XML format file. We compare data size, comparison ratio, encoding time, and decoding time with three different precisions. FastPfor, Aird, and Numpress are compared with Zlib (See Fig.2C, D, E). In terms of actual size, the m/z data size compressed by the Aird algorithm is 55% of it of Zlib on average. When using OpenSWATH, MZMine, XCMS or other software, XIC is a very frequent and common calculation step. Due to the increasing size of MS data, it becomes more and more difficult to decode the MS data and put it into memory. Decoding speed has become one of the bottlenecks of the whole workflow. The ZDPD algorithm also performs well in decoding speed due to the SIMD support. The decoding time is only 33% of it of Zlib. That means, with the same I/O strategy, Aird uses only half of the memory to complete the calculation compared with Zlib but can increase the decompression speed by 3 times. For the intensity array, Aird uses the Zlib compressor with 1dp precision. As an option, Aird also offers an optional compression algorithm that can result in precision loss of up to 0.25%.

### Data Protocol
Digital properties of intensity arrays vary across instruments. Duplicate intensities are more tend to be produced by Time of Flight spectrometer. This is a very favorable characteristic of the Zlib algorithm. Besides, m/z arrays with more numbers within the same range will have a higher compression rate as their delta values are smaller. Therefore, under the same conditions, the more the number of fragments contained in the sample, the higher the compression rate. So we can't come up with a stable and absolute conclusion to express the exact compression performance of Aird files. It is also unfair to compare the absolute size between near-lossless and lossless formats. Although we provide some results regarding size comparison with mzML and vendor files in the supplementary, they are only for readers' reference. We convert some datasets into Aird format and compare to other format, like mzML, mz5 and mgf.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Metabolomics, Aird, Proteomics, Compressor, Prm, Dia

### Affiliations
Westlake University
CSi

### Submitter
cong xie

### Lab Head
Dr Miaoshan Lu
Westlake University


