### Accession
PXD020638

### Title
Combining label-free and label-based accurate quantifications with SWATH-MS: comparison with SRM and PRM for the evaluation of bovine muscle type effects

### Description
The performances of label-based SWATH-MS, SRM and PRM to accurately quantify ten candidate biomarkers of beef meat tenderness or marbling, in a cohort of 64 bovine muscle tissues expected to cover a wide biological range of these traits, were evaluated. Limits of quantification, dynamic range and quantification performances were assessed. Moreover, protein amounts for all proteins detected in SWATH-MS were estimated in a label-free manner.

### Sample Protocol
MicroLC-MS/MS analyses for spectral library generation were performed on an ekspert nanoLC 400 system coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (both from Sciex, Concord, Canada).

### Data Protocol
Wiff files corresponding to the DDA analyses were converted into mgf files using the Protein Pilot 5.0 software (Sciex). Data were searched using Mascot search engine (version 2.5.1; Matrix Science, London, UK) against an in-house concatenated target-decoy Bos taurus UniProtKB-TrEMBL database (31,928 entries, release 06/2017), supplemented with the retention time standards, trypsin and common contaminants, and generated with the database toolbox from MSDA (Carapito et al., 2014; doi: 10.1002/pmic.201300415). The following parameters were applied: trypsin as digestion enzyme, one permitted missed cleavage, a mass tolerance of 15 ppm on the precursor ions and 0.05 Da on the fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine residues, label:13C(6)15N(2) and label:13C(6)15N(4) as variable modifications. Mascot result files were loaded into the ProlineStudio 2.0 software (Carapito at al., 2015; doi: 10.1021/pr5010345) (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) and identifications were validated on pretty rank equal to 1, 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum matches on e-value, and 1% FDR on protein sets based on Mascot Modified Mudpit scoring.

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry has proven to be a valuable tool for the accurate quantification of proteins. In this study, the performances of three targeted approaches, namely selected reaction monitoring (SRM), parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) and sequential windowed acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion mass spectra (SWATH-MS), to accurately quantify ten potential biomarkers of beef meat tenderness or marbling in a cohort of 64 muscle samples were evaluated. So as to get the most benefit out of the complete MS2 maps that are acquired in SWATH-MS, an original label-free quantification method to estimate protein amounts using an I-spline regression model was developed. Overall, SWATH-MS outperformed SRM in terms of sensitivity and dynamic range, while PRM still performed the best, and all three strategies showed similar quantification accuracies and precisions for the absolute quantification of targets of interest. This targeted picture was extended by 585 additional proteins for which amounts were estimated using the label-free approach on SWATH-MS; thus, offering a more global profiling of muscle proteomes and further insights into muscle type effect on candidate biomarkers of beef meat qualities as well as muscle metabolism.

### Keywords
Beef meat quality; data-independent acquisition (dia); quantitative ms; swath-ms; targeted proteomics

### Affiliations
LSMBO - IPHC
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), University of Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Joanna Bons

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Carapito
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO), University of Strasbourg, CNRS, IPHC, UMR 7178, F-67000 Strasbourg, France


