### Accession
PXD002470

### Title
iTRAQ Manatee

### Description
In 2013, two large-scale Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris) mortality episodes were reported on separate coasts of Florida. The east coast mortality episode was associated with an unknown etiology in the Indian River Lagoon (IRL). The west coast mortality episode was attributed to a persistent Karenia brevis algal bloom or ‘red tide’ centered in Southwest Florida. To investigate these two mortality episodes, proteomic experiments using two-dimensional difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) followed by protein identification using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were conducted, along with a separate gel-free analysis using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) LC-MS/MS.  In comparison to the control group, manatees from the IRL, an area associated with an unknown mortality episode, displayed increased levels of several proteins in their serum samples. These increased proteins, which were identified in the iTRAQ experiment, included kininogen-1 isoform 1 (average ratio 1.38), protein AMBP (1.38), histidine-rich glycoprotein (1.34), properdin (1.30), and complement C4-A isoform 1 (1.25). In the red tide group, ceruloplasmin (2.32), pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2 isoform 3 (2.29), angiotensinogen (2.08), complement C4-A isoform 1 (1.83), and complement C3 (1.42) were increased. The proteins kininogen-1 isoform 1, histidine-rich glycoprotein, complement C4-A isoform 1, angiotensinogen, and complement C3 were also identified in increased levels in the 2D-DIGE experiment (Table 2b). These proteins are associated with acute-phase response, amyloid formation and accumulation, copper and iron homeostasis, the complement cascade pathway, and other important cellular functions. The increased level of complement C4 protein observed in both the red tide and unknown mortality episode groups was confirmed through the use of Western Blot.

### Sample Protocol
Isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) labeling and LC-MS/MS were used to further quantitate protein abundance. Twelve serum samples from three groups (red tide (n=4), unknown mortality episode (n=4), and Crystal River controls (n=4)) were included in the study The red tide and unknown mortality episode groups were compared to a control group in a case-control study design using two separate experiments. Four samples from the red tide group and four samples from the unknown mortality episode group were compared separately to four control samples in each experiment.  The red tide group was comprised of manatees treated by the Lowry Park Zoo in Tampa for their red tide related illnesses. The unknown mortality episode group was comprised of animals in the Indian River Lagoon which was the site of the 2013 manatee mortality episode. The control group was comprised of manatees from Crystal River, Florida that were not influenced by the mortality episodes. The manatees from the unknown mortality episode and control groups were screened during routine annual manatee health assessments of free-ranging manatees conducted by the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) Sirenia Project (USGS permit #: MA791721) and the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission (FWC) (USFWS permit #: MA067116-1) (Harvey et al. 2009). The University of Florida (UF) obtained research approval from the University’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) to receive the samples collected during the manatee health assessments. During the health assessments, approximately 5 mL of peripheral blood was transferred into three separate Lithium-heparin tubes (total 15 mL) from the brachial vascular bundle of sub-adult and adult manatees and centrifuged at ~10-15,000 xg for 10 minutes. After the centrifuge step, the samples were transported on dry ice and stored later at -80°C. Samples from Lowry Park Zoo were shipped overnight on dry ice and stored -80°C.  Total protein quantitation on serum samples was done with EZQ protein quantitation kit (Invitrogen, CA, USA) according to manufacture instructions, and 10 mg of total protein were processed with ProteoMinerTM to deplete abundant proteins in the serum (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA).  A total of 100 µg of total protein per sample was digested with trypsin and labeled using the iTRAQ Reagents 8-plex kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX, Inc., Foster City, CA). The manatees from the unknown mortality episode and red tide groups were labeled with tags corresponding to 117, 118, 119, and 121 masses, and each sample from the exposed groups was compared to the controls (labeled 113-116). The exposure groups (red tide and unknown mortality episode) were analyzed in comparison to the controls in two separate experiments. Labeled samples were combined and lyophilized. The mixture of dried peptides was solubilized in strong cation exchange (SCX) solvent A (25% (v/v) ACN, 10 mM ammonium formate and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (pH 2.8)) Peptide fractionation was performed with an Agilent high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) 1260 system on a polysulfoethyl A column (2.1 X 100 mm, 5µm, 300 Ǻ; PolyLC, Columbia, MD, USA). Peptide elution was performed for approximately 50 minutes along a 0–20% gradient of solvent B (25% (v/v) ACN in 500 mM ammonium formate-pH 6.8)). Solvent B was ramped to 100% in 5 minutes and held for 10 minutes. Ten fractions were collected and lyophilized. The fractions were resuspended in 15 µL of loading buffer (3% ACN, 0.1% acetic acid, and 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid) and inputted into a LC Packings capillary trap cartridge (C18) (Silva-Sanchez et al. 2013).  Fractions were analyzed using a 15 cm nanoflow analytical column (C18) (PepMap 75 µm id, 3 µm, 100 Å) with a 300 nL/min flow rate on a nanoLC ultra 1D plus system (ABsciex, USA). Solvent A was comprised of 3% ACN v/v and 0.1% acetic acid v/v (Silva-Sanchez et al. 2013). Solvent B was composed of 97% ACN v/v and 0.1 % acetic acid v/v. The separation of peptides was completed using a linear gradient of solvent B (from 3-40%) for 120 minutes and then the gradient was increased to 90% in 5 minutes and held for 5 minutes. The eluted peptides were directly sprayed into an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific Inc., Bremen, Germany). MS2 spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode. An Orbitrap full MS scan (resolution: 6E4, mass range 400-1,800 dalton) was followed by 10 MS2 scans in the Orbitrap, which were performed via HCD on the top 10 most abundant ions. The isolation window for ion selection was 2 dalton. Normalized collision energy was set at 35% and the dynamic exclusion time was 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
ProteinPilot™ software was used for data interpretation. Data from iTRAQ were inputted into ProteinPilot™ software versions 4.0 and 4.5 beta. The search in ProteinPilot™ was performed using a user-defined Paragon Algorithm to identify and quantify the proteins in the samples; a method compatible with the use of iTRAQ data. Data were searched against the manatee database (NCBI, 20,140,000, 576,208 entries respectively) For the cysteine alkylation method, the s-methylmethanethiosulfonate (MMTS) default was selected. Trypsin was inputted as the digestion enzyme. For species, a default of none was inputted as this field contains the most commonly referenced species and selecting manatee was not an option. For the ‘database’ field, the database in NCBI for manatee (5/6/2014; 21,933 gene entries) was inputted into ProteinPilot™. For the ‘result quality’ field, the detected protein threshold chosen required that the unused ProtScore confidence be greater than 0.05. The false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was selected and ProteinPilot™ Paragon Algorithm search was run for both experimental groups (unknown mortality episode and red tide) in comparison to the control group.  To improve the validity of the results, proteins that scored below a 1.3 unused score were removed. The ‘unused score’ refers to the total number of peptides that do not fall under any other protein group other than the one they were assigned to exclusively by ProteinPilot™. The more a protein has peptides exclusively assigned to it, the more likely the protein assignment made is correct. An unused score threshold of 1.3 or above assures 95% confidence in the results. Reverse predictions were generated using a false discovery rate (FDR) which applies a false decoy to test if the peptide assignments made were more accurate than assignments made to a false decoy peptide. These reverse predicted proteins were removed from the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Two large-scale Florida manatee (Trichechus manatus latirostris) mortality episodes were reported on separate coasts of Florida in 2013. The east coast mortality episode was associated with an unknown etiology in the Indian River Lagoon (IRL). The west coast mortality episode was attributed to a persistent Karenia brevis algal bloom or 'red tide' centered in Southwest Florida. Manatees from the IRL also had signs of cold stress. To investigate these two mortality episodes, two proteomic experiments were performed, using two-dimensional difference in gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) and isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) LC-MS/MS. Manatees from the IRL displayed increased levels of several proteins in their serum samples compared to controls, including kininogen-1 isoform 1, alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunen precursor, histidine-rich glycoprotein, properdin, and complement C4-A isoform 1. In the red tide group, the following proteins were increased: ceruloplasmin, pyruvate kinase isozymes M1/M2 isoform 3, angiotensinogen, complement C4-A isoform 1, and complement C3. These proteins are associated with acute-phase response, amyloid formation and accumulation, copper and iron homeostasis, the complement cascade pathway, and other important cellular functions. The increased level of complement C4 protein observed in the red tide group was confirmed through the use of Western Blot.

### Keywords
Manatee, Itraq mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Student
Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology Department of Physiological Sciences & College of Medicine College of Veterinary Medicine University of Florida

### Submitter
Rebecca  Lazensky

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Nancy Denslow
Center for Environmental and Human Toxicology Department of Physiological Sciences & College of Medicine College of Veterinary Medicine University of Florida


