### Accession
PXD008141

### Title
Blood plasma and serum samples of healthy donors fractionated on different chromatography sorbents

### Description
Blood as connective tissue potentially contain evidence of all processes occurring within the organism, at least in trace amounts. Because of their small size, peptides overcome cell membranes and epithelial barriers more freely than proteins. Among the peptides found in blood, there are both fragments of proteins secreted by various tissues and performing their function in plasma, as well as receptor ligands: hormones, cytokines, mediators of the cellular response. In addition, in minor amounts, there are disease peptide markers (for example, oncomarkers) and even foreign peptides related to pathogenic organisms and infection agents. To characterize the normal peptidome LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out of blood serum and plasma samples taken from 20 healthy donors on TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer. Sample preparation was carried out based on our previously developed method of peptide desorption from the surface of abundant blood plasma proteins followed by standard chromatographic steps.

### Sample Protocol
Patients and Specimens Blood plasma and serum samples of 10 healthy male (average age 32 years) and 10 healthy female (average age 26 years) donors were collected from the Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical Chemical Medicine of the Federal Medical and Biological Agency of the Russian Federation. The status of “healthy” was set based on an anamnesis and further monitoring of the donor. Sample collection To obtain plasma the blood samples were collected from the cubital vein into blood collection tubes (REF 456023, Vacuette tube, Austria). Plasma was obtained within 15 minutes after collection. The collection tube was centrifuged for 15 min at 1000g at room temperature. The plasma was separated from blood cells, aliquoted and stored at -80C until analysis. To obtain serum the blood samples were collected from the cubital vein into blood collection tubes (REF 456092, Vacuette tube, Austria). Serum was obtained after coagulation of blood for 1 hour at room temperature. The collection tube was centrifuged for 15 min at 1000g at room temperature. The serum was separated from the clot, aliquoted and stored at -80C until analysis. Samples were fractionated on different sorbents (WCX Toyopearl CM-650M, SEC Bio-Gel P-2 Gel, SAX QAE Sephadex A-25, SCX SP Sephadex C-25) and analysed by LC-MS/MS individually and pooled. LC-MS/MS Analysis Analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer with a NanoSpray III ion source (Sciex, Canada) coupled with a NanoLC Ultra 2D+ nano-HPLC system (Eksigent, USA). The HPLC system was configured in trap-elute mode. For sample loading buffer and buffer A, a mixture of 98.9% water, 1% MeOH, 0.1% FA (v/v) was used. Buffer B was 99.9% AcN and 0.1% FA (v/v). Samples were loaded on a Chrom XP C18 trap column (3 µm, 120 Å, 350 µm 0.5 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 3 µl/min for 10 min and eluted through a 3C18-CL-120 separation column (3 µm, 120 Å, 75 µm 150 mm; Eksigent) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient was from 5% to 40% buffer B in 90 min followed by 10 min at 95% buffer B and 20 min of reequilibration with 5% buffer B. Between different samples, two blank 45-min runs consisting of 5 to 8 min waves (5% B, 95%, 95%, 5%) were required to wash the system and to prevent carryover. The information-dependent mass-spectrometer experiment included one survey MS1 scan followed by 50 dependent MS2 scans. MS1 acquisition parameters were as follows: the mass range for MS2 analysis was 300–1250 m/z, and the signal accumulation time was 250 ms. Ions for MS2 analysis were selected on the basis of intensity with a threshold of 200 counts per second and a charge state from 2 to 5. MS2 acquisition parameters were as follows: the resolution of the quadrupole was set to UNIT (0.7 Da), the measurement mass range was 200–1800 m/z, and the signal accumulation time was 50 ms for each parent ion. Collision-activated dissociation was performed with nitrogen gas with the collision energy ramped from 25 to 55 V within the signal accumulation time of 50 ms. Analyzed parent ions were sent to the dynamic exclusion list for 15 s in order to get an MS2 spectra at the chromatographic peak apex. β-Galactosidase tryptic solution (20 fmol) was run with a 15-min gradient (5% to 25% buffer B) every two samples and between sample sets to calibrate the mass spectrometer and to control the overall system performance, stability, and reproducibility.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were converted to .mgf peaklists with ProteinPilot (version 4.5, Sciex, Canada). For this procedure we ran ProteinPilot in identification mode with the following parameters: no specific digestion, TripleTOF 5600 instrument, thorough ID search with detected protein threshold 95.0% against the UniProt human protein knowledgebase. For thorough protein identification, the generated peak lists were searched with the MASCOT (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science Ltd, UK) and X! Tandem (VENGEANCE, 2015.12.15, The Global Proteome Machine Organization) search engines against the UniProt human protein knowledgebase. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 50 ppm, respectively. Database-searching parameters included the following: no specific digestion. For X! Tandem we also selected parameters that allow quick check for protein N-terminal residue acetylation, peptide N-terminal glutamine ammonia loss or peptide N-terminal glutamic acid water loss. Result files were submitted to the Scaffold 4 software (version 4.2.1, Proteome Software, Inc, USA) for validation and further analysis. We used the local false discovery rate scoring algorithm with standard experiment-wide protein grouping. For the evaluation of peptide hits, a false discovery rate less than 1% was selected for peptides only. False positive identifications were based on reverse database analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Blood as connective tissue potentially contains evidence of all processes occurring within the organism, at least in trace amounts (Petricoin et al., 2006) [1]. Because of their small size, peptides penetrate cell membranes and epithelial barriers more freely than proteins. Among the peptides found in blood, there are both fragments of proteins secreted by various tissues and performing their function in plasma and receptor ligands: hormones, cytokines and mediators of cellular response (Anderson et al., 2002) [2]. In addition, in minor amounts, there are peptide disease markers (for example, oncomarkers) and even foreign peptides related to pathogenic organisms and infection agents. To propose an approach for detailed peptidome characterization, we carried out an LC-MS/MS analysis of blood serum and plasma samples taken from 20 healthy donors on a TripleTOF 5600+ mass-spectrometer. We prepared samples based on our previously developed method of peptide desorption from the surface of abundant blood plasma proteins followed by standard chromatographic steps (Ziganshin et al., 2011) [3]. The mass-spectrometry peptidomics data presented in this article have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Deutsch et al., 2017) [4] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD008141 and 10.6019/PXD008141.

### Keywords
Blood plasma and serum, Norm, Peptidomics, Healthy donors, Mass-spectrometry

### Affiliations
Federal Research and Clinical Center of Physical-Chemical Medicine of Federal Medical Biological Agency
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Georgij Arapidi

### Lab Head
Dr Georgij Pavlovich Arapidi
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of Bioorganic Chemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences


