### Accession
PXD008653

### Title
Docosahexaenoic and Arachidonic Free Fatty Acids Exert Different Antitumor Activities on Colorectal Cancer Cells

### Description
Two PUFA, docosahexaenoic (DHA, 22: 6n3) and arachidonic acids (ARA, 20: 4n6), as well as their derivatives such as eicosanoids, regulate different activities, which include changes in receptor signaling, the composition of rafts, cell metabolism, and membrane structures. These also modify the function of transcription factors and their target genes, a key step essential for the function of FA-activated signaling.  This work is focused to determine the antitumor actions of these compounds linked to the regulation of gene transcription on HT-29 colorectal cancer. For this, we performed antiproliferative antitumour assay, LDH breakage test, caspase-3 production, and proteome changes were assessed by SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics followed by pathway analysis in order to find out which molecular mechanisms were being affected. In all cases tested, DHA exercised antitumor actions to a higher extent than ARA, acting mainly by means of down-regulating most of the proteasome system particles, while ARA presented a heavy effect on all the six DNA replication helicase particles but did not affect proteasome. The results indicated that both DHA and ARA stopped colorectal cancer growth and proliferation, thus they represent the ideal candidates as chemopreventive agents.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from HT-29 cancer cells  treated with DHA or ARA free fatty acids, and control samples, were precipitated with TCA/Acetone, and solubilised in 50 µL of 0.2% RapiGest SF. 40 µg of protein were subjected to trypsin digestion. 1 ug of each sample was injected in a nLC (2 hour gradient, 5% to 30% ACN 0.1% formic acid, 300 nL/min, column:Thermo Acclaim PepMap100 25cm x 75 um) coupled to a Sciex Triple TOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. For building the spectra library, a top 65 data dependent acquisition method (250 ms TOF MS survey scan from 350 to 1250 m/z, followed by 60 ms MS/MS of the top 65 ions from 230 to 1700 m/z) was used. For quantifying the proteins on each sample, a variable SWATH data-independent method (50 ms TOF MS from 350 to 1250 m/z followed by 60 90 ms variable precursor window MS/MS from 230 to 1500 m/z) was used.

### Data Protocol
DDA runs were searched against a human Swiss-Prot concatenated target-reverse decoy database using Protein Pilot v5.0.1. The spectral library was built using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). The library-assisted targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.1) using the MS/MSALL with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). MarkerView (version 1.2.1, Sciex) was used for signal normalisation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer; proteomics; pufa; dha; ara; swath

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC
IMIBIC

### Submitter
Ignacio Ortea

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Ortea
Proteomics Unit, IMIBIC


