### Accession
PXD045331

### Title
Nucleoid-Enriched Proteomes in Developing Plastids and Chloroplasts from Maize Leaves: A New Conceptual Framework for Nucleoid Functions

### Description
Plastids contain multiple copies of the plastid chromosome, folded together with proteins and RNA into nucleoids. The degree to which components of the plastid gene expression and protein biogenesis machineries are nucleoid associated, and the factors involved in plastid DNA organization, repair, and replication, are poorly understood. To provide a conceptual framework for nucleoid function, we characterized the proteomes of highly enriched nucleoid fractions of proplastids and mature chloroplasts isolated from the maize (Zea mays) leaf base and tip, respectively, using mass spectrometry. Quantitative comparisons with proteomes of unfractionated proplastids and chloroplasts facilitated the determination of nucleoid-enriched proteins. This nucleoid-enriched proteome included proteins involved in DNA replication, organization, and repair as well as transcription, mRNA processing, splicing, and editing. Many proteins of unknown function, including pentatricopeptide repeat (PPR), tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR), DnaJ, and mitochondrial transcription factor (mTERF) domain proteins, were identified. Strikingly, 70S ribosome and ribosome assembly factors were strongly overrepresented in nucleoid fractions, but protein chaperones were not. Our analysis strongly suggests that mRNA processing, splicing, and editing, as well as ribosome assembly, take place in association with the nucleoid, suggesting that these processes occur cotranscriptionally. The plastid developmental state did not dramatically change the nucleoid-enriched proteome but did quantitatively shift the predominating function from RNA metabolism in undeveloped plastids to translation and homeostasis in chloroplasts. This study extends the known maize plastid proteome by hundreds of proteins, including more than 40 PPR and mTERF domain proteins, and provides a resource for targeted studies on plastid gene expression. Details of protein identification and annotation are provided in the Plant Proteome Database.

### Sample Protocol
For purification of nucleoids along the leaf developmental gradient, maize (Zea mays) inbred line W22-T43 was grown in a growth chamber for 9 to 10 d (16 h of light/8 h of dark, 400 mmol photons m–2 s–1, constant 28C). Alternatively, maize inbred line B73 was grown for 7.5 to 9 d in a growth chamber (12 h of light/12 h of dark, 400 mmol photons m22 s21, 31C day and 22C night). Mixed mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplast plastids were isolated from the base of the third leaf (the first 3 cm from the ligule), the middle 3 cm of the leaf, and the tip of the leaf (last 4 cm) as follows. Maize leaves (80–140 g fresh weight) were cut to approximately 5 mm in length, homogenized in grinding medium (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 8.0, 330 mM sorbitol, 2 mM EDTA, 8 mM ascorbic acid, and 5 mM L-Cys) with four bursts of 2- to 3-s high-speed (one-third the maximum speed) and 3-s low-speed pulses by a modifiedWaring blender in which the original blades were replaced by a razor blade, and filtered through two to four layers of 20-mm Miracloth. The leaf residues on nylon membranes were returned to the blender, and the homogenization step was repeated one to three times. The crude chloroplasts were overlaid onto a 35%/80% (v/v) PF Percoll (Percoll contains 0.98% [w/v] Ficoll PM 400 and 2.9% [w/v] polyethylene glycol 4000) step gradient that was osmotically adjusted (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 8.0, 330 mM sorbitol, and 2 mM EDTA) and spun in a swinging-bucket rotor at 4,740g for 15 min. The broken chloroplasts of the upper band were removed, the intact chloroplasts from the interface of the 35% and 80% Percoll layers were collected and washed with approximately 5 volumes of the wash buffer, and the chloroplasts were collected by centrifugation at 1,940g for 4 min. All plastid isolations were carried out under low-intensity green light at 4C, and all buffers were chilled on ice. Separate mesophyll and bundle sheath chloroplasts were purified from the top 4-cm section of the third leaf and harvested about 2 h after the onset of the light period, using about 200 leaf tips (about 80 g of fresh tissue) as described (Majeran et al., 2005). For proteome analysis of proplastids, we used the first 2 cm(counting from the ligule) of each third leaf blade of 9- to 10-d-old B73 seedlings, in total collecting 8 to 10 g fresh weight per plastid isolation. The plastid isolation protocol described above was slightly modified to increase yield as follows: (1) leaf sections were ground in a Waring blender at half maximum speed with five pulses of approximately 5 s; (2) the Percoll cushion was 30%/80% instead of 35%/80% for 10 min instead of 15 min; and (3) centrifugations steps to collect crude and pure protoplastids were at higher g values and longer times than for chloroplasts, typically 10 min at 6,000 rpm in a JS13.1 rotor (average 3,649g).  Nucleoids were isolated from intact isolated maize chloroplasts essentially as described by Cannon et al. (1999) with minor modifications, as follows. Half of the chloroplast pellets were suspended in 8 mL of nucleoid isolation buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.0, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1.5 mM spermidine, 7 mM 2-mercaptohethanol, and 40 mg mL21 Pefabloc SC) in 10-mL beakers, and 2 mL of 10% (v/v) Igepal CA-630 (instead of Nonidet P-40) was slowly added while stirring to a final concentration to 2% on ice and left stirring for 30 min. The lysate was spun in a Ti50.2 rotor (Beckman) at 148,000g for 30 min at 4C. The resulting nucleoid pellets were resuspended with 1 mL of nucleoid isolation buffer with 2% Igepal CA-630 and was brought up to 20 mL of the buffer, homogenized, and spun again at 148,000g for 30 min at 4C. (In an attempt to increase the purity of the isolated nucleoids, we resuspended the nucleoid pellet in 2 mL of nucleoid resuspension buffer and loaded it onto a 30-mL 40%/80% step Suc gradient. The gradient was spun at 8,000 rpm for 15 min [Beckman SW-13.1 rotor], and the nucleoid particles were harvested from the 40% to 80% Suc interface. The harvested nucleoid particles were diluted at least 10 times in nucleoid resuspension buffer and collected by centrifugation at 48,000g for 30 min. However, we found that this procedure greatly reduced the yield, and we did not further employ this extra step.) The pellets were washed and spun again with nucleoid isolation buffer with 2% Igepal CA-630. The final nucleoid pellets were resuspended in 440 mL of nucleoid isolation buffer with 0.5% Igepal CA-630 and protease inhibitors (50 mg mL21 antipain, 40 mg mL21 bestatin, 20 mg mL21 chymostein, 10 mg mL21 E64, 10 mg mL21 phosphamidon, 2 mg mL21 aprotinin, and 250 mg mL21 Pefabloc SC) and stored at 280C until use. Protein concentrations in nucleoids were estimated from the gel stain pattern, since the high levels of nucleic acid prevented accurate protein determination using the Bradford or bicinchoninic acid assays.

### Data Protocol
After protein separation by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE, each gel lane was cut into six to 10 slices. Proteins were digested with trypsin, and the extracted peptides were analyzed by nano-LC LTQ-Orbitrap MS using data-dependent acquisition and dynamic exclusion, as described (Friso et al., 2010). Peak lists (.mgf format) were generated using DTA supercharge (version 1.19) software (http://msquant.sourceforge.net/) and searched with Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science) against maize genome release 4a.53 (with 53,764 models) from http://www.maizesequence.org/, supplemented with the plastid-encoded proteins (111 proteinmodels) andmitochondria-encoded proteins (165 protein models). Details for the calibration and control of false positive rate are described by Friso et al. (2010). MS-based information for all identified proteins was extracted from the Mascot search pages and filtered for significance (e.g. minimum ion scores, etc.), ambiguities, and shared spectra as described (Friso et al., 2010). All filtered results were uploaded into the PPDB (http://ppdb.tc.cornell.edu/; Sun et al., 2009).

### Publication Abstract
C(4) grasses, such as maize (Zea mays), have high photosynthetic efficiency through combined biochemical and structural adaptations. C(4) photosynthesis is established along the developmental axis of the leaf blade, leading from an undifferentiated leaf base just above the ligule into highly specialized mesophyll cells (MCs) and bundle sheath cells (BSCs) at the tip. To resolve the kinetics of maize leaf development and C(4) differentiation and to obtain a systems-level understanding of maize leaf formation, the accumulation profiles of proteomes of the leaf and the isolated BSCs with their vascular bundle along the developmental gradient were determined using large-scale mass spectrometry. This was complemented by extensive qualitative and quantitative microscopy analysis of structural features (e.g., Kranz anatomy, plasmodesmata, cell wall, and organelles). More than 4300 proteins were identified and functionally annotated. Developmental protein accumulation profiles and hierarchical cluster analysis then determined the kinetics of organelle biogenesis, formation of cellular structures, metabolism, and coexpression patterns. Two main expression clusters were observed, each divided in subclusters, suggesting that a limited number of developmental regulatory networks organize concerted protein accumulation along the leaf gradient. The coexpression with BSC and MC markers provided strong candidates for further analysis of C(4) specialization, in particular transporters and biogenesis factors. Based on the integrated information, we describe five developmental transitions that provide a conceptual and practical template for further analysis. An online protein expression viewer is provided through the Plant Proteome Database.

### Keywords
Proplastids, Leaf development, Nucleoids, Chloroplasts, Maize

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University

### Submitter
Tami Leppert

### Lab Head
Dr Klaas van Wijk
School of Integrative Plant Science Plant Biology Section, Cornell University


### SDRF
- organism: Zea mays
- organism part:  proplastids leaf base, leaf plastid nucleoids, leaf base plastid nucleoids, leaf Bundle Sheath plastid nucleoids, leaf Mesophyll plastid nucleoids, leaf Middle section plastid nucleoids, leaf tip plastid nucleoids
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: AC=MS:1002038;NT=label free sample
- instrument: AC=MS:1000449;NT=LTQ Orbitrap
- modification parameters: NT=Carbamidomethyl;AC=UNIMOD:4;TA=C;MT=Fixed

