### Accession
PXD029362

### Title
Generation of ENSEMBL-based proteogenomics databases boost the identification of novel peptides - Mouse dataset

### Description
A novel bioinformatics tool pypgatk and the pgdb workflow is presented in study to create proteogenomics databases based on ENSEMBL resources. The tools allow the generation of protein sequences from novel protein-coding transcripts by performing a  three-frame translation of pseudogenes, lncRNAs, and other non-canonical transcripts, such as those produced by alternative splicing events. It also includes exonic out-of-frame translation from otherwise canonical protein-coding mRNAs. Moreover, the tool enables the generation  of variant protein sequences from multiple sources of genomic variants including COSMIC, cBioportal, gnomAD, and mutations detected from sequencing of patient samples. pypgatk and pgdb provide multiple functionalities for database handling, notably optimized target/decoy generati on by the algorithm DecoyPyrat.

### Sample Protocol
Reanalyzed data is originally described in submissions PXD018891, PXD006439

### Data Protocol
The proteomicsLFQ (v1.1.0dev) nf-core workflow (https://github.com/nf-core/proteomicslfq, v.2.6.0) allows performing protein identification and quantification for label-free proteomics experiments. In summary, peptide identification is performed using MS-GF+ (v5 Aug 2020) and Comet (v2019.01) search engines. The Percolator tool (v3.05.0) is then applied to calculate the SVM score and the respective q-values for the PSMs identified by the search engines. The results from both search engines are combined using the ConsensusID OpenMS tool and filtered on 1% FDR using the target/decoy approach. OpenMS feature detection and quantification of each peptide is performed for each sample and dataset using the proteomicsLFQ workflow. The final peptide intensities are exported into different file formats including mzTab, MSstats, and Triqler file format.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Mice

### Affiliations
EMBL-EBI
EBI

### Submitter
Yasset Perez-Riverol

### Lab Head
Dr Yasset Perez-Riverol
EMBL-EBI


