### Accession
PXD032353

### Title
Human iPSCs differentiated into SMCs

### Description
Human iPSCs were differentiated towards an induced-SMC (iSMC) phenotype in a 10-day protocol. Proteomics was performed throughout the entire differentiation time course to provide a robust, well-defined starting and ending cell population. Proteomics data verified iPSC differentiation to iSMCs. Proteomics comparison with primary human SMCs showed a high correlation with iSMCs. After iSMC differentiation, we initiated calcification in the iSMCs by culturing the cells in osteogenic media for 17 days.

### Sample Protocol
iPSC-iSMC differentiation was carried out in three independent experiments (n = 3) using one single donor (BJiPSCs, ATCC) due to limited availability of commercially available donors from ATCC. For comparison to primary human coronary artery smooth muscle cells (hCASMCs) under normal and osteogenic conditions, three separate donors (N = 3) obtained from Promocell were used. Approximately 1x106 cells from a 6-well plate were collected in 400 µl of RIPA lysis buffer with protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. There are two datasets. Dataset 1 consists of the iPSCs differentiated into iSMCs (n = 3, 1 donor, time points: day 0, day 3, day 5, day 7, day 10). Dataset 2 consists of the iSMCs cultured in NM and OM collected at days 10 and 17 (n = 3, 1 donor, time points: day 10 and day 17) as well as SMCs in NM and OM from day 14 in culture (3 donors, time point: day 14). The sampling time points for dataset 1 during iPSC to iSMC differentiation correspond with the specific induction protocols. Day 0 represents naïve iPSCs; day 3 represents lateral mesoderm; day 5 represents the start of SMC induction; day 7 represents a midpoint for iSMC purification; day 10 represents the endpoint for iSMC differentiation. Dataset 2 timepoints are consistent with when calcification is present as indicated by Alizarin Red staining; days 10 and 17 for iSMCs and day 14 for primary human coronary artery SMCs.  The protein content was determined by the Pierce BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). A volume equivalent to 20 μg of protein was used for further processing. Next, the samples were prepared using iST Sample Preparation Kit (PreOmics, Germany) according to the protocol provided by manufacturer, without sonication and with a 90 minutes incubation at 37°C. The samples processed by the iST kit were resuspended in 40 μl of LC-LOAD (PreOmics).

### Data Protocol
Data-dependent acquisitions (DDAs, unbiased peptide sampling) - the peptides were and analyzed using the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fronted with an EasySpray ion source, and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated using a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm; and a PepMap RSLC C18 EASY-Spray LC heated (45 oC) column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gradient flow rate was 300 nl/min from 5 to 21% solvent B (acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) for 75 minutes, 21 to 30 % Solvent B for 15 minutes, followed by ten minutes of a ‘jigsaw wash’, alternating between 5 and 95 % Solvent B. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid. The instrument was set to 120 K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in a 3 second cycle time (within a scan range of 375-1500 m/z; isolation window, 1.6 m/z; ion trap scan rate, normal) were subjected to collision induced dissociation (collision energy 30%) for peptide sequencing (or MS/MS). Dynamic exclusion was enabled (60 seconds).  The MS/MS spectra were queried against the human  (downloaded on November 21, 2018; 155,133 entries) using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Methionine oxidation and n-terminal acetylation were set as a variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Peptides were filtered based on a 1% false discovery rate (FDR) (17) based on the reverse database (decoy) results. In order to quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample , we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were, RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of five. Precursor peptide abundances were based on their chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for normalization. Peptides assigned to a given protein group, and not present in any other protein group, were considered as unique. Consequently, each protein group is represented by a single master protein (PD Grouping feature). We used unique and razor peptides per protein for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Cardiovascular calcification is the lead predictor of cardiovascular events and the top cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide. To date, only invasive surgical options are available to treat cardiovascular calcification despite the growing understanding of underlying pathological mechanisms. Key players in vascular calcification are vascular smooth muscle cells (SMCs), which transform into calcifying SMCs and secrete mineralizing extracellular vesicles that form microcalcifications, subsequently increasing plaque instability and consequential plaque rupture. There is an increasing, practical need for a large scale and inexhaustible source of functional SMCs. Here we describe an induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived model of SMCs by differentiating iPSCs toward SMCs to study the pathogenesis of vascular calcification. Specifically, we characterize the proteome during iPSC differentiation to better understand the cellular dynamics during this process. First, we differentiated human iPSCs toward an induced-SMC (iSMC) phenotype in a 10-day protocol. The success of iSMC differentiation was demonstrated through morphological analysis, immunofluorescent staining, flow cytometry, and proteomics characterization. Proteomics was performed throughout the entire differentiation time course to provide a robust, well-defined starting and ending cell population. Proteomics data verified iPSC differentiation to iSMCs, and functional enrichment of proteins on different days showed the key pathways changing during iSMC development. Proteomics comparison with primary human SMCs showed a high correlation with iSMCs. After iSMC differentiation, we initiated calcification in the iSMCs by culturing the cells in osteogenic media for 17 days. Calcification was verified using Alizarin Red S staining and proteomics data analysis. This study presents an inexhaustible source of functional vascular SMCs and calcifying vascular SMCs to create an <i>in vitro</i> model of vascular calcification in osteogenic conditions, with high potential for future applications in cardiovascular calcification research.

### Keywords
Smooth muscle cell, Calcification, Lumos

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
Brigham and Women's Hospital

### Submitter
Sasha  Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Elena Aikawa
Brigham and Women's Hospital


