### Accession
PXD028107

### Title
Defining the Tumor Microenvironment by Integration of Im-munohistochemistry and Extracellular Matrix Targeted Imaging Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Breast stroma plays a significant role in breast cancer risk and progression yet remains poorly understood. In breast stroma, collagen is the most abundantly expressed protein and its increased deposition and alignment contributes to progression and poor prognosis. Collagen post-translation modifications such as hydroxylated-proline (HYP) control deposition and stromal organization. The clinical relevance of collagen HYP site modifications in cancer processes remains undefined due to technical issues accessing collagen from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. We previously developed a targeted approach for investigating collagen and other extracellular matrix proteins from FFPE tissue. Here, we hypothesized that immunohistochem-istry staining for fibroblastic markers would not interfere with targeted detection of collagen stroma peptides and could reveal peptide regulation influenced by specific cell types. Our initial work demonstrated that stromal peptide peak intensities when using MALD-IMS following IHC staining (αSMA, FAP, P4HA3 and PTEN) were comparable to serial sections of non-stained tissue. Analysis of histology-directed IMS using PTEN on breast tissues and TMAs revealed heteroge-neous PTEN staining patterns and suggestive roles in stromal protein regulation. This study sets the foundation for investigations of target cell types and their unique contribution to collagen regulation within extracellular matrix niches.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were then de-stained with xylene and ethanol washes, heat induced epitope re-trieved with 10 mM citraconic buffer, pH 3. An automated sprayer was used to apply  PNGaseF PRIME enzyme using an automated sprayer (M3 TM-Sprayer, HTXImaging, Chapel Hill, NC, USA) to remove N-glycans [43]. Tissues were washed to remove N-glycans, then heat induced epitope retrieved using 10 mM Tris buffer, 1 mM CaCl2, pH 9 and sprayed with COLase3 enzyme using an automated sprayer. COLase3 was sprayed onto tissue sections with parameters of 45°C, 10 psi, 25 µL/min, 1200 velocity, and 15 passes. Tissues were digested in ≥80% relative humidity at 37.5°C for 5 hours followed by spraying CHCA matrix (7 mg/mL CHCA in 50% acetonitrile, 1% trifluoracetic acid). For matrix spraying, parameters were 79°C, 10 psi, 100 µL/min, 1300 velocity and 10 passes. To limit matrix clusters, slides were rapidly dipped in cold 5 mM ammonium phosphate monobasic and dried in desiccator prior to IMS data acquisition.tissue sections were analyzed by a Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance mass spectrometer (FT-ICR) (solariX Legacy 7.0 Tesla, Bruker, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) source using positive ion mode over m/z range of 700 – 2500. Laser settings used were 200 laser shots per pixel with a step size of 125 to 200-µm between pixels. Time of flight was set to 1.050 ms and transient length was 0.8389 sec. Each tissue section was scraped into individual centrifuge tubes and digested with CO-Lase3 overnight [35]. A C18 StageTip (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to desalt pep-tides prior to loading onto a trap column for separation.  Peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with in-strumental control software v. 4.2.28.14. A UHPLC (EASY nLC 1200 System, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to separate peptides on a C18 reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 µm x 50 cm (C18, 2 µm, 100 Å), Thermo Fisher Scientific). A solvent gradient of 2-35% in 180 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min was used for separation with Solvent A (0.1% FA); Solvent B (80% ACN/ 0.1% FA). A high resolution (60,000) FTMS survey scan using a mass range of m/z 375-1575 was followed by tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) of the most intense precursors (charge states +1 through +5) with a cycle time of 3s. An automatic gain control target value of 4.0e5 was used for the survey MS scan. A precursor isolation window of 1.6 m/z was used with max injection time of 22 ms, and HCD collision energy of 35% with maximum; fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a 15,000 resolution.  Monoisotopic-precursor selection was set to “peptide” and Apex de-tection was not enabled. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 15 sec and a mass tol-erance of 10 ppm.  Advanced peak determination was not enabled.

### Data Protocol
All images were visualized in FlexImaging v5.0 and analyzed by SCiLS Lab software 2021b Premium 3D Build 9.01.12514 (Bruker Scientific, LLC, Bremen, Germany) with lin-ear interpolation without denoising normalized to total ion count. SCiLS Lab settings for visualizing the peak intensities was set to a 99% quantile. Exported peak intensities were transformed using natural log. Statistical significance of all extracted peak intensities compared between regions were determined using exact p-values calculated by student t-test using GraphPad version 9.0.2. MS/MS data was searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version Mas-cot in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288) and Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 1.4.0.288). A database was extracted from Uniprot for homo sapiens using keywords and gene ontology for extracellular matrix and collagen, dated 05052017 with 945 entries. This was appended with a contaminants da-tabase and concatenated with the reverse database of both the ECM proteome and the contaminants. Mascot and Sequest were set up to search assuming nonspecific enzymatic digestion. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of lysine, methionine and proline were specified in Mascot and Sequest as variable modifications. Scaffold (ver-sion Scaffold_4.11.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to report MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.5% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm [45]. Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [46]. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. The false discovery rate for protein identification was 0.47%

### Publication Abstract
Breast stroma plays a significant role in breast cancer risk and progression yet remains poorly understood. In breast stroma, collagen is the most abundantly expressed protein and its increased deposition and alignment contributes to progression and poor prognosis. Collagen post-translation modifications such as hydroxylated-proline (HYP) control deposition and stromal organization. The clinical relevance of collagen HYP site modifications in cancer processes remains undefined due to technical issues accessing collagen from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues. We previously developed a targeted approach for investigating collagen and other extracellular matrix proteins from FFPE tissue. Here, we hypothesized that immunohistochemistry staining for fibroblastic markers would not interfere with targeted detection of collagen stroma peptides and could reveal peptide regulation influenced by specific cell types. Our initial work demonstrated that stromal peptide peak intensities when using MALD-IMS following IHC staining (&#x3b1;SMA, FAP, P4HA3 and PTEN) were comparable to serial sections of nonstained tissue. Analysis of histology-directed IMS using PTEN on breast tissues and TMAs revealed heterogeneous PTEN staining patterns and suggestive roles in stromal protein regulation. This study sets the foundation for investigations of target cell types and their unique contribution to collagen regulation within extracellular matrix niches.

### Keywords
Imaging mass spectrometry (ims); immunohistochemistry (ihc); pten; stroma; ecm; tumor microenvironment; breast cancer

### Affiliations
Medical University of SC
Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Bruker-MUSC Center of Excellence, Clinical Glycomics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston SC USA

### Submitter
Jennifer Bethard

### Lab Head
Dr Peggi M. Angel
Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics, Bruker-MUSC Center of Excellence, Clinical Glycomics, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston SC USA


