### Accession
PXD038273

### Title
Immunopeptidomics of malignant mesothelioma to identify target antigens for T cell Immunotherapy

### Description
Immunoaffinity purification was performed on human mesothelioma cell lines NCI-H2452, NCI-H28, MSTO-211H and JL1, on murine mesothelioma cell line AB12, as well as on mesothelioma samples from two patients (including tumor and benign tissues). Thereafter Immunopeptidomics by Mass Spectrometry on a Tims TOF Pro revealed the MHC peptide landscape of mesothelioma.

### Sample Protocol
Murine MHC class I peptides were immunoaffinity purified using inVivoMAb anti-mouse MHC Class I (H-2Kd, H-2Dd) (clone 34-1-2S, BioXCell, BE0180, Lebanon, USA). Human MHC class I peptides were immunoaffinity purified using anti-human HLA-A, HLA-B, and HLA-C antibodies (clone W6/32, BioLegend 311434 San Diego, CA). For sample preparation, the snap-frozen cell pellet (1 × 108 cells for each replicate) was incubated for 2 hr at 4°C in lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, protease inhibitors (A32955, Thermo Scientific Pierce, Waltham, MA), and 1% Igepal (I8896, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO)). The lysates were precleared by low-speed centrifugation for 10 min at 500 × g, and then the supernatant was centrifuged for 30 min at 25,000 × g. The cleared lysate was loaded to the immunoaffinity column (AminoLink Plus Immobilization, Pierce) with covalently linked antibody according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Once binding occurred, the affinity column was washed using the following buffers: 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl; 400 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl; 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, and 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0; and bound complexes were eluted in 0.1 M acetic acid. Eluted peptides and the subunits of the MHC complexes were desalted using SepPac-C18 cartridges (Waters). The cartridge was prewashed with 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and then with 0.1% TFA. The peptides were purified from the MHC class I complex by elution with 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Finally, the samples were dried using vacuum centrifugation (Eppendorf). Each dry sample was dissolved in 10 μL of LC–MS solvent A (0.1% formic acid). The nanoElute LC system (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) injected and loaded the 10 μL of sample directly onto the analytical column (Aurora C18, 25 cm long, 75 μm i.d., 1.6 μm bead size, Ionopticks, Melbourne, Australia) constantly kept at 50 °C by a heating oven (PRSO-V2 oven, Sonation, Biberach, Germany). After washing and loading sample at a constant pressure of 800 bar, the LC system started a 30 min gradient from 0 to 32% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), followed by an increase to 95% B in 5 min, and finally a wash of 10 min at 95% B, all at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Online LC–MS was performed using a Tims TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker, Bremen, Germany) with the CaptiveSpray source, capillary voltage 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 L/min, and dry gas temperature at 180 °C. MS data reduction was enabled. The mass spectra peak detection maximum intensity was set to 10. The mobilogram peak detection intensity threshold was set to 5000. The mass range was 300–1100 m/z, and the mobility range was 0.6–1.30 V s/cm2. MS/MS was used with 3 PASEF (parallel accumulation–serial fragmentation) scans (300 ms each) per cycle with a target intensity of 20 000 and an intensity threshold of 1000, considering charge states 0–5. Active exclusion was used with release after 0.4 min, reconsidering a precursor if the current intensity is >4-fold the previous intensity, a mass width of 0.015 m/z, and a 1/k0 width of 0.015 V s/cm2. The isolation width was defined as 2.00 m/z for mass 700 m/z and 3.00 m/zfor mass 800 m/z. The collision energy was set as 10.62 eV for 1/k0 0.60 V s/cm2 and 51.46 eV for 1/k0 1.30 V s/cm2. Precursor ions were selected using 1 MS repetition and a cycle overlap of 1 with the default intensities/repetitions schedule.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were searched by PEAKS Studio X+ (v10.5 build 20191016) using a target–decoy strategy. The databases used were the Uniprot Human Reference Proteome protein database (including isoforms, 79680 entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 2022-06-10) and the Uniprot Mouse Reference Proteome protein database (including isoforms, 55314 entries, downloaded from uniprot.org on 2022-06-10). A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a product mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for CID-ITMS2 were used. There was no enzyme, the digest mode was unspecific, and oxidation of methionine was used as a variable modification, with a maximum of three oxidations per peptide. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was employed at the peptide level. For the patient sample datasets, results are also displayed using a cutoff of 5% FDR (peptide level).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Cell lines, Immunopeptidome, H2452, Msto211h, Ligandome, Malignant pleural mesothelioma, Ab12, Jl1, Ligandomics, H28, Cancer

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, SciLifeLab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, SciLifeLab, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


