### Accession
PXD004509

### Title
Characterization of the pyrenoid proteome in the green microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
The pyrenoid, a single microcompartment of the chloroplasts of most algae and hornworts, is the major site of CO2 fixation. To compensate the limited availability of CO2 in aquatic environments due to slower CO2 diffusion in water than air, the RubisCO-containing pyrenoid is involved in a carbon concentrating mechanism (CCM) and promotes the carboxylase activity rather than the oxygenase activity of RubisCO, the Calvin-Benson cycle enzyme catalyzing the first step of CO2 fixation. Data in the literature suggest that pyrenoid can have other functions in addition to CO2 fixation. To decipher its functions, the characterization of the pyrenoid proteome in the microalga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii was undertaken. Pyrenoid-enriched fractions from two independent biological cultures (sample1 and sample2) were obtained from cells (WT-cell) or isolated chloroplasts (WT-cp) either from the wild-type (WT) strain or from pyrenoid-deficient Chlamydomonas strains (MX-CW15 and SS-AT) and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS. Substractive proteomic analysis allowed the identification of contaminant proteins and the characterization of the pyrenoid proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Pyrenoid-enriched fractions were obtained from cells (WT-cell) or isolated chloroplasts (WT-cp) either from the wild-type (WT) strain or from pyrenoid-deficient Chlamydomonas strains (MX-CW15 and SS-AT). Pyrenoid-enriched fractions were obtained by lysing cells or chloroplasts in Triton X-100 followed by immediate isolation of pyrenoids through Percoll during centrifugation. Detergent-solubilized material remained in a supernatant whereas Pyrenoids and other material were in the pellet. Acetone-washed pyrenoid pellets were dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 6.5 M urea and 0.05% ProteaseMAX surfactant. Cysteines were reduced by dithiotreitol and alkylated by iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested by a combination of Lys-C endoproteinase and modified porcin trypsine. Tryptic peptides were thus subjected to desalting using reversed phase C18 spin columns. Peptide mixtures were prepared in 20 µL of 3% acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% FA (solvent A) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) coupled to a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 reversed phase chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) using a binary solvent system consisting of solvent A and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). 500 ng of tryptic digests were loaded on an Acclaim Pepmap C18 precolumn (2 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm, 100 Å) equilibrated in solvent A and peptides were separated on an Acclaim Pepmap C18 analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm i.d., 2 µm, 100 Å) at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min by two successive linear gradients of solvent B from 0% to 20% in 68 min, from 20% to 32% in 22 min and then up to 85% in 5 min followed by an isocratic step at 85% for 10 min. The instrument was operated in positive and data-dependent acquisition modes with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200 Da) with a mass range of m/z 400-1,800. After each full-scan MS, up to 10 of the most intense precursor ions (except +1 or unassigned charge state ions) were fragmented in the HCD cell (normalized collision energy fixed at 27) and then dynamically excluded for 60 s. AGC target was fixed to 3x10^6 ions in MS and 10^5 ions in MS/MS with a maximum ion accumulation time set to 100 msec for MS and MS/MS acquisitions. All other parameters were set as follows: capillary temperature, 250°C; S-lens RF level, 60; isolation window, 2 Th. Acquisitions were performed with Excalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and to improve mass accuracy of full-scan MS spectra, a permanent recalibration of the instrument was allowed using polycyclodimethylsiloxane ((C2H6SiO)6, m/z 445.12003 Th) as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Raw Orbitrap data were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San José, CA, USA) and searched against the UniprotKB database restricted to the C. reinhardtii taxonomy (15,175 entries on 2017.05.12) using an in-house Mascot search server (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.4). Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the parent ion mass and 20 mmu for fragments and up to two missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of peptides and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were taken into account as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Peptide False Discovery Rates (FDRs) were determined by searching against a reversed decoy database and peptide identifications were filtered at 1% FDR using the Percolator node. Proteins were validated if they were identified with at least two different peptides passing the peptide FDR filter. For each extract (MX-CW15; SS-AT; WTcell, WTcp) two biological replicates and two analytical replicates were analyzed. In PD2.1, peptide abundance values were quantified using areas of their extracted ion chromatograms using Precursor Ion Area Detection and Peptide and Protein Quantifier nodes. For each technical replicate, protein abundance values were calculated using all unique and razor peptides available and for each biological replicate, protein abundance values consisted in the mean of values obtained from two technical replicates. As similar amount of tryptic digests (500ng) from samples supposed to be highly different, no normalization was performed before comparison.

### Publication Abstract
Organelles are intracellular compartments which are themselves compartmentalized. Biogenic and metabolic processes are localized to specialized domains or microcompartments to enhance their efficiency and suppress deleterious side reactions. An example of intra-organellar compartmentalization is the pyrenoid in the chloroplasts of algae and hornworts. This microcompartment enhances the photosynthetic CO2-fixing activity of the Calvin-Benson cycle enzyme Rubisco, suppresses an energetically wasteful oxygenase activity of Rubisco, and mitigates limiting CO2 availability in aquatic environments. Hence, the pyrenoid is functionally analogous to the carboxysomes in cyanobacteria. However, a comprehensive analysis of pyrenoid functions based on its protein composition is lacking. Here we report a proteomic characterization of the pyrenoid in the green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Pyrenoid-enriched fractions were analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Contaminant proteins were identified by parallel analyses of pyrenoid-deficient mutants. This pyrenoid proteome contains 190 proteins, many of which function in processes that are known or proposed to occur in pyrenoids: e.g. the carbon concentrating mechanism, starch metabolism or RNA metabolism and translation. Using radioisotope pulse labeling experiments, we show that pyrenoid-associated ribosomes could be engaged in the localized synthesis of the large subunit of Rubisco. New pyrenoid functions are supported by proteins in tetrapyrrole and chlorophyll synthesis, carotenoid metabolism or amino acid metabolism. Hence, our results support the long-standing hypothesis that the pyrenoid is a hub for metabolism. The 81 proteins of unknown function reveal candidates for new participants in these processes. Our results provide biochemical evidence of pyrenoid functions and a resource for future research on pyrenoids and their use to enhance agricultural plant productivity. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004509.

### Keywords
Pyrenoid, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Proteomics, Carbon fixation

### Affiliations
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris

### Submitter
Christophe H. MARCHAND

### Lab Head
Dr Stéphane D. Lemaire
Institut de Biologie Physico-Chimique, UMR8226, CNRS, Sorbonne Universités, 13 rue Pierre et Marie Curie, 75005 Paris


