### Accession
PXD002833

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of lysine succinylation in 5 organisms

### Description
Recent studies have revealed the physiological significance of post-translational lysine acylations in regulation of various cellular processes.  Lysine succinylation is one of recently discovered post-translational acylations. To understand the distribution of lysine succinylations in five representative bacteria: Geobacillus kaustophilus, Thermus thermophilus, Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, and Rhodothermus marinus.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from each bacteria and trypsinized.  Then, we enriched succinylpeptides from the tryptic peptides by immunoprecipitation using anti-succinyllysine antibody.  The eluted propionylpeptides were analyzed with nano-LC-Q-TOF MS.

### Data Protocol
Data from nano-LC-MS/MS were processed by DataAnalysis version 4.0 and peaklist files were exported as mgf file.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine succinylation, one of post-translational acylations conserved from eukaryotes to bacteria, plays regulatory roles in various cellular processes. However, much remains unknown about the general and specific characteristics of lysine succinylation among bacteria, and about its functions different from those of other acylations. In this study, we characterized lysine succinylation, a newly discovered widespread type of lysine acylation in five bacterial species with different characteristics such as optimal growth temperature and cell wall structure. This study is the first to demonstrate that succinylation is general phenomenon occurring not only in mesophiles but also in thermophiles. Mapping of succinylation sites on protein structures revealed that succinylation occurs at many lysine residues important for protein function. Comparison of the succinylation sites in the five bacterial species provides insights regarding common protein regulation mechanisms utilizing lysine succinylation. Many succinylation sites were conserved among five bacteria, especially between Geobacillus kaustophilus and Bacillus subtilis, some of which are functionally important sites. Furthermore, systematic comparison of the succinyl-proteome results and our previous propionyl-proteome results showed that the abundance of these two types of acylations is considerably different among the five bacteria investigated. Many succinylation and propionylation events were detected in G. kaustophilus, whereas Escherichia coli and B. subtilis exhibited high succinylation and low propionylation; low succinylation and high propionylation were identified in Thermus thermophilus, and low succinylation and propionylation were observed in Rhodothermus marinus. Comparison of the characteristics of lysine succinylation and lysine propionylation suggested these two types of acylation play different roles in cellular processes.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Lysine succinylation

### Affiliations
Div. Biol. Geosci., Grad. Sch. Sci., Osaka City Univ., Japan
Osaka University

### Submitter
Hiroki Okanishi

### Lab Head
Dr Ryoji Masui
Div. Biol. Geosci., Grad. Sch. Sci., Osaka City Univ., Japan


