### Accession
PXD003209

### Title
Proteomics of Extracellular Vesicles Harvested with ExtraPEG

### Description
Polyethylene glycol (PEG) is commonly used to isolate virus particles from culture medium. This project adapted and optimized the virus procedure for harvesting extracellular vesicles (of similar biophysical properties to viruses) from media. An 8% PEG solution harvested the purest vesicles. Followed by a wash step (ultracentrifugation of concentrated vesicles in saline), this method produced preparations comparable or superior to commonly used methods in terms of purity, abundance, and cost. It is also highly adaptable, allowing the procedure to be used for enriching vesicles from a variety of biological fluids. As proof of principle, extracellular vesicle protein was successfully harvested from HeLa cell medium using the described PEG-based harvest method and analyzed by mass spectrophotometry.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cell extracellular vesicle proteins were harvested using the ExtraPEG protocol (8% Polyethylene Glycol precipitation of vesicles, followed by an ultracentrifugation wash of the re-suspended precipitates in saline; described above). Vesicles were lysed and proteins were harvested, quantified, and gel-purified. The pure proteins were trypsin digested in the gel. Eluted peptides were lyophilized prior to mass spectrophotometry analysis. The biosample was run with three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
All .raw files were uploaded into proteome discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.4.0.288) and searched with Mascot and Sequest HT (version 2.4.0). Trypsin was selected as the enzyme and a maximum of 2 miss cleavages were permitted. Dynamic modifications were carbamiodomethyl (C residues), Oxidation (M residues), and Phosphorylation (S, T, and Y residues). The resulting .msf files (technical replicate) were then uploaded into the Scaffold software (Proteome Software, version 4.4.1.1). Technical replicates were uploaded as an individual biosample, and data were searched with X!Tandem. All database searches used the swisprot human database with appended reverse sequences for target-decoy filtering, as well as a list of common contaminants of proteomics experimts (Contaminant sequences in the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins [cRAP] were downloaded from the Global Proteome Machine website). In Scaffold, the protein FDR was set to 1.0%, the peptide FDR was set to 1.0%, and the minimum number of peptides was set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
Initially thought to be a means for cells to eliminate waste, secreted extracellular vesicles, known as exosomes, are now understood to mediate numerous healthy and pathological processes. Though abundant in biological fluids, purifying exosomes has been challenging because their biophysical properties overlap with other secreted cell products. Easy-to-use commercial kits for harvesting exosomes are now widely used, but the relative low-purity and high-cost of the preparations restricts their utility. Here we describe a method for purifying exosomes and other extracellular vesicles by adapting methods for isolating viruses using polyethylene glycol. This technique, called ExtraPEG, enriches exosomes from large volumes of media rapidly and inexpensively using low-speed centrifugation, followed by a single small-volume ultracentrifugation purification step. Total protein and RNA harvested from vesicles is sufficient in quantity and quality for proteomics and sequencing analyses, demonstrating the utility of this method for biomarker discovery and diagnostics. Additionally, confocal microscopy studies suggest that the biological activity of vesicles is not impaired. The ExtraPEG method can be easily adapted to enrich for different vesicle populations, or as an efficient precursor to subsequent purification techniques, providing a means to harvest exosomes from many different biological fluids and for a wide variety of purposes.

### Keywords
Exosome, Polyethylene glycol, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, USA
Florida State University

### Submitter
Mark  Rider

### Lab Head
Dr David G. Meckes Jr.
Department of Biomedical Sciences, Florida State University College of Medicine, USA


