### Accession
PXD018734

### Title
Identification of VE-cadherin associated proteins regulated through the lncRNA LASSIE

### Description
The shear stress-regulated lncRNA LASSIE interacts with cytoskeletal proteins as shown by RNA-antisense purification and subsequent mass spectrometry analysis using an anti-LASSIE and a non-targeting 3’ Desthiobiotin-TEG labeled 2’ O-Me-RNA. As this analysis resulted in high protein binding to the non-targeting control oligonucleotide, the RNA antisense purification was repeated in HUVECs treated with control and anti-LASSIE siRNA. Mass spectrometry analysis confirmed binding of LASSIE to the Intermediate filament protein nestin, as nestin enrichment was decreased in the absence of LASSIE. Additional functional analyses demonstrate a role of LASSIE in shear stress sensing and barrier function in endothelial cells, by stabilizing endothelial cell junctions through connection to the cytoskeleton.

### Sample Protocol
HUVECs were treated with control or anti-LASSIE siRNA (one confluent 15 cm dish/condition) and lysed (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 % NP-40, protease inhibitor) for 30 min on ice. Cell lysates were cleared by centrifugation (10 min, 16000 x g, 4 °C). Equal amount of protein lysates were adjusted to a volume of 1 ml (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 75 mM KCl, 3 mM MgCl2, 10 mM DTT, 80 U RNase inhibitor) and pre-cleared for 2 h at 4 °C with 50 µl pre-blocked (glycogen and yeast tRNA (0.2 mg/ml, Sigma-Aldrich) for 2 h at 4 °C) streptavidin C1 beads (Thermo Scientific). RNA-protein (RNP) complexes were isolated by incubating lysates with 100 pmol 3’ Desthiobiotin-TEG labeled 2’ O-Me-RNA anti-LASSIE or scrambled control oligonucleotide for 1 h at 37 °C. RNP-oligonucleotide complexes were captured using 100 μl pre-blocked beads for 1 h at 37 °C. Beads were washed four times (lysis buffer containing 0.05 % NP-40) followed by Biotin (100 μM) elution for 1 h at RT. Eluates were supplemented with 2M GdmCl, 50mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP and incubated at 95°C for 5 min. Reduced thiols were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamid and sample were diluted with 25 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 10% acetonitrile to obtain a final GdmCl concentration of 0.6 M. Proteins were digested with 1 µg Trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) overnight at 37°C under gentle agitation. Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Peptides were loaded on multi-stop-and-go tip (StageTip) containing six  C18-disks. Purification and elution of peptides was performed as described in Rappsilber and Mann (2007). Peptides  were eluted in wells of microtiter plates and peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography / mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a with 2.4 µm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 µm, 15 cm from New Objectives) using a gradient from 4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid to 40 % eluent B (99% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 30 min and a second gradient to 60% B for 5 min with a flow rate 300 nl/min. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition. The full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3*E6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Only higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to 1*E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. MS1-Data were acquired in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
MS Data were analysed by MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0) [Cox, et al. 2008] using default settings. Proteins were identified using reviewed human reference proteome database UniProtKB with 71785 entries, released in 2/2018. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin. Acetylation (+42.01) at N-terminus and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (+57.02) as fixed modification on cysteines. False discovery rate (FDR) for the identification protein and peptides was 1%. Lable free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (IBAQ) values were recorded. Data were further analysed by Perseus (v. 1.6.1.3) [Tyanova et. al, 2016]. Contaminants and reversed identification were removed. Protein identification with at least 4 valid quantification values in at least one group were further analysed. Missing values were replaced by background values from normal distribution. Student´s t-test was used to identify significant enriched proteins between experimental groups.  Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Protocol for micro-purification, enrichment, pre-fractionation and storage of peptides for proteomics using StageTips. Nat Protoc 2, 1896-1906 (2007).  Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. (2016)The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods. 13:731-40.

### Publication Abstract
Blood vessels are constantly exposed to shear stress, a biomechanical force generated by blood flow. Normal shear stress sensing and barrier function are crucial for vascular homeostasis and are controlled by adherens junctions (AJs). Here we show that AJs are stabilized by the shear stress-induced long non-coding RNA LASSIE (linc00520). Silencing of LASSIE in endothelial cells impairs cell survival, cell-cell contacts and cell alignment in the direction of flow. LASSIE associates with junction proteins (e.g. PECAM-1) and the intermediate filament protein nestin, as identified by RNA affinity purification. The AJs component VE-cadherin showed decreased stabilization, due to reduced interaction with nestin and the microtubule cytoskeleton in the absence of LASSIE. This study identifies LASSIE as link between nestin and VE-cadherin, and describes nestin as crucial component in the endothelial response to shear stress. Furthermore, this study indicates that LASSIE regulates barrier function by connecting AJs to the cytoskeleton.

### Keywords
Rna/protein interaction

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Reinier Boon
Institute for Cardiovascular Regeneration, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe University Frankfurt am Main, Germany


