### Accession
PXD045089

### Title
A quick guideline for PRM method development applied to target proteomics in biological fluids

### Description
Combining in-silico analysis, serum high abundant protein depletion, and DDA and PRM acquisitions, we established a simple workflow to select PRM high response peptides for protein quantification in serum. The workflow enables evaluating peptide intensity, MS2 match with the spectral library, peptide stability, and linearity of response to different injected masses. This workflow was successfully applied to twelve human complement system proteins. Besides, we employed synthetic labelled peptides to compensate inter LC-MS run variability, improving the quantification. We could demonstrate this method is useful and applicable for quantification of diverse targets with time optimization and accuracy insurance by quantitative proteomics technology.

### Sample Protocol
Human samples of non-depleted serum (total serum) and depleted one were used. The depletion was performed with Agilent Human 14 Multiple Affinity Removal System 5188-6560 kit (Agilent Technologies®), following the instructions described by the manufacturer. Depleted serum was inserted into a Microcon® 5 kDa centrifugal filter and washed with Tris-HCl (pH 7,5). The retained volumed was quantified by tryptophan fluorescence and a volume corresponding to 40 µg of protein was dried in a Speedvac. Disulfide bonds were ruptured by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 8 M urea, followed by 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) incubation. Then, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was used for urea dilution to 1 M, trypsin was added in a 1:50 protease to protein mass ratio and incubation was proceeded under 37 ºC for 16-18 h. Digestion was stopped with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalination was performed by using C18 Stage Tips. The Liquid Chromatography (LC) method used was reversed phase. Through nano chromatography (flow of 250 nL/min), 62.5 to 500 ng of sample was injected on a C18 packed emitter with 75 µm I.D., 150 mm length, and 3 µm particles (Dr. Maisch®). Phase A was 0.1% formic acid, and phase B was 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The separation was carried-out on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) through a linear gradient from 5 to 40% of phase B in 120 min. For the nano electrospray, 2.3 kV was applied, and two different MS acquisitions were used, DDA or PRM in an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (runs for the spectral library) or an Orbitrap Exploris 120 (both Thermo Scientific). In DDA, the MS acquisition parameters were: MS1 and MS2 in the orbitrap analyzer at 120,000 and 15,000 resolution, respectively, with a MS1 window of 300 to 1500 m/z; AGC standard for MS1 and 3x104 for MS2; maximum injection time of 50 ms for MS1 and 22 ms for MS2; the most intense ions were subjected to MS2 (max. 2 s per cycle) using HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 30%; a dynamic exclusion list of 60 s was used; the internal calibration was enabled for MS1. In PRM acquisition, MS1 and MS2 were acquired in the orbitrap at 120,000 and 30,000 resolution, respectively, with a window of 350 to 1050 m/z; AGC standard for MS1 and the targeted MS2; maximum injection time of 50 ms for MS1 and 54 ms for the targeted MS2; the targeted MS2 was set for the list of selected peptides; peptide isolation occurred in the quadrupole with a window of 1.6 Da; peptides were fragmented by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 30%. Each scan cycle (loop control) ran the full target list; the internal calibration option was enabled for the MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
The spectra identification was carried out in MaxQuant software version 2.2.0.0 and/or in Skyline version 21.1.0.146. In MaxQuant, specific trypsin search was set, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification. For the PSM search, the Uniprot human database, containing 81,791 entries, downloaded on April 24, 2023, was used. The Skyline setup was: library ion match tolerance of 0.05 m/z; picked 5 product ions; instrument method match tolerance of 0.055 m/z; acquisition method PRM; product mass amalyzer centroided.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human serum, Quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Complement system, Prm

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Carlos Chagas Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Curitiba, Parana, Brazil
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Michel Batista

### Lab Head
Dr Fabiano Borges Figueiredo
Laboratory of Cell Biology, Carlos Chagas Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (Fiocruz), Curitiba, Parana, Brazil


