### Accession
PXD016346

### Title
Differential polysaccharide utilization is the basis for a nanohaloarchaeon : haloarchaeon symbiosis

### Description
Nanohaloarchaeota, a clade of diminutive archaea, with small genomes and limited metabolic capabilities, are ubiquitous in hypersaline habitats, which they share with the extremely halophilic and phylogenetically distant euryarchaea. Some of these nanohaloarchaeota and euryarchaea appear to interact with each other. In this study, we investigate the genetic and physiological nature of their relationship. We isolated the nanohaloarchaeon Candidatus Nanohalobium constans LC1Nh and the haloarchaeon Halomicrobium sp. LC1Hm from a solar saltern, reproducibly co-cultivated these species, sequenced their genomes, and characterized their metabolic/trophic interactions. The nanohaloarchaeon is a magnesium-dependent aerotolerant heterotrophic anaerobe of the DPANN superphylum; it lacks respiratory complexes and its energy production relies on fermentative metabolism of sugar derivatives, obtained by depolymerizing alpha-glucans or by acquiring the chitin monomer N-acetylglucosamine from the chitinolytic haloarchaeal host. Halomicrobium is a member of the class Halobacteria and a chitinotrophic aerobe. The nanohaloarchaeon lacks key biosynthetic pathways and is likely to be provided with amino acids, lipids, nucleotides and cofactors via physical contact with its host Halomicrobium. In turn, the ability of Ca. Nanohalobium to hydrolyse alpha-glucans boosts the host’s growth in the absence of a chitin substrate. These findings suggest that at least some members of the nanohaloarchaea, previously considered ecologically unimportant given their limited metabolic potential, in fact may play significant roles in the microbial carbon turnover, food chains, and ecosystem function. The behaviour of Halomicrobium, which accommodates the colonization by Ca. Nanohalobium, can be interpreted as a bet-hedging strategy, maximizing its long-term fitness in a habitat where the availability of carbon substrates can vary both spatially and temporarily.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (cell pellets and 0.45 µm filter) were dissolved with chaotropic lysis buffer containing 7 M urea (USB Corporation, Cleveland, OH), 2 M thiourea (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 % CHAPS (Sigma-Aldrich), 5 mM TCEP (Sigma-Aldrich) and a protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), and incubated for 15 min on ice. Homogenization of the pellet was achieved by ultrasonication for 5 min on ultrasonic bath Branson 2510 (Marshall Scientific, New Hampshire, USA). The homogenate was centrifuged at 20000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant containing the solubilized proteins was used for further analysis.  The cell secretomes were concentrated using a Nanosep 10 kDa cut-off filter (Pall Corporation) to obtain the secretory proteins fraction. Then, 20 µg of protein of each sample was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method and re-suspended in 30 µl of multichaotropic sample solution UTT buffer (7 M Urea, 2M thiourea, 100mM TEAB (Sigma-Aldrich)) and 10 µl of 20% SDS was added. Each re-suspended sample was reduced with 4 µL of 50 mM TCEP, pH 8.0, at 37 °C for 60 min, followed by addition of 2 µL of 200 mM cysteine-blocking reagent MMTS (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) for 10 min at room temperature. Sample was diluted to 400 µL with S-Trap buffer (90% methanol, 100mM TEAB) and digested into the S-Trap micro column (ProtiFi, NY, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Digestion was initiated by adding 1 µg of Pierce MS-grade trypsin (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Inc.) to each sample in a ratio 1:20 (w/w), and then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestion was evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. Digested sample was cleaned-up/desalted using Stage-Tips with Empore 3M C18 disks (Sigma-Aldrich). A 1 µg aliquot of resulting peptides was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MS/MS (Liquid Chromatography Electrospray Ionization Tandem Mass Spectrometric) analysis using a nano-liquid chromatography system Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus (SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) with a Nanospray III source. Analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific Inc.), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1 % formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nL/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 min gradient ranging from 2 % to 90 % mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile (Scharlab S.L), 0.1 % formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich); mobile phase B: 100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating 2300 V, curtain gas 35, interface heater temperature 150, ion source gas 1 25 and declustering potential 150 V. For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100 ms in the mass range of 100–1800. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold > 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained were processed using PeakView v2.2 Software (SCIEX) and exported as .mgf files. The resulting mass spectra were searched against the predicted peptide sequences encoded by ‘Ca. Nhb. constans’ LC1Nh and separately by the predicted peptide  sequences encoded by Halomicrobium sp. LC1Hm (9.394 sequences), together with commonly occurring contaminants, using the open-source software X!TandemPipeline version 3.4.3 (Langella et al., 2017) with default parameters. Search parameters were set as follows: enzyme,  trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 2; methylthiolation (C) as fixed modification and acetyl (Protein N-term), pyrrolidone from E, pyrrolidone from Q and oxidation (M) as variable modifications.  Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥ 95% (p<0.05) and only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% False Discovery Rates (FDR) at  spectra level were considered correctly identified. Only proteins identified with at least two unique peptides were considered correctly identified. PAI value (protein abundance index) and emPAI, (exponentially modified protein abundance index) were calculated as  described (Ishihama et al., 2005):PAI = Nobsd/Nobsbl; were Nobsd and Nobsbl are the number of observed peptides per protein and the number of observable peptides per protein, respectively (Rappsilber et al., 2002).

### Publication Abstract
Nano-sized archaeota, with their small genomes and limited metabolic capabilities, are known to associate with other microbes, thereby compensating for their own auxotrophies. These diminutive and yet ubiquitous organisms thrive in hypersaline habitats that they share with haloarchaea. Here, we reveal the genetic and physiological nature of a nanohaloarchaeon-haloarchaeon association, with both microbes obtained from a solar saltern and reproducibly cultivated together in vitro. The nanohaloarchaeon <i>Candidatus</i> Nanohalobium constans LC1Nh is an aerotolerant, sugar-fermenting anaerobe, lacking key anabolic machinery and respiratory complexes. The nanohaloarchaeon cells are found physically connected to the chitinolytic haloarchaeon <i>Halomicrobium</i> sp. LC1Hm. Our experiments revealed that this haloarchaeon can hydrolyze chitin outside the cell (to produce the monosaccharide <i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine), using this beta-glucan to obtain carbon and energy for growth. However, LC1Hm could not metabolize either glycogen or starch (both alpha-glucans) or other polysaccharides tested. Remarkably, the nanohaloarchaeon's ability to hydrolyze glycogen and starch to glucose enabled growth of <i>Halomicrobium</i> sp. LC1Hm in the absence of a chitin. These findings indicated that the nanohaloarchaeon-haloarchaeon association is both mutualistic and symbiotic; in this case, each microbe relies on its partner's ability to degrade different polysaccharides. This suggests, in turn, that other nano-sized archaeota may also be beneficial for their hosts. Given that availability of carbon substrates can vary both spatially and temporarily, the susceptibility of <i>Halomicrobium</i> to colonization by <i>Ca</i> Nanohalobium can be interpreted as a strategy to maximize the long-term fitness of the host.

### Keywords
Degradation of chitin, Dpann superphilum, Hypersaline solar saltern, Nanohaloarchaea, Haloarchaea

### Affiliations
Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnologies (CNR), Italian National Research Council, Messina, Italy
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Michail M. Yakimov
Institute for Biological Resources and Marine Biotechnologies (CNR), Italian National Research Council, Messina, Italy


