### Accession
PXD017010

### Title
Inter-domain dynamics in the chaperone SurA and multi-site binding to its unfolded outer membrane protein clients revealed by HDX-MS

### Description
We present HDX-MS data of apo-SurA, SurA in complex with OmpX, OmpF and a peptide with sequence WEYIPNV to define (1) interdomain dynamics in the periplasmic chaperone SurA, and (2) the binding site of OmpX, OmpF and WEYIPNV on SurA.

### Sample Protocol
An automated HDX robot (LEAP Technologies, Ft Lauderdale, FL, USA) coupled to a Acquity M-Class LC and HDX manager (Waters, UK) was used for all HDX-MS experiments. For differential HDX-MS of SurA in the absence and presence of OmpX/OmpF, samples contained 8 µM of SurA or 8 µM of SurA with 8 µM OmpX/OmpF (in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 0.24 M urea). For differential experiments with addition of WEYIPNV peptide, the samples contained 8 µM SurA with 110 µM peptide (in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0). Note that the addition of 0.24 M urea does not dramatically alter the intrinsic rate of exchange. 30 μL of protein-containing solution was added to 135 μL deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pD 8.0, 0.24 M d4-urea or 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer pD 8.0, 82 % D2O) and incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 2, 30 or 120 min. Four replicate measurements were performed for each condition and each time point. After labelling, HDX was quenched by adding 100 μL of quench buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, 2 M Gdn-HCl, pH 2.2) to 50 μL of the labelling reaction. 50 μL of the quenched sample was passed through immobilised pepsin and aspergillopepsin columns (Affipro, Mratín, Czech Republic) connected in series (20 °C) and the peptides were trapped on a VanGuard Pre-column [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters, UK)] for 3 min. The peptides were separated using a C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK) by gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μL min−1. Peptides were detected using a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters, UK). The mass spectrometer was operated in HDMSE mode, with dynamic range extension enabled (data independent analysis (DIA) coupled with IMS separation) were used to separate peptides prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell. CID data were used for peptide identification, and uptake quantification was performed at the peptide level (as CID results in deuterium scrambling).

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed using PLGS (v3.0.2) and DynamX (v3.0.0) software (Waters, UK). Restrictions for peptides in DynamX were as follows: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. The software Deuteros was used to identify peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake (applying a 99 % confidence interval) and to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
The periplasmic chaperone SurA plays a key role in outer membrane protein (OMP) biogenesis. E. coli SurA comprises a core domain and two peptidylprolyl isomerase domains (P1 and P2), but its mechanisms of client binding and chaperone function have remained unclear. Here, we use chemical cross-linking, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, single-molecule FRET and molecular dynamics simulations to map the client binding site(s) on SurA and interrogate the role of conformational dynamics in OMP recognition. We demonstrate that SurA samples an array of conformations in solution in which P2 primarily lies closer to the core/P1 domains than suggested in the SurA crystal structure. OMP binding sites are located primarily in the core domain, and OMP binding results in conformational changes between the core/P1 domains. Together, the results suggest that unfolded OMP substrates bind in a cradle formed between the SurA domains, with structural flexibility between domains assisting OMP recognition, binding and release.

### Keywords
E coli, Hydrogen-deuterium exchange, Chaperone, Sura

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Sheena E. Radford
Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, UK


