### Accession
PXD013827

### Title
Tissue Proteome Profiling of Ovarian cancer in Pakistani Population.

### Description
Ovarian cancer is the 5th main cause of death from cancer in females, worldwide. An early and accurate diagnosis of ovarian carcinoma is likely to improve clinical outcome of patients in terms of reduced morbidity and mortality. The objective of our project is the proteome profiling of ovarian malignant and non-malignant tissue samples to find potential biomarkers of disease diagnosis and prognosis. In this project, we have used a systematic protein profiling approach involving 2-dimensional gel electrophoresis coupled with MALDI-TOF MS analysis for identification of biomarkers of ovarian cancer. The associated research paper is in preparation.

### Sample Protocol
One day prior to surgery, peripheral blood samples (3-4mL) from patients with malignant (OC group) and non-malignant ovarian neoplasms (control subjects) were collected in EDTA vials following the approved guidelines; centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 °C to separate plasma and then stored at -80°C in aliquots until used for analysis. Ovarian biopsy samples taken within half an hour of surgery were homogenized with liquid nitrogen in lysis buffer, centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 90 minutes at 4 °C after vigorous shaking and the resulting supernatant stored at -80 °C until further use. Protein fractionation by 2D-gel electrophoresis was performed with 1st dimension pH 3-10 and 2nd dimension with 12% polyacrylamide SDS gels according to previously described protocol with some modifications. After electrophoresis, the gels were stained with colloidal coomassie G-250 dye. 2D gel images were scanned using Syngene gel documentation system and the individual protein spots, were analyzed for pI and molecular weight, followed by quantification and matching of the spots observed in both groups (OC and control) using ImageMaster 2D Platinum v7.0 (GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences) software. Differentially represented 2DE spots were then excised from 2D gels and proteins in gel were subjected to digestion using sequencing grade trypsin. Resulting peptides were mixed in 1:1 ratio with freshly prepared saturated solution of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid in 0.1 % triflouroacetic acid/acetonitrile and 1.5μL of the peptide mix was then analyzed using the MALDI-TOF MS (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics, Germany). A 337 nm nitrogen laser and a 2 GHz digitizer were used at a laser frequency and an intensity of 100 Hz and 60 % - 70 %, respectively. Spectra were attained in linear positive ion mode with 25 kV accelerating voltage, 6 kV lens potential and mass to charge (m/z) range of 500-5000. Delayed extraction was applied at 100 ns, the detector gain and the sample rate were set to 7.5 and 0.5 GS/s, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The spectra obtained after MS analysis were analyzed with the help of MASCOT Wizard 1.1.2 (http://www.matrixscience.com/wizard.html) from Matrix Science (www.matrixscience.com) and further confirmed by MS-fit program from Protein Prospector (www.prospector.ucsf.edu) using trypsin as the enzyme, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification and trypsin missed cleavage up to one, a mass tolerance of 60-120 ppm and the identified proteins with MOWSE score >60 were considered as acceptable. The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS software ver.20. Paired t-test was applied on the same protein’s multiple spots intensities obtained from 2D-gel images of at least 3 independent experiment sets and false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg approach. PMF score for identified proteins was calculated with cut off threshold value ˃79. The identified proteins were categorized according to their GO (www.geneontology.com) using Protein ANalysis THrough Evolutionary Relationships (PANTHER) software to have an overview of the molecular functions and biological processes. Network construction analyses and canonical pathways associated with data proteins were elucidated by QIAGEN's Ingenuity® Pathway Analysis software (IPA®, QIAGEN Redwood City) involving annotations of molecular and cellular functions and biomarker filtered analysis. Proteins with high fold-changes (≥2.5) were considered for validation studies by western blot (WB) and enzyme linked immunosorbant assays (ELISA). WB was performed in duplicates with polyclonal primary antibodies [(annexin A2, ABC152, EMD Millipore, USA) and annexin A6, AB31026, Abcam, USA)] and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody (A6154, Sigma Aldrich). The protein bands were developed using TMB (3,3’, 5,5’ tetramethyl benzidine, Sigma) peroxidase substrate system. Quantitative validational analysis of the candidate marker protein, annexin A6, in the plasma of study population was performed in pre-coated ELISA plates against annexin A6 (G-Biosciences, USA). All assays were performed in duplicates following instructions provided by the supplier. One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) along with unpaired Student's t-test was used for comparative analysis of the antibody titer amongst tumor and benign cohorts with significance level <0.05. To assess the performance of marker protein (annexin A6), the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve was also formed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2d-page, Proteome profiling, Mass spectrometry, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan
Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar, School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan

### Submitter
Muhammad Akhtar

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad Akhtar, School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan
Prof. Dr. M. Waheed Akhtar, School of Biological Sciences, University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan


