### Accession
PXD037981

### Title
Novel compounds modulating Mycobacterium marinum ESX-5 secretion display anti-mycobacterial activity in vivo

### Description
We observed through Western blot that Mycobacterium marinum secreted more highly abundant PE-PGRS proteins that are above 130 kDa when treated with compound 36 than mock-treated bacteria. We would like to explore which PE-PGRS proteins are more secreted in this condition and whether other proteins are also differentially secreted between two conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatant fraction of M. marinum samples treated with DMSO or compound 36.3 (each in duplicates) were loaded and run on SDS-PAGE gel 10%. Gels were stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue Staining Solution G-250. For each sample, fraction above and below 130 kDa were independently excised, collected, washed and further processed for in-gel digestion. Peptides were eluted from gel samples and further processed.Peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 110 min (140 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100 ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms, and an underfill ratio of 0.1%, resulting in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against a uniprotkb FASTA file (release March 2013, 5418  entries, canonical and isoforms) using MaxQuant 1.6.10.43. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups (default MaxQuant settings). Searches were performed with the label-free quantification option selected. Label free quantitation Proteins were quantified by spectral counting. Spectral counts were normalized on the sum of the counts per sample and differential protein analysis between groups was performed using a beta-binominal test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zebrafish., Type vii secretion system, Mycobacteria, Esx-5 secretion system, Compounds, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
Amsterdam UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, Netherlands


