### Accession
PXD000437

### Title
Amyloid Beta A4 Precursor Protein-binding Family B Member 1 (FE65) Interactomics Revealed Synaptic Vesicle Glycoprotein 2A (SV2A) and Sarcoplasmic/Endoplasmic Reticulum Calcium ATPase 2 (SERCA2) as New Binding Proteins in the Human Brain

### Description
FE65 is a cytosolic adapter protein and an important binding partner of the amyloid precursor protein (APP). Dependent on Thr668 phosphorylation in APP, which influences amyloidogenic APP processing, FE65 undergoes nuclear translocation, thereby transmitting a signal from the cell membrane to the nucleus. As this translocation may be relevant in Alzheimer disease (AD) and as FE65 consists of three protein-protein interaction domains able to bind and affect a variety of other proteins and down-stream signaling pathways, the identification of the FE65 interactome is of central interest in AD research. In this study, we identified 121 proteins as new potential FE65 interacting proteins in a pulldown/mass spectrometry approach using human post-mortem brain samples as protein pools for recombinantly expressed FE65. Co-immunoprecipitation assays further validated the interaction of FE65 with the candidates SV2A and SERCA2. In parallel, we investigated the whole cell proteome of primary hippocampal neurons from FE65/FE65L1 double knockout mice. Bioinformatics pipeline: MGF files were generated from RAW files with ProteomDiscoverer 1.3 and imported into ProteinScape 2.1 and analyzed using MASCOT version 2.3.0) with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, enzyme: Trypsin with one missed cleavage site, variable modifications: carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M), phosphorylation of S, T and Y, used database: Uniprot/SwissProt (2011_06), taxonomy Homo sapiens + one shuffled decoy per entry (results in 40620 entries, including decoys). For further details please contact Thorsten Müller (thorsten.t.mueller@rub.de), Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum.

### Sample Protocol
For details about the sample processing see paper reference PMID: 24284412

### Data Protocol
For details about the data processing see paper reference PMID: 24284412

### Publication Abstract
FE65 is a cytosolic adapter protein and an important binding partner of amyloid precursor protein. Dependent on Thr668 phosphorylation in amyloid precursor protein, which influences amyloidogenic amyloid precursor protein processing, FE65 undergoes nuclear translocation, thereby transmitting a signal from the cell membrane to the nucleus. As this translocation may be relevant in Alzheimer disease, and as FE65 consists of three protein-protein interaction domains able to bind and affect a variety of other proteins and downstream signaling pathways, the identification of the FE65 interactome is of central interest in Alzheimer disease research. In this study, we identified 121 proteins as new potential FE65 interacting proteins in a pulldown/mass spectrometry approach using human post-mortem brain samples as protein pools for recombinantly expressed FE65. Co-immunoprecipitation assays further validated the interaction of FE65 with the candidates SV2A and SERCA2. In parallel, we investigated the whole cell proteome of primary hippocampal neurons from FE65/FE65L1 double knockout mice. Notably, the validated FE65 binding proteins were also found to be differentially abundant in neurons derived from the FE65 knockout mice relative to wild-type control neurons. SERCA2 is an important player in cellular calcium homeostasis, which was found to be up-regulated in double knockout neurons. Indeed, knock-down of FE65 in HEK293T cells also evoked an elevated sensitivity to thapsigargin, a stressor specifically targeting the activity of SERCA2. Thus, our results suggest that FE65 is involved in the regulation of intracellular calcium homeostasis. Whereas transfection of FE65 alone caused a typical dot-like phenotype in the nucleus, co-transfection of SV2A significantly reduced the percentage of FE65 dot-positive cells, pointing to a possible role for SV2A in the modulation of FE65 intracellular targeting. Given that SV2A has a signaling function at the presynapse, its effect on FE65 intracellular localization suggests that the SV2A/FE65 interaction might play a role in synaptic signal transduction.

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Fe65

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum,
Medical Faculty,
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics / Functional Proteomics
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Julian Uszkoreit

### Lab Head
Dr Katrin Marcus
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-Universität Bochum


