### Accession
PXD023019

### Title
Isoginkgetin derivative IP2 enhances the adaptive immune response against tumor antigens

### Description
The success of cancer immunotherapy relies on the induction of an immunoprotective response targeting tumor antigens (TAs) presented on MHC-I molecules. We demonstrated that the splicing inhibitor isoginkgetin and its water-soluble and non-toxic derivative IP2 act at the production stage of the Pioneer Translation Products (PTPs). We showed that IP2 increases PTP-derived antigen presentation in cancer cells in vitro and impairs tumor growth in vivo. IP2 action is long-lasting and dependent on the CD8+ T cell response against TAs. We observed that the antigen repertoire displayed on MHC-I molecules at the surface of MCA205 fibrosarcoma is modified upon treatment with IP2. In particular, IP2 enhances the presentation of an exon-derived epitope from the tumor suppressor nischarin. The combination of IP2 with a peptide vaccine targeting the nischarin-derived epitope showed a synergistic antitumor effect. These findings identify the spliceosome as a druggable target for the development of epitope-based immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
The peptides were desalted using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Pierce Thermo Scientific), eluted in 40 µL acetonitrile 70% (Fisher Scientific)/0.1% formic acid, vacuum centrifuged and resuspended in 12 µL of 0.1% formic acid. All C18 zip-tipped peptides extracts were analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid equipped with an EASY-Spray Nano electrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy Nano-LC Proxeon 1200 system (all devices are from Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (75 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300nl/min flow, gradient rising from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1% formic acid) to 28% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 105 minutes and then up to 40%B in 15min followed by column regeneration for 50 min. Peptides were analyzed in the orbitrap in full ion scan mode at a resolution of 120000 and with a mass range of m/z 400-650 using quadrupole isolation and an AGC target of 1.5x105. Fragments were obtained by Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) activation with a collisional energy of 35 %. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30000 in a top-speed mode, with a total cycle of 3 seconds with an AGC target of 7x104. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 100 ms for MS acquisition and 150 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzDB files using a PWIZ-mzDB (https://github.com/mzdb/pwiz-mzdb) version 0.9.10, and then to MGF peaklists using a mzdb-access (https://github.com/mzdb/mzdb-access) version 0.7.0. Produced MGF files were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.7, MatrixScience, London, UK) against a mouse Uniprot protein sequence database released in July 2020 and downloaded from SwissProt website. The database contains 87,954 protein entries. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 10 ppm in MS mode and 20 mmu in MS/MS mode. No missed cleavage was allowed (no enzyme search). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues and oxidation of methionine residues were set as variable modifications. For peptide validation, identification results were imported into the Proline software version 2.0 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr) for target/decoy validation and label-free quantification. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one and a Mascot score above 20 were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using an adjusted variant of the Mascot E-value. For label free quantification, peptide abundances were extracted by Proline using an m/z tolerance of 5 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed. Cross-assignment (a.k.a. match between runs) of peptide ion abundances was performed between the raw files using an m/z tolerance of 5 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 60s. Precursor ions abundances were normalized using the quotient normalization method implemented in Proline.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Cancer vaccine, Lc-msms, Fibrosarcoma, Peptidomics, Cancer

### Affiliations
IPBS-Toulouse BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04 France
IPBS

### Submitter
Julien Marcoux

### Lab Head
Dr Julien Marcoux
IPBS-Toulouse BP64182 205 route de Narbonne 31077 Toulouse Cedex04 France


