### Accession
PXD029948

### Title
Adaptive responses of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to treatment with antibiotics

### Description
Circumventing or overwhelming the bacterial adaptation capabilities is key to combatting multidrug-resistant pathogens like Pseudomonas aeruginosa. In an effort to understand the physiological response of P. aeruginosa to clinically relevant antibiotics, we investigated the proteome after exposure to ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, rifampicin, gentamicin, tobramycin, azithromycin, tigecycline, polymyxin B, colistin, ceftazidime, meropenem, and piperacillin/tazobactam. We further investigated the response to CHIR-90, which represents a promising class of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis inhibitors currently under evaluation. Radioactive pulse-labeling of newly synthesized proteins followed by 2D-PAGE was used to monitor the acute response of P. aeruginosa to antibiotic treatment. Marker proteins were excised from non-radioactive gels and identified by mass spectrometry. The proteomic profiles provide insights into the cellular defense strategies for each antibiotic. A mathematical comparison of these response profiles based on upregulated marker proteins revealed similarities of responses to antibiotics acting on the same target area.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa cells were disrupted and cytosolic proteins separated via 2D-PAGE. Protein spots were excised from preparative 2D gels and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion. Identification was performed on a nanoAcquitiyUPLC (Waters, Milford, USA) coupled to a Synapt G2-S high resolution mass spectrometer equipped with a lock spray source for electrospray ionization and a ToF detector (Waters). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column and separated on an analytical column (C18) using a H2O/acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the ProteinLynxGlobalServer 2.5.2 software (Waters) with a non-redundant version of the P. aeruginosa PA01 database (5562 proteins; NCBI reference sequence: NC_0 02516.2, added manually: trypsin, keratin). The following settings were used: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimum fragment ion matches per protein, 4; maximum protein mass, 300,000 Da; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M; and false positive rate, 4.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lps biosynthesis inhibition, Proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Stress response, Mode of action

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Christoph Senges

### Lab Head
Dr Julia E. Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany


