### Accession
PXD036177

### Title
Integrative proteomics and phosphoproteomics analysis of the rat adenohypophysis after GnRH treatment

### Description
Quantitative protein proteomics by TMT labeling and phosphorylation enrichment techniques and high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry

### Sample Protocol
Adenohypophysis of 8-week-old male rats before and after GnRH treatment

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis，MaxQuant；Motif analysis，MoMo；GO comment，InterProScan；Domain comments，InterProScan；KEGG annotation，KAAS， KEGG Mapper；Subcellular localization，Wolfpsort，CELLO；Enrichment analysis，Perl module；Cluster heat map，R Package pheatmap；Protein interaction，Blast；R package networkD3

### Publication Abstract
The regulation of mammalian reproductive activity is tightly dependent on the HPG axis crosstalk, in which several reproductive hormones play important roles. Among them, the physiological functions of gonadotropins are gradually being uncovered. However, the mechanisms by which GnRH regulates FSH synthesis and secretion still need to be more extensively and deeply explored. With the gradual completion of the human genome project, proteomes have become extremely important in the fields of human disease and biological process research. To explore the changes of protein and protein phosphorylation modifications in the adenohypophysis after GnRH stimulation, proteomics and phosphoproteomics analyses of rat adenohypophysis after GnRH treatment were performed by using TMT markers, HPLC classification, LC/MS, and bioinformatics analysis in this study. A total of 6762 proteins and 15,379 phosphorylation sites contained quantitative information. Twenty-eight upregulated proteins and fifty-three downregulated proteins were obtained in the rat adenohypophysis after GnRH treatment. The 323 upregulated phosphorylation sites and 677 downregulated phosphorylation sites found in the phosphoproteomics implied that a large number of phosphorylation modifications were regulated by GnRH and were involved in FSH synthesis and secretion. These data constitute a protein-protein phosphorylation map in the regulatory mechanism of "GnRH-FSH," which provides a basis for future studies on the complex molecular mechanisms of FSH synthesis and secretion. The results will be helpful for understanding the role of GnRH in the development and reproduction regulated by the pituitary proteome in mammals.

### Keywords
Gnrh; proteomics; phosphoproteomics; pituitary; rats

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Animals, College of Animal Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, Jilin, P.R. China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
Wenzhi Ren

### Lab Head
Dr Tian Wang
Department of Laboratory Animals, College of Animal Sciences, Jilin University, Changchun 130062, Jilin, P.R. China


