### Accession
PXD019305

### Title
Xylose Metabolism and the Effect of Oxidative Stress on Lipid and Carotenoid Production in Rhodotorula toruloides: Insights for Future Biorefinery

### Description
The use of cell factories to convert sugars from lignocellulosic biomass into chemicals in which oleochemicals and food additives, such as carotenoids, play an important role is essential for the shift towards sustainable processes. Rhodotorula toruloides is a yeast that naturally metabolises a wide range of substrates, including lignocellulosic hydrolysates, and converts them into lipids and carotenoids. In this study, xylose, the main component of hemicellulose, was used as the sole substrate for R. toruloides, and a detailed physiology characterisation combined with absolute proteomics and genome-scale metabolic models was carried out to understand the regulation of lipid and carotenoid production. To improve these productions, oxidative stress was induced by hydrogen peroxide and light irradiation and further enhanced by adaptive laboratory evolution. Based on the online measurements of growth and CO2 excretion, three distinct growth phases were identified during batch cultivations. The intracellular flux estimations correlated well with the measured protein levels and demonstrated improved NADPH regeneration and phosphoketolase activity and reduced beta-oxidation, correlating with increasing lipid yields. Light irradiation conditions resulted in 70% higher carotenoid and 40% higher lipid yields. The presence of hydrogen peroxide did not affect the carotenoid yield but culminated in the highest lipid yield of 0.65 ± 0.06 g/gDCW. The adapted strain showed improved fitness and 130% higher carotenoid yield than the parental strain. This work presented a holistic view of xylose conversion into microbial oil and carotenoids by R. toruloides for further cost-effective and renewable production of these molecules.

### Sample Protocol
Fully labelled biomass to be used as the internal standard in absolute proteome analysis was produced by cultivating R. toruloides in minimal mineral medium containing labelled heavy 15N, 13C-lysine (Silantes, Munich, Germany). Heavy labelling of the proteinogenic lysine was measured at 96.6% (data not shown). Absolute proteomics and internal heavy-labelled standard preparation and analyses were carried outperformed as described in Lahtvee et al. (2017) and Kumar and Lahtvee (2020). Briefly, cells were resuspended in the lysis buffer (6 mol/L guanidine HCl, 100 mmol/L Tris-HCl pH 8.5 and 100 mmol/L dithiothreitol) and homogenised with glass beads using the FastPrep24 device. The supernatant was removed by centrifugation (17,000 g for 10 min at 4ºC) and precipitated overnight with 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) at 4ºC. Pellets from the previous precipitation step were spiked in 1:1 ratio with the heavy-labelled standard. This mixture was further precipitated with 10% TCA. The pellet was resuspended in a buffer containing 7 mol/L urea and 2 mol/L thiourea in 100 mmol/L ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) followed by reduction using 5 mmol/L DTT and alkylation with 10 mmol/L chloroacetamide. Peptides were digested at room temperature with Achromobacter lyticus Lys-C (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Osaka, Japan) for 4 h at the ratio of 1:50 (enzyme:protein), followed by overnight digestion of the previous solution diluted 5 times in 100 mmol/L ABC buffer. Peptides were desalted using in-house prepared C18 (3M Empore, Maplewood, MO, USA) tips and were reconstituted in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). For separation, 2 µg of peptides was injected on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) coupled to a C18 cartridge trap-column in a backflush configuration and an analytical 50 cm x 75 µm emitter-column (New Objective, MA, USA) in-house packed with 3 µm C18 particles (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Eluted peptides were sprayed to a quadrupole-orbitrap Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) tandem mass spectrometer. MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 software package was used for raw data identification and identification (Cox and Mann, 2008).

### Data Protocol
R. toruloides NP11 served as a reference proteome database in UniProt (www.uniprot.org). Protein quantification was carried outperformed following the total protein approach described in (Sánchez et al., 2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Xylose, Carotenoids, Rhodotorula toruloides, Microbial oil, Biorefinery, Genome-scale modelling, Absolute proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Tartu
University of Tartu, Estonia

### Submitter
Petri-Jaan Lahtvee

### Lab Head
Dr Petri-Jaan Lahtvee
University of Tartu, Estonia


