### Accession
PXD038004

### Title
Shotgun measurements of proteome fractionations: mitochondria,  aggregates, and soluble fraction of NDUFA11 KO and WT HEK293T cells

### Description
Perturbed proteostasis and mitochondrial dysfunction are often associated with age-related diseases such as Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s diseases. However, the link between them remains incompletely understood. Mitochondrial dysfunction causes proteostasis imbalance, and cells respond to restore proteostasis by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperons in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate the presence of similar responses in humans. Mitochondrial dysfunction upregulates a small heat shock protein HSPB1 and an immunoproteasome subunit PSMB9 leading to an increase in proteasome activity. HSPB1 and PSMB9 are required to prevent protein aggregation upon mitochondrial dysfunction. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on a translation elongation factor EEF1A2, and PSMB9-containing proteasomes are located near mitochondria, enabling fast local degradation of aberrant proteins. Our findings put a step forward in understanding the stress response triggered by mitochondrial dysfunction, and may be useful for therapeutic strategies to prevent or delay the onset of age-related diseases and attenuate their progression.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome fractionation: mitochondria,  aggregates, and soluble fraction (post aggregate pelleting) of NDUFA11 KO and WT HEK293T cells. 8 million cells were seeded on 150 cm2 dishes containing DMEM – high glucose medium and grown for 24 h. After harvesting the cells using a scrapper, the cells were washed with 1X PBS and pelleted by centrifugation (1,000 x g, 5 min, 4 °C). The cell pellet was resuspended in an ice-cold isotonic buffer (75 mM mannitol, 225 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA 10 mM MOPS-KOH, pH 7.2) containing 2mM PMSF and centrifuged (1,000 x g, 5 min, 4 °C). Afterwards, the cell pellet was resuspended in hypotonic buffer (100 mM sucrose, 1 mM EGTA 10 mM MOPS-KOH, pH 7.2; 5 ml per 1 g of the pellet) containing BSA (2mg/ml) and 2 mM PMSF and incubated on ice for 5-7min. The cell suspension was homogenized 15 times using a Dounce glass homogenizer. Cold hypertonic buffer (1.25 M sucrose, 10 mM MOPS-KOH, pH 7.2) was added to the cell homogenate suspension (1.1ml/1g cells), and the volume was doubled with isotonic buffer containing BSA (2 mg/ml) and PMSF (2 mM). Then the homogenate suspension was centrifuged (1,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C). The supernatant containing mitochondria was transferred to a fresh falcon tube and centrifugated again to pellet the debris. The supernatant was subjected to medium-speed centrifugation (10,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C) to pellet mitochondria. After pelleting mitochondria, the supernatant were subjected to lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 20 mM KCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1%  Triton X-100 and 2 mM PMSF as final concentration) to solubilize the samples. Then, the samples were incubated for 30 mins with occasional vortexing. The soluble samples were centrifuged (10,000 x g, 10 min, 4 °C) to remove the debris. Ice cold isotonic buffer without BSA and PMSF was used to wash the pellet and centrifuged again. Then, the pellet was resuspended in isotonic buffer (without BSA and PMSF). Finally, 500 µg of soluble sample was subjected high speed centrifugation (125,000 x g, 60 min, 4 °C) to segregate aggregates (Pellet) and soluble fraction. Further preparation of mitochondria samples. 50 µg protein per sample were dissolved in neat TFA. Protein solutions were neutralized with 10 volumes of 2M Tris base, supplemented with TCEP (8mM) and chloroacetamide (32mM), heated to 95 ⁰C for 5min, diluted with water 1:5, and subjected to overnight enzymatic digestion (0.5µg, Trypsin) at 37 ⁰C. Tryptic peptides were then desalted on C18 stage-tips, TMT-labeled on the solid support, compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated. Peptides in the compiled sample were bRP fractionated. Further preparation of soluble samples. 100 µg protein per sample were precipitated with chloroform/methanol, resuspended in 100mM HEPES pH 8.0 containing 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM chloroacetamide, and subjected to overnight digestion at 37°C with trypsin (1 µg). Next, the samples were acidified with TFA to the final concentration of 1 % and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 3 min at RT. Tryptic peptides were then desalted on C18 stage-tips, TMT-labeled on the solid support, compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated. Peptides in the compiled sample were bRP fractionated. Further preparation of aggregate samples. Aggregates were solubilized for 1 h in 10 µl of 0.1 % ProteaseMAX™ surfactant in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at RT. Then, 50 µl of digestion mixture (100 mM HEPES pH 8.0; 5 mM TCEP; 10 mM iodoacetamide; 0.5 µg of trypsin and 0.02 % ProteaseMAX™) was added and the samples were digested overnight at 37°C. Next, the samples were acidified with TFA to the final concentration of 1 % and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 3 min at RT. Tryptic peptides (the entire sample) were then desalted on C18 stage-tips, TMT-labeled on the solid support, compiled into a single TMT sample and concentrated. Peptides in the compiled sample were bRP fractionated. LC-MS/MS: peptide fractions were resuspended in 0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in water. Chromatographic separation was performed on an Easy-Spray Acclaim PepMap column 50 cm long × 75 µm inner diameter at 55 °C by applying a 120 min acetonitrile gradients in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. An UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source. The Q Exactive HF-X was operated in TMT mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200. Up to 18 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charges 2-5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 32, while the dynamic exclusion was set to 35 s. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200) were 50 and 96 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 3e6 and for MS/MS to 1e5, and the minimum AGC target was set to 1e3.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed with MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0, and the peptides were identified from the MS/MS spectra searched against Uniprot Human Reference Proteome (UP000005640) using the build-in Andromeda search engine. Raw files obtained from the LC-MS/MS measurements of peptide fractions from a particular protein fraction were analyzed together. Reporter ion MS2-based quantification was applied with reporter mass tolerance = 0.003 Da and min. reporter PIF = 0.75. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamination, as well as protein N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For in silico digests of the reference proteome, cleavages of arginine or lysine followed by any amino acid were allowed (trypsin/P), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The FDR was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. Match between runs was enabled. Other parameters were used as pre-set in the software.

### Publication Abstract
Perturbed cellular protein homeostasis (proteostasis) and mitochondrial dysfunction play an important role in neurodegenerative diseases, however, the interplay between these two phenomena remains unclear. Mitochondrial dysfunction leads to a delay in mitochondrial protein import, causing accumulation of non-imported mitochondrial proteins in the cytosol and challenging proteostasis. Cells respond by increasing proteasome activity and molecular chaperones in yeast and C. elegans. Here, we demonstrate that in human cells mitochondrial dysfunction leads to the upregulation of a chaperone HSPB1 and, interestingly, an immunoproteasome-specific subunit PSMB9. Moreover, PSMB9 expression is dependent on the translation elongation factor EEF1A2. These mechanisms constitute a defense response to preserve cellular proteostasis under mitochondrial stress. Our findings define a mode of proteasomal activation through the change in proteasome composition driven by EEF1A2 and its spatial regulation, and are useful to formulate therapies to prevent neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Aggregates, Tmt, Ndufa11 ko

### Affiliations
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland
The International Institute of Molecular Mechanisms and Machines, Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Remigiusz Serwa

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Agnieszka Chacinska
ReMedy International Research Agenda Unit, IMol Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland


