### Accession
PXD013383

### Title
Proteomics of Clostridium butyricum strains in aerobic and anaerobic conditions

### Description
Analysis of proteins from botulinum neurotoxin-producing Clostridium butyricum strains grown upon exposure to air. This strain usually lives in anaerobic environments, but we found that it is able to keep growing and producing toxin in vitro upon exposure to air. This project analyzes the proteins differentially expressed both in anaerobic and aerobic conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins  extracted from C. butyricum type E strain ISS-190 were separated on a 1D gel 4-12% and colored by Coomassie staining. Each gel lane was cut in 12-15 contiguous slices and in gel  digested with trypsin after cysteine reduction with DTT and alkylation with iodoacetamide. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS  using a linear ion trap (LTQ, Thermo), acquiring MS/MS spectra in DDA mode (top five). The experiments were performed in quintuplicate.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against  NCBI database containing proteins from C. butyricum type E strain BL5262 TxId 632245 using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo). Spectra matches were filtered with with q-value based FDR of 0.01. 2 and 0.8 Da tolerance was selected for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Specific trypsin cleavages were admitted, with two possible miss cleavages. Proteins were taken into account only if  identified with at least two peptides and minimum high  confidence peptides was considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Clostridium butyricum proteomics

### Affiliations
Istituto superiore di sanità
Core Facilities, Italian National Institute of Health

### Submitter
Serena Camerini

### Lab Head
Dr Serena Camerini
Core Facilities, Italian National Institute of Health


