### Accession
PXD023441

### Title
Akt phosphorylates insulin receptor substrate (IRS) to limit PI3K-mediated PI(3,4,5)P3 synthesis

### Description
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt network is tightly controlled by feedback mechanisms that regulate signal flow and ensure signal fidelity. Here, we show that Akt itself engages negative feedback by phosphorylating insulin receptor substrate (IRS) 1 and 2 on a number of residues. Mechanistically this serves to deplete plasma membrane-localised IRS1/2 and reduce its interaction with the insulin receptor. Together these events limit plasma membrane associated PI3K and phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) synthesis. We identified two Akt-dependent phosphorylation sites in IRS2 at S306 (S303 in mouse) and S577 (S573 in mouse) that are key drivers of this negative feedback. These findings establish another mechanism by which the kinase Akt auto-regulates its activity, through post-translational modification of the IRS scaffold that in turn controls PIP3 levels.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed sample processing protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Detailed data processing protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)-Akt network is tightly controlled by feedback mechanisms that regulate signal flow and ensure signal fidelity. A rapid overshoot in insulin-stimulated recruitment of Akt to the plasma membrane has previously been reported, which is indicative of negative feedback operating on acute timescales. Here, we show that Akt itself engages this negative feedback by phosphorylating insulin receptor substrate (IRS) 1 and 2 on a number of residues. Phosphorylation results in the depletion of plasma membrane-localised IRS1/2, reducing the pool available for interaction with the insulin receptor. Together these events limit plasma membrane-associated PI3K and phosphatidylinositol (3,4,5)-trisphosphate (PIP3) synthesis. We identified two Akt-dependent phosphorylation sites in IRS2 at S306 (S303 in mouse) and S577 (S573 in mouse) that are key drivers of this negative feedback. These findings establish a novel mechanism by which the kinase Akt acutely controls PIP3 abundance, through post-translational modification of the IRS scaffold.

### Keywords
Signal transduction, Phosphorylation, Pi3k, Irs1, Irs2, Akt

### Affiliations
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia
Murdoch Children's Research Institute

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr David James
School of Life and Environmental Sciences, Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Australia


