### Accession
PXD031632

### Title
Crosslinking/mass spectrometry analysis of Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway FANCD2-FANCI complexes

### Description
DNA interstrand crosslinks (ICLs) are repaired by the Fanconi anemia (FA) pathway. The FA pathway is activated by phosphorylation of FANCI in FANCD2-FANCI complex. To investigate how phosphorylation regulates FA pathway activation and function, recombinant FANCD2-FANCI complexes prepared using either the wild-type FANCI or the phosphomimetic FANCI, were comparied using crosslinking/mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
We purified Chicken FANCD2(D2), wild-type FANCI (IWT), and phosphomimetic FANCI (I3D), which had three conserved phosphorylation sites mutated to aspartic acid (Ser558, Ser561, and Thr567), along with 44-bp ds DNA. We prepared four recombinant FANCD2-FANCI complexes: D2-IWT, D2-I3D, D2IWT+DNA, D2I3D+DNA. We crosslinked these complexes individually in triplicate using the crosslinker Sulfo-SDA (sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate) for crosslinking/mass spectrometry analysis. We separated crosslinked D2-I complex samples on a 3-8% NuPAGE Tris-acetate gel, excised gel bands corresponding to the crosslinked D2-I heterodimer, and in-gel digested them for crosslinking/mass spectrometry analysis. Gel bands of crosslinked FANCD2-FANCI complexes were cut into 1 mm cubes, had disulfide bonds reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 minutes, and had free -SH groups alkylated with 55 mM IAA at 23 °C for 20 min in the dark. We then digested the proteins with trypsin in 45 mM ABC, 10% ACN with a protein to trypsin mass ratio of 50:1, and incubated the digestion reaction at 37 °C for 15 hours. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and desalted using C18 StageTips. We injected 1 µg of peptides for each LC-MS/MS acquisition and performed LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). We resuspended each size exclusion chromatography fraction in 1.6% v/v acetonitrile 0.1% v/v formic acid and analyzed them with replicated LC-MS/MS acquisitions. Peptides were loaded and separated at a flowrate of 0.3 μl/min, separated by a series of linear gradients, and ionized by an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific) and introduced directly into the mass spectrometer. The MS data was acquired in the data-dependent mode with the top-speed option. For each three-second acquisition cycle, the full scan mass spectrum was recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000, and fragmentation spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 50,000. We enabled dynamic exclusion with single repeat count and 60 seconds exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
xiSEARCH & xiFDR is used to analyze the data and identified the peptides and proteins. Results are exported to mzidentml.

### Publication Abstract
DNA interstrand cross-links are tumor-inducing lesions that block DNA replication and transcription. When cross-links are detected at stalled replication forks, ATR kinase phosphorylates FANCI, which stimulates monoubiquitination of the FANCD2-FANCI clamp by the Fanconi anemia core complex. Monoubiquitinated FANCD2-FANCI is locked onto DNA and recruits nucleases that mediate DNA repair. However, it remains unclear how phosphorylation activates this pathway. Here, we report structures of FANCD2-FANCI complexes containing phosphomimetic FANCI. We observe that, unlike wild-type FANCD2-FANCI, the phosphomimetic complex closes around DNA, independent of the Fanconi anemia core complex. The phosphomimetic mutations do not substantially alter DNA binding but instead destabilize the open state of FANCD2-FANCI and alter its conformational dynamics. Overall, our results demonstrate that phosphorylation primes the FANCD2-FANCI clamp for ubiquitination, showing how multiple posttranslational modifications are coordinated to control DNA repair.

### Keywords
Fanconi anemia (fa) pathway, Crosslinking/mass spectrometry, Fanci phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Zhuo Chen 

### Lab Head
 Juri Rappsilber 
Technische Universität Berlin


