### Accession
PXD006552

### Title
Diversity of Amyloid-beta Proteoforms in the Alzheimer's Disease Brain

### Description
Amyloid-beta (Aβ) plays a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), but little is known about the proteoforms present in human AD brain. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to analyze intact, undigested Aβ from purified soluble aggregates and insoluble material in brains of 6 cases with severe dementia and pathologically confirmed AD. The soluble aggregates are especially relevant because they are believed to be the most toxic form of Aβ. We found a diversity of Aβ peptides, with 26 unique proteoforms including various N- and C-terminal truncations. N- and C-terminal truncations comprised 73% and 30%, respectively, of the number of Aβ proteoforms detected. The Aβ proteoforms segregated between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates with N-terminal truncations predominating in the insoluble material and C- terminal truncations segregating into the soluble aggregates. In contrast, canonical Aβ comprised the minority of the number of identified proteoforms (15.3%) and did not distinguish between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates. The relative abundance of many truncated Aβ proteoforms did not correlate with post-mortem interval, suggesting they are not artefacts. This heterogeneity of Aβ proteoforms deepens our understanding of AD and offers many new avenues for investigation into pathological mechanisms of the disease, with implications for therapeutic development.

### Sample Protocol
Complete methods are described in Esparza et al. 3. The layers atop the 70% sucrose cushion of the 475,000 x g spin were immunoprecipitated with 100 uL/mL of a 50% slurry of beads conjugated to the monoclonal antibodies HJ3.4 and HJ5.1 overnight (22 hrs) at 4°C. The pellet of the 100,000 x g spin was resolubilized in 5 M guanidine hydrochloride (pH 8.0) overnight at 4°C. The resulting guanidine solubilized 100k pellet was centrifuged in a MicroCL 17R centrifuge at 17,000 x g to remove any guanidine insoluble material. Next, the supernatant was diluted 1:10 (0.5 M guanidine, final concentration) in 1X PBS and immunoprecipitated with 100 uL/mL of a 50% slurry of immobilized monoclonal antibodies HJ3.4 and HJ5.1 overnight (22 hrs) at 4°C. Beads were washed 15 times in 1X PBS (1 mL each) and eluted 3X with 100 uL formic acid at room temperature for 5 min each. . The 2D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ) was used to desalt and delipidate the samples. Precipitated samples were subjected to C8 TopTips (Glygen, Columbia, MD) to separate full-length proteins from Aβ peptides for analysis by nLC-MS/MS. Separations were performed using an online NanoAcquity UPLC (Waters). The chromatographic separation was performed on an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3 (360 μm OD × 75 μm ID) column packed with 10 cm C18 (1.8 μm, 100 Å, Waters) at 300 nL/min and heated to 60°C. Mobile phases were 0.1% FA in water (A) and 0.1% FA in ACN (B). Samples were eluted from the column with the gradient ramped to 35% B over 65 min and further increased to 95% B over 8 min and held for an additional 6 min. Total run time, including column equilibration, sample loading, and analysis was 89 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. The survey scans (m/z 400–2000) (MS) were acquired in the Orbitrap at high resolution (60,000 at m/z 400) in profile mode, and the MS/MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (15,000 at m/z 400) in centroid mode using XCalibur, version 3.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ion injection times for the MS and MS/MS scans were 500 ms each. The automatic gain control targets were set as 2 × 105 for MS and MS/MS in the Orbitrap. The most abundant precursor ions from each MS scan were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the Orbitrap using HCD (isolation width 2.0 Da, normalized collision energy 30%, activation Q 0.250, and activation time 10 ms) within a 3 sec duty cycle (TopSpeed method). Dynamic exclusion (±10 ppm relative to precursor ion m/z) was enabled with a repeat count of one, a maximal exclusion list size of 500, and an exclusion duration of 60 s. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) was enabled and unassigned ions were rejected.

### Data Protocol
MS files (.raw) were imported into PEAKS (version 8, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON) and searched against a UniprotKB/SwissProt Human database of reviewed, canonical sequences (October 2015; 20,204 entries) appended with the cRAP contaminant database (January 2015 version, The Global Proteome Machine, www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html). Precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da with no enzyme specificity. All modifications in the UniMod database (http://www.unimod.org) were considered in the PEAKS search. PEAKS automatically generates a decoy-fusion database, which appends a decoy sequence to each protein identification for the calculation of FDR6. The Spider search results with a score (-10logP) of 31.9 or higher (an estimated FDR value of 2.9% at the peptide level) for the CDR3 cohort data. Spider is an algorithm tool within PEAKS, which we utilized to search peptide spectrum matches not identified by the database search by altering the amino acids systematically at each residue until a new, better peptide sequence is constructed from the MS/MS data 7. All non-Aβ peptides and those Aβ proteoforms containing formylation were removed. Immunoprecipitation elution was in neat formic acid (Sigma #94318); thus, formylation occurring endogenously or by the elution conditions is indistinguishable. Further, samples were resuspended in MS buffer containing 5% methanol (v/v) to maintain solubility of Aβ, which in combination with 1% FA could lead to artefactual methylation via Fischer esterification.  In the CDR3 cohort, 27 Aβ proteoforms were identified meeting the criteria described above. However, we sought reproducible identification of the 27 Aβ proteoforms on an independent platform. The filtered list of Aβ proteoforms were i) assigned identification numbers by a third party who had no part in the initial analysis and ii) transformed into chemical formulas. This chemical formula list was queried against each .raw file with National Resource for Top-Down Proteomics (NRTDP) pipeline version 1.3 at ±10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance and a 4 min retention time window alignment (Supp. Fig. 3). If a given proteoform was not identified by both platforms (PEAKS and NRTDP), it was removed from analysis; 26 out of 27 were reproducibly identified on both platforms. MS intensity was calculated across all peaks within an isotopic cluster extracted with Skyline for each proteoform identified in Fig. 2 and exported as an Excel file.

### Publication Abstract
Amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) plays a key role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), but little is known about the proteoforms present in AD brain. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry to analyze intact A&#x3b2; from soluble aggregates and insoluble material in brains of six cases with severe dementia and pathologically confirmed AD. The soluble aggregates are especially relevant because they are believed to be the most toxic form of A&#x3b2;. We found a diversity of A&#x3b2; peptides, with 26 unique proteoforms including various N- and C-terminal truncations. N- and C-terminal truncations comprised 73% and 30%, respectively, of the total A&#x3b2; proteoforms detected. The A&#x3b2; proteoforms segregated between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates with N-terminal truncations predominating in the insoluble material and C- terminal truncations segregating into the soluble aggregates. In contrast, canonical A&#x3b2; comprised the minority of the identified proteoforms (15.3%) and did not distinguish between the soluble and more insoluble aggregates. The relative abundance of many truncated A&#x3b2; proteoforms did not correlate with post-mortem interval, suggesting they are not artefacts. This heterogeneity of A&#x3b2; proteoforms deepens our understanding of AD and offers many new avenues for investigation into pathological mechanisms of the disease, with implications for therapeutic development.

### Keywords
Top-down mass spectrometry, Truncations, Alzheimer’s disease, Post-translational modifications (ptms), Amyloid-beta, Proteoforms

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Neurology

### Submitter
Norelle Wildburger

### Lab Head
Dr David L. Brody
Washington University School of Medicine Department of Neurology


