### Accession
PXD035000

### Title
ACP Acylation Is an Acetyl-CoADependent Modification Required for Electron Transport Chain Assembly

### Description
The electron transport chain (ETC) is an important participant in cellular energy conversion, but its biogenesis presents the cell with numerous challenges. To address these complexities, the cell utilizes ETC assembly factors, which include the LYR protein family. Each member of this family interacts with the mitochondrial acyl carrier protein (ACP), the scaffold protein upon which the mitochondrial fatty acid synthesis (mtFAS) pathway builds fatty acyl chains from acetyl-CoA. We demonstrate that the acylated form of ACP is an acetyl-CoA-dependent allosteric activator of the LYR protein family used to stimulate ETC biogenesis. By tuning ETC assembly to the abundance of acetyl-CoA, which is the major fuel of the TCA cycle and ETC, this system could provide an elegant mechanism for coordinating the assembly of ETC complexes with one another and with substrate availability.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and protein digestion, and peptide labeling In order to fully use the sample multiplexing ability, an 11-plex experiment was designed containing the following proteome-wide comparisons: wt (n = 3), mct1D (n = 3), mpc1D (n = 30), and wt_extra (samples for an unrelated experiment) (n = 2). Cell pellets from each condition were resuspended at 4C in buffer containing 8M urea, 50mM EPPS pH 8.5, 50mM NaCl, and protease inhibitors. Chilled zirconium oxide beads were added to cell slurries. Cells were lysed using a MiniBeadbeater (Biospec products, Bartlesville, OK) at 4C in 2mL screw cap tubes for 5 cycles of 30 s each, with 1 min pauses between cycles to avoid overheating. After centrifugation, clarified lysates were transferred to new tubes. Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was performed to determine protein concentration. Proteins were then subjected to disulfide reduction with 5mM tris (2 carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), (room temperature, 30 min) and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room temperature, 30 min in the dark). 15 mM dithiotreitol was used to quench excess iodoacetamide (room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Proteins (200mg) were then chloroform/methanol precipitated and washed with methanol prior to air drying. Samples were resuspended in 8 M urea, 50 mM EPPS, pH 8.5, and then diluted to < 1M urea with 50mM EPPS, pH 8.5. Proteins were digested for 16 hours with LysC (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) at room temperature, followed by trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein ratio) for 6 hours at 37C. Peptides were quantified using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. TMT-11 reagents (0.8mg) were dissolved in 40mL anhydrous acetonitrile, and 7mL was used to label 70mg peptides in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile. Labeling proceeded for 1 hour at room temperature, until reaction was quenched using 7mL 5% hydro

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a 100 mm inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35 cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6 mm, 150 A˚ , Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 2mg peptides were separated using a 2.5 h gradient of acidic acetonitrile. We used the multinotch MS3-based TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014). The scan sequence began with a MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 4001400 Th). MS2 analysis followed collision-induced dissociation (CID, CE = 35) with a maximum ion injection time of 150 ms and an isolation window of 0.5 Da. The 10 most abundant MS1 ions of charge states 2-6 were selected for MS2/MS3 analysis. To obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by high-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD, CE = 55) and analyzed in the Orbitrap (resolution was 50,000 at 200 Th) with a maxim

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondiria, Yeast, Oxphos

### Affiliations
University of Utah School of Medicine
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Jonathan Van Vranken

### Lab Head
Dr Jared Rutter
University of Utah School of Medicine


