### Accession
PXD017800

### Title
Proteome analysis of Actinomycetospora chiangmaiensis DSM 45062 degrading 2-HIBA

### Description
The tertiary branched short-chain 2-hydroxyisobutyric acid (2-HIBA) has been associated with several metabolic diseases and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation seems to be a common eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic post-translational modification in proteins. In contrast, the underlying 2-HIBA metabolism has thus far only been detected in a few microorganisms, such as the betaproteobacterium Aquincola tertiaricarbonis L108 and the Bacillus group bacterium Kyrpidia tusciae DSM 2912. In these strains, 2-HIBA can be specifically activated to the corresponding CoA thioester by the 2-HIBA-CoA ligase HCL and is then isomerized to 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA in a reversible and B12-dependent mutase reaction. Here, we demonstrate that the actinobacterial strain Actinomycetospora chiangmaiensis DSM 45062 degrades 2-HIBA and also its precursor 2-methylpropane-1,2-diol via acetone and formic acid by employing a thiamine pyrophosphate-dependent lyase. The corresponding gene is located directly upstream of hcl, which has previously been found only in operonic association with the 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA mutase genes in other bacteria. Heterologous expression of the lyase gene from DSM 45062 in E. coli established a 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA lyase activity in the latter. In line with this, analysis of the DSM 45062 proteome reveals a strong induction of the lyase-HCL gene cluster on 2-HIBA. Acetone is likely degraded via hydroxylation to acetol catalyzed by a MimABCD-related binuclear iron monooxygenase and formic acid appears to be oxidized to CO2 by selenium-dependent dehydrogenases. The presence of the lyase-HCL gene cluster in isoprene-degrading Rhodococcus strains and Pseudonocardia associated with tropical leafcutter ant species points to a role in degradation of biogenic volatile organic compounds.

### Sample Protocol
Cells from fed-batch cultures growing on either acetone or 2-HIBA as main carbon source in mineral salt medium supplemented with selenium were harvested by centrifugation (10 min, 4 °C, 5000 x g), washed twice in mineral salt medium and stored at -30 °C. Proteome analyses were performed as described previously (Bastida et al., 2018) with five replicated for each treatment. Mass spectrometric analysis of eluted peptides was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v.2.2, Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against the protein-coding sequence of A. chiangmaiensis DSM 45062 (from NCBI March 2019) supplemented with protein-coding entries of FdhA1 and FdhA2 (in total 5,504 sequence entries) (see Fig. 2C). Search settings for Sequest HT search engine were set to trypsin (Full), max. missed cleavage sites: 2, precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was specified as a fixed modification and the oxidation of methionine and N-Acetylation of the protein N-terminus as a variable modification. Proteins were considered as identified when at least one unique peptide passed the false discovery rate below 0.01. In total, we were able to identify 2,848 protein groups comprised of 20,561 peptides, so the coverage of the A. chiangmaiensis DSM 45062 proteome was about 52%.

### Publication Abstract
The tertiary branched short-chain 2-hydroxyisobutyric acid (2-HIBA) has been associated with several metabolic diseases and lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation seems to be a common eukaryotic as well as prokaryotic post-translational modification in proteins. In contrast, the underlying 2-HIBA metabolism has thus far only been detected in a few microorganisms, such as the betaproteobacterium <i>Aquincola tertiaricarbonis</i> L108 and the <i>Bacillus</i> group bacterium <i>Kyrpidia tusciae</i> DSM 2912. In these strains, 2-HIBA can be specifically activated to the corresponding CoA thioester by the 2-HIBA-CoA ligase (HCL) and is then isomerized to 3-hydroxybutyryl-CoA in a reversible and B<sub>12</sub>-dependent mutase reaction. Here, we demonstrate that the actinobacterial strain <i>Actinomycetospora chiangmaiensis</i> DSM 45062 degrades 2-HIBA and also its precursor 2-methylpropane-1,2-diol via acetone and formic acid by employing a thiamine pyrophosphate-dependent lyase. The corresponding gene is located directly upstream of <i>hcl</i>, which has previously been found only in operonic association with the 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA mutase genes in other bacteria. Heterologous expression of the lyase gene from DSM 45062 in <i>E. coli</i> established a 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA lyase activity in the latter. In line with this, analysis of the DSM 45062 proteome reveals a strong induction of the lyase-HCL gene cluster on 2-HIBA. Acetone is likely degraded via hydroxylation to acetol catalyzed by a MimABCD-related binuclear iron monooxygenase and formic acid appears to be oxidized to CO<sub>2</sub> by selenium-dependent dehydrogenases. The presence of the lyase-HCL gene cluster in isoprene-degrading <i>Rhodococcus</i> strains and <i>Pseudonocardia</i> associated with tropical leafcutter ant species points to a role in degradation of biogenic short-chain ketones and highly branched organic compounds.

### Keywords
Isobutene, Acyloin condensation, 2-hydroxyacyl-coa lyase, Tert-butyl alcohol, Degradation pathway, Fuel oxygenate, Mycolicibacterium

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany Phone +49 341 235 4767


