### Accession
PXD030467

### Title
Functional Requirements for a Samd14-Capping Protein Complex in Stress Erythropoiesis

### Description
Acute anemia induces rapid expansion of erythroid precursors and accelerated differentiation to replenish erythrocytes. Paracrine signals – involving cooperation between SCF/c-Kit signaling and other signaling inputs – are required for the activation and function of erythroid precursors in anemia. Our prior work revealed that the Sterile Alpha Motif (SAM) Domain 14 (Samd14) gene is transcriptionally upregulated in a model of acute anemia. Samd14 expression increases the regenerative capacity of the erythroid system and promotes stress-dependent c-Kit signaling. However, the mechanism underlying Samd14’s role in stress erythropoiesis is unknown. We identified a protein-protein interaction between Samd14 and the α- and β heterodimers of the F-actin capping protein (CP) complex. Knockdown of the CP β subunit increased erythroid maturation in ex vivo cultures and decreased colony forming potential of stress erythroid precursors. In a genetic complementation assay for Samd14 activity, our results revealed that the Samd14-CP interaction is a determinant of erythroid precursor cell levels and function. Samd14-CP promotes SCF/c-kit signaling in CD71med spleen erythroid precursors.

### Sample Protocol
5 x 107 G1E-∆Enh cells expressing different Samd14 mutants were collected between days 12 and 14 after sorting for GFP using FACS. Cells were lysed 1 h in 1% NP-40 Lysis buffer (150 nM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 2 mM DTT, 0.2 mM PMSF, 20 µg/mL leupeptin) on ice. Protein lysates were incubated with 40 µL slurry of HA-agarose beads (Pierce) overnight. Washed beads were boiled in SDS lysis buffer and analyzed by SDS-PAGE or mass spectrometry. In-gel samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide, washed and then digested overnight using trypsin. Tryptic digests were run by LC-MS/MS using a 2 h gradient on a 0.075 mm x 250 mm Waters CSH C18 column on a U3000 nanoRSLC (Dionex) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (ThermoScientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science; v.2.6.1), searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.060 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Deamidated asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine, phospho serine, threonine and tyrosine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Results were then validated and summarized into Scaffold (Proteome Software; v. 4.8.9) using a 99.0% protein probability with a minimum of 2 unique peptides with at least 80% peptide probability.   Statistically enriched proteins were determined using a 2-way ANOVA.

### Publication Abstract
Acute anemia induces rapid expansion of erythroid precursors and accelerated differentiation to replenish erythrocytes. Paracrine signals-involving cooperation between stem cell factor (SCF)/Kit signaling and other signaling inputs-are required for the increased erythroid precursor activity in anemia. Our prior work revealed that the sterile alpha motif (SAM) domain 14 (<i>Samd14</i>) gene increases the regenerative capacity of the erythroid system in a mouse genetic model and promotes stress-dependent Kit signaling. However, the mechanism underlying Samd14's role in stress erythropoiesis is unknown. We identified a protein-protein interaction between Samd14 and the &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-heterodimers of the F-actin capping protein (CP) complex. Knockdown of the CP &#x3b2; subunit increased erythroid maturation in murine ex vivo cultures and decreased colony forming potential of stress erythroid precursors. In a genetic complementation assay for Samd14 activity, our results revealed that the Samd14-CP interaction is a determinant of erythroid precursor cell levels and function. Samd14-CP promotes SCF/Kit signaling in CD71<sup>med</sup> spleen erythroid precursors. Given the roles of Kit signaling in hematopoiesis and Samd14 in Kit pathway activation, this mechanism may have pathological implications in acute/chronic anemia.

### Keywords
Samd14; capping protein; c-kit; erythropoietin; stress erythropoiesis

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska - Lincoln
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska- Lincoln

### Submitter
Sophe Alvarez

### Lab Head
Dr Sophie Alvarez
Proteomics and Metabolomics Facility, University of Nebraska- Lincoln


