### Accession
PXD004520

### Title
Phagosome proteome of activated murine macrophage

### Description
Proteomics of carboxylated polystyrene bead (1.0 um) phagosomes from murine bone marrow-derived macrophages. cells were either resting or treated with 100 U/ml IFN-γ (PeproTech) and 100 ng/ml LPS (Sigma) for 24 h, 20 ng/ml Interleukin-4 (IL4) (BD Pharmingen) for 48 h, 20 ng/ml Interleukin-13 (IL13), 10 ng/ml Interleukin-10 (IL10)for 48 h or Reprogrammed (IL4 was incubated with BMDMs for 24 h, and the medium was replaced with fresh medium containing IFN-γ/LPS to incubate for another 24 h). Phagosomes were isolated after 30 min bead inoculation.

### Sample Protocol
Phagosomal proteins were reduced, alkylated with Iodoacetamide and then digested using trypsin. peptides were isotopically labelled using mTRAQ 0 and 8 reagents. samples were labelled as follows: Resting (L) vs IFNg/LPS (H) Resting (L) vs Reprogrammed (H) Resting (L) vs IL4 (H) IL4 (L) vs IL13 (H) IL4 (L) vs IL10 (H)

### Data Protocol
Proteome identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant v1.3.0.5 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with variable modifications Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), 2 multiplicities with mTRAQ Lysine/N-terminal (Δ0 and Δ8), maximum 5 modifications per peptide, and 2 missed cleavages. Spectra were matched to a Uniprot-Trembl Mus musculus database (50,543 entries, downloaded October 18, 2012) plus common contaminants. A reverse database was used for false peptide discovery. Mass accuracy was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for ion trap MS/MS data. Identifications were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the protein and peptide level, accepting a minimum peptide length of 7. Quantification used only razor and unique peptides, and required a minimum ratio count of 2. “Re-quantify” and “match between runs” were enabled. Normalized ratios were extracted for each protein/condition and used for downstream analyses. Statistical analyses were performed in Perseus (v1.3.0.4). T-test-based statistics were applied on normalized and logarithmized protein ratios to extract the significant regulated proteins. Hierarchical clustering was performed in Perseus on logarithmized ratios of significant proteins using Correlation distances and Average linkage to generate the heatmap.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Il10, Interleukin-4, Interferon-gamma, Interleukin-10, Il13, Cytokine, Lysosome, Interleukin-13, Reprogrammed, Phagosome, Lps, Il4, Mouse, Endosome, Macrophage

### Affiliations
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit,School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK
Newcastle University

### Submitter
Matthias Trost

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Trost
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit,School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland, UK


