### Accession
PXD008346

### Title
Genomes of trombidid mites reveal novel predicted allergens and laterally-transferred genes associated with secondary metabolism

### Description
Background Trombidid mites have a unique lifecycle in which only the larval stage is ectoparasitic. In the superfamily Trombiculoidea (“chiggers”), the larvae feed preferentially on vertebrates, including humans. Species in the genus Leptotrombidium are vectors of a potentially fatal bacterial infection, scrub typhus, which affects 1 million people annually. Moreover, chiggers can cause pruritic dermatitis (trombiculiasis) in humans and domesticated animals. In the Trombidioidea (velvet mites), the larvae feed on other arthropods and are potential biological control agents for agricultural pests. Here, we present the first trombidid mites genomes, obtained both for a chigger, Leptotrombidium deliense, and for a velvet mite, Dinothrombium tinctorium. Results Sequencing was performed on the Illumina MiSeq platform. A 180 Mb draft assembly for D. tinctorium was generated from two paired-end and one mate-pair library using a single adult specimen. For L. deliense, a lower-coverage draft assembly (117 Mb) was obtained using pooled, engorged larvae with a single paired-end library. Remarkably, both genomes exhibited evidence of ancient lateral gene transfer from soil-derived bacteria or fungi. The transferred genes confer functions that are rare in animals, including terpene and carotenoid synthesis. Thirty-seven allergenic protein families were predicted in the L. deliense genome, of which nine were unique. Preliminary proteomic analyses identified several of these putative allergens in larvae. Conclusions Trombidid mite genomes appear to be more dynamic than those of other acariform mites. A priority for future research is to determine the biological function of terpene synthesis in this taxon and its potential for exploitation in disease control. Project was jointly supervised by Stuart Armstrong and Ben Makepeace.

### Sample Protocol
Homogenisation and protein digestion. Engorged L. deliense mites (n=10) were washed with chilled 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Soluble protein extracts were prepared by homgenisation in 0.1% w/v, Rapigest (Waters) in 50mM ammonium bicararbonate using a mini-pestle and microcentrifuge tube. This was followed by 3 cycles of sonication on ice (Vibra-cell 130PB sonicator, 20Hz, with microprobe, 10 seconds sonication alternating with 30 seconds incubation on ice). Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was removed and retained. One D. tinctorium mite was homogenised using a mini-pestle and microcentrifuge tube in lysis buffer (4% SDS, Tris-HCL pH 7.6) and sonicated as above. The sample was centrifuged as above and the supernatant retained. Samples were stored at -80°C until used. Protein concentrations of the samples were determined using a Bradford protein assay (Thermo). L. deliense proteins were reduced with 3 mM DTT (Sigma) at 60°C for 10 min, cooled, then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) at RT for 30 min in the dark; all steps were performed with intermittent vortex-mixing. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1 and incubated at 37°C overnight. Rapigest was removed by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% (v/v). Peptide samples were centrifuged at 13,000 x g for 30 min to remove precipitated Rapigest.  D. tinctorium proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) approach (5).  D. tinctorium peptides were split into 6 fractions using the Pierce™ high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit according the manufacturer’s instructions. Each digest and fraction was concentrated and desalted using C18 Stage tips (Thermo scientific), then dried down using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and resuspended in a 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile solution.  NanoLC MS ESI MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analysed by on-line nanoflow LC using the Ultimate 3000 nano system (Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 2 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å) at 9μl /min with an aqueous solution containing 0.1 %( v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile. After 3 min, the trap column was set in-line an analytical column (Easy-Spray PepMap® RSLC 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Dionex).  The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C and the LC system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatography was performed with a buffer system consisting of 0.1 % formic acid (buffer A) and 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50 % buffer B over 90 minutes (D. tinctorium and L. deliense whole digests) or 30 minutes (L. deliense fractions) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Scan range was 300 to 2000m/z. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2 to +5 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 50ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E4 for the MS/MS scans. MS/MS events were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. Repetitive sequencing of peptides was minimized through dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification  Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics.  Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +7. Spectral data were converted into .mgf files with Progenesis LC–MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine as described above. Tandem MS data were searched against a database including translated ORFs from either the D. tinctorium genome (DinoT_V2_aug2016, 19,258 sequences; 8,386,445 residues), and a contaminant database (cRAP, GPMDB, 2012) (119 sequences; 40,423 residues) or the L. delicense genome (L_deliense_V2_Aug16  15,096 sequences; 5,183,596 residues), a rat genome (Uniprot, Apr16 7,948 sequences; 4,022,300 residues) and a contaminant database (cRAP, GPMDB, 2012) (119 sequences; 40,423 residues)The search parameters were as follows: precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set as 0.05Da. Two missed tryptic cleavages were permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as variable modification. Mascot search results were further validated using the machine learning algorithm Percolator embedded within Mascot. The Mascot decoy database function was utilised and the false discovery rate was <1%, while individual percolator ion scores >13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p <0.05).Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as XML files. Fractions were combined using the Progenesis combine analysed fractions workflow. Relative protein abundance was calculated by the Hi-3 default method in Progenesis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scrub typhus, Lc-msms, Trombidid mites, Genome

### Affiliations
Infection Biology
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, UK

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, UK


