### Accession
PXD027846

### Title
Riptortus pedestris saliva LC-MS

### Description
Here, for the first time, we have tried to identify their salivary proteins by proteomic analyses.Saliva of R. pedestris males, females and nymphs was collected and proteins inside were identified. In total, 155, 20 and 11 R. pedestris proteins were, respectively, found in their saliva.The potential functions of the proteins in regulating plant defenses were discussed. The datasets reported here represent an important first step in identifying effectors in R. pedestris.

### Sample Protocol
The bean bug R. pedestris adults were collected in soybean fields, Nanjing, East China, in the summer of 2020. They were reared in tents (30 × 30 × 30 cm) in an incubator (25 °C, LD=16:8 h), where soybean seedlings (3–5 weeks old) and seeds (variety Lindou 10) were provided as food.  R. pedestris saliva was collected in a Petri dish (2 cm × 10 cm) whose open was covered by two layers of Parafilm with 2 ml sterile sucrose solution (2.5 % in water) as food in between (Figure 1). The Parafilm was previously sterilized by 75 % ethanol solution. The sucrose solution was prepared with aseptic water and filtered through a 0.22 μm syringe filter (Millipore, MA, USA) for the removal of microorganisms. Ten individuals (males, females or fourth-instar nymphs) were put in each Petri dish and the collection lasted 24 h. The collection was repeated 30 times. In total, 300 individuals were used. After collections, the sucrose solutions of each Petri dish were combined (about 60 ml) and concentrated by ultrafiltration (3-kDa, Amicon Ultra-4 Centrifugal Filter Tube, Millipore; 5,000 g, 4 °C, 30 min). The proteins were dissolved in 200 μl of SDT buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate; 1 mM DTT and 100 mM Tris-HCl) and then were incubated in warm water for 15 min.  Subsequently, DTT was added into protein samples to a concentration of 100 mM, and then the samples were boiled for 5 min. After ultrafiltration (3-kDa; 14,000 g, 25 °C, 10 min), 100 μl iodoacetamide (IAA) buffer (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was used to dissolve the proteins, and then the samples were incubated at room temperature for 30 min in darkness. After ultrafiltration (3-kDa) again, the samples were washed with 100 μl UA buffer (8 M urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0) twice, and then washed with 100 μl NH4HCO3 buffer (25 mM, Sigma) twice. Finally, the proteins were digested overnight in 4 μg of trypsin (Sigma) in 40 μl NH4HCO3 buffer (25 mM) at 37 °C. The digested peptides were collected by ultrafiltration (3-kDa) and were dissolved in 40μl NH4HCO3 buffer (25 mM). The digested peptides were separated by Thermo Scientific Easy nanoLC 1000 that was equipped with a C18 column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm × 2 cm). Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) including 5% buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) were used as the mobile phase for gradient separation. The sample was uploaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. Subsequently, the column was eluted by a linear gradient of buffer B at a flow rate of 0.25 μl/min (0-50 min, concentration increasing from 0% to 35%; 50-55 min, 35% to 100%; and finally pure buffer B maintained for 5 min). The eluted peptides were analyzed by the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer over the range m/z 300-1800 with a mass resolution of 70000 (at m/z 200). The twenty most intense peaks with charge state ≥ 2 were fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30% (the isolation window was 2 m/z), and tandem mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a mass resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. For all detections, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 60 s. Proteins were identified and annotated by using Mascot 2.2 to search UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) with the restriction to R. pedestris data. The following parameters were used: trypsin was selected as the enzyme; two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 20  ppm mass tolerances for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; oxidation was a variable modification; carbamidomethyl was a static modification.

### Data Protocol
The eluted peptides were analyzed by the Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).Proteins were identified and annotated by using Mascot 2.2 to search UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) with the restriction to R. pedestris data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Riptortus pedestris, Salivary protein

### Affiliations
15720613383
College of plant protection ,Nanjing agricultural university

### Submitter
fu weichuan

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Hao
College of plant protection ,Nanjing agricultural university


