### Accession
PXD002313

### Title
Plasmodium spp. Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase: Diverse subcellular localization and multiple post-translational modifications

### Description
Glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (Gapdh), a glycolytic enzyme is known to be associated with multiple non-glycolytic functions. To examine the possibility of Plasmodium spp Gapdh having moonlighting functions, PfGapdh was cloned, overexpressed, purified to homogeneity and characterized. Polyclonal antibodies were raised in mice and used for immuno detection. Western analysis of P. yoelii whole cell extract, soluble and particulate fractions showed three major species with molecular mass ~27, 37 and 51 kDa. All three forms were equally abundant in the soluble fraction. Particulate fraction that accounted for ~10-15% of total PyGapdh did not show ~51 kDa form. Immunological evidence suggests~51 kDa form to arise by ubiquitination of native 37kDa form. For determining subcellular distribution, P. yoelii cells were subjected to differential detergent fractionation and analyzed using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Various subcellular fractions showed multiple species of Gapdh, indicating multiple post-translational modifications. For the determination of the nature of PTMs and residues modified, ‘Top-Down’ and ‘Bottom-Up’ approaches were used. Spots in a 2D gel that showed high intensity in western were excised and analyzed for identification of protein as well as PTMs. For more comprehensive analysis of PTM, P. yoelii whole cell extract was run on a 1D gel and bands that showed reactivity in western were cut out and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. In all, eleven residues were identified that underwent modifications. Modifications consisted of four phosphorylations, five ubiquitinations, two acetylations, two methylations and one nitrosylation. Physiological relevance of these modifications is not yet understood

### Sample Protocol
P. yoelii were prepared by lysing infected RBCs using 0.05% saponin for the release of the intra-cellular parasites. The parasite pellet was lysed using lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 3 mM EDTA, 1mM PMSF, 1mg/ml lysozyme and 1X protease inhibitor cocktail) followed by freeze-thaw cycles in liquid nitrogen. This whole cell lysate was centrifuged at 40,000g and the supernatant was used as the ‘soluble fraction’. These were resolved on a 12% SDS PAGE. For bottom-up analysis the protein bands that showed reactivity to anti-PfGAPDH antibody were cut out and subjected to trypsin digestion as described earlier (Shevade S et. al. Plos One 2013, Shevchenko A et. al. PNAS 1996, Gharahdaghi F et. al. Electrophoresis 1999). For the fractionation of various subcellular organelle sub-proteomes, differential detergent fractionation (DDF) method was used (Ramsby ML et. al. Methods Mol Bio 2009, Pal-Bhowmick I et. al. Malaria J 2007). Details of the protocol followed are described in (Pal-Bhowmick et. al. Malaria J 2007).  Organeller sub-proteome from each solubilized fraction was precipitated by the addition of cold 10% trichloroaceticacid (TCA) in acetone (w/v). The precipitate was separated by centrifugation. For the removal of TCA, pellet was suspended in cold acetone and centrifuged. Supernatant was discarded. This was repeated multiple times (5-6 times). Final pellet was dissolved in 125 l of 2-D rehydration buffer (2% CHAPS, 7M urea, 2M thiourea, 50 mM DTT) containing 0.2% IPG buffer and 0.002% bromophenol blue. IPG strips (pH 3-10; size 7 cm, Bio Rad) were passively rehydrated for 12–14 hrs. IEF was then performed at 20 ºC at a maximum 50 μA/strip using the gradient voltage program to reach a total of 15,000-20,000 V-h. Following IEF, the IPG strips were subjected to reduction and alkylation by treating the strips sequentially in equilibration buffer (6M urea, 2% SDS, 375 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 20% glycerol) containing 2% DTT and 2.5% iodoacetamide, respectively, for 20 min each. For the second dimension separation, IPG strips were transferred to 12% SDS polyacrylamide gels mounted in Mini-protean tetra system (Bio-Rad). All gels were run in duplicates, of which one was silver stained (Shevchenko A et. al Anal Chem 1996) and the other was blotted on a PVDF membrane and probed with anti-rPfGapdh antibodies. Various molecular species of PyGapdh that were observed on the blot, corresponding spots from silver stained gel were excised and in-gel trypsin digestion was performed as described earlier (Shevade S et. al. Plos One 2013, Shevchenko A et. al. PNAS 1996, Gharahdaghi F et. al. Electrophoresis 1999). Peptides extracted from trypsin treated samples were analyzed by LC-ESI/MS/MS using an Agilent 6520-QTOF. Details for mass spectrometric analysis have been described earlier (Shevade S et. al. Plos One 2013). Typically, peptides extracted from digest were re-suspended in 3 μL 0.1% formic acid (Solvent A) of which 2.8 μL was injected at a rate of 40 μL/min. After the sample injection, the column was washed for 3 min with 3-12% Solvent B (90% ACN in 0.1% FA), and peptides were eluted for 3-23 min with 12-60%, 23-27 min with 60-95%. Active exclusion was set-on for 0.5 min after 2 MS/MS spectra of a parent ion. The m/z range scanned was 100-1700. MS scan rate = 5 and MS/MS scan rate = 3 per sec. For each MS, five most abundant precursor ions were sequenced.

### Data Protocol
From all MS data files, Mascot generic files (.mgf) were extracted using Agilent Mass hunter qualitative analysis software (Perkins DN et. al. Electrophoresis 2009). The peak lists (i.e. all mgf data) was searched using a Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.3.0) against the NCBInr (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/) and Swiss-port (http://www.isb-sib.ch/) databases where ‘Alveolata’ was selected for taxonomy. The parameters for the search were - carbamidomethyl (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, phospho (serine/threonine), phospho (tyrosine), acetyl (lysine), nitrosylation on cysteine and glygly (lysine) were set as variable modifications. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and MS/MS mass tolerance to 0.6 Da. Charge states of peptides were set to 2+, 3+ and 4+.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium spp.; glyceraldehyde 3-phopshate dehydrogenase; subcellular localization; post-translational modification; moonlighting functions; mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai

### Submitter
Nitin Jindal

### Lab Head
Dr Gotam K Jarori
Tata Institute of Fundamental Research, Mumbai


