### Accession
PXD001483

### Title
Bacillus cereus proteomics (Intraproteome)

### Description
This project contributes to the intraproteomic comparison of Bacillus cereus wild-type and Bacillus cereus mutant devoided of the EntD protein grown in aerobiosis condition and harvested at the early exponential growth stage.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA, spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Bacillus cereus is a Gram-positive pathogen that causes a wide variety of diseases in humans. It secretes into the extracellular milieu proteins that may contribute directly or indirectly to its virulence. EntD is a novel exoprotein identified by proteogenomics of B. cereus ATCC 14579. We constructed a &#x394;entD mutant and analyzed the impact of entD disruption on the cellular proteome and exoproteome isolated from early, late, and stationary-phase cultures. We identified 308 and 79 proteins regulated by EntD in the cellular proteome and the exoproteome, respectively. The contribution of these proteins to important virulence-associated functions, including central metabolism, cell structure, antioxidative ability, cell motility, and toxin production, are presented. The proteomic data were correlated with the growth defect, cell morphology change, reduced motility, and reduced cytotoxicity of the &#x394;entD mutant strain. We conclude that EntD is an important player in B. cereus virulence. The function of EntD and the putative EntD-dependent regulatory network are discussed. To our knowledge, this study is the first characterization of an Ent family protein in a species of the B. cereus group.

### Keywords
Toxin, Shotgun proteomics, Intraproteome

### Affiliations
Li2D
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA-Marcoule, DSV-iBEB-SBTN-LBSP, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


