### Accession
PXD028505

### Title
A SISCAPA-based approach for detection of SARS-CoV-2 viral antigens from clinical samples.

### Description
SARS-CoV-2 has created a global disease burden infecting >100 million humans in just over a year. In this study, we adopted a SISCAPA-based enrichment approach using anti-peptide antibodies generated against peptides from the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2. We developed a targeted workflow in which nasopharyngeal samples were digested followed by enrichment of viral peptides using the anti-peptide antibodies and targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis using a high-resolution mass spectrometer. This workflow was applied to 41 RT-PCR-confirmed clinical nasopharyngeal swab samples and 30 negative samples. The SISCAPA-based platform described in the current study can serve as one of the alternative methods for SARS-CoV-2 viral detection.

### Sample Protocol
Nasopharyngeal swab samples from COVID positive and COVID-19 negative patients were collected.  750 µl of each nasopharyngeal swab samples were collected in a 96-well plate. Viral inactivation and reduction of proteins was done by addition of 15 µl of 1 M dithiothreitol and 15 µl of 0.1% ZWITTERGENT 3-16 Detergent and incubating at 70 ℃ for 30 minutes. Alkylation was done using 45 µl of 1 M iodoacetamide, vortexed and incubated in dark for 30 minutes. Finally, 250 µl of 1 M Tris hydrochloride solution (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), pH 8.0 buffer was added and digested using 2.5 µg of Worthington TPCK treated trypsin. The digested peptides were then subjected to SISCAPA immunoprecipitation using anti-peptide polyclonal antibodies against three peptides- ITFGGPSDSTGSNNQNGER, DGIIWVATEGALNTPK and NPANNAAIVLQLPQGTTLPK by using automatic liquid handler. The eluate was then dried, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and subjected to targeted analysis using parallel reaction monitoring.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed using Skyline. The peaks were manually verified for correct detection of the peak, exact integration and lacking the interferences. The total peak area was calculated by summing all the selected transitions. The coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated by dividing standard deviation with mean and expressed as a percentage.

### Publication Abstract
SARS-CoV-2, a novel human coronavirus, has created a global disease burden infecting&#x2009;&gt;&#x2009;100 million humans in just over a year. RT-PCR is currently the predominant method of diagnosing this viral infection although a variety of tests to detect viral antigens have also been developed. In this study, we adopted a SISCAPA-based enrichment approach using anti-peptide antibodies generated against peptides from the nucleocapsid protein of SARS-CoV-2. We developed a targeted workflow in which nasopharyngeal swab samples were digested followed by enrichment of viral peptides using the anti-peptide antibodies and targeted parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis using a high-resolution mass spectrometer. This workflow was applied to 41 RT-PCR-confirmed clinical SARS-CoV-2 positive nasopharyngeal swab samples and 30 negative samples. The workflow employed was highly specific as none of the target peptides were detected in negative samples. Further, the detected peptides showed a positive correlation with the viral loads as measured by RT-PCR Ct values. The SISCAPA-based platform described in the current study can serve as an alternative method for SARS-CoV-2 viral detection and can also be applied for detecting other microbial pathogens directly from clinical samples.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Parallel reaction monitoring (prm), Siscapa, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology & Center for Individualized Medicine Mayo Clinic Rochester MN 55905, USA


