### Accession
PXD009317

### Title
De novo mutations of MSL3 cause a novel X-linked syndrome due to impaired histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation

### Description
Epigenetic regulation by histone acetylation plays a key role in cellular homeostasis and its misregulation is associated with human disease. Histone 4 Lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac) serves a unique role amongst the many histone modifications as it directly affects chromatin structure1. The Male Specific Lethal (MSL) complex associated MOF/KAT8 histone acetyl transferase is responsible for bulk H4K16ac in flies and mammals. Yet, its importance during human development and a potential involvement in human pathologies remains largely unknown. Here, we uncover that pathogenic variants in MSL3, a component of the MSL complex, are causative for a new recognizable X-linked syndrome affecting Histone 4 Lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac) in both male and female individuals. Common clinical features of the syndrome include global developmental delay comprising profound speech delay, delayed ability to walk and craniofacial dysmorphism. Using patient-derived primary fibroblasts, we demonstrate that de novo variants or deletions of MSL3 affect the assembly and enzymatic activity of the MSL complex, hence impacting on global H4K16ac levels. Transcriptome analysis from patient cells showed misregulation of cellular pathways involved in serotonergic signaling, morphogenesis, axon guidance and cell structure. Finally, using HDAC inhibitor treatment, we can rescue expression of downregulated target genes, offering potential therapeutic avenues for MSL3-mutated patients. Taken together, we characterize a novel syndrome, named ILyADe (Impaired Lysine 16 acetylation associated disorder), which is caused by mutations of an epigenetic regulator, allowing us for the first time to unravel the crucial role of H4K16ac during human development. ILyaDe thus constitutes a new class of syndromes associated with misregulation of a single epigenetic modification caused by a genetic alteration.

### Sample Protocol
After histone extraction and purification, proteins were separated on a 16 % Tris-Glycine gels (Novex™) and stained with colloidal coomassie. Gel bands containing histone proteins were cut out and subjected to in-gel propionylation. In brief, after destaining, reduction and in gel alkylation, histones were propionylated in a 79:1 mixture of isopropanol and propionic anhydride (Sigma #240311) for a total of 2 h. Gel pieces were washed with MiliQ water, dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge and rehydrated in hydroxylamine which was followed by incubation with ammonium hydroxide solution to reestablish a neutral pH. After further washes with ammonium bicarbonate based buffer and acetonitrile, gel pieces were dehydrated again in a SpeedVac centrifuge. Subsequent tryptic digestion was performed essentially as described by hevchenko, A. et al. (2006), . Recovered peptides were desalted on STAGE tips according to Rappsilber et al.   Bottom-up analysis of histone peptides: Digested and desalted peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using nanoflow HPLC (Easy nLC1200, Thermo Scientific) coupled with QExactive hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm long, 75 m wide analytical column filled in-house with 1.9 um C18 beads (Reprosil C18, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. Analytical column was then equilibrated for 5 minutes (5 % buffer A) which was followed by a 60 minutes long peptide elution at flow rate of 300 nl/min with an linearly increasing concentration of organic solvent (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). QExactive was operated in positive mode, employing data-dependent acquisition of fragmentation spectra of multiple-charged peptides for their identification. Each instrument cycle consisted of full MS scan at a resolution of 70,000 at 400 m/z (AGC target 3E6, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by up to 10 data-dependent MS2 spectra at a resolution of 35,000 (AGC target 2E5, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z). Dynamic exclusion of analyzed ions was set up to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16) was used for raw file peak extraction and protein identification. Integrated Andromeda database search engine used Mouse UniprotKB protein sequence database (83,962 entries) modified by addition of common protein contaminant sequences. Search parameters for peptides included trypsin as cleaving enzyme with a maximum of 4 miscleavages, minimum 6 amino acids per peptide, 20 ppm MS peptide mass tolerance and 0.5 Da MS/MS tolerance, carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine, acetylation at N-terminal of proteins, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine, lysine acetylation, trimethylation, propionylation and propionyl-methylation and methylation of lysine or arginine  were set as variable modification. Peptide and protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 using a decoy database. Additionally, “match between runs” was used with matching time window of 1 min and alignment time window of 20 minutes.  Data analysis and visualization - List of ratios of modified lysine or arginine sites derived from MaxQuant (“…sites.txt”) was imported to Perseus. Data matrix was modified by applying “Expand site table” step, removing empty rows, as well as contaminants and entries coming from decoy database. Further data transformation was performed in R (R version 3.4.3 (2017-11-30) (6.)). All site intensities were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracting the mean of the whole sample from the particular histone site intensities (7.).  Moderated t-test was used to test for significant differences between control and patient samples. Differences with the qvalue < 0.05 (Benjamini-Hochberg correction) were taken as significant. Data were visualized with the use of ggplot2 package.

### Publication Abstract
The etiological spectrum of ultra-rare developmental disorders remains to be fully defined. Chromatin regulatory mechanisms maintain cellular identity and function, where misregulation may lead to developmental defects. Here, we report pathogenic variations in MSL3, which encodes a member of the chromatin-associated male-specific lethal (MSL) complex responsible for bulk histone H4 lysine 16 acetylation (H4K16ac) in flies and mammals. These variants cause an X-linked syndrome affecting both sexes. Clinical features of the syndrome include global developmental delay, progressive gait disturbance, and recognizable facial dysmorphism. MSL3 mutations affect MSL complex assembly and activity, accompanied by a pronounced loss of H4K16ac levels in vivo. Patient-derived cells display global transcriptome alterations of pathways involved in morphogenesis and cell migration. Finally, we use histone deacetylase inhibitors to rebalance acetylation levels, alleviating some of the molecular and cellular phenotypes of patient cells. Taken together, we characterize a syndrome that allowed us to decipher the developmental importance of MSL3 in humans.

### Keywords
Histone h4, X-linked syndrome, Msl3, Acetylation, Lysine 16

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Witold Szymanski

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics Freiburg, Germany


