### Accession
PXD038639

### Title
Conservation of the PBL-RBOH immune module in land plants

### Description
The rapid production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a key signaling output in plant immunity. In the angiosperm model species, Arabidopsis thaliana (hereafter Arabidopsis), recognition of non- or altered-self elicitor patterns by cell-surface immune receptors activates the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases (RLCKs) of the AVRPPHB SUSCEPTIBLE 1 (PBS1)-like (PBL) family, particularly BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1)​1–3​. BIK1/PBLs in turn phosphorylate the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG D (RBOHD) to induce apoplastic ROS production​4,5​. PBL and RBOH functions in plant immunity have been extensively characterized in flowering plants. Much less is known about the conservation of pattern-triggered ROS signaling pathways in non-flowering plants. In this study, we show that, in the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha (hereafter Marchantia), single members of RBOH and PBL families, namely MpRBOH1 and MpPBLa, are required for chitin-induced ROS production. MpPBLa directly interacts with and phosphorylates MpRBOH1 at specific, conserved sites within its cytosolic N-terminus and this phosphorylation is essential for chitin-induced MpRBOH1-mediated ROS production. Collectively, our work reveals the functional conservation of the PBL-RBOH module that controls pattern-triggered ROS production in land plants.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 1 µg of kinase and was incubated with approximately 2 µg of substrate protein in kinase buffer (25 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.4, 5 mM MnCl2, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT). Five micromolar of ATP plus 0.5 µCi 32P-γ-ATP in a final reaction volume of 30 µL were added to the tube to initiate the reaction. Reactions were incubated at RT for 30 min and terminated by addition of SDS-loading dye following by heating at 70 °C for 10 min. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE, transferred to PVDF membrane, and stained with Coomassie brilliant blue G-250. Autoradiographs were imaged using an Amersham Typhoon phosphorimager (GE Healthcare).

### Data Protocol
Peak lists in the form of Mascot generic files were prepared from raw data files using MS Convert (Proteowizard) and sent to a peptide search on Mascot server v.2.8.0 using Mascot Daemon (Matrix Science) against an in-house constructs and contaminants database and the E. coli K12 protein database. Tryptic peptides with up to one possible mis-cleavage and charge states +2 and +3 were allowed in the search. The following peptide modifications were included in the search: carbamidomethylated cysteine (fixed), oxidized methionine (variable) and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine (variable). Data were searched with a monoisotopic precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively. Decoy database was used to validate peptide sequence matches. Mascot results were combined in Scaffold v.5.0.0 (Proteome Software) and filtered to show only phospho-peptides. Peptide and protein identifications were accepted if peptide probability and protein threshold was ≥80.0% and 95% respectively. Phospho-site specificity was then confirmed by eye. Data were then exported to Excel (Microsoft) for further processing. For each phospho-peptide, spectral counts from all biological replicates were summed. Spectral counts from mis-cleaved peptides identifying the same phosphorylation site were then summed to give final spectral counts for each site.

### Publication Abstract
The rapid production of reactive oxygen species (ROS) is a key signaling output in plant immunity. In the angiosperm model species Arabidopsis thaliana (hereafter Arabidopsis), recognition of non- or altered-self elicitor patterns by cell-surface immune receptors activates the receptor-like cytoplasmic kinases (RLCKs) of the AVRPPHB SUSCEPTIBLE 1 (PBS1)-like (PBL) family, particularly BOTRYTIS-INDUCED KINASE1 (BIK1).<sup>1</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>2</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>3</sup> BIK1/PBLs in turn phosphorylate the nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) oxidase RESPIRATORY BURST OXIDASE HOMOLOG D (RBOHD) to induce apoplastic ROS production.<sup>4</sup><sup>,</sup><sup>5</sup> PBL and RBOH functions in plant immunity have been extensively characterized in flowering plants. Much less is known about the conservation of pattern-triggered ROS signaling pathways in non-flowering plants. In this study, we show that in the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha (hereafter Marchantia), single members of the RBOH and PBL families, namely MpRBOH1 and MpPBLa, are required for chitin-induced ROS production. MpPBLa directly interacts with and phosphorylates MpRBOH1 at specific, conserved sites within its cytosolic N terminus, and this phosphorylation is essential for chitin-induced MpRBOH1-mediated ROS production. Collectively, our work reveals the functional conservation of the PBL-RBOH module that controls pattern-triggered ROS production in land plants.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Kinase, Oxidative burst, Marchantia

### Affiliations
the Sainsbury laboratory
The Sainsbury Laboratory

### Submitter
FRank Menke

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Menke
The Sainsbury Laboratory


