### Accession
PXD019621

### Title
Magnitude of ubiquitination determines the fate of activated epidermal growth factor receptor and downstream cellular effects

### Description
Receptor tyrosine kinases (RTK) bind growth factors and are critical for cell proliferation and differentiation. Their dysregulation leads to a loss of growth control, often resulting in cancer. Epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) is the prototypic RTK and can bind several ligands exhibiting distinct mitogenic potentials. Whereas the phosphorylation on individual EGFR sites and their roles for downstream signaling have been extensively studied, less is known about ligand-specific ubiquitination events on EGFR, which are crucial for signal attenuation and termination. We used a proteomics-based workflow for absolute quantitation combined with mathematical modelling to unveil potentially decisive ubiquitination events on EGFR from the first 30 seconds to 15 minutes of stimulation. Four ligands were used for stimulation: epidermal growth factor (EGF), heparin-binding-EGF like growth factor, transforming growth factor- and epiregulin. Whereas only little differences in the kinetic profiles of individual ubiquitination sites were observed, the overall amount of modified receptor differed depending on the used ligand, indicating that absolute magnitude of EGFR ubiquitination, and not distinctly regulated ubiquitination sites, is a major determinant for signal attenuation and the subsequent cellular outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
IPs' Beads were incubated in SDS sample buffer for 10 min at 90°C, proteins eluted and resolved on Novex 4–12% Bis-TRIS gradient gels using the MES buffer system (Invitrogen) followed by staining of the gel (Colloidal Blue Staining Kit, Invitrogen). The region of the gel containing unmodified and modified EGFR was excised and proteins were subjected to in-gel digestion using chloroacetamide for alkylation instead of iodoacetamide and a mix of LysC enzyme (12.5 ng/µl) and Trypsin (12.5 ng/µl). The master-mix of synthetic peptides (containing 1 pmol of each synthetic peptide) was spiked into samples prior to the extraction step of the in-gel digestion procedure. The extracted peptide mixtures were concentrated and desalted using STAGE tips. Prior to MS analysis samples were dissolved in a solvent of 0.1% TFA containing 0.01% H2O2 and injected into 24 cm a fused silica column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in-house with C18 resin (3µm beads, Reprosil, Dr. Maisch GmbH) for reverse-phase chromatography using an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was connected on-line to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.5 % acetic acid) and eluted by applying a 120 min gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid). The Q Exactive mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with a capillary temperature of 275°C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 70`000 with automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 1e6 for a scan range of 300-1750 m/z and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 120 ms. A data-dependent method was used for acquisition: the top 12 most intense ions were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collisional energy (NCE) of 25 eV. Precursor ions with charge states 1, 8 and higher were excluded from selection. MS/MS scans were performed with a resolution of 35`000, maximum IT of 124 ms and an ion target value of 5e5, scan range of 200 to 2000 m/z, 1.2 m/z isolation window. Repeat sequencing of peptides was prevented by setting the dynamic exclusion window to 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
A single peak-list was generated from raw files using DTA supercharge v.2.0 (37) and searched against a database containing protein sequences of human EGFR, UBQ, ERBB2, ERBB4. Search parameters were following: precursor mass tolerance of 7 ppm and 0.6 Da tolerance for fragments; trypsin enzyme specificity; maximum 2 missed cleavages; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M), phosphorylation (STY), GlyGly (K), and the SILAC related: Label:13C(6) (R6), Label:13C(6)15N(4) (R10), Label:2H(4) (K4), Label:13C(6)15N(2) (K8), GlyGly (K4), GlyGly (K8). MSQuant software was used for quantitation and manual validation of peptides’ ratios

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Signaling, Aqua, Egf, Tgf, Proteomics, Rtk, Mathematical modelling, Epiregulin, Mass spectrometry, Egfr

### Affiliations
Center for Experimental BioInformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Vyacheslav Akimov

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Center for Experimental BioInformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark


