### Accession
PXD033732

### Title
Anastellin impacts on the processing of extracellular matrix and stimulates the release of cytokines from smooth muscle cells

### Description
Anastellin, a recombinant protein fragment from the first type III module of fibronectin, mimics a partially-unfolded intermediate with exposed cryptic protein-protein interaction sites implicated in assembly of fibronectin fibrils. Anastellin initiates in vitro fibrillation of fibronectin, yielding “superfibronectin”, a polymer with enhanced cell-adhesive properties. This ability is absent in an anastellin double mutant, L37AY40A. Here we demonstrate that both wild-type and L37AY40A anastellin affects fibronectin processing within the ECM of smooth muscle cells. FN fibrils are diminished in the ECM from cells treated with anastellin, but are partially rescued by supplementation with plasma fibronectin in cell media. Proteomics analysis reveals that anastellin also impacts on the processing of other ECM proteins, with increased collagen and decreased laminin detected in media from cells exposed to wild-type anastellin.

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants (300 μL) containing conditioned media from cells exposed +/- 30 μM AN (wt or L37AY40A AN) for 24 h in basal media as described above were loaded on 1 mL HisTrap columns (Cytiva life science) equilibrated in 25 mM HEPES-NaOH pH 7, 500 mM NaCl, 0.25 mM EDTA, 0.25 mM EGTA, 20% v/v glycerol, 5 mM β mercaptoethanol to remove AN. The flow-through was concentrated to 300 μL and mixed with 200 μL 8 M urea (dissolved in 0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5) in a spin filter (10,000 kD MWCO, Vivacon 500, Sartorius), then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 25 min at 20 °C. 400 μL 8 M urea in Tris buffer containing 50 mM DTT was added and incubated at 20 °C for 30 min. The filter was again centrifuged (14,000 g for 25 min at 20 °C), added 400 μL 8 M urea in Tris buffer containing 50 mM iodoacetamide, and incubated for another 30 min at 20 °C in the dark. Samples were centrifuged as above and added 400 μL 1.6 M urea in 0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0). After repeating this centrifugation step samples were added 100 μL 1.6 M urea in 0.1 M Tris (pH 8.0) and 1 μL trypsin (0.1 μg/μL) followed by incubation overnight at room temperature. Released peptides were pooled from the flow-through after centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min and the flow-through from a subsequent wash of the spin filter with 50 μL 0.5 M NaCl. Samples were subjected to stage-tip solid-phase extraction on C18 discs as described previously and subsequently analyzed on a Bruker TIMS TOF PRO mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) in the positive ion mode with a Captivespray ion source on-line connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSnano chromatography systems (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora column (C18 1.6 uM, 25 cm, 75 µm ID; Ion optics) at 60 °C with a solvent gradient over 42 min, using acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 600 nL min-1. The mass spectrometer was operated in DIA PASEF mode with 0.53 sec cycle time and TIMS ramp time of 100 ms. MS scan range was set to 100–1700 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed using DIA-NN with a spectral library generated in-silico from the human UniProt reference proteome (UP000000558) using the following parameters: trypsin with 1 missed cleavage, maximum number of variable modifications (methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation), cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed modification), MS1 accuracy +/- 10 ppm, precursor false discovery rate (FDR) 1 %. Post-processing and statistical analysis on triplicate samples of culture supernatants was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
Anastellin, a recombinant protein fragment from the first type III module of fibronectin, mimics a partially unfolded intermediate implicated in the assembly of fibronectin fibrils. Anastellin influences the structure of fibronectin and initiates in vitro fibrillation, yielding "superfibronectin", a polymer with enhanced cell-adhesive properties. This ability is absent in an anastellin double mutant, L37AY40A. Here we demonstrate that both wild-type and L37AY40A anastellin affect fibronectin processing within the extracellular matrix (ECM) of smooth muscle cells. Fibronectin fibrils are diminished in the ECM from cells treated with anastellin, but are partially rescued by supplementation with plasma fibronectin in cell media. Proteomic analyses reveal that anastellin also impacts on the processing of other ECM proteins, with increased collagen and decreased laminin detected in media from cells exposed to wild-type anastellin. Moreover, both anastellin forms stimulate release of inflammatory cytokines, including interleukin 6. At the molecular level, L37AY40A does not exhibit major perturbations of structural features relative to wild-type anastellin, though the mutant showed differences in heparin binding characteristics. These findings indicate that wild-type and L37AY40A anastellin share similar molecular features but elicit slightly different, but partially overlapping, responses in smooth muscle cells resulting in altered secretion of cytokines and proteins involved in ECM processing.

### Keywords
Anastellin, Extracellular matrix, Smooth muscle cells, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
1Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Per Hägglund

### Lab Head
Dr Per Hägglund
1Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark


