### Accession
PXD002583

### Title
Comprehensive computational identification and characterization of conserved small ORFs in animals

### Description
There is increasing evidence that transcripts or transcript regions annotated as non-coding can harbor functional short open reading frames (sORFs). Loss-of-function experiments have identified essential developmental or physiological roles for a few of the encoded peptides (micropeptides), but genome-wide experimental or computational identification of functional sORFs remains challenging. In this project we expand our previously developed method and present results of an integrated computational pipeline for the identification of conserved sORFs in human, mouse, zebrafish, fruit fly and the nematode C. elegans.  This dataset represents the peaklist of identified novel and annotated mouse micropeptides by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
C2C12 cells were cultivated in SILAC DMEM (PAA), supplemented with 10% dFCs (Sigma), 1 % Penicillin/Streptomycin (Gibco 15140), L-Glutaminine (200 mM; 1:3000), L-arginine (84 mg/ml; 1:3000) and L-Lysine (146 mg/ml; 1:3000) at 37°C, 5 % CO2. For differentiation of the cells medium was changed to DMEM (4.5 g/l) containing 2 % dHorse Serum (P/S; Gibco), 1 % P/S, 4 mM Glut, L-Arg and L-Lys, when cells were 90 % confluent. Undifferentiated cells, cells undergoing differentiation (0, 10, 30, 100) and differentiated cells (150 h) were collected. Supernatant from whole cell lysate (6 M urea/2M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) was reduced for 30 min at room temperature in 10 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated for 20 min in 55 mM iodacetamide in the dark. Proteins were digested with LysC (Wako, protein:enzyme ratio 50:1) for 4 hours. Peptide solutions were subsequently diluted four times with ammonium bi-carbonate in water (pH 8.0) and further digested with trypsin overnight (protein:enzyme ratio 50:1; sequence grade modified trypsin, Promega). The reaction was quenched, by acidifying the solution to a pH < 2 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were further fractionated into 6 fractions for each sample using SAX fractionation (pH 8, pH6, pH 5, pH 4, pH 3 and flow through) and acidified with 10 % TFA to a pH < 2. After desalting peptides using StageTips (1), peptides were detected using reverse-phase liquid chromatography (Easy-nLC II, Thermo-Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. Flow rate was set to 250 nl/min using a 10 to 60 % acetonitrile gradient over 4 h in 0.5 % acetic acid. The Q-Exactive was operated in data dependent mode (DDA) with 1 Full Scan (300-1700 m/z; 106 AGC target; 120 ms maximal injection time) at a resolution of 70 000 followed by 10 MS/MS scans at 17 500 resolution (5x105 AGC target; 80 ms maximal injection time; monoisotopic precursor selection enabled; isolation window set to 2 m/z). Singly charged ions and with unassigned charge state were rejected and ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s.  1. Rappsilber, J., Ishihama, Y. & Mann, M. Stop and go extraction tips for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization, nanoelectrospray, and LC/MS sample pretreatment in proteomics. Anal Chem 75, 663–670 (2003).

### Data Protocol
Data was processed by MaxQuant 1.4.1.2 program with the following parameters: cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and protein N-Acetylation as variable modifications and Lys8 Arg10, Lys4 Arg6 as special amino acids. Custom database containing micropeptide candidates together with protein sequences from UniProt was used for identification at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Micropeptides, Sorfs, Functional small open reading frames

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin-Buch

### Submitter
Henrik Zauber

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
MDC Berlin-Buch


