### Accession
PXD039152

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of Extracellular vesicles derived from naive HUVEc cells or ZIKV-infected HUVEc cells

### Description
In this project, we aimed to explore the role of extracellular vesicles (EVs) in Zika virus (ZIKV) infection. We preferred antibody capture to ltracentrifugation for exosome isolation. The EVs derived from naive HUVEc cells or ZIKV-infected HUVEc cells were harvested and analyzed by mass spectrometry. The protein profile data understand the relationship between the ZIKV and EVs.

### Sample Protocol
For EVs isolation, EVs derived from na?ve cells or viral infected cells were first isolated via ultracentrifugation and further purification by immune-capture. Briefly, cells (HUVEc) grown to 80% confluence in 150 mm dish were infected with ZIKV. 4 hours post infection, unbound viruses were removed, and fresh medium with 2% EV-depleted FBS was added for further incubation. 3 days later, EV-containing culture supernatant (total 240 ml) was harvested and spun at 700 ×g for 10 min at 4°C to remove cells (Sorvall ST16R, Thermo Fisher), and centrifuged at 2000 ×g for 20 min at 4°C to remove debris and apoptotic bodies (Sorvall ST16R, Thermo Fisher). Next, the supernatant was spun at 10,000 ×g for 60 min at 4°C to deplete the large extracellular vesicles (5811, Eppendorf AG). Then, the supernatant was concentrated (Ultracel?-100K, Merck Millipore), transferred into ultracentrifuge tubes (330901A, HITACHI) and centrifuged at 100000 ×g for 2 hours at 4°C (CP80WX, HITACHI). The resulting EV pellets were resuspended in 600?l cold PBS. Furthermore, the beads coating with anti-Human CD9 antibody were incubated with EVs in rotating tubes overnight at 4°C. After washing six times with 2ml PBST, captured EVs were eluted with 200?l CD9 large extracellular loop (dissolved in PBS) for 1h on ice. Finally, the solution that removed beads was used for mass spectrometry.  For Mass spectrometry and data analysis, the samples (na?ve and ZIKV infected cells derived EVs) were lysed with Urea (8M) for 30min on ice, after spun for 20min at 12000×g followed by concentrated by ultrafiltration(3KD, Merck Millipore), protein concentrations were measured by BCA assay kit(Thermo Fisher Scientific), The solution contained 13?g of protein was reduced with 10 mM [tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine] (TCEP) at 37°C for 60 min followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in the dark at room temperature for 20 min. After precipitated with cold acetone, pellet was resuspended with 100 m Mtriethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer. Then, Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (w:w) and digestion at 37°C overnight. After lyophilized and desalted, Peptides from each replicate were analyzed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with an Easy nLC-1200 (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was loaded onto the C18-reversed phase column (75 μm × 25 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States) having two solvent systems consisted of water containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent [A]) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent [B]) for 160 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The full scan MS spectra ranged from 350 to 1300 m/z at a resolution of 70,000.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were screened by Proteome DiscovererTM 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Homo sapiens, The highest score for a given peptide mass (best match to that predicted in the database) was used to identify parent proteins. The raw file is submitted to the Proteome Discoverer 2.1 server when searching the database (uniprot-proteome-UP000005640-Homo sapiens), and involved search parameters included Cys alkylation (Iodoacetamide), dynamic modification (Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-Terminus)), static modification (carbamidomethyl), Enzyme name(trypsin), max missed cleavage sites (2), precursor mass tolorance (10 ppm), Fragment Mass Tolorance (0.05Da).

### Publication Abstract
Mosquito-borne flaviviruses including Zika virus (ZIKV) represent a public health problem in some parts of the world. Although ZIKV infection is predominantly asymptomatic or associated with mild symptoms, it can lead to neurological complications. ZIKV infection can also cause antibody-dependent enhancement (ADE) of infection with similar viruses, warranting further studies of virion assembly and the function of envelope (E) protein-specific antibodies. Although extracellular vesicles (EVs) from flavivirus-infected cells have been reported to transmit infection, this interpretation is challenged by difficulties in separating EVs from flavivirions due to their similar biochemical composition and biophysical properties. In the present study, a rigorous EV-virion separation method combining sequential ultracentrifugation and affinity capture was developed to study EVs from ZIKV-infected cells. We find that these EVs do not transmit infection, but EVs display abundant E proteins which have an antigenic landscape similar to that of virions carrying E. ZIKV E-coated EVs attenuate antibody-dependent enhancement mediated by ZIKV E-specific and DENV-cross-reactive antibodies in both cell culture and mouse models. We thus report&#xa0;an alternative route for Flavivirus E protein secretion. These results suggest that modulation of E protein release via virions and EVs may present a new approach to regulating flavivirus-host interactions.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Mass specctrometry, Zikv infection

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
Fudan university

### Submitter
Fanfan Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Gang Long
Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Virology (MOE/NHC/CAMS), School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.


