### Accession
PXD042497

### Title
SHP-1(FLAG) AP-MS, with/without TAOK3 and/or SRC kinase

### Description
To understand the influence of phosphorylation on the protein-protein interactions, we performed an AP-MS of SHP-1(FLAG) in HEK293T/17 cells co-transfected with TAOK3 and/or SRC kinase. Whilst TAOK3 phosphorylates Thr-394, SRC phosphorylates Tyr536 and Tyr564.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T/17 cells were transfected with SHP-1 (FLAG) and co-transfected with or without TAOK3 and/or SRCY527F. Cell lysates were subjected to M2-FLAG immunoprecipitation as per the previously described method. Co-IP sample beads were loaded onto a single stacking gel band to remove lipids, detergents, and salts. The single gel band containing all proteins was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetic acid, and digested with trypsin. 2 µg of extracted peptides were re-solubilized in 0.1% aqueous formic acid and loaded onto a Thermo Acclaim Pepmap (Thermo, 75uM ID X 2cm C18 3uM beads) pre-column and then onto an Acclaim Pepmap Easyspray (Thermo, 75uM X 15cm with 2uM C18 beads) analytical column separation using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC at 250 nL/min with a gradient of 2-35% organic (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 2 hours.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer operating at 120,000 resolution (FWHM in MS1) with HCD sequencing (15,000 resolution) at top speed for all peptides with a charge of 2+ or greater. The raw data were converted into *.mgf format (Mascot generic format) for searching using the Mascot 2.6.2 search engine (Matrix Science) against Human Uniprot sequences (2022). The database search results were loaded onto Scaffold Q+ Scaffold_4.9.0 (Proteome Sciences) for statistical treatment and initial data visualization. Further analysis was realized with the Prohitz visualization tool. Protein interaction networks and molecular functions were visualized using the GeneMania online tool.

### Publication Abstract
Thousand-and-one-amino acid kinase 3 (TAOK3) is a serine and threonine kinase that belongs to the STE-20 family of kinases. Its absence reduces T cell receptor (TCR) signaling and increases the interaction of the tyrosine phosphatase SHP-1, a major negative regulator of proximal TCR signaling, with the kinase LCK, a component of the core TCR signaling complex. Here, we used mouse models and human cell lines to investigate the mechanism by which TAOK3 limits the interaction of SHP-1 with LCK. The loss of TAOK3 decreased the survival of na&#xef;ve CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells by dampening the transmission of tonic and ligand-dependent TCR signaling. In mouse T cells, Taok3 promoted the secretion of interleukin-2 (IL-2) in response to TCR activation in a manner that depended on <i>Taok3</i> gene dosage and on Taok3 kinase activity. TCR desensitization in <i>Taok3<sup>-/-</sup></i> T cells was caused by an increased abundance of Shp-1, and pharmacological inhibition of Shp-1 rescued the activation potential of these T cells. TAOK3 phosphorylated threonine-394 in the phosphatase domain of SHP-1, which promoted its ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation. The loss of TAOK3 had no effect on the abundance of SHP-2, which lacks a residue corresponding to SHP-1 threonine-394. Modulation of SHP-1 abundance by TAOK3 thus serves as a rheostat for TCR signaling and determines the activation threshold of T lymphocytes.

### Keywords
Shp-1(flag), Phosphorylation, Ap-ms, Src, Taok3, Ppis

### Affiliations
Distinguished James McGill Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec
McGill University

### Submitter
Alexandre Poirier

### Lab Head
Dr Michel L. Tremblay
Distinguished James McGill Professor, Department of Biochemistry, Rosalind and Morris Goodman Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec


