### Accession
PXD038910

### Title
A viral ADP-ribosyltransferase attaches RNA chains to host proteins

### Description
The mechanisms by which viruses hijack their host’s genetic machinery are of current interest. When bacteriophage T4 infects Escherichia coli, three different ARTs (ADP-ribosyltransferases) reprogram the host’s transcriptional and translational apparatus 1,2 through ADP-ribosylation using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as substrate. Recently, NAD was identified as a 5’-modification of cellular RNAs 3-5. Here, we report that the bacteriophage T4 ART ModB accepts not only NAD but also NAD-capped RNA (NAD-RNA) as substrate, linking entire RNA chains to acceptor proteins in an “RNAylation” reaction. We discovered that ModB specifically RNAylates ribosomal proteins rS1 and rL2. By mass spectrometric (MS) analysis we identified arginine residues of rS1 and rL2 as RNAylation sites. Furthermore, we identified specific E. coli and T4 phage RNAs, which are covalently linked to rS1 in vivo. T4 phages expressing an inactive mutant of ModB show a decreased burst size and a decelerated lysis of E. coli during T4 infection. The attachment of specific RNAs to ribosomal proteins might provide a strategy for the phage to modulate the host’s translation machinery. Our findings reveal a distinct biological role of NAD-RNA, namely activation of the RNA for enzymatic transfer. This work exemplifies the first direct connection between RNA modification and post-translational protein modification. As ARTs play important roles far beyond viral infections 6, RNAylation may have far-reaching implications.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis of His-tagged in vitro RNAylated rS1 and rL2 Cleaned-up rS1 and rL2 peptide samples were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were loaded on a Pepmap 300 C18  trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (flow rate, 10 µl/min) in buffer A (0.1% [v/v] FA) and washed for 3 min with buffer A. Peptide separation was performed on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm; ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 1.9 µm, C18-AQ; inner diameter, 75 µm; flow rate: 300 nl/min) by applying a linear gradient of buffer B (80% [v/v] ACN, 0.08% [v/v] FA). The main column was equilibrated with 5% buffer B for 18 s, sample was applied and column was washed for 3 min with 5% buffer B.   A linear gradient from 10-45% buffer B over 44 min was applied to elute peptides, followed by 4.8 min washing at 90% buffer B and 6 min at 5% buffer B. Eluting rS1 and rL2 peptides were analysed for 58 min in positive mode using a data-dependent top 20 acquisition method. MS1 and MS2 resolution were set to 120,000 and 30,000 FWHM, respectively, and AGC targets were set to 106 (MS1) and 105(MS2). MS1 scan range was set to m/z 350-1600. Precursors were fragmented using 28% normalized, higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. Other analysis parameters were set as follows: isolation width, 1.6 m/z; dynamic exclusion, 9 s; max. injection times (MS1/MS2), 60 ms/120 ms.  For all measurements, the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of in vitro RNAylated rS1 and rL2 MS data MS data were analysed and manually validated using the OpenMS pipeline RNPxl and OpenMS TOPPASViewer 56. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm. MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. A neutral loss of 42.021798 Da (C1H2N2) at arginine residues was defined as well as adducts of ribose minus H2O (78.010565 Da; C5H2O), ADPribose (541.06111 Da; C15H21N5O13P2) and ADPribose minus adenine base (485.97295 Da; C10H17O16P3) 57. Results were filtered for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level. Ion chromatograms for rS1 peptides were extracted and visualized using Skyline (v. 21.2.0.369) 58.  56 Kramer, K. et al. Photo-cross-linking and high-resolution mass spectrometry for assignment of RNA-binding sites in RNA-binding proteins. Nat Methods 11, 1064-1070, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3092 (2014). 57 Gehrig, P. M. et al. Gas-Phase Fragmentation of ADP-Ribosylated Peptides: Arginine-Specific Side-Chain Losses and Their Implication in Database Searches. J Am Soc Mass Spectrom 32, 157-168, doi:10.1021/jasms.0c00040 (2021). 58 MacLean, B. et al. Skyline: an open source document editor for creating and analyzing targeted proteomics experiments. Bioinformatics 26, 966-968, doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq054 (2010).

### Publication Abstract
The mechanisms by which viruses hijack the genetic machinery of the cells they infect are of current interest. When bacteriophage T4 infects Escherichia&#x2009;coli, it uses three different adenosine diphosphate (ADP)-ribosyltransferases (ARTs) to reprogram the transcriptional and translational apparatus of the host by ADP-ribosylation using nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD) as a substrate<sup>1,2</sup>. NAD has previously been identified as a 5' modification of cellular RNAs<sup>3-5</sup>. Here we report that the T4 ART ModB accepts not only NAD but also NAD-capped RNA (NAD-RNA) as a substrate and attaches entire RNA chains to acceptor proteins in an 'RNAylation' reaction. ModB specifically RNAylates the ribosomal proteins rS1 and rL2 at defined Arg residues, and selected E.&#x2009;coli and T4 phage RNAs are linked to rS1 in vivo. T4 phages that express an inactive mutant of ModB have a decreased burst size and slowed lysis of E.&#x2009;coli. Our findings reveal a distinct biological role for NAD-RNA, namely the activation of the RNA for enzymatic transfer to proteins. The attachment of specific RNAs to ribosomal proteins might provide a strategy for the phage to modulate the host's translation machinery. This work reveals a direct connection between RNA modification and post-translational protein modification. ARTs have important roles far beyond viral infections<sup>6</sup>, so RNAylation may have far-reaching implications.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Rnaylation, Lc-ms/ms, T4 phage

### Affiliations
SYNMIKRO, Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie, Philipps Universität Marburg, Karl-von-Frisch-Str. 14, 35043 Marburg, Germany   Max-Planck-Institut für Terrestrische Mikrobiologie, Karl-von-Frisch Straße 16, 35043 Marburg, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Luisa Welp

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Katharina Höfer
SYNMIKRO, Zentrum für Synthetische Mikrobiologie, Philipps Universität Marburg, Karl-von-Frisch-Str. 14, 35043 Marburg, Germany   Max-Planck-Institut für Terrestrische Mikrobiologie, Karl-von-Frisch Straße 16, 35043 Marburg, Germany


