### Accession
PXD024250

### Title
Proteomic analysis of koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) spermatozoa and prostatic bodies

### Description
The aims of this study were to investigate the proteome of koala (Phascolarctos cinereus) spermatozoa and that of the prostatic bodies with which they form intimate contact at the moment of ejaculation. For this purpose, spermatozoa and prostatic bodies were obtained from four adult male koala by electroejaculation and analysed by high performance liquid chromatography coupled to a mass spectrometer. This strategy successfully identified and 744 koala sperm and 1,297 prostatic body proteins, which were subsequently attributed to 482 and 776 unique gene products, respectively. Gene ontology curation of the koala sperm proteome revealed an abundance of proteins mapping to the canonical sirtuin and 14-3-3 signalling pathways. By contrast, protein ubiquitination and unfolding protein response pathways dominated the equivalent analysis of proteins uniquely identified in koala prostatic bodies. In terms of functional annotation, koala sperm proteins commonly mapped to the categories of cellular compromise/inflammatory response, whilst those of the prostatic body revealed an over-representation of molecular chaperone and stress-related proteins associated with cell survival. Cross-species comparisons demonstrated that the koala sperm proteome displays greater conservation with that of eutherians (human; 93%) as opposed to reptile (crocodile; 39%) and avian (rooster; 27%) spermatozoa. Similarly, koala prostatic body proteins also presented a relatively high degree of overlap (70%) with those identified in sub-populations of large human seminal plasma extracellular vesicles. Together, this work contributes our overall understanding of the core sperm proteome and has identified candidate markers that may contribute to the exceptional longevity of koala spermatozoa during ex vivo storage.

### Sample Protocol
Preparations of koala spermatozoa and prostatic bodies were solubilized in ice-cold 0.1 M Na2CO3 supplemented with protease (Merck) and complete EDTA-free phosphatase inhibitors (Roche Holding, AG, Basel, Switzerland).  These suspensions were subjected to probe tip sonication at 4 °C for 3 × 10 sec intervals prior to incubation for 1 h at 4°C. Samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 6 M urea, 2 M thiourea and reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (30 min, room temperature), and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, room temperature, in the dark). Subsequently digested with 1:30 (v/v) dilution of Lys-C/Trypsin Mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 3 h at room temperature. Each solution was diluted below 1 M urea using 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and digested overnight at 37°C. Formic acid was added to each sample (2% v/v final concentration) to precipitate lipids from the peptide suspensions and peptides purified using Oasis 1 cc desalting columns (Waters Corp, Milford, MA, USA). Peptide quantification performed using a Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 2 µg of peptides per sample were lyophilised for mass spectrometry analysis.NanoLC–MS/MS, was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000RSLC nanoflow high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide populations were suspended in buffer A (2% v/v acetonitrile; 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) and directly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online desalting. Separation was then achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a linear gradient from 2 to 40% acetonitrile at 300 nl/min over 120 min. Q-Exactive Plus MS System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode (data-dependent acquisition). The Orbitrap mass analyser was used at a resolution of 35,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 380 – 2,000, incorporating a target automatic gain control value of 1e6 and maximum fill times of 50 ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a stepped normalized collisional energy of 25, 28 and 30. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 17,500 using an automatic gain control target of 5e5 and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Each sample group was processed separately using SEQUEST HT database searching of raw files performed on Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) against the Theria crown group comprising Eutheria and Metatheria within the UniprotKB database (Theria, downloaded on the 20th February 2020).  Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS modes were 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; trypsin was designated as the digestion enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was designated as a fixed modification, with dynamic modifications of acetylation of lysine and oxidation of methionine residues. Interrogation of the corresponding reversed database was also performed to evaluate the false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide identification using Percolator based on q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. To filter out target peptide spectrum matches over the decoy-peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level. Proteome discoverer nodes Minora Feature Detector and Feature Mapper were utilised to calculate label free quantification of area under the curve MS1 peaks. Each protein list was exported as an Excel file (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). Initial characterization of spermatozoa and prostatic bodies’ proteomes were refined to include only high confidence (FDR ≤ 0.01) proteins with a minimum of one unique peptide. Further refinement excluded duplicated proteins, based on protein name, due to higher order searches whereby repeated proteins under differing species are included (Supplemental Table S3). Human homologues of each refined proteome were achieved using OmicsBox (version 1.3.11, BioBam Bioinformatics, Valencia, Spain) (https://www.biobam.com/omicsbox) Blast2GO pipeline with an e-value cut-off of zero. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was used to analyse refined human homologue proteomic lists, both full compositions and cell-type specific proteomes

### Publication Abstract
The aims of this study were to investigate the proteome of koala spermatozoa and that of the prostatic bodies with which they interact during ejaculation. For this purpose, spermatozoa and prostatic bodies were fractionated from the semen of four male koalas and analysed by HPLC MS/MS. This strategy identified 744 sperm and 1297 prostatic body proteins, which were subsequently attributed to 482 and 776 unique gene products, respectively. Gene ontology curation of the sperm proteome revealed an abundance of proteins mapping to the canonical sirtuin and 14-3-3 signalling pathways. By contrast, protein ubiquitination and unfolded protein response pathways dominated the equivalent analysis of proteins uniquely identified in prostatic bodies. Koala sperm proteins featured an enrichment of those mapping to the functional categories of cellular compromise/inflammatory response, whilst those of the prostatic body revealed an over-representation of molecular chaperone and stress-related proteins. Cross-species comparisons demonstrated that the koala sperm proteome displays greater conservation with that of eutherians (human; 93%) as opposed to reptile (crocodile; 39%) and avian (rooster; 27%) spermatozoa. Together, this work contributes to our overall understanding of the core sperm proteome and has identified biomarkers that may contribute to the exceptional longevity of koala spermatozoa during ex vivo storage.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Koala, Prostatic bodies, Proteomics

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Reproductive Science Group, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science School of Environmental and Life Sciences College of Engineering, Science and Environment

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Brett Nixon
Reproductive Science Group, Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science School of Environmental and Life Sciences College of Engineering, Science and Environment


