### Accession
PXD043041

### Title
TurboID-mediated proximity labeling for screening interacting proteins of FIP37 in Arabidopsis

### Description
Proximity labeling (PL) was recently developed to detect protein–protein interactions (PPIs) and members of subcellular multiprotein structures in living cells. Proximity labeling is conducted by fusing an engineered enzyme with catalytic activity, such as biotin ligase, to a protein of interest (bait protein) to biotinylate adjacent proteins. The biotinylated protein can be purified by strep-tavidin beads, and identified by mass spectrometry (MS). TurboID is an engineered biotin ligase with high catalytic efficiency, which is used for proximity labeling. Although TurboID-based proximity labeling technology has been successfully established in mammals, its application in plant systems is limited. Here, we report the usage of TurboID for proximity labeling of FIP37, a core member of m6A methyltransferase complex, to identify FIP37 interacting proteins in Ara-bidopsis thaliana. By analyzing the MS data, we found 214 proteins biotinylated by GFP-TurboID-FIP37 fusion, including five components of m6A methyltransferase complex that have been previously confirmed. Therefore, the identified proteins may include potential proteins directly involved in the m6A pathway or functionally related to m6A-coupled mRNA processing due to spatial proximity. Moreover, we demonstrated the feasibility of proximity labeling tech-nology in plant epitranscriptomics studies, thereby expanding the application of this technology to more subjects of plant research.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis seeds were sown on 1/2MS plates containing 0.5% sucrose under long day conditions (16 hours light /8 hours dark, 22°C) for 5 days. The 5-day-old Arabidopsis transgenic seedlings of GFP-TurboID and GFP-TurboID-FIP37 overexpression were treated with 50 μM of biotin and vacuum infiltrated under the plant tissue, which was filled with liquid (this process took approximately 10 minutes). The seedlings were then incubated at room temperature (~22°C) for 3 hours, with GFP-TurboID overexpression lines used as negative controls. There were two biological replicates, each weighing approximately 0.8 g fresh weight. After treatment, the plant material was quickly washed 3 times in ice-cold water to stop the labeling reaction and to remove excess bi-otin, then dried and flash-frozen. Samples were quickly ground to powder in liquid ni-trogen and resuspended in 4 mL of Protein Extraction Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM DDT, 1 mM PMSF, Leupeptin, Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The resuspension was centrifuged at 17,000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C to remove cell debris. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and centrifuged again for 15 minutes, and a small amount of the supernatant was taken as an input. The desalting column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog number 89893) was equilibrated with 5 mL Protein Extraction Buffer 3 times, and the protein extracts was then placed in the column to remove excess free biotin. To enrich biotinylated proteins from protein extracts, the desalted proteins were added to the 120 μL Dynabead C1 streptavidin beads (Invitrogen, Catalog number 65001) and incubated on a rotator wheel overnight (12~16 hours) at 4°C. The next day, the beads were separated from the protein extracts on a magnetic rack and subsequently washed twice with 1 mL Protein Extrac-tion Buffer, once with 1 M KCl buffer, once with 100 mM Na2CO3 buffer, and once with buffer (1 M Urea add to 10 mM Tris-HCl) and finally twice with 1mL Protein Extraction Buffer. To confirm the successful enrichment of the biotinylated proteins, 20 μL of beads were taken out with 4x SDS loading buffer (200 mM Tris-HCl (pH6.8), 8% SDS, 40% Glycerol, 20% β-mercaptoethanol, 0.1% Bromophenol blue, 2 mM Biotin, 20 mM DDT) and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes for Western Blot analysis. The rest of the beads were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C or immediately sent on dry ice for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, the dried peptides samples were resuspended in Nano-HPLC Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated using the Nano-HPLC liquid phase system EASY-nLC1200. Trap column (100 μm×20 mm，RP-C18, Thermo Scientific) were balanced at 100% liquid A (0.1% formic acid). The sample was adsorbed onto Trap column, and then separated by the Analysis column (75 μm×150 mm，RP-C18, Thermo Scientific). The flow rate was 300 nl/minutes and a 30 minutes gradient was used. The enzyme products were separated by capillary HPLC and then analyzed by mass spec-troscopy using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spec-trometer was operated in Data-Dependent Acquisition mode (DDA), the 20 most in-tense fragment maps (MS2 scan) were collected after full scan. The peptides were fragmented with high energy collision dissociation (HCD) and normalized collision energy (NCE)28. MS1 spectra were measured at a resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3e6 with a maximum ion time of 100 ms. MS2 spectra were measured at a resolution of 17,500, an AGC of 1e5 with a maximum ion time of 50 ms. The MS raw data for each sample were searched using the Proteome Discover 2.5 software against an Uniprot-Arabidopsis thaliana database. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at 10 parts per million (ppm) and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a static modification while Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ) and Oxidation (M) were set as a dynamic modification. All matched MS spectra were filtered by mass accuracy and matching scores to reduce protein FDR (strict) to ≤ 0.01 or 0.01 < FDR (relaxed) < 0.05 on the basis of the target-decoy strategy using a reversed database.

### Publication Abstract
Proximity labeling was recently developed to detect protein-protein interactions and members of subcellular multiprotein structures in living cells. Proximity labeling is conducted by fusing an engineered enzyme with catalytic activity, such as biotin ligase, to a protein of interest (bait protein) to biotinylate adjacent proteins. The biotinylated protein can be purified by streptavidin beads, and identified by mass spectrometry (MS). TurboID is an engineered biotin ligase with high catalytic efficiency, which is used for proximity labeling. Although TurboID-based proximity labeling technology has been successfully established in mammals, its application in plant systems is limited. Here, we report the usage of TurboID for proximity labeling of FIP37, a core member of m<sup>6</sup>A methyltransferase complex, to identify FIP37 interacting proteins in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. By analyzing the MS data, we found 214 proteins biotinylated by GFP-TurboID-FIP37 fusion, including five components of m<sup>6</sup>A methyltransferase complex that have been previously confirmed. Therefore, the identified proteins may include potential proteins directly involved in the m<sup>6</sup>A pathway or functionally related to m<sup>6</sup>A-coupled mRNA processing due to spatial proximity. Moreover, we demonstrated the feasibility of proximity labeling technology in plant epitranscriptomics study, thereby expanding the application of this technology to more subjects of plant research.

### Keywords
Proximity labeling (pl); turboid; protein–protein interactions (ppis); biotin; m6a; fip37

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science

### Submitter
li xiao fang

### Lab Head
Dr Chuanlin Shi
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Science


