### Accession
PXD033001

### Title
Genetic dissection of the pluripotent proteome through multi-omics data integration

### Description
Genetic background is a major driver of the phenotypic variability observed across pluripotent stem cells (PSCs), and studies addressing it have relied on transcript abundance as the primary molecular readout of cell state. However, little is known about how proteins, the functional units in the cell, vary across genetically diverse PSCs and how this relates to variation in other measures of gene output. Here we present the first comprehensive genetic study characterizing the pluripotent proteome using 190 unique mouse embryonic stem cell lines derived from highly heterogeneous Diversity Outbred mice. Moreover, we integrated the proteome with chromatin accessibility and transcript abundance in 163 cell lines with matching genotypes using multi-omics factor analysis to distinguish shared and unique drivers of variability across molecular layers. Our findings highlight the power of multi-omics data integration in revealing the distal impacts of genetic variation. We show that limitations in mapping of individual molecular traits may be overcome by utilizing data integration to consolidate the influence of genetic signals shared across molecular traits and increase detection power.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 8 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS, pH 8.5, with protease inhibitor, and lysed by passing through a 21-gauge needle with syringe. After centrifugation at 13,000 rpm at 4°C for 10min, supernatant was used for further analysis. BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Samples were reduced in 5 mM TCEP for 15min, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 15min, and quenched with 15 mM DTT for 15min. 200 µg protein was chloroform-methanol precipitated and re-suspended in 200 µL 200 mM EPPS (pH 8.5). Protein was digested by Lys-C at a 1:100 protease-to-peptide ratio overnight at room temperature with gentle shaking. Trypsin was used for further digestion for 6 hours at 37°C at 1:100. 100 μL of each sample were aliquoted. 30 µL acetonitrile (ACN) was added into each sample to 30% final volume. 200 µg TMT reagent (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131N) in 10 µL ACN was added to each sample. After 1 hour of labeling, 2 µL of each sample was combined, desalted, and analyzed using mass spectrometry. TMT labeling efficiency was calculated and over 99%. After quenching using 0.3% hydroxylamine, 10 samples in each TMT were combined and fractionated with basic pH reversed phase (BPRP) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), collected onto a 96 six well plate and combined for 24 fractions in total. Twelve fractions were desalted and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based pipeline. Spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database search included all entries from an indexed Ensembl database version 90 (downloaded:10/09/2017). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. In addition, for phosphopeptide analysis, phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on serine, threonine, and tyrosine are included as variable modifications. Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) were adjusted to a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). PSM filtering was performed using a linear discriminant analysis (LDA). For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the summed signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel and found the closest matching centroid to the expected mass of the TMT reporter ion. For protein-level comparisons, PSMs were identified, quantified, and collapsed to a 1% peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and then collapsed further to a final protein-level FDR of 1%, which resulted in a final peptide level FDR of <0.1%. Moreover, protein assembly was guided by principles of parsimony to produce the smallest set of proteins necessary to account for all observed peptides. Proteins were quantified by summing reporter ion counts across all matching PSMs. PSMs with poor quality, MS3 spectra with less than 10 TMT reporter ion channels missing, MS3 spectra with TMT reporter summed signal-to-noise of less than 100 or having no MS3 spectra were excluded from quantification. Each reporter ion channel was summed across all quantified proteins and normalized assuming equal protein loading of all 10 samples.

### Publication Abstract
Genetic background drives phenotypic variability in pluripotent stem cells (PSCs). Most studies to date have used transcript abundance as the primary molecular readout of cell state in PSCs. We performed a comprehensive proteogenomics analysis of 190 genetically diverse mouse embryonic stem cell (mESC) lines. The quantitative proteome is highly variable across lines, and we identified pluripotency-associated pathways that were differentially activated in the proteomics data that were not evident in transcriptome data from the same lines. Integration of protein abundance to transcript levels and chromatin accessibility revealed broad co-variation across molecular layers as well as shared and unique drivers of quantitative variation in pluripotency-associated pathways. Quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping localized the drivers of these multi-omic signatures to genomic hotspots. This study reveals post-transcriptional mechanisms and genetic interactions that underlie quantitative variability in the pluripotent proteome and provides a regulatory map for mESCs that can provide a basis for future mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Diversity outbred mice, Chromatin accessibility, Multi-omics factor analysis, Eqtl, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Embryonic stem cells, Ground state metastability, Pluripotency, Pqtl

### Affiliations
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Steven Gygi
Cell Biology Department, Harvard Medical School


