### Accession
PXD015489

### Title
Contribution of proteasome-catalyzed peptide cis-splicing to viral targeting by CD8+ T cells in HIV-1 infection

### Description
Peptides generated by proteasome-catalyzed splicing of non-contiguous amino acid sequences have been shown to constitute a source of non-templated human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) epitopes, but their role in pathogen-specific immunity remains unknown. CD8+ T cells are key mediators of human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) control, and identification of novel epitopes to enhance targeting of infected cells is a priority for prophylactic and therapeutic strategies. To explore the contribution of proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS) to HIV-1 epitope generation, we developed a broadly-applicable mass spectrometry-based discovery workflow that we employed to identify spliced HLA-I-bound peptides on HIV-infected cells. We demonstrate that HIV-1-derived spliced peptides comprise a novel, but relatively minor, component of the HLA-I-bound viral immunopeptidome. Although spliced HIV-1 peptides may elicit CD8+ T cell responses relatively infrequently during infection, CD8+ T cells primed by partially-overlapping contiguous epitopes in HIV-infected individuals were able to cross-recognize spliced viral peptides, suggesting a potential role for PCPS in restricting HIV-1 escape pathways. Vaccine-mediated priming of responses to spliced HIV-1 epitopes could thus provide a novel means of exploiting epitope targets typically under-utilized during natural infection.

### Sample Protocol
Roughly 150×106 cells were harvested, washed once in PBS and lysed in 5 mL of cell lysis buffer (1% IGEPAL 630, 300 mM NaCl, 100 mM Tris pH 8.0 plus protease inhibitors) for 45 minutes at 4°C. Lysates of infected cells were cleared by two subsequent centrifugation steps, 2000 × g for 10 min followed by 20,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. HLA-peptide complexes were captured from cleared lysates on W6/32-coated Protein A‐Sepharose beads overnight at 4°C in a volume of 10 mL. W6/32-bound HLA-peptide complexes were sequentially washed with 20 mL of wash buffer 1 (0.005% IGEPAL, 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA), wash buffer 2 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl), wash buffer 3 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 400 mM NaCl) and finally wash buffer 4 (50 mM Tris pH 8.0) under gravity flow in Econo-Column glass chromatography columns (Bio-Rad). 5 mL of 10% acetic acid was added to elute peptide-HLA complexes from the beads, and samples were dried down prior to resuspension in 120 μL loading buffer (0.1% TFA, 1% acetonitrile in ultragrade HPLC water).   Eluted material was loaded onto a 4.6 × 50 mm ProSwift RP-1S column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted using a 500 μL/min flow rate over 10 min from 2 to 34% buffer B (0.1% TFA in acetonitrile) in buffer A (0.1% TFA in water) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). Detection was performed using a variable wavelength detector at 280 nm. Alternate odd and even fractions that did not contain β2-microglobulin were combined and dried prior to resuspension in 20 μL LC-MS/MS loading buffer (0.1% TFA in water).

### Data Protocol
The analysis of all LC-MS/MS datasets (.raw files) was performed using PEAKS v8.0 (Bioinformatic Solutions) software. LC-MS/MS scans were searched without enzyme specification using a mass tolerance precursor setting of 5 ppm for peptides and 0.03 Da for fragment ions. PEAKS de novo assisted sequencing was implemented for the assignment of peptide-spectral matches. De novo sequencing was set to output 100 candidates per spectrum for each dataset without variable or fixed modifications. An average local confidence (ALC) value was assigned to each peptide-spectrum match (PSM), and a tailored in-house bioinformatics workflow applied to discover cid-spliced and non-database matched contiguous peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides generated by proteasome-catalyzed splicing of noncontiguous amino acid sequences have been shown to constitute a source of nontemplated human leukocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) epitopes, but their role in pathogen-specific immunity remains unknown. CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells are key mediators of HIV type 1 (HIV-1) control, and identification of novel epitopes to enhance targeting of infected cells is a priority for prophylactic and therapeutic strategies. To explore the contribution of proteasome-catalyzed peptide splicing (PCPS) to HIV-1 epitope generation, we developed a broadly applicable mass spectrometry-based discovery workflow that we employed to identify spliced HLA-I-bound peptides on HIV-infected cells. We demonstrate that HIV-1-derived spliced peptides comprise a relatively minor component of the HLA-I-bound viral immunopeptidome. Although spliced HIV-1 peptides may elicit CD8<sup>+</sup> T cell responses relatively infrequently during infection, CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells primed by partially overlapping contiguous epitopes in HIV-infected individuals were able to cross-recognize spliced viral peptides, suggesting a potential role for PCPS in restricting HIV-1 escape pathways. Vaccine-mediated priming of responses to spliced HIV-1 epitopes could thus provide a novel means of exploiting epitope targets typically underutilized during natural infection.

### Keywords
Epitope discovery, Peptide splicing, Human leukocyte antigen, Viral escape, Immunopeptidome, Cd8+ t cell, Spliced epitope, Human immunodeficiency virus, Mass spectrometry, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Nuffield Department Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Nicola Ternette

### Lab Head
Dr Nicola Ternette
Nuffield Department Medicine, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7BN, United Kingdom.


