### Accession
PXD037173

### Title
Increased protein solubility contributes to heat priming of the plant pathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea

### Description
Botrytis cinerea causes grey mold disease in leading crop plants. The disease develops only at cool temperatures, but the fungus remains viable in warm climates and can survive periods of extreme heat. We discovered a strong heat priming effect in which the exposure of B. cinerea to moderately high temperatures greatly improves its ability to cope with subsequent, potentially lethal temperature conditions. We showed that priming promotes protein solubility during heat stress and discovered a group of priming-induced serine-type peptidases. Several lines of evidence, including transcriptomics, proteomics, pharmacology and mutagenesis data, link these peptidases to the B. cinerea priming response, highlighting their important roles in regulating priming-mediated heat adaptation.

### Sample Protocol
Fungal material was produced firstly at 22°C or 29°C for 14 h and then transferred to 37°C for 2 h. Soluble and aggregated proteins were extracted from the samples according to Koplin and Brennan with some modifications. At the end of the heat treatments, the fungal biomass was collected (0.8–1.6 g), ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and suspended in 1.2 ml of freshly prepared protein extraction buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate, pH 6.8, 10 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Tween, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche). The samples were centrifuged at 3000g for 6 min at 4°C using a tabletop centrifuge, and each supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5-ml Eppendorf tube. The samples were centrifuged at 5,000g for 5 min at 4°C to precipitate remnants of cellular debris, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. A sample of the protein extract was measured in a spectrophotometer, and the amount of total protein in each sample was calculated using a 1 mg/ml standard sample of bovine serum albumin (Sigma-Aldrich). To separate the soluble and aggregated proteins, extracted proteins were centrifuged at 16,000g for 20 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was carefully removed, transferred to a new tube and stored at –80°C as the soluble protein fraction. The pellet was washed twice with 300 μl sodium phosphate buffer (20 mM Na-phosphate pH 6.8, 1 mM PMSF, 1x Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) with centrifugation at 16,000g for 20 min between washes. The supernatant was removed and the clean pellet stored at –80°C as the protein aggregate fraction.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data from all three replications were analyzed using MaxQuant software v.1.5.2.8. for peak identification and quantitation using the Andromeda search engine, which searches for tryptic peptides against the B05.10 UniProt database, with a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for both the precursor masses and fragment ions. Oxidation on methionine and protein N-terminus acetylation were accepted as variable modifications, and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as a static modification, as the percentage of carbamylation was low. Minimal peptide length was set to 6 amino acids, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target decoy strategy. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and common contaminants and single peptide identifications. The data were quantified by SILAC analysis using the same software. H/L ratios for all peptides belonging to a particular protein species were pooled, providing a ratio for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Botrytis cinerea</i> causes gray mold disease in leading crop plants. The disease develops only at cool temperatures, but the fungus remains viable in warm climates and can survive periods of extreme heat. We discovered a strong heat priming effect in which the exposure of <i>B. cinerea</i> to moderately high temperatures greatly improves its ability to cope with subsequent, potentially lethal temperature conditions. We showed that priming promotes protein solubility during heat stress and discovered a group of priming-induced serine-type peptidases. Several lines of evidence, including transcriptomics, proteomics, pharmacology, and mutagenesis data, link these peptidases to the <i>B. cinerea</i> priming response, highlighting their important roles in regulating priming-mediated heat adaptation. By imposing a series of sub-lethal temperature pulses that subverted the priming effect, we managed to eliminate the fungus and prevent disease development, demonstrating the potential for developing temperature-based plant protection methods by targeting the fungal heat priming response. IMPORTANCE Priming is a general and important stress adaptation mechanism. Our work highlights the importance of priming in fungal heat adaptation, reveals novel regulators and aspects of heat adaptation mechanisms, and demonstrates the potential of affecting microorganisms, including pathogens through manipulations of the heat adaptation response.

### Keywords
Priming effect; protein aggregates; botrytis cinerea

### Affiliations
School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, Tel Aviv University
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
mingzhe zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Amir Sharon
School of Plant Sciences and Food Security, Tel Aviv University


