### Accession
PXD013926

### Title
Increasing Pexophagy as an Unconventional Mode to Kill Cancer Cells

### Description
The autophagy-mediated degradation of peroxisomes, pexophagy, serves as a rheostat for peroxisome homeostasis. However, disturbing this process has yet to be investigated in the context of therapy treatment and resistance in cancer.  In Vorinostat (Vor)-resistant lymphoma (B8) cells, an autophagosome enrichment procedure, followed by mass spectrometry (MS), revealed an abundance of peroxisomal proteins, indicative of elevated pexophagy.  This was validated by immunofluorescence colocalization and co-immunoprecipitation of PEX5 with the pexophagy receptor p62.  Using Vor-resistant B8 cells, we triggered apoptosis by genetically silencing PEX1, PEX6 and PEX26, members of the exportomer complex, which negatively regulates pexophagy. To further explore PEX26 in other model systems, we genetically silenced the exportomer component in A549 (lung adenocarcinoma), 1205Lu (melanoma) and in 1205Lu cells with acquired resistance to MAPK-targeted therapies (VCR5). Here, we observed that silencing PEX26 promotes therapy sensitivity under otherwise therapy-resistant conditions. Using gene expression data from lymphoma (DLBCL), melanoma and lung adenocarcinoma cohorts, we found that low gene expression of PEX26, a component of the “negative regulation of pexophagy” signature, was significantly associated with prolonged patient survival. Clinically, gene expression levels of this signature could be utilized as a prognostic indicator in DLBCL, lung adenocarcinoma, melanoma, and perhaps other cancers.  In conclusion, we provide precedence for the development and use of therapies that promote pexophagy in cancer. Furthermore, the MS-based identification of autophagosome cargos provides a platform towards identifying proteins unique to pro-death and pro-survival autophagosomes in cancer model systems, which could illuminate therapeutic use and development.

### Sample Protocol
For MS measurements, whole cell extracts (inputs), and density centrifugation samples were lysed in AMPK buffer, then subjected to in-gel digestion and LC MS/MS as described in R. Drissi, et al, Mol Cell Proteomics, 14 (2015) 2002-2013.

### Data Protocol
Using the label-free quantitation function from MaxQuant software, output data from 9 autophagosome enrichment experiments (U937 DMSO/CQ, U937+Vor/CQ, B8+Vor/CQ, n=3), and 9 respective whole cell extract inputs (U937 DMSO/CQ, U937+Vor/CQ, B8+Vor/CQ, n=3) was arranged into a single file containing peptide identities, counts, intensities, etc (see attached MS data). With Perseus software (MaxQuant platform), rows containing “reverse” and “contaminant” were initially removed, followed by rows, which contained a zero-intensity value for peptides across all rows. We first examined (Log2) relative peptide intensities from each Fr.1 based on the following criteria: (1) scored a p-value of 0.05 or lower upon a Student’s t-test comparison between biological triplicates of two conditions (e.g. n=3, B8+Vor/CQ vs. n=3, U937+DMSO/CQ), (2) corresponding peptide intensities were two- fold greater with respect to the conditions under comparison, and (3) identified protein identities overlapped between two separate t-tests (e.g. common B8 proteins between B8 vs U937 and B8 vs U937+Vor). The same approach was followed for analysis of inputs. For selectivity analysis (B8+Vor/CQ Fr.1 vs. B8+Vor/CQ input), a Student’s t-test of respective biological triplicates was performed and analyzed based on a minimum two-fold enrichment and p-value of 0.05 or lower.

### Publication Abstract
Promoting the macroautophagy/autophagy-mediated degradation of specific proteins and organelles can potentially be utilized to induce apoptosis in cancer cells or sensitize tumor cells to therapy. To examine this concept, we enriched for autophagosomes from histone deacetylase inhibitor (HDACi)-sensitive U937 lymphoma cells and isogenic HDACi-resistant cells. Mass spectrometry on autophagosome-enriched fractions revealed that HDACi-resistant cells undergo elevated pexophagy, or autophagy of the peroxisome, an organelle that supports tumor growth. To disturb peroxisome homeostasis, we enhanced pexophagy in HDACi-resistant cells via genetic silencing of peroxisome exportomer complex components (<i>PEX1, PEX6</i>, or <i>PEX26</i>). This consequently sensitized resistant cells to HDACi-mediated apoptosis, which was rescued by inhibiting ATM/ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM serine/threonine kinase), a mediator of pexophagy. We subsequently engineered melanoma cells to stably repress <i>PEX26</i> using CRISPR interference (CRISPRi). Melanoma cells with repressed <i>PEX26</i> expression showed evidence of both increased pexophagy and peroxisomal matrix protein import defects versus single guide scrambled (<i>sgSCR)</i> controls. <i>In vivo</i> studies showed that <i>sgPEX26</i> melanoma xenografts recurred less compared to <i>sgSCR</i> xenografts, following the development of resistance to mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)-targeted therapy. Finally, prognostic analysis of publicly available datasets showed that low expression levels of <i>PEX26, PEX6</i> and <i>MTOR</i>, were significantly associated with prolonged patient survival in lymphoma, lung cancer and melanoma cohorts. Our work highlighted that drugs designed to disrupt peroxisome homeostasis may serve as unconventional therapies to combat therapy resistance in cancer.<b>Abbreviations:</b> ABCD3/PMP70: ATP binding cassette subfamily D member 3; ACOX1: acyl-CoA oxidase 1; AP: autophagosome; COX: cytochrome c oxidase; CQ: chloroquine; CRISPRi: clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats interference; DLBCL: diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; GO: gene ontology; dCas9: Cas9 endonuclease dead, or dead Cas9; HDACi: histone deacetylase inhibitors; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; LAMP2: lysosomal associated membrane protein 2; LCFAs: long-chain fatty acids; LFQ-MS: label-free quantitation mass spectrometry; LPC: lysophoshatidylcholine; MAP1LC3B/LC3B: microtubule associated protein 1 light chain 3 beta; MTOR: mechanistic target of rapamycin kinase; PBD: peroxisome biogenesis disorders; PTS1: peroxisomal targeting signal 1; ROS: reactive oxygen species; sgRNA: single guide RNA; VLCFAs: very-long chain fatty acids; Vor: vorinostat; WO: wash-off.

### Keywords
Pexophagy, Peroxisome, Exportomer, Metabolism, Autophagy, Cancer

### Affiliations
Université de Sherbrooke
Lady Davis Institute, McGill University

### Submitter
Francois-Michel Boisvert

### Lab Head
Dr Sonia V. del Rincón
Lady Davis Institute, McGill University


