### Accession
PXD007776

### Title
Human keratinocytes HaCaT LC-MS/MS

### Description
Triton X-100 has been used as a model substance to study the effects of irritants on the skin. HaCaT human keratinocyte cell line were treated with a non-cytotoxic dose of Triton X-100, as determined by the MTT assay and microscopically examination) for 48 h. The altered abundance of proteins from HaCaT keratinocytes exposed to Triton X-100 was analyzed by LC-MS/MS approach and quantified using Progenesis LC software.

### Sample Protocol
HaCaT cells were seeded in T75 tissue culture flasks (Corning, USA) and cultured in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), Glutamax™ Supplement and antibiotics (100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin). Media components were purchased from Gibco, USA. Cells were maintained at 37°C and in a humidified 5% CO2 atmosphere. The cells homogenates (control and after Triton X-100 treatment) were prepared by sonication of the suspension at +4°C following the program for the ultrasonic BANDELIN Sonopuls HD 2070 instrument: 2 cycles for 50s with a 5 s interval. The resultant ultrasonic treatment included 20 active seconds.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs in raw format were carried out for untreated and SDS exposed HaCaT cells and processed separately or jointly (control vs Triton X-100-exposed) using Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd.), where raw ﬁles was converted into Mascot generic format (mgf) containing feature list for protein identiﬁcation by using Mascot software (www.matrixscience.com). Mascot data in xml formats were re-imported into Progenesis LC-MS for convenient work with identiﬁed protein list.

### Publication Abstract
The effects of sodium dodecyl sulfate (25 mg/ml) and Triton X-100 (12.5 mg/ml and 25 mg/ml) on the HaCaT immortalized keratinocytes exposed to these surfactants for 48 h were studied. Using shotgun proteomics, a comparative analysis of the proteomic profiles of control and experimental cells after surfactants exposure was carried out. 260 common proteins were identified in control and experimental cells; 33 proteins were found in cells exposed to all three treatments, but not in control cells. These 33 proteins apparently reflect a nonspecific (universal) response of cells to toxic damage by the surfactants. These proteins are associated with activation of cell proliferation, changes in the functional activity of their ER and mitochondria, increased mRNA stability and activation of protein degradation processes in the cells. The possibility of using these proteins as a nonspecific parameter of cell response to cytotoxic damage is discussed. The mass spectrometry proteomics data ("raw", "mgf" and "xml" files) have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifiers PXD007789 and PXD007776.

### Keywords
Hacat keratinocytes, Exposure, Triton x-100, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
V.-N. Orekhovich Research Institute of Biomedical Chemistry
dr

### Submitter
Olesya Larina

### Lab Head
Dr Lisitsa AV
V.-N. Orekhovich Research Institute of Biomedical Chemistry


