### Accession
PXD015808

### Title
TMT quantitative proteomics of a) protrusions and cells bodies of a panel of cell lines, b) protrusions and cells bodies of MDA-MB231 cells collected after 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 8 h post- induction of protrusions, c) non-transfected (nt) or LARP6 siRNAs MDA-MB231 cells grown on either close or open collagen coated transwells and d) protrusions and cells bodies of a panel of breast cell lines.

### Description
Translation of Ribosomal Protein coding mRNAs (RP-mRNAs) constitutes a key step in regulation of ribosome biogenesis in human cells, but the exact mechanisms which modulate RP-mRNAs translation under various cellular and environmental conditions remain poorly understood. Here we show that the subcellular localisation of RP-mRNAs acts as a key regulator of their translation in mesenchymal-like migratory cells. As cells invade into their surroundings, RP-mRNAs localise to the actin-rich protrusions at the front of the cells. This localisation is mediated by La related protein-6 (LARP6), an RNA Binding Protein (RBP) that is enriched in protrusions. Importantly, translation initiation and elongation factors are also enriched in protrusions. LARP6 dependent localisation of RP-mRNAs enhances their translation, leading to up-regulation of ribosome biogenesis and increased overall protein synthesis. In breast carcinomas, enhanced expression of LARP6 is associated with Epithelial to Mesenchymal Transition (EMT), and can be therapeutically targeted by a small molecule inhibitor which interferes with LARP6 RNA binding. These findings reveal an RNA localisation based post-transcriptional mechanism that governs ribosome biogenesis in migratory cells, and implicate a role for this process in cancer progression downstream of EMT.

### Sample Protocol
Cell crude lysates were homogenized in 2-4% SDS reduced with 100 mM DTT boiling at 95 degreesC for 10 min. Isobraric Filter Aided Sample Preparation (iFASP) (McDowell et al., 2017) was performed for the generation of tryptic peptides as described before with modifications. From each sample, 25 microg of protein sample were reduced with 50 mM Bond-Breaker TCEP Solution (ThermoFisher) boiling at 95 degrees C for 10 min. Reduced samples were diluted in 8 M urea;100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5, transferred to Vivacon 500 filter, concentrated by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 20 min twice, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Samples were concentrated and washed by centrifugation at 14,000 g three times. Samples were then diluted with 100 mM Dissolution Buffer TEAB to reduce the urea concentration, prior to trypsin digestion at 37 degrres C, overnight. Samples were then incubated with 5 microg of TMT label reagent at 25°C for 1 hour in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer, and then quenched with 5% hydroxylamine at 25°C for 30 min in a 600 rpm shaking thermomixer. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 g three times and further elution with 30% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried with a vacuum concentrator and desalted via Pierce™ basic pH reverse-phase fractionation and separation into 7 fractions. Samples were then dried with vacuum centrifugation before analysis by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For Mass spectrometry (MS) data acquisition, Q Exactive Orbitrap LC-MS/MS System was used. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and about 1-5 microg injected. Samples were resolved at flow rate of 250 nL/min on an Easy-Spray 50cm X 75 microm RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher). Each run consisted of a 120 min gradient of 3% to 35 % of Buffer B (0.1% FA in Acetonitrile) against Buffer A (0.1% FA in LC-MS gradient water), and separated samples were infused into the MS by electrospray ionization (ESI). Spray voltage was set at 1.95 kV, and capillary temperature was set to 255 degrees C. MS was operated in data dependent positive mode, with 1 MS scan followed by 15 MS2 scans (top 15 method). Full scan survey spectra (m/z 375-1,500) were acquired with a 70,000 resolution for MS scans and MS2 acquired with 35,000 scan resolution. A 30 sec dynamic exclusion for fragmented peaks was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Actin-rich protrusions are membrane extensions generated by actin polymerization that drive mesenchymal-like cell migration. Characterization of protrusions proteome is crucial for understanding their function. We present a complete step-by-step protocol based on microporous filter-based fractionation of protrusive cellular domains coupled with sample preparation for quantitative proteomics, mass spectrometric data acquisition, and data analysis. This protocol enables purification, quantification, and analysis of the distribution of proteins present in protrusions and cell bodies. For complete details on the use and execution of this protocol, please refer to Dermit et&#xa0;al. (2020).

### Keywords
Human, Malignant and non-malignant cell lines, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.
qmul

### Submitter
Maria Dermit Salazar

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz K. Mardakheh
Centre for Cancer Cell and Molecular Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse square, London EC1M 6BQ, United Kingdom.


