### Accession
PXD043233

### Title
Fuzzy interactions between the auto-phosphorylated C-terminus and the kinase domain of CK1δ inhibits activation of TAp63α

### Description
The p53 family member TAp63α plays an important role in maintaining the genetic integrity in oocytes. DNA damage, in particular DNA double strand breaks, lead to the transformation of the inhibited, only dimeric conformation into the active tetrameric one that results in the initiation of an apoptotic program. Activation requires phosphorylation by the kinase CK1 which phosphorylates TAp63α at four positions. The third phosphorylation event is the decisive step that transforms TAp63α into the active state. This third phosphorylation, however, is ~20 times slower than the first two phosphorylation events. This difference in the phosphorylation kinetics constitutes a safety mechanism that allows oocytes with a low degree of DNA damage to survive. So far these kinetic investigations of the phosphorylation steps have been performed with the isolated CK1 kinase domain. However, all CK1 enzymes contain C-terminal extensions that become auto-phosphorylated and inhibit the activity of the kinase. Here we have investigated the effect of auto-phosphorylation of the C-terminus in the kinase CK1δ and show that it slows down phosphorylation of the first two sites in TAp63α but basically inhibits the phosphorylation of the third site. We have identified up to ten auto-phosphorylation sites in the CK1δ C-terminal domain and show that all of them interact with the kinase domain in a “fuzzy” way in which not a single site is particularly important. Through mutation analysis we further show that hydrophobic amino acids following the phosphorylation site are important for a substrate to be able to successfully compete with the auto-inhibitory effect of the C-terminal domain. This auto-phosphorylation adds a new layer to the regulation of apoptosis in oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry for phosphorylatoin-site identification The purified CK1δ protein was reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide in 50mM Tris-HCL and NaCl buffer. 6 µg of the protein were subjected to enzymatic digestion using Trypsin (Promega, V5113) at a weight-to-weight ratio of 1:100 (Trypsin:Protein). The digestion was carried out overnight at 37 oC in a final Urea concentration of 1M. The peptides were cleaned up with Empore C18 stage tipping and dried right away for shooting.  Mass spectrometry (LC-MS2) Dried peptides of each sample were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile/1% (v/v) formic acid solution and shot similar to earlier publication41. Simply, peptides were separated with Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven. Individual peptides were eluted by a nonlinear gradient from 4 to 32% acetonitrile over 50 min, followed by a step-wise increase to 76% acetonitrile in 6 min, which was kept for another 9 min and sprayed into a QExactive HF massspectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full-scan MS spectra (300–1650 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, maximum injection time of 20 ms and AGC target value of 3x106. The 10 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation (Top 10) and isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 1.4Th. MS2 scans were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 54 ms, AGC target value of 1x105. Ions were then fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27; and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s to minimize the acquisition of fragment spectra of already acquired precursors.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis Raw data was analyzed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific). SequenceHT node was selected for database searches of MS2-spectra. Human trypsin digested proteome (Homo sapiens SwissProt database (TaxID:9606, version 12 March 2020)) was used for protein identifications. Contaminants (MaxQuant “contamination.fasta”) were determined for quality control. Carbamidomethyl (C, +57.021) at cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. Phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) on Ser, Thr, and Tyr residues, methionine oxidation (M, +15.995) and acetylation (+42.011) at the protein N-terminus were set for dynamic modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Default percolator settings in PD were used to filter perfect spectrum matches (PSMs). Reporter ion quantification was achieved with default settings in consensus workflow.

### Publication Abstract
The p53 family member TAp63&#x3b1; plays an important role in maintaining the genetic integrity in oocytes. DNA damage, in particular DNA double strand breaks, lead to the transformation of the inhibited, only dimeric conformation into the active tetrameric one that results in the initiation of an apoptotic program. Activation requires phosphorylation by the kinase CK1 which phosphorylates TAp63&#x3b1; at four positions. The third phosphorylation event is the decisive step that transforms TAp63&#x3b1; into the active state. This third phosphorylation, however, is&#x2009;~&#x2009;20 times slower than the first two phosphorylation events. This difference in the phosphorylation kinetics constitutes a safety mechanism that allows oocytes with a low degree of DNA damage to survive. So far these kinetic investigations of the phosphorylation steps have been performed with the isolated CK1 kinase domain. However, all CK1 enzymes contain C-terminal extensions that become auto-phosphorylated and inhibit the activity of the kinase. Here we have investigated the effect of auto-phosphorylation of the C-terminus in the kinase CK1&#x3b4; and show that it slows down phosphorylation of the first two sites in TAp63&#x3b1; but basically inhibits the phosphorylation of the third site. We have identified up to ten auto-phosphorylation sites in the CK1&#x3b4; C-terminal domain and show that all of them interact with the kinase domain in a "fuzzy" way in which not a single site is particularly important. Through mutation analysis we further show that hydrophobic amino acids following the phosphorylation site are important for a substrate to be able to successfully compete with the auto-inhibitory effect of the C-terminal domain. This auto-phosphorylation adds a new layer to the regulation of apoptosis in oocytes.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Quality control, Ck1, Dna damage, Tetramerization, Premature ovarian insufficiency, P53 family, P63, Ovarian reserve

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Christian Münch

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Münch
Institute of Biochemistry II, Faculty of Medicine, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Frankfurt Cancer Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany Cardio-Pulmonary Institute, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


