### Accession
PXD028784

### Title
Pandanus amaryllifolius drought stress and recovery LC-MSMS TMT-Labelled

### Description
The aim of this project is to determine the protein changes of P. amaryllifolius in response to drought stress and during recovery. The protein changes between drought-stressed, well-watered, and recovered plants were evaluated using tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics. The proteins were extracted from sample by using TCA/Acetone method and digested with trypsin. The digested proteins were then labelled with 10-plex TMT labelling prior fractionation with 12.5%, 17.5%, and 50% ACN with 0.1% triethylamine. The prepared proteins were then subjected to 1D data dependent acquisition (DDA) with nano LC column ionization source was set as positive ion mode, whereby 350-1850 m/z peptide precursors were scanned at 70,000 resolutions. The raw data generated was then searched against Viridiplantae protein sequences downloaded from UniProt. Of the 1,415 differentially abundant proteins, 74 were significantly altered. The majority of proteins differing between them were related to carbon metabolism, photosynthesis, stress response, and antioxidant activity. This is the first study that reports the protein changes in response to drought stress in Pandanus. The data generated provide an insight into the drought-responsive mechanisms in P. amaryllifolius.

### Sample Protocol
The dried samples were sent to Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF) for LC-MS/MS. About 140 μg total protein from each sample was resuspended in S-Trap lysis buffer and reduced by 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 56°C and alkylated by 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in dark. The pH of the solution was adjusted by adding 12% aqueous phosphoric acid with 1:10 ratio for a final concentration of 1.2% and diluted by using S-Trap binding buffer (90% aqueous methanol containing 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.55). The S-Trap binding buffer was then added to the acidified lysis buffer. The mixture was transferred to a labelled S-Trap column before centrifuged at 4,000 × g. S-Trap binding buffer was used to wash the column twice and the protein retained on the column was digested with 125 μL trypsin solution (~10 μg trypsin (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, USA) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) at 47°C for 3 h. Next, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate was added to the column following centrifugation to elute off the peptides, while the remaining peptides were eluted from the column by sequential centrifugation with 0.2% aqueous formic acid followed by 50% aqueous acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.2% formic acid. The peptides were vacuum centrifuged and resuspended in 110 μL 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.8). Each 10 μL sample was pooled. The peptide concentration of the reconstituted solution was determined by using Pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo Scientific, USA).  All samples were labelled in a 10-plex TMT label (Thermo Scientific, USA) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h with occasional vortexing. Next, 5% hydroxylamine was added to each sample, vortexed, and incubated at room temperature for 15 min to remove the excess TMT label. To ensure the number of peptides in each sample was equal, an equal amount of each TMT-labelled sample was mixed, vacuum dried, and resuspended in 2% ACN 0.1% formic acid to obtain the normalization factor. All TMT-labelled samples were pooled with a 1:1 ratio. The TMT-labelled peptides were vacuum dried, reconstituted in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and fractionated at three concentrations of 12.5%, 17.5%, and 50% ACN with 0.1% triethylamine from Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific, USA).  1D data dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MS (Q-Exactive, Thermo Fisher, USA) was performed by injecting each TMT-labelled peptide fraction onto the peptide trap, followed by a loading buffer (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid). The peptides were eluted from the trap onto the nano-LC column and separated with linear gradient of 1% mobile phase A (99.9% water and 0.1% formic acid) to 30% over 110 min at 300 nL/min, followed by 85% B (99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) for 8 min. The ionization source was set as positive ion mode, whereby 350-1850 m/z peptide precursors were scanned at 70,000 resolutions. The 10 most intense ions in the survey scan were subjected to the fragmentation by HCD using a normalized collision energy of 35 with precursor isolation width of 0.7 m/z. The precursors with charges of +2 to +4 were subjected to MS/MS analysis under the parameters: minimum signal of 6,200 ions was required for MS2 triggering, an AGC target value of 2 ×105 for MS2 and maximum injection time of 250 ms with 70,000 MS/MS scan resolution, and 90 s of dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files generated were searched against Viridiplantae protein sequences downloaded from UniProt (Reviewed, 40,400 proteins sequences; 210312_uniprot-taxonomy_viridiplantae+reviewed. fasta) (Accessed on March 2021) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Scientific, USA) and the Sequest HT search algorithm, allowing up to two missed cleavages per peptide and 20 ppm precursor mass tolerance. Carbonylation of cysteine was used as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, deaminated (N, Q), Glu-> PyroGlu, Gln-> PyroGlu, N-Terminus acetylation, TMT6Plex (K), and TMT6Plex (N-Term) were used as variable modifications. Only high confidence peptides were selected using a percolator algorithm for the peptide-spectrum match (PSM) in database searches with false discovery rate (FDR) threshold set at 0.01 for protein identification. The identified proteins were filtered based on their abundance ratio of comparisons; Comparison 1 (Drought vs Well-watered), Comparison 2 (Recovery vs Well-watered), and Comparison 3 (Recovery vs Drought), following p-value of less than 0.05 (Student's t-test) and in the range of less than 0.5-fold change and more than 1.2-fold change of abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is one of the significant threats to the agricultural sector. However, there is limited knowledge on plant response to drought stress and post-drought recovery. <i>Pandanus amaryllifolius</i>, a moderate drought-tolerant plant, is well-known for its ability to survive in low-level soil moisture conditions. Understanding the molecular regulation of drought stress signaling in this plant could help guide the rational design of crop plants to counter this environmental challenge. This study aimed to determine the morpho-physiological, biochemical, and protein changes of <i>P. amaryllifolius</i> in response to drought stress and during recovery. Drought significantly reduced the leaf relative water content and chlorophyll content of <i>P. amaryllifolius</i>. In contrast, relative electrolyte leakage, proline and malondialdehyde contents, and the activities of antioxidant enzymes in the drought-treated and recovered samples were relatively higher than the well-watered sample. The protein changes between drought-stressed, well-watered, and recovered plants were evaluated using tandem mass tags (TMT)-based quantitative proteomics. Of the 1415 differentially abundant proteins, 74 were significantly altered. The majority of proteins differing between them were related to carbon metabolism, photosynthesis, stress response, and antioxidant activity. This is the first study that reports the protein changes in response to drought stress in <i>Pandanus</i>. The data generated provide an insight into the drought-responsive mechanisms in <i>P. amaryllifolius</i>.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Pandanus amaryllifolius, Abiotic stress, Drought stress, Tmt-labelled, Recovery

### Affiliations
Centre for Research in Biotechnology for Agriculture(CEBAR),Universiti Malaya, Malaysia.
Universiti Malaya (UM), CEBAR

### Submitter
Boon Chin Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Boon Chin Tan
Centre for Research in Biotechnology for Agriculture(CEBAR),Universiti Malaya, Malaysia.


