### Accession
PXD026942

### Title
Comparison of LFQ and IPTL for protein identification and relative quantification

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome profiling is most commonly performed by label-free quantification (LFQ), stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), and reporter-ion based isobaric labeling methods (TMT and iTRAQ). Isobaric peptide termini labeling (IPTL) was described as an alternative to these methods and is based on crosswise labeling of both peptide termini and MS2 quantification. High quantification accuracy was assumed for IPTL because multiple quantification points are obtained per identified MS2 spectrum. A direct comparison of IPTL with other quantification methods has not been performed yet because IPTL commonly requires digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C. To enable tryptic digestion of IPTL samples, a novel labeling for IPTL was developed which combines metabolic labeling (Arg-0/Lys-0 and Arg-d4/Lys-d4, respectively) with crosswise N-terminal dimethylation (d4 and d0, respectively). The comparison of IPTL with LFQ revealed significantly more protein identifications for LFQ above homology ion scores but not above identity ion score. However, the quantification accuracy was superior for LFQ despite the many quantification points obtained with IPTL. A reason for this outcome is probably because of the significantly higher signal intensities in MS1 compared to MS2.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were thawed and 800 µL cell lysis buffer (Invitrogen, Oslo, Norway) was added followed by homogenization and mechanical breakage with a blue pestle. The samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4°C in a Heraeus Biofuge pico (Kendro, Hanau, Germany) and the supernatant was divided in 20 μL aliquots. An aliquot was precipitated with 80 µL 100 % ice-cold acetone over night at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded, and the precipitate was washed three times with acetone. The pellet was dissolved in 50 µL 6 M urea, DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM, mixed thoroughly and incubated at 37°C for 30 min using a Thermomixer (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). The reduction was followed by alkylation using iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 25 mM, incubated for 60 min in the dark at room temperature. Excess alkylation reagent was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 30 mM and left for 30 min at 37°C. For digestion, 240 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and Trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:200 were added and incubated for 18 h at 37 °C. The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 1 %. The tryptic peptides were puriﬁed by solid phase extraction using Strata C18-E SPE cartridge (Phenomenex, Værløse, Denmark) and evaporated to dryness using a Speed Vac concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany).  N-terminal dimethylation for IPTL samples  The frozen, dried and purified tryptic digest was thawed and dissolved in 40 µL 1 % acetic acid, pH 2.7 and vortexed for about 5 min. 2 µL 4 % formaldehyde or formaldehyde-d2 in water and 2 µL sodium cyanoborohydride were added to a final concentration of 30 mM, mixed thoroughly and left for incubation for 30 min. Subsequently, 8 µL of 1 % ammonia hydroxide was added, vortexed, and incubated for 1 min. The reaction was stopped adding 1 µL 5% formic acid. The tryptic peptides were puriﬁed with µ-C18 ZipTips and dried using a Speed Vac concentrator. 2.4. Solid phase extraction for purification of peptides Strata C18-E SPE cartridges were activated using 500 µL acetonitrile and equilibrated with three times 500 µL 1 % formic acid in water. The sample was loaded by passing through the column material three times. The column was washed using 500 µL water and the peptides were eluted with 500 µL 50 % acetonitrile. OMIX-C18 Tips were activated using 50 µL acetonitrile and equilibrated with three times 50 µL 1 % formic acid in water. The sample was loaded by passing through the column material three times. The column was washed using 50 µL of water and eluted with 10 µL 70 % acetonitrile.

### Data Protocol
For further analysis the raw files were converted to Mascot generic format (.mgf) files using ProteoWizard Analysis 3.0.331. For protein identifications, PEAKS Studio X+ and Mascot 2.4 were used. For relative quantification, LFQ samples were quantified using PEAKS Studio X+ whereas Mascot 2.4 in combination with IsobariQ version 2.0a was applied to IPTL data [PMID 21067241]. General search parameters were as following: Search against Swiss-Prot database (human, 20,431 sequences), trypsin was selected as enzyme with one allowed missed cleavage site, precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and MS2 fragment tolerance of 0.05 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification and N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. For IPTL, Lys-d4, Arg-d4, dimethylation-d0 and dimethylation-d4 were chosen as variable modifications with satellite ions [PMID: 22460078]. Automatic decoy database searches were performed using the inherent methods by the respective software program. ProteomXchange For quantification of LFQ data using PEAKS, following parameters were applied: Quality ≥ 4, average area ≥ 1E5, charge: 2-5, peptide ID count per group ≥ 1 in at least 2 samples per group significance ≥ 0, and significance method: ANOVA with at least 2 peptides. Ten internal standard proteins were used for normalization. For quantification of IPTL data using IsobariQ, following parameters were used: Ignore peptide assignments with ion score below 20, peptide scoring standard for identification and minimal number of quantified peptides (PSMs) per protein: 4, require all labeling schemas, require bold red, and use unique and razor peptide for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
(1) Background: Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome profiling is most commonly performed by label-free quantification (LFQ), stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), and reporter ion-based isobaric labeling methods (TMT and iTRAQ). Isobaric peptide termini labeling (IPTL) was described as an alternative to these methods and is based on crosswise labeling of both peptide termini and MS2 quantification. High quantification accuracy was assumed for IPTL because multiple quantification points are obtained per identified MS2 spectrum. A direct comparison of IPTL with other quantification methods has not been performed yet because IPTL commonly requires digestion with endoproteinase Lys-C. (2) Methods: To enable tryptic digestion of IPTL samples, a novel labeling for IPTL was developed that combines metabolic labeling (Arg-0/Lys-0 and Arg-d4/Lys-d4, respectively) with crosswise N-terminal dimethylation (d4 and d0, respectively). (3) Results: The comparison of IPTL with LFQ revealed significantly more protein identifications for LFQ above homology ion scores but not above identity ion scores. (4) Conclusions: The quantification accuracy was superior for LFQ despite the many quantification points obtained with IPTL.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Lfq, Tmt, Silac, Iptl

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Bernd Thiede

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
Department of Biosciences, University of Oslo, Norway


