### Accession
PXD018918

### Title
A PEROXO-Tag enables rapid isolation of peroxisomes from human cells

### Description
Peroxisomes are metabolic organelles that perform a diverse array of critical functions in human physiology. Traditional isolation methods for peroxisomes can take more than one hour to complete and can be laborious to implement. To address this, we have now extended our prior work on rapid organellar isolation to peroxisomes via the development of a peroxisomally-localized 3XHA epitope tag (“PEROXO-Tag”) and associated immunoprecipitation (“PEROXO-IP”) workflow. Our PEROXO-IP workflow has excellent reproducibility, is easy to implement, and achieves highly rapid (~10 minutes post-homogenization) and specific isolation of human peroxisomes, which we characterize here via proteomic profiling. By offering speed, specificity, reproducibility, and ease of use, the PEROXO-IP workflow should facilitate studies on the biology of peroxisomes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed on an S-Trap Micro Spin Column (Protifi) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, samples were mixed with 5% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.55, 5 mM TCEP (final concentrations), heated for 10 min at 55°C, cooled to room temperature, and alkylated with 15 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) for 10 min at room temperature. Afterward, phosphoric acid was added to 1.2% final concentration, and an additional 6X volume of S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM TEAB, pH 7.1) was added. Samples were applied to an S-Trap Micro Spin Column and centrifuged for 1 min at 4000 x g. The column was washed four times with S-Trap binding buffer. Sequencing-grade trypsin (0.75 μg for IP samples or 1 μg trypsin for 25 μg of whole cell sample) in 50 mM TEAB, pH 8 was added to the column and digested for 16 h at 37°C. Peptides were eluted with 40 μl each of 50 mM TEAB and then 0.2% aqueous formic acid, followed by a final elution with 35 μl 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. The three step-wise elutions were pooled and lyophilized. Off-line chromatographic separation was done as follows. For generation of data-dependent acquisition (DDA) spectral libraries, two separate pools consisting of either whole-cell or PEROXO-IP samples were made and fractionated off-line to generate diverse pools. Briefly, a first dimension of chromatographic separation with fraction collection was utilized where the labeled tryptic peptides were subjected to basic (high pH) reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) with fraction collection using Shimadzu LC-20AD pumps and an FRC-10A fraction collector. The sample was loaded on a 10 cm x 2.1 mm column packed with 2.6 µm Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18 media (Phenomenex). The gradient was isocratic 1% A buffer (20 mM ammonium formate pH 10 in water) for 1 min 150 µl min-1 with increasing B buffer (acetonitrile) concentrations to 16.7% B at 20.5 min, 30% B at 31 min and 45% B at 36 min. For the whole-cell samples, 2 μg of peptides from four replicates of Control-PEROXO and HA-PEROXO cells were pooled and collected as a total of 20 fractions (fx). These were combined as follows for a total of eight samples (fx1+2+19+20, fx3+10, fx4+11, fx5+12, fx6+13, fx7+14, fx8+15+17, fx9+16+18). Similarly for the IP samples, 30% of peptides from four replicates were pooled, collected as a total of 16 fractions, and combined as follows for a total of six samples (fx1+2+15+16, fx3+8, fx4+9, fx5+10, fx6+11+13, fx7+12+14). All pooled fractions were lyophilized. Mass spectrometry was performed as follows. Samples were analyzed by HPLC using Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 pumps and autosampler and a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer in a nano-flow configuration. Samples were loaded on a 6 cm x 100 µm column packed with 10 µm ODS-A C18 material (YMC) and washed with 12 µl total volume to trap and wash peptides. These were then eluted onto the analytical column, which was 14 cm x 75 µm PicoFrit Emitter with 15 µm tip (New Objective) self-packed with 1.7 µm Aeris C18 material (Phenomenex). For whole cell samples, the gradient was isocratic 1% A buffer (1% formic acid in water) for 1 min 300 nl min-1 with increasing B buffer (1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) concentrations to 25% B at 105 min, 40% B at 125 min, and 100% B at 126 min. For IP samples, the gradient was isocratic 6% A Buffer for 1 min 300 nl min-1 with increasing B buffer concentrations to 21% B at 19.5 min, 36% B at 31 min, 50% B at 36 min, and 100% B at 48.5 min.  Off-line fractionated pools were analyzed and the mass spectrometer was operated in a top 20 data-dependent acquisition mode. Each DDA cycle consisted of one MS scan at 60,000 resolution, with precursor ions meeting defined criteria (AGC target: 1E6) fragmented and detected at 15,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw files of off-line fractionated pools were loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as fractions and analyzed using precursor-based quantification. SequestHT was used for searching peptides against the human genome database (Human_Uniprot_Sprt_Trembl_Isoforms_Release2019_01_Contams_20190205), allowing up to two missed tryptic cleavages. Tolerances were set to 10 ppm for precursor mass and 0.02 Da for fragment mass. PSM validation was performed using Percolator (Kall et al., 2007) for PSMs with deltaCn of 0.05 or less, with the target decoy database settings for high confidence at 0.01 and moderate confidence at 0.05. In Skyline (MacLean et al., 2010), spectral libraries were assembled from all DDA sample search results, using only PSMs with a q-value cutoff score of 0.95 from the .msf Proteome Discoverer output file.

### Publication Abstract
Peroxisomes are metabolic organelles that perform a diverse array of critical functions in human physiology. Traditional isolation methods for peroxisomes can take more than 1&#xa0;h to complete and can be laborious to implement. To address this, we have now extended our prior work on rapid organellar isolation to peroxisomes via the development of a peroxisomally localized 3XHA epitope tag ("PEROXO-Tag") and associated immunoprecipitation ("PEROXO-IP") workflow. Our PEROXO-IP workflow has excellent reproducibility, is easy to implement, and achieves highly rapid (~10&#xa0;min post homogenization) and specific isolation of human peroxisomes, which we characterize here via proteomic profiling. By offering speed, specificity, reproducibility, and ease of use, the PEROXO-IP workflow should facilitate studies on the biology of peroxisomes.

### Keywords
Human hek-293t, Peroxisome

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA

### Submitter
Elizabeth Boydston

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA; Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA


