### Accession
PXD035399

### Title
Analysis of context-specific KRAS-effectors (sub)complexes in Caco-2 cells

### Description
Ras is a key switch controlling cell behavior. In the GTP-bound form, Ras interacts with numerous effectors in a mutually exclusive manner, where individual Ras-effectors are likely part of larger cellular (sub)complexes. The molecular details of these (sub)complexes and their alteration in specific contexts is not understood. Focusing on KRAS, we performed affinity purification (AP)-mass spectrometry (MS) experiments of exogenous expressed Flag-KRAS WT and three oncogenic mutants (‘genetic contexts’) in the human Caco-2 cell line, each exposed to 11 different culture media (‘culture contexts’) that mimic conditions relevant in the colon and colorectal cancer. We identified four effectors present in complex with KRAS in all genetic and growth contexts (‘context-general effectors’). Seven effectors are found in KRAS complexes in only some contexts (‘context-specific effectors’). Analyzing all interactors in complex with KRAS per condition, we find that the culture contexts had a larger impact on interaction rewiring than genetic contexts. We analyzed how changes in the interactome impact functional outcomes and created interactive shiny app for interactive visualization. We validated some of the functional differences in metabolism and proliferation. Finally, we used networks to evaluate how KRAS effectors are involved in the modulation of functions by random walk analyses of effector-mediated (sub)complexes. Altogether, our work shows the impact of environmental contexts on network rewiring, which provides insides into tissue-specific signaling mechanisms. This may also explain why KRAS oncogenic mutants may be causing cancer only in specific tissues despite KRAS being expressed in most cells and tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation after AP for mass spectrometry  For protein cleanup the paramagnetic bead–based SP3 (solid-phase-enhanced sample-preparation) workflow was used (47). For each AP experiment sample protein concentrations were determined using the PierceTM BCA protein assay (ThermoFisher) following the manufacturer’s instructions and 50 µg of proteins were adjusted in 20 µl of buffer/MS grade water. Samples were homogenized and denatured in urea (final concentration, 4 M), ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM), and calcium chloride (100 mM), then reduced in DTT (final concentration, 1 mM) for 15 minutes at room temperature and alkalinized in iodoacetamide (IAA) (3 mM) in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes. The tryptic digestion protocol was performed using the KingFisher DuoPrime purification system (ThermoFisher) in a series of steps. First, magnetic hydrophobic and hydrophilic beads were washed several times in MS grade water and added to the deepwells plate in the KingFisher along with the samples and the same volume as the sample of 100 % ethanol. Next, the solutions were mixed at low speed for 10 minutes, after which the beads coupled to the proteins were collected with the magnetic arm of the KingFisher and transferred to be washed in 3 different deepwells containing each 80% of ethanol. The washed beads-proteins were then released into the trypsin (Promega, V5111)-containing deepwells at a 50:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio and mixed at low speed for 8 h of digestions into peptide fragments at 37 °C in the KingFisher. Peptide samples were transferred into low protein binding tubes, 1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to acidify the samples ready to be desalted, cleaned, and concentrated on C18Tips (ThermoFisher, 87784) (48) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Purified peptides were dried and resuspended in low protein binding tubes before mass spectrometry analysis in 30 ul of 0.15 % TFA acid and 1 % acetic acid in mass spectrometry grade water.  Mass spectrometry The peptides were analysed using a shotgun proteomics technique. This technique allows a sensitive bottom-up approach that consists of separating peptides resulting from protein digestion by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer connected to an Evosep One liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid and each sample was loaded onto an Evosep tip. The Evosep tips were placed in position on the Evosep One, in a 96-tip box. The autosampler is configured to pick up each tip, elute and separate the peptides using a set chromatography method (1). The chromatography buffers used were buffer B (99.9 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer A (99.9 % water, 0.1 % formic acid). All solvents are LCMS grade.  The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 5 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.03 seconds (2).   References 1. Bache, Nicolai, et al. "A novel LC system embeds analytes in pre-formed gradients for rapid, ultra-robust proteomics." Molecular & Cellular Proteomics 17.11 (2018): 2284-2296. 2.  Meier, F. et al. Online Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) with a Novel Trapped Ion Mobility Mass Spectrometer. Mol Cell Proteomics 17, 2534-2545, doi :10.1074/mcp. TIR118.000900 (2018).

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was done using MaxQuant software. The raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) with the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.3.0). Specific parameters for trapped ion mobility spectrometry data-dependent acquisition (TIMS DDA) were used: Fixed Mod: carbamidomethylation; Variable Mods: methionine, oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme (maximum 2 missed cleavages); Precursor mass tolerances 10 ppm; Peptide FDR 1%; Protein FDR 1%. The normalized protein intensity of each identified protein was used for label-free quantitation (LFQ) using the MaxLFQ algorithm (3).   Reference 3. Cox, Jürgen, et al. "Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ." Molecular & cellular proteomics 13.9 (2014): 2513-2526.   3. Cox, Jürgen, et al. "Accurate proteome-wide label-free quantification by delayed normalization and maximal peptide ratio extraction, termed MaxLFQ." Molecular & cellular proteomics 13.9 (2014): 2513-2526.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kras, Affinity purification (ap)-mass spectrometry (ms), Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Associate Professor of Systems Biology Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia 9, via A Ferrata/ 27100 Pavia / Italy
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Kiel
Associate Professor of Systems Biology Department of Molecular Medicine University of Pavia 9, via A Ferrata/ 27100 Pavia / Italy


