### Accession
PXD037134

### Title
Comprehensive glycoprofiling of oral tumours associates N-glycosylation with lymph node metastasis and patient survival

### Description
While altered protein glycosylation is regarded a trait of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), its heterogeneous glycoproteome and dynamics with disease progression remain unmapped. Employing an integrated multi-omics approach comprising unbiased and quantitative glycomics and glycoproteomics on resected OSCC tissues, we firstly profiled the N-glycome that overall displayed uniform expression in OSCC patients with (N+, n = 19) and without (N0, n = 12) lymph node metastasis, suggesting relatively stable N-glycosylation during metastasis. Notably, glycoproteomics and advanced correlation analysis uncovered altered site-specific N-glycosylation and associations with clinicopathological features. Importantly, targeted analyses of the multi-omics data unveiled two N-glycans and three N-glycopeptides that were closely associated with patient survival. This study provides novel insight into the complex OSCC tissue N-glycoproteome forming an important resource to further explore the underpinning disease mechanisms and uncover new prognostic glyco-markers for OSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue protein samples (35 µg/sample) were reduced with 5 mM DTT (final concentration) for 25 min at 56°C and alkylated using 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Urea was added to a final concentration of 1.6 M in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 mM calcium chloride prior to digestion with 1 µg sequencing grade porcine trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched with a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The resulting peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB 1 cc (30 mg) SPE cartridges (Waters) using an established protocol with modifications. After washing twice with 1.5 mL 1% (v/v) FA, peptides were eluted twice with 250 µL 70 % ACN in 1% FA (both v/v) and dried. Peptide samples were labelled with TMT and then loaded onto primed custom-made HILIC SPE micro-columns packed with ZIC-HILIC resin onto supporting C8 disks in p10 pipette tips for glycopeptide enrichment. The flow-through fractions were collected. The HILIC-SPE micro-columns were then washed with 50 μL loading/washing solvent and the wash fraction combined with the flow-through fraction for separate downstream analysis, as this fraction contained the non-glycosylated peptides. The retained N-glycopeptides were eluted in three sequential steps, firstly with 50 μL 0.1% (v/v) TFA, followed by 50 μL 25 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate and then 50 μL 50% (v/v) ACN. The three N-glycopeptide fractions were combined to form the enriched glycopeptide mixture, which was dried and desalted on a primed Oligo R3 reversed phase SPE micro-column.

### Data Protocol
Data of intact N-glycopeptides were searched with Byonic v2.6.46. The identified N-glycopeptides were quantified using the Report Ion Quantifier as a node in Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Scientific) and the reporter ion intensities from the MS/MS scans were extracted from the QuantSpectra table. Glycopeptides were manually grouped by summing the reporter ion intensities from peptide spectral matches (PSMs) belonging to the same UniProtKB identifier, same glycosylation site within the protein, and same glycan composition. The abundances of the unique glycopeptides from each channel were first normalized by dividing each unique glycopeptide reporter ion intensity by the reference reporter intensity (from the peptide pool, see above) within that specific experiment and further normalized by the total sum intensity of each channel to correct for any variation in the total yield during the labelling reactions. Protemics data were processed using MaxQuant v1.6.12.0 and searched against the reviewed UniProtKB Human Protein Database, with a tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for product ions, no match between runs, unique and razor peptides allowed for quantification, and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys (+57.021 Da) was considered a fixed modification, and oxidation of Met (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.010 Da) were considered variable modifications. A maximum of a 1% FDR was set for both the protein and peptide identification.

### Publication Abstract
While altered protein glycosylation is regarded a trait of oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC), the heterogeneous and dynamic glycoproteome of tumor tissues from OSCC patients remain unmapped. To this end, we here employ an integrated multi-omics approach comprising unbiased and quantitative glycomics and glycoproteomics applied to a cohort of resected primary tumor tissues from OSCC patients with (n&#xa0;= 19) and without (n&#xa0;= 12) lymph node metastasis. While all tumor tissues displayed relatively uniform N-glycome profiles suggesting overall stable global N-glycosylation during disease progression, altered expression of six sialylated N-glycans was found to correlate with lymph node metastasis. Notably, glycoproteomics and advanced statistical analyses uncovered altered site-specific N-glycosylation revealing previously unknown associations with several clinicopathological features. Importantly, the glycomics and glycoproteomics data unveiled that comparatively high abundance of two core-fucosylated and sialylated N-glycans (Glycan 40a and Glycan 46a) and one N-glycopeptide from fibronectin were associated with low patient survival, while a relatively low abundance of N-glycopeptides from both afamin and CD59 were also associated with poor survival. This study provides insight into the complex OSCC tissue N-glycoproteome, thereby forming an important resource to further explore the underpinning disease mechanisms and uncover new prognostic glycomarkers for OSCC.

### Keywords
Lymph node metastasis, Glycoproteomics, Glycoproteome, Oral cancer, Glycomics, Glycosylation

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências (LNBio), Centro Nacional de Pesquisa emEnergia e Materiais (CNPEM) (lab head)
CNPEM

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Laboratório de Espectrometria de Massas, Laboratório Nacional de Biociências (LNBio), Centro Nacional de Pesquisa emEnergia e Materiais (CNPEM) (lab head)


