### Accession
PXD030063

### Title
Mapping of nanobody binding sites on human LRRK2 by CX-MS

### Description
As part of an in-depth characterization of nanobodies directed against the human Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), epitopes of the nanobodies bound to LRRK2 were mapped by chemical crosslinking combined with mass spectrometry using the CID-cleavable crosslinker disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO).

### Sample Protocol
For chemical crosslinking, the LRRK2 concentration was adjusted to 3µM and each Nb was added at a 2:1 molar ratio and incubated for 1 h at 4 °C. The crosslinking reaction was performed using the NHS-ester-based and CID-cleavable reagent disuccinimidyl sulfoxide (DSSO; Thermo Fisher) at a molar excess of 60:1 (referred to the Nbs), and carried out for 30 min at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by adding Tris-HCL (pH 7.5). Proteins were precipitated by chloroform/ methanol and subjected to tryptic proteolysis. The tryptic peptide solutions were cleaned up by C18-StageTips (Thermo Fisher) and the volume was reduced to approx. 10µL in a SpeedVac. 40µL SEC buffer (30% [vol/vol] acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) were added to the desalted peptides.  The entire volume of 50µL was loaded onto the SEC column (Superdex Peptide column 3.2/300; Cytiva) which was mounted to an Äkta pure system (Cytiva) and equilibrated in SEC buffer. The SEC was performed at a flow rate of 50µL/min. The eluates were collected in 100µL fractions. Vacuum-dried fractions (remaining volume of 2µL to avoid complete dryness) containing the crosslinked peptides, were re-dissolved in a total volume of 10µL 0.5% TFA and analyzed individually on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) using the MS2_MS3 fragmentation method with the default settings (ver. 3.0, build 2041). MS1 scans were performed in the Orbitrap (FTMS, resolution = 60K) at an m/z range of 375-1500. MS2 was performed with CID (CE=25%) and spectra were acquired in the Orbitap (FTMS) at 30K resolution. The MS3 scans were performed with HCD (CE=30%) and spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The Thermo Raw files were analyzed with the MS2_MS3 workflow provided by in Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (build 2.5.0.400), which uses XlinkX (ver. 2.5) for the detection of crosslinked peptides. A global search of MS2 spectra was performed with Sequest HT against the human subset of the Swissprot database (v. 2019_02; 20417 entries) supplemented with the sequences of the nanobodies followed by an FDR analysis (FDR=0.01) by the Target Decoy PSM validator. For the Sequest analysis, the following settings have been used: Trypsin has been used as enzyme. Carbamylation of cysteines has been used as fixed modification and Methionine oxidation, DSSO hydrolyzed (K+176.014 Da), DSSO Tris (K+279.078 Da) and N-terminal Acetylation were allowed as variable modifications.  For the detection of crosslinked peptides by the XlinkX detection node, the acquisition strategy was set to MS2_MS3 and DSSO (158.004; K) was used as crosslinker at an S/N minimum of 1.5. For the XlinkX database search, the following parameters have been used: Trypsin has been used as enzyme. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm (precursor), 20 ppm (FTMS) and 0.5 Da (ITMS), respectively. The search was performed using a database containing the LRRK2 sequence and the individual sequences of all used nanobodies. Carbamidometyl has been used as fixed and Methionine oxidation was allowed as variable modification. FDR-based analysis (XlinkX/PD validator node) was performed using an FDR threshold of 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the gene coding for leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) are a leading cause of the inherited form of Parkinson's disease (PD), while LRRK2 overactivation is also associated with the more common idiopathic form of PD. LRRK2 is a large multidomain protein, including a GTPase as well as a Ser/Thr protein kinase domain. Common, disease-causing mutations increase LRRK2 kinase activity, presenting LRRK2 as an attractive target for drug discovery. Currently, drug development has mainly focused on ATP-competitive kinase inhibitors. Here, we report the identification and characterization of a variety of nanobodies that bind to different LRRK2 domains and inhibit or activate LRRK2 in cells and in in&#xa0;vitro. Importantly, nanobodies were identified that inhibit LRRK2 kinase activity while binding to a site that is topographically distinct from the active site and thus act through an allosteric inhibitory mechanism that does not involve binding to the ATP pocket or even to the kinase domain. Moreover, while certain nanobodies completely inhibit the LRRK2 kinase activity, we also identified nanobodies that specifically inhibit the phosphorylation of Rab protein substrates. Finally, in contrast to current type I kinase inhibitors, the studied kinase-inhibitory nanobodies did not induce LRRK2 microtubule association. These comprehensively characterized nanobodies represent versatile tools to study the LRRK2 function and mechanism and can pave the way toward novel diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for PD.

### Keywords
Lrrk2, Cx-ms, Crosslinking, Cl-ms, Dsso, Nanobodies, Cid-cleavable

### Affiliations
DZNE
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Otfried-Müller-Strasse 23 72076 Tübingen Germany

### Submitter
Johannes Gloeckner

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Johannes Gloeckner
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Otfried-Müller-Strasse 23 72076 Tübingen Germany


