### Accession
PXD012772

### Title
Serial mixture of peptides from mouse skin and primary human mesenchymal stem cells for protein quant methods benchmarking

### Description
Multivariate regression modelling provides a statistically powerful means of quantifying the effects of a given treatment while compensating for sources of variation and noise, such as variability between human donors and the behaviour of different peptides during mass spectrometry. However, methods to quantify endogenous post-translational modifications (PTMs) are typically reliant on summary statistical methods that fail to consider sources of variability such as changes in levels of the parent protein. Here, we compare three multivariate regression methods, including a novel Bayesian elastic net algorithm (BayesENproteomics) that enables assessment of relative protein abundances while also quantifying identified PTMs for each protein. We tested the ability of these methods to accurately quantify expression of proteins in a mixed-species benchmark experiment, and to quantify synthetic PTMs induced by stable isotope labelling. Finally, we extended our regression pipeline to calculate fold changes at the pathway level, providing a complement to commonly used enrichment analysis. Our results show that BayesENproteomics can quantify changes to protein levels across a broad dynamic range while also accurately quantifying PTM and pathway-level fold changes.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of primary human MSCs lysates  Cells were lysed in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AB) buffer containing 1.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, Sigma), 0.3% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma), protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma), phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma). Six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance) were added to the tube and samples were homogenised with a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) at maximum speed for 2 minutes. Homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10000 rpm, 5 minutes).  Preparation of mouse skin lysates Skin from 3 month old female C57BL/6J mice was a gift from the Hardman group (University of Manchester; all animal work was performed under UK Home Office and local ethics committee approval). Ventral skin was shaved and scraped, then dissected into 1 mm3 pieces. 100 µL of 8 M urea (Fisher Scientific) in 25 mM AB containing 25 mM dithiothretol (DTT, Sigma), protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Sigma) was added to the tissue sections with six 1.6 mm steel beads (Next Advance). Samples were then homogenised with a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) at maximum speed for 3 minutes. Resulting homogenates were cleared by centrifugation (12 °C, 10000 rpm, 5 minutes).  Preparation of tryptic peptides  Immobilised trypsin beads (Perfinity Biosciences) were suspended in 150 µL of digest buffer (1.33 mM CaCl2, Sigma, in 25 mM AB) with 50 µL of cell or tissue lysate and shaken at 1400 rpm overnight at 37 °C in a thermocycler. The resulting digest was then reduced by the addition of 4 µL of 500 mM DTT (Sigma, in 25 mM AB; 10 min. shaking at 1400 rpm at 60 °C) and alkylated by the addition of 12 µL 500 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma, in 25 mM AB; 30 min. shaking in the dark at room temperature). Immobilised trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation at 10000 rpm for 10 min. Supernatant containing reduced, alkylated peptides were transferred to 1.5 mL ‘LoBind’ Eppendorf tubes and acidified by addition of 5 µL 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma) in water, and cleaned by two-phase extraction (3 x addition of 200 µL ethyl acetate, Sigma, followed by vortexing and aspiration of the organic layer). Peptides were desalted using POROS R3 beads (Thermo Fisher). Briefly, R3 beads were thoroughly mixed in 50 % (v/v) acetonitrile (Sigma; prepared in milliQ H2O; elute solution) by vortexing, to a concentration of 10 mg/ml. For each sample, 120 µl of bead suspension was pipetted into a well of a 96-well filtration membrane plate. The plate was then centrifuged (200 x g, 1 minute, room temperature) and the run-through was collected into a separate 96-well plate. The beads were then resuspended in 50 µl elute solution and centrifuged again twice before repeating the procedure with 0.1 % TFA (prepared in milliQ H2O; wash solution). The run-through from the collection plate was discarded and the R3 beads were resuspended in 100 µl of sample before centrifugation. This process was repeated until all sample had been added. Bead-bound peptides were washed twice in wash solution. The run-through was discarded and the collection plate was washed with elute solution. Peptides were then eluted by two rounds of suspension in 50 µl elute solution and centrifugation. Eluted peptides were then lyophilized.  Peptide concentrations (measured by Direct Detect spectrophotometer, Millipore) in injection solution (5% HPLC grade acetonitrile, Fisher Scientific, 0.1% TFA in deionized water) were adjusted to 200 ng/µL prior to MS analysis.  Preparation of serial mixtures of human and mouse peptides  Primary human MSCs and mouse skin sections were prepared separately as described above. Tryptic peptides from each preparation were mixed in ratios of 3:1, 1:1 and 1:3 (human:mouse, one series for each human donor:mouse), as described previously in (Swift et al, 2013a).

### Data Protocol
Preliminary data analysis using Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics)  Spectra from multiple samples were automatically aligned using Progenesis QI with manual placement of vectors where necessary. Peak picking sensitivity was set to 4/5 and features with a charge greater than +4 or fewer than 3 isotopes were excluded from further analysis. In the mouse/human mixed-species experiment, remaining features were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science), against the SwissProt and TREMBL pan-mammalian database (non-human and non-mouse identifications were removed). The peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (monoisotopic mass change, +57.021 Da) as a fixed modification, with oxidized methionine (+15.995 Da), hydroxylation of asparagine, aspartic acid, proline or lysine (+15.995 Da) and phosphorylation of serine, tyrosine, threonine (+79.966 Da) as variable modifications. For the PNGase F-treated experiment, the peptide database was modified to search for alkylated cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification, with oxidized methionine (+15.995 Da), 18O-deamidation of asparagine/glutamine (+2.988 Da) and 16O-deamidation of asparagine/glutamine (+0.984 Da). A maximum of one missed cleavage was allowed. Peptide detection intensities were exported from Progenesis QI as Excel (Microsoft) spread sheets for further processing. Deamidated spectrum counts were performed in Scaffold (version 4, Proteome Software) using .DAT files from Mascot, following pre-processing in Progenesis QI as detailed above. We applied quantification calculations to proteins detected with >2 unique (by sequence) peptides. Peptides assigned to proteins with ‘unreviewed’ status in the UniProt database were reassigned to the most abundant ‘reviewed’ protein with sequence identity in the dataset. Peptides shared between different protein groups were excluded from subsequent analysis.  equent analysis.  Multi-variate regression modelling  To compare different types of regression analysis we used three different types of linear regression algorithms: (A) ordinary least squares (OLS); (B) Linear mixed effects models with Huber residual weights (LME-H); and (C) BayesENproteomics.

### Publication Abstract
Multivariate regression modelling provides a statistically powerful means of quantifying the effects of a given treatment while compensating for sources of variation and noise, such as variability between human donors and the behavior of different peptides during mass spectrometry. However, methods to quantify endogenous post-translational modifications (PTMs) are typically reliant on summary statistical methods that fail to consider sources of variability such as changes in the levels of the parent protein. Here, we compare three multivariate regression methods, including a novel Bayesian elastic net algorithm (BayesENproteomics) that enables assessment of relative protein abundances while also quantifying identified PTMs for each protein. We tested the ability of these methods to accurately quantify expression of proteins in a mixed-species benchmark experiment and to quantify synthetic PTMs induced by stable isotope labelling. Finally, we extended our regression pipeline to calculate fold changes at the pathway level, providing a complement to commonly used enrichment analysis. Our results show that BayesENproteomics can quantify changes to protein levels across a broad dynamic range while also accurately quantifying PTM and pathway-level fold changes.

### Keywords
Bayesenproteomics, Skin, Msc

### Affiliations
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Venkatesh Mallikarjun

### Lab Head
Dr Joe Swift
Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine (L5) / Division of Cell Matrix Biology & Regenerative Medicine, University of Manchester


