### Accession
PXD014585

### Title
Endoplasmic Reticulum Chaperones Stabilize Ligand-Receptive MR1 molecules for Efficient Presentation of Metabolite Antigens

### Description
Quantitative MS analysis of MR1 GFP immunoprecipates to identify steady-state binding partnets.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins co-immunoprecipitating with MR1-GFP compared to free GFP were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using the FASP protein digestion method prior to nano flow HPLC coupled to an Impact II UHR-QqTOF mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.6.0) for feature detection and protein identification Extracted peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Homo sapiens database (March 2019). Statistical analyses were performed using LFQAnalyst (https://bioinformatics.erc.monash.edu/apps/LFQ-Analyst/) whereby the LFQ intensity values were used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The antigen-presenting molecule MR1 (MHC class I-related protein 1) presents metabolite antigens derived from microbial vitamin B<sub>2</sub> synthesis to activate mucosal-associated invariant T (MAIT) cells. Key aspects of this evolutionarily conserved pathway remain uncharacterized, including where MR1 acquires ligands and what accessory proteins assist ligand binding. We answer these questions by using a fluorophore-labeled stable MR1 antigen analog, a conformation-specific MR1 mAb, proteomic analysis, and a genome-wide CRISPR/Cas9 library screen. We show that the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) contains a pool of two unliganded MR1 conformers stabilized via interactions with chaperones tapasin and tapasin-related protein. This pool is the primary source of MR1 molecules for the presentation of exogenous metabolite antigens to MAIT cells. Deletion of these chaperones reduces the ER-resident MR1 pool and hampers antigen presentation and MAIT cell activation. The MR1 antigen-presentation pathway thus co-opts ER chaperones to fulfill its unique ability to present exogenous metabolite antigens captured within the ER.

### Keywords
Label-free ms, Mait cells, Mhc, Mr1

### Affiliations
Postdoctoral research fellow, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Laura Dagley

### Lab Head
Dr Hamish E.G. McWilliam
Postdoctoral research fellow, Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Melbourne, Australia


