### Accession
PXD016338

### Title
Biophysical basis of cellular multi-specificity encoded in a model molecular switch

### Description
Molecular switches are central to many cellular networks, enabling signal processing via interactions with molecules that write, erase, or read the active state of the switch. One switch protein can independently regulate distinct processes, but the molecular mechanisms enabling this functional multi-specificity remain unclear. Here we integrate system-scale cellular and biophysical measurements to study how a paradigm switch, the small GTPase Ran/Gsp1, achieves its functional multi-specificity. We make targeted point mutations to individual interactions of Ran/Gsp1 and show through genetic and physical interaction mapping that Ran/Gsp1 interface perturbations have widespread cellular consequences that cluster by biological processes but, unexpectedly, not by the targeted interactions. Instead, the cellular consequences of the interface mutations group by their biophysical effects on kinetic parameters of the GTPase switch cycle, and cycle kinetics are allosterically tuned by distal interface mutations. We propose that the functional multi-specificity of Ran/Gsp1 is explained by a differential sensitivity of biological processes to different kinetic parameters of the Gsp1 switch cycle, and that Gsp1 switch readers binding to the sites of distal mutations can also act as allosteric writers and erasers of the switch cycle. Similar mechanisms may underlie biological regulation by other GTPases and biological switches in general.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae cell lysate preparation S. cerevisiae strains for AP-MS were grown in YAPD medium (120 mg adenine hemisulfate salt (CAT # A9126, SIGMA), 10 g Bacto yeast extract (CAT # BD 212720), 20 g Bacto peptone (CAT # BD 211820), 20 g dextrose (D-glucose D16-3 Fisher Chemicals) per 1 L of medium). Each strain was grown at 30ºC for 12 to 24 h to OD600 of 1-1.5. The cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000 RCF for 3 minutes and the pellet was washed in 50 ml of ice-cold ddH2O, followed by a wash in 50 ml of 2x lysis buffer (200 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM KCl, 2 mM MgCl2, 30 μM GTP (Guanosine 5′-triphosphate sodium salt hydrate, CAT #G8877, Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM Dithiothreitol (Promega V3151), 0.1% IGEPAL CA-630 (CAT # I8896, Sigma-Aldrich), and 10% glycerol). Each pellet of approximately 500 μl was then resuspended in 500 μl of 2X lysis buffer supplemented with protease inhibitors without EDTA (cOmplete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, CAT # 11836170001, Roche) and dripped through a syringe into liquid nitrogen. The frozen S. cerevisiae cell pellets were lysed in liquid nitrogen with a SPEX™ SamplePrep 6870 Freezer/Mill™. FLAG immunoprecipitation FLAG immunoprecipitations were performed as previously described50,51. Details are as follows. For FLAG immunoprecipitations, frozen samples were initially kept at room temperature for 5 minutes and then placed on ice or at 4C in all subsequent steps, unless indicated otherwise. Following the addition of 1.5 – 3.0 ml Suspension Buffer (0.1 M HEPES pH 7.5, 0.1 M KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 15 M GTP, and 0.5 mM Dithiothreitol) supplemented with cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche), samples were incubated on a rotator for at least 10 minutes and then adjusted to 6.0 ml total volume with additional Suspension Buffer supplemented with inhibitors before centrifugation at 18,000 rpm for 10 minutes. Anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel beads (50 l slurry; Sigma-Aldrich) were washed twice with 1.0 ml Suspension Buffer. After reserving 50 l, the remaining supernatant and anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel beads were combined and incubated for  2 hours on a tube rotator. Beads were then collected by centrifugation at 300 rpm for 5 minutes and washed three times. For each wash step, beads were alternately suspended in 1.0 ml Suspension Buffer and collected by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm for 5 minutes. After removing residual wash buffer, proteins were eluted in 42 l 0.1 mg/ml 3xFLAG peptide, 0.05% RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters Corporation) in Suspension Buffer by gently agitating beads on a vortex mixer at room temperature for 30 minutes. Immunoprecipitated proteins (~4 l) were resolved on 4-20% Criterion Tris-HCl Precast gels (BioRad) and visualized by silver stain (Pierce Silver Stain Kit; Thermo Scientific) (Supplementary File 1 Fig. 8) before submitting 10 l of each sample for mass spectrometry. At least three independent biological replicates were performed for each FLAG-tagged protein and the untagged negative control.

### Data Protocol
Liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis  To prepare samples for LC-MS/MS analysis, immunoprecipitated protein (10 l) was denatured and reduced in 2 M urea, 10 mM NH4HCO3, and 2 mM Dithiothreitol for 30 minutes at 60°C with constant shaking, alkylated in the dark with 2 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature and digested overnight at 37°C with 80 ng trypsin (Promega). Following digestion, peptides were acidified with formic acid and desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Samples were re-suspended in 4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution, and separated by a 75-minute reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow C18 column (Dr. Maisch). Peptides were directly injected into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo), with all MS1 and MS2 spectra collected in the orbitrap. Raw MS data were searched against the S. cerevisiae proteome (SGD sequences downloaded January 13, 2015) using the default settings in MaxQuant (version 1.5.7.4), with a match-between-runs enabled52,53. Peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring using SAINTexpress54. Label free quantification and statistical analysis were performed using MSstats55. Fold change in abundance of preys for 3xFLAG-tagged Gsp1 point mutants was always calculated compared to the wild-type Gsp1 with the corresponding tag.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yeast, Ppis

### Affiliations
UCSF
Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA The J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA.

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
Quantitative Biosciences Institute (QBI), University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA The J. David Gladstone Institutes, San Francisco, CA, USA.


