### Accession
PXD018851

### Title
CCPRD: A novel analytical framework for comprehensive proteomic reference database construction of non-model organisms

### Description
Protein reference databases are a critical part of producing efficient proteomic analyses. However, the method for constructing clean, efficient, and comprehensive protein reference databases is lacking. Existing methods either do not have contamination control procedures, or these methods rely on a three-frame and/or six-frame translation that sharply increases the search space and harms MS results. Herein we propose a framework for constructing a customized comprehensive proteomic reference database (CCPRD) from draft genomes and deep sequencing transcriptomes. Its effectiveness is demonstrated by incorporating the proteomes of nematocysts from endoparasitic cnidarian: myxozoans. By applying customized contamination removal procedures, contaminations in omic data were successfully identified and removed. This is an effective method that does not result in over-decontamination. This can be shown by comparing the CCPRD MS results with an artificially-contaminated database and another database with removed contaminations in genomes and transcriptomes added back. CCPRD outperformed traditional frame-based methods by identifying 35.2%-50.7% more peptides and 35.8%-43.8% more proteins, with a maximum 84.6% in size reduction. A BUSCO analysis showed that the CCPRD maintained a relatively high level of completeness compared to traditional methods. These results confirm the superiority of the CCPRD over existing methods in peptide and protein identification numbers, database size, and completeness. By providing a general framework for generating the reference database, the CCPRD, which does not need a high-quality genome, can potentially be applied to any organisms and significantly contribute to proteomic research.

### Sample Protocol
The research with fish was performed under the National Institute of Health guidelines for the humane use of laboratory animals. All experimental procedures involving fish were approved by the institution’s animal care and use committee of the Huazhong Agricultural University, China. All efforts were made to minimize the suffering of the animals. Briefly, fish infected with myxozoans were sent to the laboratory and kept in a relaying tank prior to being euthanized with an overdose of MS-222 (Sigma-Aldrich, Co., Ltd., St. Louis, MO., USA). Cysts of Myxobolus honghuensis Liu et Gu, 2011 and Myxobolus wulii Landsberg & Lom, 1991 were obtained from infected allogynogenetic gibel carp Carassius auratus gibelio. Cysts of Thelohanellus kitauei Egusa & Nakajima, 1981 was collected from infected common carp Cyprinus carpio. Myxospores were then purified from the cysts by homogenization, filtering and sucrose gradient centrifugation. Part of purified myxospores were immediately placed into RNAlater (Sigma) or 95% ethanol, frozen in liquid nitrogen and finally stored at -80°C. Other fresh spores were immediately sent to nematocyst isolation as described in technical papers (Guo et al., 2020). Nematocysts were solubilized by adding 400 μL SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris*HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M dithiothreitol) to 1 mL samples. Vortex and boiling water bath for 5 min. Brief sonication was performed to reduce the viscosity of the lysate. Boiling water bath for 15 min. Then centrifuge for 40 min at 14,000 g to remove debris by 0.22 μm filters. the filtrate was quantified with the bicinchonininc acid Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). 20 μg proteins were mixed with 5× loading buffer boiled for 5 min, and then separated on 10% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min) to detect protein purity. Protein bands were visualized with Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. Samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP). DTT was added to 60 μL protein solution to give a concentration of 100mM. Boiling water bath for 5 min and cool down to room temperature. Lysate was mixed with 200 μL UA buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) in a 10-kDa cut-off Microcon device (Millipore, Watford, UK). The device was centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. Discard the filtrate and repeat the process. Successive washes or incubations were performed by: add 100 μL IAA buffer (100mM iodoacetamide in UA), centrifuge at 600 rpm for 1 min, incubation for 30 min, then centrifuge at 14,000 g for 15 min. Add 100 μL UA buffer, centrifuge at 14,000 g for 15 min, repeat this for two times. Add 100 μL 25mM NH4HCO3, centrifuge at 14,000 g for 15 min, repeat this for two times. Add 40 μL Trypsin buffer (2 μg Trypsin in 40 μL 100mM NH4HCO3), centrifuge at 600 rpm for 1 min and incubate 16-18 h at 37 °C. Change the collect tube, centrifuge at 14,000 g for 15 min and add 40 μL 25mM NH4HCO3, centrifuge at 14,000 g for 15 min and collect the filtrate. Peptide was fractionated using SAX or desalted using C18 StageTips constructed with three membrane plugs and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The resulting peptide concentrations were estimated by UV light spectral density at OD280.

### Data Protocol
The samples were analyzed using Easy-nLC nanoflow HPLC system connected to Q‐Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). A total of 5 μg of each sample was loaded onto Thermo Scientific EASY column (2 cm × 100 μm, 5 μm C18) using an auto-sampler at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The sequential separation of peptides on Thermo Scientific EASY column (100 mm × 75 μm, 3 μm C18) was accomplished using a segmented 2-h gradient from Solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) to 55% Solvent B (84% ACN in 0.1% formic acid) for 110 min, followed by 55–100% Solvent B for 5 min and then 100% Solvent B for 5 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode, and MS spectra were acquired over a range of 300–1800 m/z. The resolving powers of the MS scan and MS/MS scan at 200 m/z for the Q-Exactive were set as 70 000 and 17 500, respectively. The maximum ion injection times were set at 50 ms for the survey scan and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans, and the automatic gain control target values for both scan modes were set to 3.0 × 10−6. The top twenty most intense signals in the acquired MS spectra were selected for further MS/MS analysis. The isolation window is 2 m/z, the MS2 activation type is HCD, the normalized collision energy is 27 eV, the dynamic exclusion is 60 s and the under fill ration is 0.1%. The raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.3.0.5. The search was set at a precursor mass window of 6 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 20 ppm. The enzyme is set to trypsin. Missed cleavage sites are set to 2. Carbamidomethyl (C) is selected as fixed modification. Per default oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation are used. The false-discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 0.01. Different customized databases were separately subjected to MaxQuant search engine.

### Publication Abstract
Protein reference databases are a critical part of producing efficient proteomic analyses. However, the method for constructing clean, efficient, and comprehensive protein reference databases of nonmodel organisms is lacking. Existing methods either do not have contamination control procedures, or these methods rely on a three-frame and/or six-frame translation that sharply increases the search space and the need for computational resources. Herein, we propose a framework for constructing a customized comprehensive proteomic reference database (CCPRD) from draft genomes and deep sequencing transcriptomes. Its effectiveness is demonstrated by incorporating the proteomes of nematocysts from endoparasitic cnidarian: myxozoans. By applying customized contamination removal procedures, contaminations in omic data were successfully identified and removed. This is an effective method that does not result in overdecontamination. This can be shown by comparing the CCPRD MS results with an artificially contaminated database and another database with removed contaminations in genomes and transcriptomes added back. CCPRD outperformed traditional frame-based methods by identifying 35.2-50.7% more peptides and 35.8-43.8% more proteins, with a maximum of 84.6% in size reduction. A BUSCO analysis showed that the CCPRD maintained a relatively high level of completeness compared to traditional methods. These results confirm the superiority of the CCPRD over existing methods in peptide and protein identification numbers, database size, and completeness. By providing a general framework for generating the reference database, the CCPRD, which does not need a high-quality genome, can potentially be applied to nonmodel organisms and significantly contribute to proteomic research.

### Keywords
Protein identification, Nematocysts, Proteomics, Reference database, Myxozoans, Ccprd

### Affiliations
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University
Huazhong Agricultural University

### Submitter
qingxiang Guo

### Lab Head
Dr Zemao Gu
College of Fisheries, Huazhong Agricultural University


