### Accession
PXD000960

### Title
K63 polyubiquitination is a new modulator of the oxidative stress response, shotgun data

### Description
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification that signals multiple processes, including protein degradation, trafficking and DNA repair. Polyubiquitin accumulates globally during the oxidative stress response, and this has been mainly attributed to increased ubiquitin conjugation and perturbations in protein degradation. Here we show that the unconventional Lys 63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitin accumulates in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a highly sensitive and regulated manner as a result of exposure to peroxides. We demonstrate that hydrogen peroxide inhibits the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2, leading to accumulation of K63 conjugates assembled by the Rad6 ubiquitin conjugase and the Bre1 ubiquitin ligase. Using linkage-specific isolation methods and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)–based quantitative proteomics, we identified >100 new K63-polyubiquitinated targets, which were substantially enriched in ribosomal proteins. Finally, we demonstrate that impairment of K63 ubiquitination during oxidative stress affects polysome stability and protein expression, rendering cells more sensitive to stress, and thereby reveal a new redox-regulatory role for this modification.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative SILAC experiments were performed in cells grown in SD containing amino acid dropout depleted in arginine and lysine (Sunrise Science). SILAC media were supplemented with light or heavy isotopes of arginine and lysine (L-Arg6 13C; L-Lys8 13C, 15N – Cambridge Isotopes). Wildtype yeast strain (GMS280) was grown in light medium and mutant K63R (GMS413) was grown in heavy medium for at least 7 generation before 0.6 mM H2O2 treatment for 45 min. Cell disruption was performed by glass-bead agitation at 4 C in standard buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), 1x  EMD Millipore protease inhibitor cocktail set I. The extract was cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). Protein preparation for proteomics analysis was performed as previously described (Vogel et. al., 2011 – Mol Cell Proteomics). For AP-MS analysis, K63 ubiquitinated proteins were isolated from cell lysate using FLAG K63-TUBE (K63-Tandem Ubiquitin Binding Entities - LifeSensors) according to manufacturer’s protocol. 50 nM of K63-TUBE peptide and 5 mM EDTA were added to the standard lysis buffer and incubated for one additional hour at 4 C after lysate clearing. K63 proteins were immunoprecipitated using magnetic Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) loaded with 7 µg/mg beads of anti-FLAG antibody (Sigma). The immunoprecipitation was performed for 1 h at 4 C under agitation. K63 targets were eluted with 0.2 M glycine pH 2.5 for 1 h at 4 C. The pH of the eluate was neutralized and the trypsin digestion for proteomics analysis was performed as described below. Tryptically digested proteins were separated on an Agilent Zorbax 300 Stablebond-C18 column (3.5 µm, 0.075 x 150 mm) by reverse-phase chromatography with a gradient of 5 to 60 % acetonitrile from 3 to 5h, performed with an Eksigent NanoLC 2DPlus liquid chromatography system. The eluted peptides were in-line injected into a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent analysis was performed on the top 20 most intense ions from each MS full scan with dynamic exclusion set to 90 s if m/z acquisition was repeated within a 45 s interval.

### Data Protocol
The output RAW data was processed using MaxQuant suite (v. 1.3.0.5) to identify and quantify protein abundance. The spectra were matched against the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae database (Uniprot- 2012 release). Protein identification was performed using 20 ppm tolerance at the MS level (FT-mass analyzer) and 0.5 Da at the MS/MS level (Ion Trap analyzer), with a posterior global false discovery rate at 1% based on the reverse sequence of the yeast FASTA file. Up to two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were searched as variable post-translational modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed. The minimum number of SILAC peptide pairs used to quantify the protein abundance was set to two; only proteins present in all biological replicates containing at least two peptides were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is a post-translational modification that signals multiple processes, including protein degradation, trafficking and DNA repair. Polyubiquitin accumulates globally during the oxidative stress response, and this has been mainly attributed to increased ubiquitin conjugation and perturbations in protein degradation. Here we show that the unconventional Lys63 (K63)-linked polyubiquitin accumulates in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae in a highly sensitive and regulated manner as a result of exposure to peroxides. We demonstrate that hydrogen peroxide inhibits the deubiquitinating enzyme Ubp2, leading to accumulation of K63 conjugates assembled by the Rad6 ubiquitin conjugase and the Bre1 ubiquitin ligase. Using linkage-specific isolation methods and stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)-based quantitative proteomics, we identified &gt;100 new K63-polyubiquitinated targets, which were substantially enriched in ribosomal proteins. Finally, we demonstrate that impairment of K63 ubiquitination during oxidative stress affects polysome stability and protein expression, rendering cells more sensitive to stress, and thereby reveal a new redox-regulatory role for this modification.

### Keywords
K63 ubiquitination yeast oxidative stress

### Affiliations
Duke University
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology Department of Biology New York University, New York, NY, 10003, USA

### Submitter
Gustavo Silva

### Lab Head
Dr Christine Vogel
Center for Genomics and Systems Biology Department of Biology New York University, New York, NY, 10003, USA


