### Accession
PXD019215

### Title
MC4 crosslinking of rhodopsin and GRK1 complex

### Description
G protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinases (GRKs) selectively phosphorylate agonist bound GPCRs, thereby switching the signal from G protein-dependent to arrestin-dependent pathways, including receptor internalization and downregulation. There are currently no high-resolution details known about how a GRK recognizes an activated receptor, but most functional studies indicate that its unique N-terminus is key to agonist-dependent phosphorylation. Herein, we report the 7.2 Å cryo-electron microscopy (EM) single particle reconstruction of the rhodopsin-rhodopsin kinase (GRK1) complex. The structure reveals a 1:1 assembly with multiple contact points between the GRK1 kinase domain and rhodopsin, the most prominent being the insertion of the GRK1 N-terminal helix directly into the cytoplasmic cleft formed by rhodopsin in its active state. Cross-linking coupled with mass spectrometry, along with functional studies, confirmed the observed interface between the proteins and revealed regions of the complex that are dynamic.

### Sample Protocol
The purification of the crosslinked rhodopsin–GRK1 complex. A crosslinking reaction of 10 uM GRK1 and 10 uM rhodopsin in a total volume 1.5 ml was set up as described above. 50 mM Tris (pH 8.0) was added to quench the reaction. The reaction mix was loaded to a 1 ml HiTrap Q column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM LMNG and 20 µM Sgm. GRK1 and crosslinked rho-GRK1 complex were eluted over a gradient of 100 mM to 200 mM NaCl. Rhodopsin and self-crosslinked rhodopsin eluted at 500 mM NaCl. The fractions containing mainly crosslinked rhodopsin–GRK1 complex and some GRK1 were pooled together and concentrated with a 100 kDa cutoff concentrator to ~400 µl. The concentrated sample was loaded onto a S200 increase column (GE Healthcare) equilibrated with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 0.2 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM LMNG and 20 µM Sgm. The crosslinked rhodopsin–GRK1 complex was eluted at a volume corresponding to a 150 kDa globular protein and was collected for EM and MS analysis.  Protein digestion and peptide purification. The crosslinked rhodopsin–GRK1 complex was sequentially digested with V8-protease (GluC) and trypsin. Frozen samples in 20 mM HEPES (45 µg) were dried and adjusted to 50 µL with digestion buffer. Digestion buffer contained 0.6% DDM, 4 M urea, and 150mM Tris. Samples were reduced with 14 mM of tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide, and diluted 5-fold prior to digestion with GluC for 6 hours at 37 ˚C. Samples were diluted further to 900 µL and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 ˚C. A second crosslinking replicate of the complex was digested with chymotrypsin after initial digestion with GluC using identical conditions as GluC/trypsin. Digested samples were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), pH 2, prior to peptide enrichment and desalting using a two-dimensional solid-phase extraction procedure. Briefly, peptides were desalted with reversed-phase polymeric cartridges (Thermo peptide desalting spin columns) followed by strong cation exchange with volatile triethylammonium buffers (TEA). Peptides eluted in 50% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA from the first step were dried and resuspended in 2mM TEA▪TFA (pH 2.3) prior to peptide enrichment with strong cation exchange spin columns (macrospin SCX, NEST group) and eluted using 0.2M TEA acetate. Dried peptide fractions were frozen until submitted for liquid chromatography- tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MSMS) analysis.  LC-MSMS analysis. Dried samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, and 1 µg aliquots were analyzed in duplicate on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer operated in positive mode and equipped with an Ultimate nano-UHPLC. Peptides were eluted (75µm i.d. X 50cm) with a 60 min gradient from 4% ACN to 36% ACN at 300 nL/min. Total acquisition time was 90 min, including initial 5 min hold and 25 min wash/equilibration step. Each sample was acquired with data-dependent HRMS2 fragmentation using both HCD fragmentation and HRMS2-MS2 workflows (low energy CID and HCD fragmentation) with Orbitrap resolutions of 60K (MS1) and 30K (MS2), and a cycle time of 3 sec.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed with Thermo Proteome Discoverer (ver 2.3, PD) using embedded CID-cleavable crosslinking workflows configured for MC4 and digestion conditions. PD was used to generate spectra files (.mgf) for search in MeroX (v 2.0b, MX). Protein crosslinks were evaluated with the XlinkX node in PD. XlinkX was configured for 1% false discovery rate (FDR) using a simple database of 12 proteins to evaluate system performance (e.g. system carryover, and possible contaminant peaks). The sequestHT and MS-AMANDA nodes were used to evaluate protein coverage and extent of MC4 modification. Spectra files were searched with MX to identify protein crosslinks and MC4 reactivity using a 2% FDR. Peptide identification scores and mass deviations for reported high confidence matches from both software were binned and refined further to remove false positives and outliers. Thresholds for high confidence identifications were set to a mass deviation range < 4ppm, MX scores > 100, and Xlink scores >80 (∆Xlx Score > 80%). NHS esters of serine were also included in the dataset and were validated manually for unambiguous assignment. After refinement and validation, no putative serine crosslinks were retained among high confidence assignments. Intraprotein crosslinks were further evaluated for GRK1 and rhodopsin using known structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank and Xwalk for further validation using distance constraints consistent with MC4 (< 30 Å).

### Publication Abstract
G-protein-coupled receptor (GPCR) kinases (GRKs) selectively phosphorylate activated GPCRs, thereby priming them for desensitization<sup>1</sup>. Although it is unclear how GRKs recognize these receptors<sup>2-4</sup>, a conserved region at the GRK N terminus is essential for this process<sup>5-8</sup>. Here we report a series of cryo-electron microscopy single-particle reconstructions of light-activated rhodopsin (Rho*) bound to rhodopsin kinase (GRK1), wherein the N terminus of GRK1 forms a helix that docks into the open cytoplasmic cleft of Rho*. The helix also packs against the GRK1 kinase domain and stabilizes it in an active configuration. The complex is further stabilized by electrostatic interactions between basic residues that are conserved in most GPCRs and acidic residues that are conserved in GRKs. We did not observe any density for the regulator of G-protein signalling homology domain of GRK1 or the C terminus of rhodopsin. Crosslinking with mass spectrometry analysis confirmed these results and revealed dynamic behaviour in receptor-bound GRK1 that would allow the phosphorylation of multiple sites in the receptor tail. We have identified GRK1 residues whose mutation augments kinase activity and crosslinking with Rho*, as well as residues that are involved in activation by acidic phospholipids. From these data, we present a general model for how a small family of protein kinases can recognize and be activated by hundreds of different GPCRs.

### Keywords
Grk1, Rhodopsin, Rhodopsin kinase, Crosslinking, Gpcr, Mc4

### Affiliations
University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Biological Chemistry, Ann Arbor, MI
University of Michigan Medical School

### Submitter
Manolo Plasencia

### Lab Head
Dr Philip C Andrews
University of Michigan Medical School, Department of Biological Chemistry, Ann Arbor, MI


