### Accession
PXD033664

### Title
Integrating proteomic data with metabolic modelling provides insight into key pathways in Bordetella pertussis biofilms

### Description
Pertussis, commonly known as whooping cough is a severe respiratory disease caused by the bacterium, Bordetella pertussis. Despite widespread vaccination, pertussis resurgence has been observed globally. The development of the current acellular vaccine (ACV) has been based on planktonic studies. However, recent studies have shown that B. pertussis readily forms biofilms. A better understanding of B. pertussis biofilms is important for developing novel vaccines that can target all aspects of B. pertussis infection. This study compared the proteomic expression of biofilm and planktonic B. pertussis cells to identify key changes between the conditions. Major differences were identified in virulence factors including an upregulation of toxins (adenylate cyclase toxin and dermonecrotic toxin) and strong downregulation of pertactin and type III secretion system proteins in biofilm cells. To further dissect metabolic pathways that are altered during the biofilm lifestyle, the proteomic data was then incorporated into a genome scale metabolic model using the integrated metabolic analysis tool (iMAT). The analysis revealed that planktonic cells utilised the glyoxylate shunt while biofilm cells completed the full tricarboxylic acid cycle. Differences in processing aspartate, arginine and alanine were identified as well as unique export of valine out of biofilm cells which may have a role in inter-bacterial communication and regulation. Finally, increased polyhydroxybutyrate accumulation and superoxide dismutase activity in biofilm cells may contribute to increased persistence during infection. Taken together, this study modelled major proteomic and metabolic changes that occur in biofilm cells which helps lay the groundwork for further understanding B. pertussis pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Bordetella pertussis L1423 strain was grown on Bordet-Gengou agar (BG, BD Scientific) for 3-5 days at 37C. A loopful of pure Bvg+ colonies were suspended into Thalen-Ijssel (THIJS) media supplemented with 1% heptakis ((2,6‐O‐dimethyl) β‐cyclodextrin) and 1% THIJS supplement and grown for 24 h shaking at 180 rpm at 37°C. For planktonic growth, the OD600 of the starter culture was adjusted to 0.05 in 20 mL THIJS and incubated for 12 h, shaking at 180 rpm. For biofilms, the OD600 was adjusted to 0.1 and 1 mL of this adjusted culture was seeded into each well of a 24 well plate. The 24 well plate was incubated statically for 5 h at 37°C for attachment of cells before the media was refreshed to remove non-adherent cells. After 96 h of incubation, the wells were washed with PBS and then the plate was water bath sonicated at 37 kHz for 2 min to detach cells. The planktonic and biofilm cells were then probe sonicated and proteins extracted. Six biological replicates per condition were performed. The protein extracts (10 µg) were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin. The peptides were analysed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo) at the UNSW Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility (BMSF).

### Data Protocol
The output spectra were matched against a custom B. pertussis database on the MaxQuant (v2.0.3.1) proteomics software with the following parameters: digestion mode – specific, enzyme – Trypsin/P, max missed cleavages – 1, Label free quantification – LFQ, FTMS MS/MS match tolerance – 4 ppm, Protein identification false discovery rate – 0.01 and min peptides per protein – 2. All other parameters were set as the recommended default values.

### Publication Abstract
Pertussis, commonly known as whooping cough is a severe respiratory disease caused by the bacterium, <i>Bordetella pertussis</i>. Despite widespread vaccination, pertussis resurgence has been observed globally. The development of the current acellular vaccine (ACV) has been based on planktonic studies. However, recent studies have shown that <i>B. pertussis</i> readily forms biofilms. A better understanding of <i>B. pertussis</i> biofilms is important for developing novel vaccines that can target all aspects of <i>B. pertussis</i> infection. This study compared the proteomic expression of biofilm and planktonic <i>B. pertussis</i> cells to identify key changes between the conditions. Major differences were identified in virulence factors including an upregulation of toxins (adenylate cyclase toxin and dermonecrotic toxin) and downregulation of pertactin and type III secretion system proteins in biofilm cells. To further dissect metabolic pathways that are altered during the biofilm lifestyle, the proteomic data was then incorporated into a genome scale metabolic model using the Integrative Metabolic Analysis Tool (iMAT). The generated models predicted that planktonic cells utilised the glyoxylate shunt while biofilm cells completed the full tricarboxylic acid cycle. Differences in processing aspartate, arginine and alanine were identified as well as unique export of valine out of biofilm cells which may have a role in inter-bacterial communication and regulation. Finally, increased polyhydroxybutyrate accumulation and superoxide dismutase activity in biofilm cells may contribute to increased persistence during infection. Taken together, this study modeled major proteomic and metabolic changes that occur in biofilm cells which helps lay the groundwork for further understanding <i>B. pertussis</i> pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Lfq, Biofilm, Bordetella pertussis

### Affiliations
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (lab head)
University of New South Wales, Sydney

### Submitter
Hiroki Suyama

### Lab Head
Dr Ruiting Lan
School of Biotechnology and Biomolecular Sciences, University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia (lab head)


