### Accession
PXD018382

### Title
Mycobacteria tolerate carbon monoxide by remodelling their respiratory chain

### Description
Carbon monoxide (CO) is a gas infamous for its acute toxicity. The toxicity of CO predominately stems from its tendency to form carbonyl complexes with transition metals, thus inhibiting the heme-prosthetic groups of proteins, including the terminal oxidases of the respiratory chain. While CO has been proposed as an antibacterial agent, the evidence supporting its toxicity towards bacteria is equivocal, and its cellular targets remain poorly defined. In this work, we investigate the physiological response of Mycobacterium smegmatis to CO. We show that M. smegmatis is highly resistant to the toxic effects of CO, exhibiting normal growth parameters when cultured in its presence. We profiled the proteome of M. smegmatis during growth in CO, identifying strong induction of cytochrome bd oxidase and members of the dos regulon, but relatively few other changes. We show that the activity of cytochrome bd oxidase is resistant to CO, whereas cytochrome bcc-aa3 oxidase is strongly inhibited by this gas. Consistent with these findings, growth analysis shows that M. smegmatis lacking cytochrome bd oxidase displays a significant growth defect in the presence of CO, while induction of the dos regulon appears to be unimportant for adaption to CO. Altogether, our findings suggest that M. smegmatis has considerable resistance to CO and benefits from respiratory flexibility to withstand its inhibitory effects.

### Sample Protocol
For shotgun proteomic analysis, 30 mL cultures of M. smegmatis were grown on Hartmans de Bont minimal medium [48] supplemented with 0.05% (w/v) tyloxapol and 5.8 mM glycerol in triplicate in 120 mL serum vials sealed with rubber butyl stoppers. Immediately after inoculation, one triplicate set was amended with 20% CO (via 100% v/v CO gas cylinder, 99.999% pure). Cells were harvested in mid-exponential phase (OD600 ~ 0.3) by centrifugation (10,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C). They were subsequently washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS; 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4 and 2 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4), recentrifuged, and resuspended in 100 mM Tris + 4% SDS at a weight:volume ratio of 1:4. The resultant suspension was then lysed by beat-beating with 0.1 mm zircon beads for five 30 second cycles. To denature proteins, lysates were boiled at 95 °C for 10 min, then sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) using 20 cycles of ‘30 seconds on’ followed by ‘30 seconds off’. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation (14,000 × g, 10 mins). Protein concentration was confirmed using the bicinchoninic acid assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and normalized for downstream analyses. After removal of SDS by chloroform/methanol precipitation, the proteins were proteolytically digested with trypsin (Promega) and purified using OMIX C18 Mini-Bed tips (Agilent Technologies) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSL Cnano system equipped with a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS autosampler, the samples were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific) onto an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific). The peptides were separated by increasing concentrations of buffer B (80% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid) for 158 min and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using in-house, LFQ-optimized parameters.

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant to globally identify and quantify proteins pairwise across the different conditions. Data visualization and statistical analyses were performed in R studio [49] with the ggplot2 package [50].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Respiratory chain, Mycobacteria, Carbon monoxide

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Cheng Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Greening
Department of Microbiology, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia


