### Accession
PXD014169

### Title
Proteome analysis of bacterial strain Thermodesulfobium acidiphilum

### Description
Proteome analysis of bacterial strain Thermodesulfobium acidiphilum 3127-1 was done using off-line SCX fractionation of tryptic peptides with subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses of obtained fractions using Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and reduction, alkylation, and digestion of the proteins.  Cell lysis was done as follows: frozen cell residue was suspended in 500 µl of SDC reduction and alkylation buffer (4% SDC, 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM 2-CAA) and sonicated for 20 s using ultrasonic cell disrupter VirSonic 100 (VirTis). The solution obtained was boiled for 10 min and after cooling to room temperature, centrifuged at 15000 g for 15 min. Protein concentration in cell lysate was determined using a Bradford reagent. An aliquot of cell lysate (100 µg of protein) was diluted eight times with 100 mM TRIS pH 8.5 and 1 µg of trypsin was added. Digestion was performed at 37oC overnight. Peptides were desalted using SDB-RPS StageTip as described previously with minor modifications: peptides were acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA, and 20 µg was loaded on three 14-gauge StageTip plugs. Ethylacetate/1% TFA (125 µl) was added, and the StageTips were centrifuged at 300 g. After washing the StageTips using two wash steps of 100 µl ethylacetate/1% TFA and one of 100 µl 0.2% TFA consecutively, peptides were eluted by 60 µl of elution buffer (80% acetonitrile, 5% ammonia). The collected material was completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Savant, SpeedVac concentrator) and stored at -80oC before analyses. SCX StageTip fractionation  Before LC-MS/MS analysis peptides were fractionated using SCX as described previously (59) with minor modifications. In brief, peptides (40 µg) were dissolved in 100 µl of 1% TFA in water and loaded on two 10-gauge SCX StageTip plugs, washed by 100 µl of 0.2% TFA and successively eluted by step-gradient of ammonium acetate (100, 150, 200, 300, 400, 600 mM) in 20% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) formic acid with final elution by 5% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) ACN. All fractions obtained were desalted on three 14-gauge SCX StageTip plugs, completely dried using a SpeedVac centrifuge (Savant, SpeedVac concentrator) and stored at -80oC before analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide fractions were suspended in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) and sonicated for 2 min in ultrasonic water bath (Elma, Elmasonic S100) before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Approximately 1 µg of peptides were loaded for 2 h gradient. Peptides were separated on a 25-cm 75-µm inner diameter column packed in-house with Aeris Peptide XB-C16 2.6 µm resin (Phenomenex). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an Ultimate 3000 Nano LC System (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to the Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.2% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a linear 120-min gradient of 4–55% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B for 5 min and reequilibrated with buffer A for 5 min. Column temperature was kept at 40°C. MS data were acquired with an automatic switch between a full scan and up to 15 data-dependent MS/MS scans (topN method). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 in the 300−1,200 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 60 ms and a resolution of 60,000. Isolation of precursors was performed with a 1.4 m/z window and a fixed first mass of 100.0 m/z. Precursors were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 28 eV. MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at m/z 400 with an ion target value of 1×105 in the 200−2,000 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 30 ms. Repeat sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.6.5, and peptide lists were searched against the T. acidiphilum genome (deposited in NCBI database under accession numbers QSLN00000000) and a common contaminants database by the Andromeda search engine with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidations as variable modifications. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and was determined by searching a reverse database. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed in the database search. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation up to 10 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Matching between runs was performed with 6 SCX fractions serving as a library. Proteins matching to the reversed database were filtered out.

### Publication Abstract
The Calvin-Benson-Bassham (CBB) cycle assimilates CO<sub>2</sub> for the primary production of organic matter in all plants and algae, as well as in some autotrophic bacteria. The key enzyme of the CBB cycle, ribulose-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RubisCO), is a main determinant of de novo organic matter production on Earth. Of the three carboxylating forms of RubisCO, forms I and II participate in autotrophy, and form III so far has been associated only with nucleotide and nucleoside metabolism. Here, we report that form III RubisCO functions in the CBB cycle in the thermophilic chemolithoautotrophic bacterium <i>Thermodesulfobium acidiphilum,</i> a phylum-level lineage representative. We further show that autotrophic CO<sub>2</sub> fixation in <i>T. acidiphilum</i> is accomplished via the transaldolase variant of the CBB cycle, which has not been previously demonstrated experimentally and has been considered unlikely to occur. Thus, this work reveals a distinct form of the key pathway of CO<sub>2</sub> fixation.

### Keywords
Thermodesulfobium acidiphilum, Proteome

### Affiliations
Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center of Biotechnology, Russian Academy of Sciences
Shemyakin-Ovchinnikov Institute of bioorganic chemistry Russian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Rustam Ziganshin

### Lab Head
Dr Elizaveta A. Bonch-Osmolovskaya
Winogradsky Institute of Microbiology, Research Center of Biotechnology, Russian Academy of Sciences


