### Accession
PXD006046

### Title
KCC2 Proteome -  Native KCC2 interactome reveals PACSIN1 as a critical regulator of synaptic inhibition

### Description
KCC2 is a neuron-specific K+-Cl‑ cotransporter essential for establishing the Cl- gradient required for hyperpolarizing inhibition. KCC2 is highly localized to excitatory synapses where it regulates spine morphogenesis and AMPA receptor confinement. Aberrant KCC2 function contributes to numerous human neurological disorders including epilepsy and neuropathic pain. Using unbiased functional proteomics, we identified the KCC2-interactome with the goal of determining KCC2-protein interactions that regulate KCC2 function. Our analysis revealed that KCC2 interacts with a diverse set of proteins, and its most predominant interactors play important roles in postsynaptic receptor recycling. The most abundant KCC2 interactor is a neuronal endocytic regulatory protein termed PACSIN1 (SYNDAPIN1). We verified the PACSIN1-KCC2 interaction biochemically and demonstrated that shRNA knockdown of PACSIN1 in hippocampal neurons significantly increases KCC2 expression and hyperpolarizes the reversal potential for Cl-. Overall, our global native-KCC2 interactome and subsequent characterization revealed PACSIN1 as a novel and potent negative regulator of KCC2.

### Sample Protocol
We first determined the detergent-based conditions that preserve native KCC2 following membrane extraction, using non-denaturing Blue-Native PAGE (BN-PAGE) and affinity purification mass-spectrometry (AP-MS) to compare the efficacy of various detergent based-solubilized membrane fractions. We determined that the detergent (C12E9)-based solubilization conditions provide the higher stringency for KCC2 AP-MS. Using these extraction conditions we performed a full-scale multi-epitope AP-MS analysis on both developing (P5) and mature/adult (P50) mouse brain using pan-KCC2, KCC2b-isoform specific and pSer940-specific KCC2 antibodies. Following AP-MS we applied a defined set of analysis criteria, to segregate the putative-KCC2 partners as gold-, silver- and bronze- interactors, and compiled 181 proteins that make up the KCC2 interactome.

### Data Protocol
We then interpreted the potential functional roles of KCC2-protein interactors by segregating them based on their abundance at excitatory and inhibitory synapses and by performing Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) to classify the KCC2-interactors into highly-enriched Gene Ontology (GO) classes. These analyses revealed that KCC2 interacts with a diverse set of proteins, and that the KCC2 interactors are highly enriched at excitatory synapses in comparison to inhibitory synapses; and its most predominant interactors play important roles in postsynaptic receptor recycling.

### Publication Abstract
KCC2 is a neuron-specific K<sup>+</sup>-Cl<sup>-</sup> cotransporter essential for establishing the Cl<sup>-</sup> gradient required for hyperpolarizing inhibition in the central nervous system (CNS). KCC2 is highly localized to excitatory synapses where it regulates spine morphogenesis and AMPA receptor confinement. Aberrant KCC2 function contributes to human neurological disorders including epilepsy and neuropathic pain. Using functional proteomics, we identified the KCC2-interactome in the mouse brain to determine KCC2-protein interactions that regulate KCC2 function. Our analysis revealed that KCC2 interacts with diverse proteins, and its most predominant interactors play important roles in postsynaptic receptor recycling. The most abundant KCC2 interactor is a neuronal endocytic regulatory protein termed PACSIN1 (SYNDAPIN1). We verified the PACSIN1-KCC2 interaction biochemically and demonstrated that shRNA knockdown of PACSIN1 in hippocampal neurons increases KCC2 expression and hyperpolarizes the reversal potential for Cl<sup>-</sup>. Overall, our global native-KCC2 interactome and subsequent characterization revealed PACSIN1 as a novel and potent negative regulator of KCC2.

### Keywords
Cation chloride cotransporter, Lc/ms, Neuronal chloride homeostasis, Kcc2, E/i balance, Slc12a5, Proteomics, Gaba, Glutamate, Interacting proteins

### Affiliations
Associate Professor, Department of Cell and Systems Biology Director, Human Biology Program University of Toronto, Canada
National Institutes of Health

### Submitter
Vivek Mahadevan

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Woodin
Associate Professor, Department of Cell and Systems Biology Director, Human Biology Program University of Toronto, Canada


