### Accession
PXD002554

### Title
Human platelet detergent resistant membranes proteome

### Description
Here we characterized the proteins associated with detergent resistant membranes (DRMs) from resting and activated human platelets. We achieved a proteomic profile of 141 DRM proteins involved in many biological pathways including 'PAR-1-mediated thrombin signal events', 'Integrin family cell surface interactions', 'Platelet activation, signalling and aggregation' and 'Platelet degranulation'. Therefore, a high level of relevant platelet signalling and trafficking proteins were identified e.g., Rap 1b, Src, SNAP-23 and syntaxin-11, implicating platelet DRMs as concentrating platforms not only in the critical platelet function of activation but also in secretion/degranulation.

### Sample Protocol
Platelets were isolated from healthy donors and activated using thrombin receptor activating peptide 6 or von Willebrand factor. Following 30s activation platelets were lysed in a solution of TX-100 (final concentration 1%) and resulting lysates were centrifuged in a discontinuous sucrose gradient (40:30:5%) at 200,000xg for 16h at 4 oC. Twelve 1ml fractions were collected and anti-Flitillin-1 immunoblotting revealed insoluble DRM-associated proteins to be located in fractions 3-5, representing 5-30% interface. Fractions 3-5 were pooled separately for control and activated platelets and subjected in in-solution LysC-Trypsin double digest. Resulting peptides were analysed using LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer raw data files were searched using MaxQuant proteomics software. Peptides were searched against human FASTA (may 2014) obtained from UniProt with a false discovery rate of 0.05. Statistical analysis of the MaxQuant output was performed using Perseus or Microsoft Excel. Functional Enrichment analysis tool (FunRich, http://www.funrich.org/) and PANTHER (http://pantherdb.org/) were used to assign gene ontology.

### Publication Abstract
Proteomic studies have facilitated the identification of proteins associated with the detergent-resistant membrane (DRM) fraction in a variety of cell types. Here, we have undertaken label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomic profiling of the proteins associated with detergent-resistant plasma and internal membranes from resting and activated platelets. One hundred forty-one proteins were identified and raw data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002554. The proteins identified include a myriad of important platelet signaling and trafficking proteins including Rap1b, Src, SNAP-23, syntaxin-11, and members of the previously unattributed Ragulator complex. Mean LFQ intensities calculated across three technical replicates for the three biological donors revealed that several important platelet signaling proteins altered their detergent solubility upon activation, including GPIb&#x3b1;, GPIb&#x3b2;, Src, and 14-3-3&#x3b6;. Altered detergent solubility for GPIb&#x3b1;, following activation using a variety of platelet agonists, was confirmed by immunoblotting and further coimmunoprecipitation experiments revealed that GPIb&#x3b1; forms a complex with 14-3-3&#x3b6; that shifts into DRMs following activation. Taken together, proteomic profiling of platelet DRMs allowed greater insight in the complex biology of both DRMs and platelets and will be a useful subproteome to study platelet-related disease. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002554 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002554).

### Keywords
Human, Detergent resistant membranes, Lc-ms/ms, Platelets

### Affiliations
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Paulina Szklanna

### Lab Head
Dr Patricia B. Maguire
School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science, Conway Institute, University College Dublin, Ireland


