### Accession
PXD014415

### Title
Evaluating False Transfer Rates from the Match-Between-Runs algorithm with a two-proteome model

### Description
Stochasticity between independent LC-MS/MS runs is a challenging problem in the field of proteomics resulting in significant missing values (i.e., abundance measurements) among observed peptides. To address this issue, several approaches have been developed including computational methods such as MaxQuant’s Match-Between-Runs (MBR) algorithm. Often dozens of runs are all considered at once by MBR, transferring identifications from any one run to any of the others.  To evaluate the error associated with these transfer events, we created a two-sample/two-proteome approach.  In this way, samples containing no yeast lysates were assessed for false identification transfers from samples containing yeast.  Overall, transfers from any of 20 runs with yeast were assessed to any of 20 runs without yeast were measured.  While MBR increased the total number of spectral identifications by ~40%, we also found that 44% of all identified yeast proteins had identifications transferred to at least one sample without yeast.  However, of these only 2.7% remained in the final dataset after applying the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm.  We conclude that false transfers by MBR are plentiful, but likely have only a small impact on the final dataset due to downstream removal.

### Sample Protocol
Human cell lysate and yeast cell lysate were prepared for label-free LC-MS/MS analysis following protocols previously described2. Briefly, a protein level bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Pierce) was performed on the clarified lysates to determine protein concentration. Lysates were then reduced at room temperature in the dark with incubation of 5mM tris(2-carboxyethly)-phosphine (TCEP), followed by alkylation with 10mM iodoacetamide to covalently block reactive cysteine groups. The reaction was quenched with the addition of 15mM dithiotreitol. Blocked lysates were then precipitated using chloroform-methanol precipitation. Precipitated proteins were resuspended in 200mM EPPS pH 8.5 and placed in an orbital shaker at room temperature for overnight digestion with Lys-C  at a 1:100 protease:protein ratio (Wako). Sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to the Lys-C digest and incubated for 6hrs on an orbital shaker at 37°C. A Quantitative Colorometric Peptide assay (Pierce) was then performed to measure the concentration of digested peptides present. At this point, the human sample was split into 2 aliquots of 30ug each. 3ug of yeast peptides was added to one of the human samples, while an equal volume of HPLC grade water was added to the other sample. Both samples were independently de-salted using stop-and-go-extraction tips containing a C18 solid phase18. De-salted samples were then dried in vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in a 5% acetonitrile, 5% formic acid buffer for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography and Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Both unfractionated samples were each analyzed 20 times consecutively on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer operated in positive-mode with a Proxeon EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described2. Peptide fractionation was performed on a 100um inner diameter microcapillary column packed with 35cm of Accucore C18 resin (2.6um, 150 A, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Approximately 1ug of peptide was loaded onto the column for LC-MS/MS analysis. Separation occurred across a 90min gradient from 4% to 35% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid. Flow rate was set to 525nL/min over the gradient. To prevent carry over, the 20 analyses of the human only sample were queued first followed by the 20 analyses of the human+10% yeast spike-in sample. A data dependent Top Speed (3 second) method was used to collect spectra: High resolution MS1 spectra (Orbitrap resolution: 120,000; mass range: 350-1,400Th; and automatic gain control (AGC) target: 4x105; maximum injection time 50ms); high resolution MS2 spectra (Quadrupole isolation window: 1.6Th; Orbitrap resolution: 7,500; HCD energy: 30%; AGC target: 5x104; maximum injection time: 22ms). Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a duration time of 120s. Data Analysis. Spectra collected from our 40 LC-MS/MS analyses were analyzed with the MaxQuant software package (1.6.3.4)2,11. Spectra were searched against a concatenated human and yeast database. Database reversal for false discovery rate determination using the target-decoy method was performed by MaxQuant19. To prevent bias, MaxQuant default parameters were used. All 40 LC-MS/MS runs were analyzed simultaneously and given a unique Experiment tag in the “Raw data” upload section of MaxQuant. LFQ was enabled with default settings. LC-MS/MS runs were analyzed once without and once with MBR enabled. Proteins containing shared peptides between human and yeast databases were removed to avoid artificially increasing the amount of yeast identifications (n = 77). To account for leucine/isoleucine isomers, a regex search was conducted for peptides containing those amino acids, allowing them to match sequences containing either form of the isomers from both databases. MBR was enabled through Identification subtab in the Global Parameters tab of MaxQuant. The default settings for MBR were used (0.7min match window and 20min alignment time).

### Publication Abstract
Stochasticity between independent LC-MS/MS runs is a challenging problem in the field of proteomics, resulting in significant missing values (i.e., abundance measurements) among observed peptides. To address this issue, several approaches have been developed including computational methods such as MaxQuant's match-between-runs (MBR) algorithm. Often dozens of runs are all considered at once by MBR, transferring identifications from any one run to any of the others. To evaluate the error associated with these transfer events, we created a two-sample/two-proteome approach. In this way, samples containing no yeast lysate (<i>n</i> = 20) were assessed for false identification transfers from samples containing yeast (<i>n</i> = 20). While MBR increased the total number of spectral identifications by &#x223c;40%, we also found that 44% of all identified yeast proteins had identifications transferred to at least one sample without yeast. However, of these only 2.7% remained in the final data set after applying the MaxQuant LFQ algorithm. We conclude that false transfers by MBR are plentiful, but few are retained in the final data set.

### Keywords
Two-proteome mixture, Match-between-runs, Label-free quantitation, False transfer rate

### Affiliations
Dept of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School 240 Longwood Ave Boston, MA 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Steven P. Gygi
Dept of Cell Biology Harvard Medical School 240 Longwood Ave Boston, MA 02115


