### Accession
PXD004188

### Title
High precision iRT retention time prediction in the targeted analysis of data-independent acquisition and its impact on identification and quantitation

### Description
Targeted analysis of DIA data is a powerful mass spectrometric approach for comprehensive, reproducible and precise proteome quantitation. It requires a spectral library, which contains for all considered peptide precursor ions empirically determined fragment ion intensities and their predicted retention time. Retention times, however, are not comparable on an absolute scale, especially if heterogeneous measurements are combined.  Here we present a method for high-precision prediction of retention time, which significantly improves the quality of targeted DIA analysis compared to in silico retention time prediction and the state of the art indexed retention time (iRT) normalization approach. We describe a high precision normalized retention time algorithm, which is implemented in the Spectronaut software. We furthermore investigate the influence of nine different experimental factors, such as chromatographic mobile and stationary phase, on iRT precision.  In summary we show that using targeted analysis of DIA data with high precision iRT significantly increases sensitivity and data quality. The iRT values are generally transferable across a wide range of experimental conditions. Best results, however, are achieved if library generation and analytical measurements are performed on the same system.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were digested in solution. In brief, the cell dishes were washed three times with PBS, then the cells were collected and spun down. The pellets were resuspended in 8M urea 0.1M ammonium carbonate. After reduction and alkylation, the lysates were diluted to 2M urea. Trypsin was used 1:100 for protein. Finally, the samples were cleaned with C18 spin columns.

### Data Protocol
The DDA data was analyzed using Maxquant and standard settings. The DIA data was analyzed using Spectronaut and default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted analysis of data-independent acquisition (DIA) data is a powerful mass spectrometric approach for comprehensive, reproducible and precise proteome quantitation. It requires a spectral library, which contains for all considered peptide precursor ions empirically determined fragment ion intensities and their predicted retention time (RT). RTs, however, are not comparable on an absolute scale, especially if heterogeneous measurements are combined. Here, we present a method for high-precision prediction of RT, which significantly improves the quality of targeted DIA analysis compared to in silico RT prediction and the state of the art indexed retention time (iRT) normalization approach. We describe a high-precision normalized RT algorithm, which is implemented in the Spectronaut software. We, furthermore, investigate the influence of nine different experimental factors, such as chromatographic mobile and stationary phase, on iRT precision. In summary, we show that using targeted analysis of DIA data with high-precision iRT significantly increases sensitivity and data quality. The iRT values are generally transferable across a wide range of experimental conditions. Best results, however, are achieved if library generation and analytical measurements are performed on the same system.

### Keywords
Dia, Retention time prediction

### Affiliations
Biognosys AG
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Schweiz

### Submitter
Roland Bruderer

### Lab Head
Dr Lukas Reiter
Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Schweiz


