### Accession
PXD000861

### Title
Phosphopattern Predicts CK2 Substrate, HMGA1, as a Drug Resistant Target for Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer

### Description
Lung adenocarcinoma cells harboring epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations are sensitive to EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs), including gefitinib. Acquired resistance to EGFR-TKIs develops after prolonged treatments. Known mechanisms for EGFR-TKI resistance, including KRAS mutation, HER2 mutation, EGFR T790M mutation and MET gene amplification did not observe in the resistant cells, PC9/gef. The study was prompt to explore effective strategies against resistance to EGFR-TKIs in PC9/gef cells. Here, we used label-free quantitative mass spectrometry to globally profile the basal phosphoproteome and proteome of a panel of TKI sensitive PC9, TKI resistant PC9/gef and TKI dose-dependent PC9/gef NSCLC cell lines. For phosphorylation level, we identified 5844 phosphorylation sites from 4612 phosphopeptides of 1548 proteins. For protein level, we identified 3835 proteins. Most of the quantitatively change is from phosphorylation whereas most of the protein level is unchanged. Among these big datasets, there is a phosphopattern of phosphopeptides presented up-regulated in resistant cells but no response to further gefitinib treatment; we proposed this group could regulate drug resistance. By motif analysis, these phosphopeptides mapped to the corresponding kinases, CK2, as the drug resistant kinase. Network analysis showed that CK2 directed interacting with 10 proteins. Among these proteins, we found that HMGA1 is the substrate protein to CK2. By biochemical evidence, we discovered that CK2 could regulate cell death in TKI-resistant cells. Furthermore, we found that HMGA1 for the first time could be the potential drug resistant target to reverse the drug resistance in PC9/gef cells. The results provide new insights into HMGA1 as the drug resistant target through the cellular signaling networks associated with the TKI-induced drug resistant NSCLCs.

### Sample Protocol
After cell lysis, the protein samples were via gel-assisted digestion, tip based pH/acid controlled IMAC and LC-MS/MS analysis. For quantitation, we used IDEAL-Q software for label-free quantitation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data from the LTQ-Orbitrap were transformed to msm-files using the software RAW2MSM (version 1.1.).  The raw data files acquired from the LTQ-Orbitrap were converted into files of mzXML format by the program ReAdW

### Publication Abstract
Although EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) have demonstrated good efficacy in non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients harboring EGFR mutations, most patients develop intrinsic and acquired resistance. We quantitatively profiled the phosphoproteome and proteome of drug-sensitive and drug-resistant NSCLC cells under gefitinib treatment. The construction of a dose-dependent responsive kinase-substrate network of 1548 phosphoproteins and 3834 proteins revealed CK2-centric modules as the dominant core network for the potential gefitinib resistance-associated proteins. CK2 knockdown decreased cell survival in gefitinib-resistant NSCLCs. Using motif analysis to identify the CK2 core sub-network, we verified that elevated phosphorylation level of a CK2 substrate, HMGA1 was a critical node contributing to EGFR-TKI resistance in NSCLC cell. Both HMGA1 knockdown or mutation of the CK2 phosphorylation site, S102, of HMGA1 reinforced the efficacy of gefitinib in resistant NSCLC cells through reactivation of the downstream signaling of EGFR. Our results delineate the TKI resistance-associated kinase-substrate network, suggesting a potential therapeutic strategy for overcoming TKI-induced resistance in NSCLC.

### Keywords
Imac, Lung cancer, Phosphoproteome, Hmga1, Ck2, Drug resistance

### Affiliations
Institute of Chemistry
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chia-Feng Tsai

### Lab Head
Dr Yu-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


