### Accession
PXD034604

### Title
Cardioviruses’ leader proteins retarget RSK kinases toward alternative substrates to perturb nucleocytoplasmic traffic

### Description
Proteins from unrelated pathogens, including some RNA or DNA viruses and bacteria can recruit and activate cellular p90-ribosomal protein S6 kinases (RSKs) through a common linear motif. Data suggested a model where pathogens' proteins act to dock the recruited RSKs toward specific substrates, which then act as effectors to the benefit of the pathogens. Using cardiovirus leader protein (L) as a paradigm, we show that pathogens' proteins can modify the spectrum of RSK substrates in infected cells. L triggers nucleocytoplasmic trafficking perturbation and phenylalanine-glycine (FG)-nucleoporin hyperphosphorylation in an RSK-dependent fashion. Biotin ligase experiments identified FG-nucleoporins as common partners of L and RSK in infected cells. Using cells expressing an analog-sensitive RSK2 mutant, we show that L triggers direct phosphorylation of NUP98 and NUP214 by RSK2 in infected cells. Our data therefore demonstrate a novel virulence mechanism where pathogens' proteins hijack and retarget cellular protein kinases of the RSK family

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin pulldown samples were resolved using a 10% Tris-Glycine SDS gel run until 6mm migration in the separating gel. Proteins were colored using PageBlue (Thermo Scientific, 24620). The 6mm bands containing whole proteins were cut into 3 different slices and trypsin digested. Peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% TFA in 2% ACN), directly loaded onto reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific) and eluted in backflush mode. Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 0.075 x 250 mm,Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 4%-27.5% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) for 35 min, 27.5%-40% solvent B for 5 min, 40%-95% solvent B for 5 min and holding at 95% for the last 5 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 RSLC system. The peptides were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using Sequest HT search engine within Proteome Discoverer 2.5 SP1 against a Homo Sapiens protein database obtained from Uniprot (78 787 entries) and containing the sequences of viral proteins and BioID2-RSK. Trypsin was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and up to 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.1 Da for fragment ions. Oxidation on Met (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation on Ser, Thr and Tyr (+79.966 Da), conversion of Gln (-17.027 Da) or Glu (- 18.011 Da) to pyro-Glu at the peptide N-term, biotinylation of Lys (+ 226.077) were considered as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was assessed using Percolator and thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins from some unrelated pathogens, including small RNA viruses of the family Picornaviridae, large DNA viruses such as Kaposi sarcoma-associated herpesvirus and even bacteria of the genus Yersinia can recruit cellular p90-ribosomal protein S6 kinases (RSKs) through a common linear motif and maintain the kinases in an active state. On the one hand, pathogens' proteins might hijack RSKs to promote their own phosphorylation (direct target model). On the other hand, some data suggested that pathogens' proteins might dock the hijacked RSKs toward a third interacting partner, thus redirecting the kinase toward a specific substrate. We explored the second hypothesis using the Cardiovirus leader protein (L) as a paradigm. The L protein is known to trigger nucleocytoplasmic trafficking perturbation, which correlates with hyperphosphorylation of phenylalanine-glycine (FG)-nucleoporins (FG-NUPs) such as NUP98. Using a biotin ligase fused to either RSK or L, we identified FG-NUPs as primary partners of the L-RSK complex in infected cells. An L protein mutated in the central RSK-interaction motif was readily targeted to the nuclear envelope whereas an L protein mutated in the C-terminal domain still interacted with RSK but failed to interact with the nuclear envelope. Thus, L uses distinct motifs to recruit RSK and to dock the L-RSK complex toward the FG-NUPs. Using an analog-sensitive RSK2 mutant kinase, we show that, in infected cells, L can trigger RSK to use NUP98 and NUP214 as direct substrates. Our data therefore illustrate a novel virulence mechanism where pathogens' proteins hijack and retarget cellular protein kinases toward specific substrates, to promote their replication or to escape immunity.

### Keywords
Picornavirus, Nucleocytoplasmic traffic, Linear motifs, Cardiovirus, Phosphorylation, Nucleoporins, Yopm, Rsk, P90 ribosomal s6 kinases

### Affiliations
VIRO unit, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 1200, Belgium
UCL - de Duve Institute, Brussels Belgium

### Submitter
Didier Vertommen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Michiels
VIRO unit, de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 1200, Belgium


