### Accession
PXD019528

### Title
Cigarette smoke extract-treated alveolar macrophage-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
This project is based upon the fundamental observation that alveolar macrophage-derived extracellular vesicles (AM-EVs), when internalized by neighboring epithelial cells, inhibit their infection by influenza virus. This inhibitory activity of AM-EVs is abolished when AMs are treated with cigarette smoke extract (CSE). We chose to survey the AM-EV proteome in an effort to identify candidate proteins whose abundance within EVs was downregulated by CSE treatment of AMs, thus explaining the ability of CSE to abrogate the inhibitory activity against influenza.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicles (EVs)were collected from mouse MH-S cell line alveolar macrophages cultured in 0% CSE or 0.8% CSE in serum-free RPMI. EVs from both conditions were resuspended in 8M Urea + 25mM HEPES lysis buffer followed by high sensitivity protein estimation (Sigma). 22 µg of protein from each condition in triplicate was labeled with the Tandem Mass Tag 6-plex labeling kit (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to their identification, labeled proteins were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid/acetone and separated using nano-ultra high pressure liquid chromatography.

### Data Protocol
For identification, MS3 analysis (McAlister et al., 2014) on an Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer was employed. Candidate proteins were selected based on their differential expression in control EVs vs. EVs isolated from 0.8% CSE-treated AMs. Data were analyzed with Proteome Discoverer (v2.1 Thermo Fisher) and initial spectra were searched against the Uniprot mouse proteome database (modified 2018 07-27, 53857 sequences). Identified proteins and peptides had a false discovery rate of <1%. Paired t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple testing correction (Benjamini and Hochberg, 1995) was used on spectra to identify statistically significant (p < 0.05) differences in abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alveolar macrophage, Extracellular vesicle, Cigarette smoke

### Affiliations
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA
University of Michigan

### Submitter
Daniel Schneider

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Joseph Schneider
Department of Internal Medicine Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA


