### Accession
PXD036007

### Title
Developmental and housekeeping transcriptional programs in Drosophila require distinct chromatin remodelers

### Description
Using CRISPR-Cas9 to tag endogenous remodeler subunits in Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells, we demonstrate that developmental gene transcription requires SWI/SNF-type complexes, primarily to maintain distal enhancer accessibility.

### Sample Protocol
Drosophila S2 cells expressing endogenously AID-3xFLAG-tagged Brd7 protein were used for immunoprecipitation. Parental cells without the AID-3xFLAG tag were used as a background. Two hundred million Drosophila S2 cells were collected through centrifugation at 300g, washed in PBS, resuspended in 10mL of hypotonic swelling buffer (10mM Tris pH7.5, 2mM MgCl2, 3mM CaCl2, protease inhibitors) and incubated for 15 minutes at 4°C. Cells were pelleted at 700g for 10 minutes at 4°C, resuspended in 10mL of GRO lysis buffer (10mM Tris pH7.5, 2mM MgCl2, 3mM CaCl2, 0.5% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 1mM DTT, protease inhibitors) and incubated for 30 minutes with rotation at 4°C. Samples were pelleted at 700g for 10 minutes at 4°C, resuspended in 1mL of IP lysis buffer (100mM NaCl, 20mM HEPES pH7.6, 2mM MgCl2, 0.25% NP-40, 0.3% Triton X-100, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, protease inhibitors) and lysed with rotation for 30 minutes at 4°C. Lysed samples were pelleted for 5 minutes at 20000g at 4°C and supernatant (soluble nucleoplasm) and pellet (chromatin) were separated. The pellet was resuspended in 300uL of IP lysis buffer supplemented with 300mM NaCl, sonicated for 10 minutes (30 sec on/30 sec off, low intensity, 4°C) on Diagenode Bioruptor sonicator, pelleted for 5 minutes at 20000g at 4°C and soluble fraction mixed with the supernatant from earlier. The resulting mixture was then cleared by centrifugation for 5 minutes at 20000g at 4°C and protein concentrations measured using Qubit Protein Assay Kit. For each immunoprecipitation, 1mg of total protein was incubated with 50ul previously buffer-equilibrated Anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads for 6 hours at 4°C with rotation. The beads were then washed three times for 10 minutes in IP lysis buffer supplemented with 150mM NaCl, and four times for 10 minutes in a no-detergent buffer (130mM NaCl, 20mM Tris pH7.5). The beads were resuspended in 50ul of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and subject to tryptic digest and mass-spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
For peptide identification, the RAW-files were loaded into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.5.0.400, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All hereby created MS/MS spectra were searched using MSAmanda v2.0.0.16129 (Dorfer et al., 2014). RAW-files were against the drosophila database called dmel-all-translation-r6.34.fasta (Flybase.org, 22,226 sequences; 20,310,919 residues), each case supplemented with common contaminants, using the following search parameters: The peptide mass tolerance was set to ±5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance to ±15 ppm (HF-X) or to ±6 ppm (Exploris). The maximal number of missed cleavages was set to 2, using tryptic specificity with no proline restriction. Beta-methylthiolation on cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation on methionine was set as a variable modification, the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. The result was filtered to 1 % FDR on protein level using the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007) integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer and was used to generate a smaller sub-database for further processing. As a second step, the RAW-files were searched against the created sub-database using the same settings as above plus the following search parameters: Deamidation on asparagine and glutamine were set as variable modifications. In some data sets acetylation on lysine, phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine, methylation on lysine and arginine, di-methylation on lysine and arginine, tri-methylation on lysine, ubiquitinylation residue on lysine, biotinylation on lysine, formylation on lysine were set as additional variable modifications. The localization of the post-translational modification sites within the peptides was performed with the tool ptmRS, based on the tool phosphoRS (Taus et al., 2011). Peptide areas were quantified using the in-house-developed tool apQuant (Doblmann et al., 2018). Proteins were quantified by summing unique and razor peptides. Protein-abundances-normalization was done using sum normalization. Statistical significance of differentially expressed proteins was determined using limma (Smyth, 2005).

### Publication Abstract
Gene transcription is a highly regulated process in all animals. In Drosophila, two major transcriptional programs, housekeeping and developmental, have promoters with distinct regulatory compatibilities and nucleosome organization. However, it remains unclear how the differences in chromatin structure relate to the distinct regulatory properties and which chromatin remodelers are required for these programs. Using rapid degradation of core remodeler subunits in Drosophila melanogaster S2 cells, we demonstrate that developmental gene transcription requires SWI/SNF-type complexes, primarily to maintain distal enhancer accessibility. In contrast, wild-type-level housekeeping gene transcription requires the Iswi and Ino80 remodelers to maintain nucleosome positioning and phasing at promoters. These differential remodeler dependencies relate to different DNA-sequence-intrinsic nucleosome affinities, which favor a default ON state for housekeeping but a default OFF state for developmental gene transcription. Overall, our results demonstrate how different transcription-regulatory strategies are implemented by DNA sequence, chromatin structure, and remodeler activity.

### Keywords
Transcription, Swi/snf, Drosophila, Chromatin remodelers, Brd7

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
IMP, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Stark
IMP, Vienna Biocenter, Vienna, Austria


