### Accession
PXD031639

### Title
The Proteome and Transcriptome of Stress Granules and P-Bodies during Human T Lymphocytes Activation

### Description
Stress granules (SGs) and processing bodies (PBs) are membraneless cytoplasmic assemblies regulating mRNAs under environmental stress such as viral infections, neurological disorders, or cancer. Upon antigen stimulation, T lymphocytes mediate their immune functions under regulatory mechanisms involving SGs and PBs. However, the impact of T cell activation on such complexes, in term of formation, constitution and relationship remains unknown. Here, by combining proteomic, transcriptomic and immunofluorescence approaches, we simultaneously characterized the SGs and PBs from primary human T lymphocytes pre- and post-stimulation. The proteomes and transcriptomes of SGs and PBs were identified, unveiling an unanticipated molecular and functional complementarity. Notwithstanding, these granules keep distinct spatial organizations and abilities to interact with mRNAs. This comprehensive characterization of the RNP granule proteomic and transcriptomic landscapes provides a unique resource for future investigations on SGs and PBs in T lymphocytes.

### Sample Protocol
peptides were solubilized in 5% acetonitrile 0.05% TFA and spiked with iRT peptides according to the provider protocol (Biognosys). Then they were loaded on a 150 x 320 μm Thermo Scientific Hypersil GOLD C18, capillary column (particle diameter 3 μm) connected to a RS3000 Dionex HPLC system. The run length gradient was 55 min with a gradient from 4% to 7% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 3 min, from 7% to 45% buffer B in 41min, from 45% to 95% buffer B in 1min at a flowrate of 5 µl/min.  The Dionex system was coupled to a TripleTOF 5600+ (Sciex) with a ESI source (Ion Source Gas1: 10, Curtain Gas: 25, IonSpray Voltage: 5500V). The acquisition parameters were: one 50 ms scan, followed by 30 variable SWATH windows at 50 ms accumulation time. The total cycle time was 1.55 s.

### Data Protocol
SWATH runs were loaded in Spectronaut (Biognosys). Peptides were quantified in Spectronaut and identified with a false discovery rate <1% with either a “granule” database (6 runs of DCP1A and G3BP1 granules) or a cytosol database. Peptides abundances were then exported and normalized according to the sum of all ions signals.  Each group was compared with the isotype control group to remove any unspecific identification (proteins with a fold change > 2 compare to the isotype control in at least 2 out3 samples were considered as positive identification). Each group was analyzed with both databases to extend the discovery and multiple comparisons between groups were performed to strengthen the statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Stress granules (SGs) and processing bodies (PBs) are membraneless cytoplasmic assemblies regulating mRNAs under environmental stress such as viral infections, neurological disorders, or cancer. Upon antigen stimulation, T lymphocytes mediate their immune functions under regulatory mechanisms involving SGs and PBs. However, the impact of T&#xa0;cell activation on such complexes in terms of formation, constitution, and relationship remains unknown. Here, by combining proteomic, transcriptomic, and immunofluorescence approaches, we simultaneously characterized the SGs and PBs from primary human T lymphocytes pre and post stimulation. The identification of the proteomes and transcriptomes of SGs and PBs indicate an unanticipated molecular and functional complementarity. Notwithstanding, these granules keep distinct spatial organizations and abilities to interact with mRNAs. This comprehensive characterization of the RNP granule proteomic and transcriptomic landscapes provides a unique resource for future investigations on SGs and PBs in T lymphocytes.

### Keywords
Ribonucleoprotein granules, Proteome, Human t lymphocytes

### Affiliations
Cancer Research Center of Toulouse (CRCT) 2 Avenue Hubert Curien 31037 Toulouse
Cancer Research Center of Toulouse (CRCT)

### Submitter
Don-Marc Franchini

### Lab Head
Dr Camille Laurent
Cancer Research Center of Toulouse (CRCT) 2 Avenue Hubert Curien 31037 Toulouse


