### Accession
PXD025586

### Title
Proteome analysis of Renibacterium salmoninarum reveals putative role of membrane vesicles in virulence

### Description
This study used subcellular fractionation combined with proteomics for a comprehensive overview of the protein localizations of R. salmoninarum proteins within enriched subcellular fractions of cytosolic, membrane, extracellular and membrane vesicle (MV) proteins. With this approach, 1,674 protein groups were label-free quantified and the abundance of proteins involved in virulence processes were compared between the subcellular fractions.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial strain, cultivation and harvest R. salmoninarum was grown in quadruplicates in PYC medium (1% peptone, 1% yeast extract, 0.1% L-cysteine HCl, pH 6.8) 26 in a 15 °C water bath under shaking. Bacteria were harvested at an optical density (OD600) of 2.1 by centrifugation. While the pellet was used for the subcellular fractions of cytosolic and membrane proteins, the culture supernatant was filtered twice with a 0.45 µm bottle-top filter membrane and used for both, the fractions of extracellular proteins and MVs.  Preparation of cytosolic and membrane protein fractions Bacterial cells were disrupted using a Ribolyser. The supernatant was transferred to a new reaction tube. Afterwards, samples were ultracentrifuged. The supernatant contained the proteins labeled as “cytosolic fraction” in this study. The pellet was washed with 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid (HEPES) (10 mM, pH 7.4) and ultracentrifuged again. The supernatant was discarded and pellet resuspended in 500 µl PBS. The pellet contained the proteins labeled as “membrane fraction” in this study. Prepared subcellular fractions were stored at -20 °C until S-Trap protein digest.  Preparation of MV protein fraction The filtered supernatant was concentrated using tangential flow filtration (Äkta flux tangential flow filtration system, GE Healthcare) with a nominal molecular weight cut-off of 100,000 Da. The volume was reduced ~20-fold and ultracentrifuged afterwards. Subsequently, the MVs were purified by density gradient centrifugation with OptiPrep (60% Iodixanol) und washed afterwards as described in the paper. The resulting pellet resuspended in 50 µl PBS. The pellet contained the proteins labeled as “MV fraction” in this study. The prepared MV fraction was stored at -20 °C until S-Trap protein digest.  S-Trap protein digestion and peptide fractionation The protein concentrations of the cytosolic, membrane and MV fraction was determined by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay according to manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific). The S-Trap protein digest was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol (www.protifi.com) with minor modifications, as in detail described in the paper.  To reduce the sample complexity, cytosolic, membrane and MV samples were fractionated by performing basic reverse phase peptide fractionation as described by the manufacturer (Pierce high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit, Thermo Scientific). In short, peptides were loaded onto C18 micro spin columns and eluted in eight fractions with increasing acetonitrile concentrations ranging from 5 to 50% in a high-pH solution (0.1% triethylamine). The eluates from fraction 1 & 5, 2 & 6, 3 & 7 and 4 & 8 were pooled orthogonally. Peptides were dried using a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS measurement.  Preparation of the extracellular protein fraction and in-gel digestion Extracellular proteins were enriched by using StrataClean affinity beads. In brief, 20 µl of primed StrataClean beads (Agilent) were incubated with 10 ml of filtered bacterial culture supernatant in an overhead shaker over-night at 4 °C. On the next day, the bead suspension was centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in 2x reducing SDS sample buffer and proteins were separated by SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. The gel was tryptically digested as described in the paper. The dried peptides were resuspended in 10 µl Aq. dest. and desalinated using C18 ZipTips according to manufacturer’s protocol (Merck Millipore). Afterwards, peptides were resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% acetic acid and stored at -20°C until LC-MS/MS measurement.  Mass spectrometry data acquisition Tryptic peptides of the cytosol, membrane, extracellular and MV subcellular fractions were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a reverse-phase C18 column (in-house packed inner diameter 100 µm, outer diameter 360 µm, length 200 mm, packed with Dr. Maisch ReproSil pur C18 120 Å particle size 3.0 µm) and a column oven set to 45 °C. Peptides were loaded with 22 µl of buffer A (0.1% acetic acid) at 400 bar and subsequently eluted with a non-linear 100 min gradient from 1 to 99% buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% acetic acid) at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were measured in a Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data dependent mode. The MS1 scan was recorded in the orbitrap with a mass window of 300   1,700 m/z and a resolution of 60,000. The 20 most intense precursor ions (ions with an unassigned charge or a charge of 1 were excluded) were selected for fragmentation. The fragmentation was performed by collision-induced dissociation with a collision energy of 35%. The resulting MS/MS spectra were measured by the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The resulting *.raw-files were searched against the UniProt reference proteome of the R. salmoninarum strain ATTC 33209 with the ID UP000002007 (3,421 protein entries, downloaded on 17th August 2020) and the cRAP contaminants list using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.17.0). For samples of the cytosol, membrane and MV, the search was performed with a maximum of two missed cleavages, oxidation (M) and acetylation as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation (C) as a fixed modification. The extracellular fraction was searched with a maximum of two missed cleavages, oxidation (M), acetylation and carbamidomethylation as a variable modification. Proteins were treated as identified at a minimum of 2 peptides per protein group, while one of the peptides had to be unique. Match between run was used in between biological replicates. For label-free quantification (LFQ), unique and razor peptides were used and the LFQ calculation was performed separate for each of the enriched subcellular fractions. Resulting data was analyzed with Perseus software (version 1.6.14.0). Data was filtered based on hits against the reverse database, identified by site and the contamination list of MaxQuant. Further, only proteins were treated as quantified if a protein group had LFQ intensities in at least 3 out of 4 replicates. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and for relative comparison normalized by subtraction of the median.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial kidney disease (BKD) is a chronic bacterial disease affecting both wild and farmed salmonids. The causative agent for BKD is the Gram-positive fish pathogen Renibacterium&#xa0;salmoninarum. As treatment and prevention of BKD have proven to be difficult, it is important to know and identify the key bacterial proteins that interact with the host. We used subcellular fractionation to report semi-quantitative data for the cytosolic, membrane, extracellular, and membrane vesicle (MV) proteome of R.&#xa0;salmoninarum. These data can aid as a backbone for more targeted experiments regarding the development of new drugs for the treatment of BKD. Further analysis was focused on the MV proteome, where both major immunosuppressive proteins P57/Msa and P22 and proteins involved in bacterial adhesion were found in high abundance. Interestingly, the P22 protein was relatively enriched only in the extracellular and MV fraction, implicating that MVs may play a role in host-pathogen interaction. Compared to the other subcellular fractions, the MVs were also relatively enriched in lipoproteins and all four cell wall hydrolases belonging to the New Lipoprotein C/Protein of 60&#xa0;kDa (NlpC/P60) family were detected, suggesting an involvement in the formation of the MVs.

### Keywords
Microbiology, Proteomics, Membrane vesicles, Mass spectrometry, Renibacterium salmoninarum

### Affiliations
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Kroniger

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Center for Functional Genomics of Microbes, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


