### Accession
PXD026244

### Title
Structural probing of Hsp26 activation and client binding by quantitative cross-linking mass spectrometry

### Description
Small heat-shock proteins (sHSP) are important members of the cellular stress response in all species. Their best described function is the binding of early unfolding states and the resulting prevention of protein aggregation. All sHSPs exist as oligomers but vary in size and subunit organization. Some sHSPs exist as a polydisperse composition of oligomers which undergoes changes in subunit composition, folding status and relative distribution upon heat activation. To date only an incomplete picture of the mechanism of sHSP activation exists and in particularly the molecular basis of how sHSPs bind client proteins and mediate client specificity is not fully understood. In this study we have applied cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) to obtain detailed structural information on sHSP activation and client binding for yeast Hsp26. Our cross-linking data reveals the middle domain of Hsp26 as client-independent interface in multiple Hsp26::client complexes and indicates that client-specificity is likely mediated via additional binding sites with its αCD and CTE. Our quantitative XL-MS data underpins the middle domain as the main driver of heat-induced activation and client binding but shows that global rearrangements spanning all domains of Hsp26 are taking place simultaneously. We also investigated a Hsp26::client complex in the presence of Ssa1 (Hsp70) and Ydj1(Hsp40) at the initial stage of refolding and see that the interaction between refolding chaperones is altered by the presence of a client protein, pointing to a mechanism where interaction of Ydj1 with the HSP::client complex initiates assembly of the active refolding machinery.

### Sample Protocol
Hsp26, Ydj1, Ssa1 and client protein were cross-linked by H12/D12 DSS, digestion by Trypsin, cross-linked peptide enrichment by SEC and measurement on Fusion Orbitrap in DDA mode. MS1 Orbitrap, MS2 Ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using xQuest in ion-tag mode with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.For matching of fragment ions, tolerances of 0.2 Da for common ions and 0.3 Da for crosslink ions were applied. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was used as a static modification for cysteine. As database the sequences of the measured recombinant proteins and reversed and shuffled sequences were used for the FDR calculation by xProphet. QUantification of cross-links by xTract in LFQ mode. Statistical evaluation and visualization by in house designed Python scripts

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shsps, Hsp26, Xl-ms, Ssa1, Refolding complex, Chaperones, Qxl-ms, Ydj1

### Affiliations
Universität Konstanz
Uni Konstanz, Biology

### Submitter
Florian Stengel

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Stengel
Uni Konstanz, Biology


