### Accession
PXD026923

### Title
Cell-matrix adhesion contributes to permeability control in human colon organoids

### Description
Background and aims: Cell-cell adhesion structures (desmosomes and, especially, tight junctions) are known to play important roles in control of transepithelial permeability in the colon. The involvement of cell-matrix interactions in permeability control is less clear. The goals of the present study were to: i) determine if disruption of colon epithelial cell interactions with the extracellular matrix alters permeability control and ii) determine if increasing the elaboration of protein components of cell-matrix adhesion complexes improves permeability control and mitigates the effects of cell-matrix disruption.  Results: Treatment of colon organoids with Aquamin® increased the expression of multiple basement membrane and hemidesmosomal proteins as well as keratin 8 and 18. TEER values were higher in the presence of Aquamin® than they were under control conditions.  Conclusions: These findings provide evidence that cell-matrix interactions contribute to permeability control in the colon. They suggest that the elaboration of proteins important to cell-matrix interactions can be increased in human colon organoids by exposure to a multi-mineral natural product. Increasing the elaboration of such proteins may help to mitigate the consequences of disrupting cell-matrix interactions on permeability control.

### Sample Protocol
Methods: Human colon organoids were interrogated for proteomics under control conditions (0.25 mM calcium) and in the presence of Aquamin®, a multi-mineral product, at a level providing 1.5 mM calcium. The effects of Aquamin® on cell-matrix adhesion protein expression were determined in a proteomic screen.  Colonoids (colon organoids derived from healthy colon) were isolated from Matrigel using 2mM EDTA for 15 minutes and then exposed to Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA)- lysis and extraction buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) for protein isolation. Proteomic experiments were carried out in the Proteomics Resource Facility (PRF) in the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan, employing mass spectrometry-based Tandem Mass Tag (TMT, ThermoFisher Scientific). Fifty micrograms of colonoid protein from each condition (of each subject) were digested separately with trypsin and individually labeled with one of the 10 isobaric mass tags following the manufacturer’s protocol. After labeling, equal amounts of the peptide from each condition were mixed together. In order to achieve in-depth characterization of the proteome, the labeled peptides were fractionated using 2D-LC (basic pH reverse-phase separation followed by acidic pH reverse phase) and analyzed on a high-resolution, tribrid mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid, ThermoFisher Scientific). MultiNotch MS3 approach was employed to obtain accurate quantitation of the identified proteins/peptides.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer (v 2.3, ThermoFisher). MS2 spectra were searched against SwissProt human protein database (20353 sequences; downloaded on 06/20/2019) using the following search parameters: MS1 and MS2 tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively; carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02146 Da) and TMT labeling of lysine and N-termini of peptides (229.16293 Da) were considered static modifications; oxidation of methionine (15.9949 Da) and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (0.98401 Da) were considered variable. Identified proteins and peptides were filtered to retain only those that passed ≤2% false-discovery rate (FDR) threshold of detection. Quantitation was performed using high-quality MS3 spectra (Average signal-to-noise ratio of 9 and <40% isolation interference). Differential protein expression between conditions, normalizing to control (0.25mM calcium) for each subject’s specimens separately was established using edgeR. Then, results for individual proteins from the three subjects were averaged. Proteins names were retrieved using Uniprot.org, and Reactome V66 (reactome.org) was used for pathway enrichment analyses. Only proteins with a ≤2% false discovery rate (FDR) were included in the analyses. The initial analysis involved an unbiased proteome-wide screen of all proteins modified by Aquamin or by calcium alone in relation to control. Follow-up analysis was targeted towards differentiation, barrier-related, cell-cell and cell-matrix adhesion proteins. String database (string-db.org) was used to identify interactions between differentially-expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The importance of cell-matrix adhesion to barrier control in the colon is unclear. The goals of the present study were to: (i) determine if disruption of colon epithelial cell interactions with the extracellular matrix alters permeability control measurement and (ii) determine if increasing the elaboration of protein components of cell-matrix adhesion complexes can mitigate the effects of cell-matrix disruption. Human colon organoids were interrogated for transepithelial electrical resistance (TEER) under control conditions and in the presence of Aquamin&#xae;, a multi-mineral product. A function-blocking antibody directed at the C-terminal region of the laminin &#x3b1; chain was used in parallel. The effects of Aquamin&#xae; on cell-matrix adhesion protein expression were determined in a proteomic screen and by Western blotting. Aquamin&#xae; increased the expression of multiple basement membrane, hemidesmosomal and focal adhesion proteins as well as keratin 8 and 18. TEER values were higher in the presence of Aquamin&#xae; than they were under control conditions. The blocking antibody reduced TEER values under both conditions but was most effective in the absence of Aquamin&#xae;, where expression of cell-matrix adhesion proteins was lower to begin with. These findings provide evidence that cell-matrix interactions contribute to barrier control in the colon.

### Keywords
Gut barrier, Colon organoids, Colon, Intestinal permeabilty, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Departmemnt of Pathology, University of Michigan

### Submitter
Muhammad Aslam

### Lab Head
Dr Muhammad N Aslam
Departmemnt of Pathology, University of Michigan


