### Accession
PXD004197

### Title
Proteomic Time-Course Investigation into the Effects of Exposure of Mycobacterium smegmatis to Sub-Lethal Dose of Rifampicin

### Description
Drug susceptible Mycobacterium smegmatis (Mc2-155) was exposed to a sub-MIC concentration of antimycobacterial drug Rifampicin (treated) or DMSO (control). Cells were harvested at 30, 255 and 300 minutes post-exposure and the proteome at each time analysed using LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Q-Exactive.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures were harvested by centrifugation. The cells were washed twice in PBS and and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen. Frozen cell pellets were thawed by addition of 700 μL lysis buffer consisting of 1.5% deoxycholate, 1% sodium dodecasulphate (SDS), 375 μg lysozyme, 1 tablet PhosSTOP and 1 tablet cOmplete ULTRA protease inhibitor (Roche) in 10 mL 500 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.  Once thawed, bacteria were subjected to probe sonication for 20-30 seconds, with several minutes on ice in between rounds. The lysate was clarified by centrifugation and the supernatant was purified for protein by methanol/chloroform precipitation and solubilised in denaturing buffer (6M Urea, 2M Thiourea in 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8). Protein was quantitated by modified Bradford assay and taken through in-solution digestion: Proteins were reduced by 1 mM DTT, alkylated with 5.5 mM iodoacetamide, pre-digested with Lys-C (1:100 mass ratio) before dilution of the denaturing buffer (with 4 volumes ammonium bicarbonate) and then digested with Trypsin (1:50 mass ratio) overnight. Peptides were desalted using STAGE tips and resuspended in 2% ACN.  Samples were fractionated in-line by means of a Dionex Ultimate 3500 RSLC Nano System running a reversed phase gradient over an in-house built 40 cm column (75 μm internal diameter; 3.6 μm Aeris Aeris Peptide C18 beads, Phenomenex 04A-4507) and maintained at 40°C. Solvent A was 0.1% Formic Acid in HPLC grade water and solvent B 0.1% Formic Acid in Acetonitrile. Gradient consisted of holding 1% solvent B for 10 minutes, increasing to 6% B over 2 minutes and then increasing to 35% B over 118 minutes; washing with 80% B followed.  Tandem mass spectrometry was performed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer operating in top 10 data-dependant acquisition mode. Precursor MS1 scan range was between 300 and 1,750 with resolution of 75,000, and automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and maximum fill time of 250 ms. Fragmentation of precursor ions was set to a normalised collision energy of 28.   MS2 scans employed a resolution of 17,500 and an isolation window 2 Th. Scan range for MS2 was 200 to 2,000 Th, AGC target was set to 5e4 and maximum fill time was 80 ms. Sample injection volumes were adjusted so as to yield a total ion count of approximately 5e9 at the highest point in the peptide region for each sample.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed in MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.3.) The M. smegmatis 155mc2 reference proteome from Uniprot15 (6,600 entries) was used to define the search space for the Andromeda search engine.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications with carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a constant modification. Mass measurement corrections were performed by means of a first search with 20 ppm accuracy tolerance followed by a search on the re-calibrated data with 4.5 ppm tolerance. Missed cleavages were limited to at-most two and an empirically derived false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%, estimated using the reversed proteome in a target-decoy approach, was used to restrict identifications at both the peptide spectrum matching and protein inference levels. Protein inference required at least one unique or razor peptide for identification of a protein group. The label free quantitation was enabled through the MaxLFQ algorithm available in MaxQuant and is an MS1 intensity-based method.  The resulting protein quantifications were batch normalised using R and the SVA package, outlier samples (identified by means of hierarchical clustering and PCA plots) and were repeated. Subsequent data processing in R included: protein identifications were filtered so as to consider only proteins with non-zero LFQ values for triplicate measures; mean protein expression values were compared between treated and control groups using a student’s t-test (assuming equal variance) with p = 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
In the last 40 years only one new antitubercular drug has been approved, whilst resistance to current drugs, including rifampicin, is spreading. Here, we used the model organism Mycobacterium smegmatis to study mechanisms of phenotypic mycobacterial resistance, employing quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to investigate the temporal effects of sub-lethal concentrations of rifampicin on the mycobacterial proteome at time-points corresponding to early response, onset of bacteriostasis and early recovery. Across 18 samples, a total of 3,218 proteins were identified from 31,846 distinct peptides averaging 16,250 identified peptides per sample. We found evidence that two component signal transduction systems (e.g. MprA/MprB) play a major role during initial mycobacterial adaptive responses to sub-lethal rifampicin and that, after dampening an initial SOS response, the bacteria supress the DevR (DosR) regulon and also upregulate their transcriptional and translational machineries. Furthermore, we found a co-ordinated dysregulation in haeme and mycobactin synthesis. Finally, gradual upregulation of the M. smegmatis-specific rifampin ADP-ribosyl transferase was observed which, together with upregulation of transcriptional and translational machinery, likely explains recovery of normal growth. Overall, our data indicates that in mycobacteria, sub-lethal rifampicin triggers a concerted phenotypic response that contrasts significantly with that observed at higher antimicrobial doses.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium smegmatis tuberculosis drug resistance sub-lethal sub-mic

### Affiliations
Division of Computational and Systems Biology, Department of Integrative Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Science, University of Cape Town, South Africa.
University of Cape Town

### Submitter
Alexander Giddey

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan M Blackburn
Division of Computational and Systems Biology, Department of Integrative Biomedical Science, Faculty of Health Science, University of Cape Town, South Africa.


