### Accession
PXD008896

### Title
Protein interaction networks for Matrin 3 encoding mutations

### Description
To understand how mutations in Matrin 3 (MATR3) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and distal myopathy, we used transcriptome and interactome analysis. We found over-expression of wild-type (WT) or F115C mutant MATR3 had little impact on gene expression in neuroglia cells. We identified ~123 proteins that bound MATR3, with proteins associated with stress granules and RNA processing/splicing being prominent. The interactome of myopathic S85C and ALS-variant F115C MATR3 were virtually identical to WT protein. Deletion of RNA recognition motif (RRM1) or Zn finger motifs (ZnF1 or ZnF2) diminished the binding of a subset of MATR3 interacting proteins. Remarkably, deletion of the RRM2 motif caused enhanced binding of >100 hundred proteins. In live cells, MATR3 lacking RRM2 (ΔRRM2) formed intranuclear spherical structures that fused over time into large structures. Our findings in the cell models used here suggest that MATR3 with disease-causing mutations is not dramatically different from WT protein in modulating gene regulation or in binding to normal interacting partners. The intra-nuclear localization and interaction network of MATR3 is strongly modulated by its RRM2 domain.

### Sample Protocol
HEK 293 cells were transfected with wild-type and mutated Avi-tagged plasmids, using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, catalog #11668-019, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Twenty-four hours post transfection, the cells were rinsed three times with 1x PBS and then harvested by scraping. The cells were spun at 3000 xg for 5 min and the supernatant was discarded. The cells were resuspended in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, with 1% NP-40 and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma Aldrich #P8340). The cells were lysed by sonication (10 sec, 3 times) and spun 5 min at 3000 xg, retaining the supernatant. To pre-clear endogenous biotinylated proteins, the cell lysate was incubated with Dynabeads MyOne Streptavidin T1 (Life Tech #65601) for 30 min on a Nutator. Using a magnet to separate the beads, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and incubated for 2 h at 30°C with biotin protein ligase (Genecopoeia #BIRA500). Samples were purified through PD SpinTrap G25 columns (Fisher #45001527) and once again incubated with Streptavidin beads for 30 min. The beads were separated with a magnet and the supernatant was discarded. Beads were washed with 1% NP-40/50mM Tris, pH 7.4, for 10 min on the Nutator. The supernatant was removed and the beads were resuspended in 1% NP-40/50Mm Tris, pH 7.4, and transferred to a new tube. The beads were washed 3 more times and then suspended in 25 µL 1x Laemmli buffer. The samples in Laemmli buffer were boiled (5 min, 95°C) and the condensate was spun down. The Dynabeads were separated with a magnet and the sample was electrophoresed on an 4-20% Tris-Glycine gel and electrophoresed for 15 min at 125 V in which time the proteins migrated about 1 cm into the gel. The gels were stained with Coomassie blue in 7% acetic acid with 40% methanol for 2 h. The gel was destained overnight in 7% acetic acid and 40% methanol. The total protein in each lane, contained within 1 cm of gel, was excised by cutting the gel with a clean scalpel and then further dicing each gel slice into 1 mm3 pieces. After incubation in water for 30 min, the gel pieces were washed 3 times in 50% acetonitrile with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min. The samples were dried down in a speedvac for 15 min before reduction with 45 nM of dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°C and alkylation in 100 mM iodoacetamide (30 min, in the dark). The gel pieces were then washed in 50% acetonitrile with 50 Mm ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min, 3 times. The gel pieces were completely dried in a speedvac and placed on ice and incubated with 12.5 ng/µL of trypsin (Sigma T6567-5X20UG) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h and then placed in a 37°C incubator overnight (~16 h). The reaction was stopped with 5% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile (30 min incubation). The digested peptides were extracted in 50% acetonitrile and then 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried down in a speedvac.  The dried samples were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The Zip-Tip was washed 3 times with acetonitrile and 3 times with 0.1% TFA. Next, the sample was slowly pipetted up and down the Zip-Tip five times and discarded. The Zip-Tip was washed 3 times with 0.1% TFA and the peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA into a clean tube, pipetting up and down 5 times. Samples were dried down in a speedvac. The digested peptides were analyzed with a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) Mass Spectrometer. Each sample was initially resuspended with a 0.1% formic acid in 100% water solvent. Then was loaded through an Acclaim Pepmap 100 pre-column (20 mm x 75 mm; 2 mm-C18) and a Pepmap RSLC analytical column (250 mm x 75 mm; 2 μm-C18) at a 300nl/minute flow rate during a linear gradient from solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (v/v), 80% acetonitrile (v/v)) for 90 minutes, followed by ramping up to 98% solvent B for additional 30 minutes.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Version 2.40). Scaffold Proteome Software (Version 4.8.2, Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at > 95% probability as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they were identified by at least two peptides and could be established at >99% probability using the Peptide Prophet algorithm. Spectral counting was used to determine the relative abundance of proteins in the samples following published protocols 27,42, in which the change in abundance was determined by the ratio of the total number of identified MS/MS spectra for a particular protein between the wild-type MATR3 and mutated MATR3 samples. A statistical G-test was utilized to determine the statistical probability that the abundance of a particular protein in a MATR3 affinity capture sample was significantly greater than chance (p < 0.05). To increase the statistical power of the G-test analysis and overall spectral counting sensitivity of proteins identified with high confidence (99% protein confidence, 95% peptide confidence, and containing two unique peptides), we included data sets of peptides with lower Mascot scores that represent positive identifications at 50% probability to match. To further establish whether a protein was over-represented in fractions bound to Avi-tagged MATR3, we also analyzed the data by T-test and SAINT score 29. The SAINT algorithm uses regression analysis to determine the probability that a protein identified in the MATR3-binding fraction was not a consequence of random chance.

### Publication Abstract
To understand how mutations in Matrin 3 (MATR3) cause amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and distal myopathy, we used transcriptome and interactome analysis, coupled with microscopy. Over-expression of wild-type (WT) or F115C mutant MATR3 had little impact on gene expression in neuroglia cells. Only 23 genes, expressed at levels of &gt;100 transcripts showed &#x2265;1.6-fold changes in expression by transfection with WT or mutant MATR3:YFP vectors. We identified ~123 proteins that bound MATR3, with proteins associated with stress granules and RNA processing/splicing being prominent. The interactome of myopathic S85C and ALS-variant F115C MATR3 were virtually identical to WT protein. Deletion of RNA recognition motif (RRM1) or Zn finger motifs (ZnF1 or ZnF2) diminished the binding of a subset of MATR3 interacting proteins. Remarkably, deletion of the RRM2 motif caused enhanced binding of &gt;100 hundred proteins. In live cells, MATR3 lacking RRM2 (&#x394;RRM2) formed intranuclear spherical structures that fused over time into large structures. Our findings in the cell models used here suggest that MATR3 with disease-causing mutations is not dramatically different from WT protein in modulating gene regulation or in binding to normal interacting partners. The intra-nuclear localization and interaction network of MATR3 is strongly modulated by its RRM2 domain.

### Keywords
Interaction, Matrin 3

### Affiliations
Neuroscience
Department of Neuroscience Center of Translational Research on Neurodegenerative Disesae University of Florida

### Submitter
Guilian Xu

### Lab Head
Dr David R. Borchelt
Department of Neuroscience Center of Translational Research on Neurodegenerative Disesae University of Florida


