### Accession
PXD016202

### Title
The regulator PltZ senses exogenous2,4-DAPG and regulate a novel multidrug resistant pump in involved in Pseudomonas aeruginosaATCC27853

### Description
2, 4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG) is secondary metabolites produced by soil rhizophsere bacterium Pseudomonas fluorescens with ability to against bacteria,fungi, oomycetes and nematodes. Pseudomonas aeruginos is considered to be one cause of nosocomial infection due to its multi-drug resistance. We found aromatic polyketide antibiotic2,4-DAPG promotes the expression ofmultidrug efflux pumpsgenes pltIJK by blocking the interaction between pltI promoter andTetR family transcription factor PltZin P. aeruginosa; and our proteomics data estsblished thatPltZ is involved in diverse physiological process including metabolism of amino acids, biosynthesis of virulence factors, motility, ion transporting, carbohydrate and lipid transporting.We described asophisticated ATP-binding cassette(ABC)transportsystems regulation mechanismwhich affords insights into the role ofaromatic polyketide antibiotics.

### Sample Protocol
Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC27853 of wild type and ΔpltZ were collected, lysed, reduced and alkylated at OD600 = 1 as previously described (Wang et al., 2019). Briefly, the collected cells were resuspended in 100 μl of cell lysate (8 M Urea, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 10 mM Tris pH 8.5) and followed by boiled in a 95°C water bath for 5 min. And the above mixture was diluted to 1 mL with the dilution buffer (10% ACN, 25mM Tris pH8.5) then trypsin was added for peptide digestion about 18 h and the mixture was purified by C18StageTip.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry files were analyzed by the software Proteomics Discovery and MS/MS spectra were searched against the protein sequences of P. fluorescens 2P24. The methionine oxidation and cysteine carbamidomethylation were included as the variable modification and fixed modification, respectively (Wang et al., 2019). Other parameters were set up using the default values and the false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for both peptide and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> is an opportunistic pathogen commonly infecting immunocompromised patients with diseases like cystic fibrosis (CF) and cancers and has high rates of recurrence and mortality. The treatment efficacy can be significantly worsened by the multidrug resistance (MDR) of <i>P. aeruginosa</i>, and there is increasing evidence showing that it is easy for this pathogen to develop MDR. Here, we identified a gene cluster, <i>pltZ-pltIJKNOP</i>, which was originally assumed to be involved in the biosynthesis of an antimicrobial pyoluteorin, significantly contributing to the antibiotic resistance of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> ATCC 27853. Moreover, the TetR family regulator PltZ binds to a semi-palindromic sequence in the promoter region of the <i>pltIJKNOP</i> operon and recognizes the antimicrobial 2,4-diacetylphloroglucinol (2,4-DAPG), which in turn induces the expression of the <i>pltIJKNOP</i> operon. Using quantitative proteomics method, it was indicated that the regulator PltZ also plays an important role in maintaining metabolic hemostasis by regulating the transporting systems of amino acids, glucose, metal ions, and bacteriocins.

### Keywords
2, Pltz, 4-dapg, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Lanzhou University

### Submitter
yu xiaoquan

### Lab Head
Dr Yong-Xing He
Lanzhou University


