### Accession
PXD046777

### Title
Direct translation of incoming retroviral genomes

### Description
Viruses that carry a positive-sense, single-stranded (+ssRNA) RNA translate their genomes soon after entering the host cell to produce viral proteins, with the exception of retroviruses. A distinguishing feature of retroviruses is reverse transcription, where the +ssRNA genome serves as a template to synthesize a double-stranded DNA copy that subsequently integrates into the host genome. As retroviral RNAs are produced by the host cell transcriptional machinery and are largely indistinguishable from cellular mRNAs, we investigated the potential of incoming retroviral genomes to directly express proteins. Here we show through multiple, complementary methods that retroviral genomes are translated after entry. Our findings challenge the notion that retroviruses require reverse transcription to produce viral proteins. Synthesis of retroviral proteins in the absence of productive infection has significant implications for basic retrovirology, immune responses and gene therapy applications.

### Sample Protocol
Labeling and immunoprecipitation for mass spectrometry was performed using the SILAC Protein Quantitation-Trypsin kit and MS-compatible Magnetic IP kit from Pierce (Thermo) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were cultured in light medium with 10% dialyzed FBS and transduced with viruses also produced in light medium. The virus used was VSV-G-pseudotyped, NL4.3-Firefly reporter virus carrying 10 amino acids from the p6 region of SIVmac (pNL-luc3-SIVp6[17-26]). Infection was performed in the presence or absence of NVP (25 µM) or CHX (100 µg/ml) at an MOI of 0.5 by spinoculation. The conditions were: Mock (no virus), virus (no drug), virus + NVP, and virus + NVP + CHX. At the time of transduction, cells were switched to heavy medium. After incubation for 18 hours, cells were washed extensively with PBS or PBS+CHX (50 µg/ml) to remove all heavy media and lysed in IP-MS cell lysis buffer with protease inhibitors on ice. Immunoprecipitation was performed with an anti-p24 antibody (183-H12-5C; NIH-ARP-3537) using Pierce Protein A/G magnetic beads. Peptides were analyzed on an Evosep One liquid chromatography system coupled to a timsTOF HT mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using the 30 samples per day (SPD) method. The timsTOF HT was operated in ddaPASEF mode in the m/z range of 100-1,700 and in the ion mobility (IM) range of 0.65 – 1.35 Vs/cm².47 Singly-charged precursors were filtered out based on their m/z-ion mobility position. Precursor signals above 2,500 arbitrary units were selected for fragmentation using a target value of 20,000 arbitrary units and an isolation window width of 2 Th below 700 Da and 3 Th above 700 Da. Afterwards, fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded for 0.4 min. The collision energy was decreased as a function of the IM from 59 eV at 1/K0 = 1.6 Vs/cm to 20 eV at 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs/cm. One cycle consisted of 10 PASEF ramps.

### Data Protocol
The LC-IMS-MS/MS data were analyzed using FragPipe (version 20.0). Spectra were searched using MSFragger against the protein sequences of the human proteome (UP000005640, UniProtKB) and of HIV-1 (NL4-3 e- r- Fluc [ARP-3418] with a modified SIV p6 between aa 17-26) with a precursor and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, strict trypsin specificity (KR) and allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation of proteins as well as heavy labeling of lysine and arginine (K + 8.014199 Da, R + 10.008269 Da) as variable modifications. Search results were validated using Percolator with MSBooster enabled rescoring and converged to false discovery rates of 1 % on all levels. Proteins were quantified using IonQuant based on peptides consistently identified in all replicates and requiring at least 2 peptides for protein.

### Publication Abstract
Viruses that carry a positive-sense, single-stranded (+ssRNA) RNA translate their genomes soon after entering the host cell to produce viral proteins, with the exception of retroviruses. A distinguishing feature of retroviruses is reverse transcription, where the +ssRNA genome serves as a template to synthesize a double-stranded DNA copy that subsequently integrates into the host genome. As retroviral RNAs are produced by the host cell transcriptional machinery and are largely indistinguishable from cellular mRNAs, we investigated the potential of incoming retroviral genomes to directly express proteins. Here we show through multiple, complementary methods that retroviral genomes are translated after entry. Our findings challenge the notion that retroviruses require reverse transcription to produce viral proteins. Synthesis of retroviral proteins in the absence of productive infection has significant implications for basic retrovirology, immune responses and gene therapy applications.

### Keywords
Hiv, Ip-ms, Silac

### Affiliations
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute


