### Accession
PXD019670

### Title
Requirement of Nuclear Pore Complex Subunits for transposon silencing in Drosophila

### Description
The piRNA pathway is a small RNA-based immune system that silences mobile genetic elements in animal germlines. In Drosophila ovaries, piRNAs are produced from discrete genomic loci, called piRNA clusters, which are composed of inactive transposon copies and fragments and thus constitute a genetically encoded memory of past transposon challenges. Two types of piRNA clusters exist in flies: dual-strand clusters, expressed only in the germline via a highly specialised machinery, and uni-strand cluster, which are predominantly expressed in the somatic follicle cells. Flamenco (flam) is the major uni-strand piRNA cluster in Drosophila, giving rise to the majority of somatic piRNAs. Flam resembles a canonical RNA polymerase II transcriptional unit, nonetheless it can be specifically recognised by the piRNA pathway and directed to the biogenesis machinery. Recent work has implicated the RNA helicase Yb in the licensing of somatic piRNA production, however a detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying flam export and specification is still lacking. Here, we show that flam export triggers the assembly of peri-nuclear condensates of Yb and provide evidence that piRNA production from flam specifically requires subunits of the Nuclear Pore Complex (NPC). In the absence of some NPC subunits, transposons become de-silenced and piRNA biogenesis is compromised exclusively from flam. We also show that Yb transiently associates with the NPC to promote flam export. Taken together, our data shed light on how the export of uni-strand cluster transcripts is achieved and suggest the evolution of a specialised machinery that couples transcription, nuclear export and piRNA production.

### Sample Protocol
4x10^6 OSCs were transfected using Xfect (Takara Bio Europe 631318) as described (Saito 2014) with 20 μg of plasmid expressing HA-BASU-Yb or HA-ZsGreen, as a negative control. After 48 hrs, the growth media was supplemented for 1 hr with 200 μM Biotin. The cells were then harvested, lysed in 1.8 ml Lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 500 mM NaCl, 0.4% SDS, 1 mM dithiothreitol, 2% Triton-100 supplemented with protease inhibitors) and sonicated using a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode, 3x cycles 30 sec on / 30 sec off). Sonicated lysates were then diluted 2x in 50 mM Tris, pH 7.4 and cleared for 10 min at 16,500g. Following pre-clearing of the lysate using 100 μl of Protein A/G Dynabeads (Thermo Fischer Scientific 10015D), biotinylated proteins were isolated by incubation with 200 μl of Dynabeads (MyOne Streptavidin C1; Life Technologies) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed two times in 2% SDS, two times in Wash Buffer 1 (0.1% deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100, 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 50 mM 4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid, pH 7.5), two times with Wash Buffer 2 (250 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 1 mM EDTA, and 10 mM Tris, pH 8), and two times with 50 mM Tris. Washed beads were rinsed two times with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate, before submission for Mass Spectrometry. HA-BASU-Yb pulldown was subjected to TMT-labelling followed by quantitative Mass Spectrometry on a nano-ESI Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Spectral .raw files were processed with the SequestHT search engine on Thermo ScientificTM Proteome Discoverer™ 2.1 software. Data was searched against a FlyBase database (“dmel-all-translation-r6.24”) at a 1% spectrum level FDR criteria using Percolator (University of Washington). MS1 mass tolerance was constrained to 20 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) were set as static modifications. Oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995 Da), deamidation (+0.984) of asparagine and glutamine residues, and biotinylation of lysines and protein N-terminus (+226.078) were included as dynamic modifications. For TMT-based reporter ion quantitation, we extracted the signal-to-noise (S:N) ratio for each TMT channel. Parsimony principle was applied for protein grouping and the level of confidence for peptide identifications was estimated using the Percolator node with decoy database search. Strict FDR was set at q-value < 0.01. Downstream data analysis was performed on R using the qPLEXanalyzer package (https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1237825) as described (Papachristou et al. 2018).

### Publication Abstract
The nuclear pore complex (NPC) is the principal gateway between nucleus and cytoplasm that enables exchange of macromolecular cargo. Composed of multiple copies of ~30 different nucleoporins (Nups), the NPC acts as a selective portal, interacting with factors which individually license passage of specific cargo classes. Here we show that two Nups of the inner channel, Nup54 and Nup58, are essential for transposon silencing via the PIWI-interacting RNA (piRNA) pathway in the <i>Drosophila</i> ovary. In ovarian follicle cells, loss of Nup54 and Nup58 results in compromised piRNA biogenesis exclusively from the <i>flamenco</i> locus, whereas knockdowns of other NPC subunits have widespread consequences. This provides evidence that some Nups can acquire specialised roles in tissue-specific contexts. Our findings consolidate the idea that the NPC has functions beyond simply constituting a barrier to nuclear/cytoplasmic exchange as genomic loci subjected to strong selective pressure can exploit NPC subunits to facilitate their expression.

### Keywords
Pirna piwi npc nuclear export

### Affiliations
Cambridge University
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom

### Submitter
Marzia Munafo

### Lab Head
Dr Gregory J. Hannon
CRUK Cambridge Institute University of Cambridge Li Ka Shing Centre Robinson Way CB2 0RE Cambridge United Kingdom


