### Accession
PXD004274

### Title
Comparative ploidy proteomics of Candida albicans biofilms unraveled the role of AHP1 in the biofilm persistence against amphotericin B

### Description
To understand the molecular mechanism operating in the biofilm mode of growth of C. albicans haploids, we performed an iTRAQ-based mass spectrometry profiling of proteins of 72 h mature biofilms of the two haploids, GZY792 and GZY803 compared to that of the diploids, SC5314 and BWP17.

### Sample Protocol
Seventy-two-hour biofilms of SC5314, BWP17, GZY792 and GZY803 were taken for protein extraction. Biofilm was washed once with PBS and cell pellets were solubilized in triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB)/urea/triton-X/SDS (TUTS) buffer. Samples were homogenized using glass bead (0.5 mm) in a beadbeater following operator protocol.For each sample, 100 μg of proteins were taken. Subsequently, samples were subjected to reduction, alkylation, followed by trypsinization at 37 ºC for 16 h. Samples were then acidified and subjected to strong cation-exchange chromatography using iTRAQ method development kit (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Elutes were then desalted in Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA), dried, and then reconstituted in 25 μl of diluent (98% water, 2%ACN, and 0.05% formic acid) before sending for LC-MS/MS analysis. The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (SCIEX) in information dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed using ProteinPilotTM 4.5 (AB SCIEX) software. Peptides were mapped onto UniProt database of Candida albicans proteins. The search parameters used were as follows: cysteine alkylation of MMTS; trypsin digestion; TripleTOF 5600; and biological modifications. For iTRAQ quantitation, the peptide for quantification was automatically selected by Pro GroupTM algorithm to calculate the reporter peak area, error factor (EF) and p value. The resulting data set was auto bias-corrected to remove any variations imparted because of the unequal mixing during the combination of different labeled samples. This software counts each modified peptide as unique one.

### Publication Abstract
Candida albicans is a major fungal pathogen causing lethal infections in immunocompromised patients. C. albicans forms antifungal tolerant biofilms contributing significantly to therapeutic failure. The recently established haploid C. albicans biofilm model provides a new toolbox to uncover the mechanism governing the higher antifungal tolerance of biofilms. Here, we comprehensively examined the proteomics and antifungal susceptibility of standard diploid (SC5314 and BWP17) and stable haploid (GZY792 and GZY803) strains of C. albicans biofilms. Subsequent downstream analyses identified alkyl hydroperoxide reductase 1 (AHP1) as a critical determinant of C. albicans biofilm's tolerance of amphotericin B. At 32 &#x3bc;g/ml of amphotericin B, GZY803 haploid biofilms showed 0.1% of persister population as compared with 1% of the diploid biofilms. AHP1 expression was found to be lower in GZY803 biofilms, and AHP1 overexpression in GZY803 restored the percentage of persister population. Consistently, deleting AHP1 in the diploid strain BWP17 caused a similar increase in amphotericin B susceptibility. AHP1 expression was also positively correlated with the antioxidant potential. Furthermore, C. albicans ira2&#x394;/&#x394; biofilms were susceptible to amphotericin B and had a diminished antioxidant capacity. Interestingly, AHP1 overexpression in the ira2&#x394;/&#x394; strain restored the antioxidant potential and enhanced the persister population against amphotericin B, and shutting down the AHP1 expression in ira2&#x394;/&#x394; biofilms reversed the effect. In conclusion, we provide evidence that the AHP1 gene critically determines the amphotericin B tolerance of C. albicans biofilms possibly by maintaining the persisters' antioxidant capacity. This finding will open up new avenues for developing therapies targeting the persister population of C. albicans biofilms. The mass spectrometry proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004274.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Antifungals, Biofilms, Proteomics, Ahp1

### Affiliations
National University of Singapore
Oral Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore

### Submitter
Thuyen Truong

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. C. J. Seneviratne
Oral Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, National University of Singapore


