### Accession
PXD009755

### Title
LC-MSMS of the lc6 MHC class I immunopeptidome

### Description
MHC I-associated peptides (MAPs) presented at the surface of nucleated cells play a central role in CD8 T-cell immunosurveillance. MAPs presented by mature (i.e. MHC IIhi) medullary thymic epithelial cells (mTEChi) are essential to eliminate self-reactive CD8 T cells in a process called central tolerance. On tumor cells, MAPs that do not induce tolerance (i.e. non-tolerogenic MAPs), because absent from mTEChi or any other normal cells, are referred to as tumor-specific antigens (TSAs). Despite their clinical relevance, very few have been identified, even in highly mutated tumor types. Thus, we developed a novel proteogenomic workflow able to characterize the full TSA landscape of any tumor. Briefly, using RNA-seq data, we subtracted the mTEChi from the tumor signal to generate tumor-specific protein databases enriched in non-tolerogenic sequences. Using these databases to analyze the MAP repertoire of two murine cell lines (CT26 and EL4) sequenced by mass spectrometry, we identified a total of 21 TSAs, 90% of which derived from allegedly non-coding regions. Interestingly, our results highlighted that 70% of those TSAs derived from non-mutated yet tumor-restricted sequences, e.g. endogenous retroelements. Moreover, we showed that our approach is easily amenable to analyze human primary samples as we were able to identify TSAs in three lung tumor biopsies and four B-ALL specimens. Focusing on 5 TSAs, we demonstrated that both TSA expression and TSA-specific T-cell frequency in the pre-immune repertoire influenced the overall survival of pre-immunized tumor-bearing mice. In conclusion, this proof-of-concept study demonstrates that non-coding-derived TSAs are frequent and protective in vivo, while they could be shared by several individuals. Altogether, our findings will help expand the repertoire of human TSAs and facilitate their prioritization in the clinic.

### Sample Protocol
Lung tumor biopsies (wet weight ranging from 771 mgs to 1825 mgs), were cut in small pieces (cubes, ~3 mm in size) and 5 ml of ice-cold PBS containing protein inhibitor cocktail was added to each tissue sample. Tissues were first homogenized twice for 20 seconds using an Ultra Turrax T25 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at speed 20000 rpm and then once for 20 seconds using an Ultra Turrax T8 homogenizer (IKA-Labortechnik) set at speed 25000 rpm. Then, 550 µl of ice-cold 10X lysis buffer (10% w/v CHAPS) was added to each sample. After 60 minute incubation with tumbling at 4°C, samples were spun at 10000g for 30 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were transferred into new tubes containing magnetic beads coupled to W6/32 antibodies. Samples were incubated with tumbling for 180 minutes at 4°C and placed on a magnet to recover bound MHC I complexes to magnetic beads.  Magnetic beads were first washed with 8 × 1 mL PBS, then with 1 × 1 mL of 0.1X PBS and finally with 1 × 1 mL of water. MHC I complexes were eluted from the magnetic beads by acidic treatment using 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA).  Eluates were transferred into 2.0 mL Costar mL Spin-X centrifuge tube filters and spun 2 minutes at 3000g. Filtrates containing peptides were separated from MHC I subunits using home-made stage tips packed with twenty 1 mm diameter octadecyl (C-18) solid phase extraction disks (EMPORE). Stage tips were pre-washed first with methanol then with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.2% TFA and finally with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were loaded and then washed with 0.1% FA. Peptides were eluted with 30% ACN in 0.1%TFA, dried using vacuum centrifugation and then stored at -20°C. MAP extracts were loaded on a home-made C18 analytical column (15 cm x 150 𝜇m i.d. packed with C18 Jupiter Phenomenex) with a 100-min gradient from 5–28 % acetonitrile (0.2 % formic acid) and a 600 nl.min-1 flow rate on a nEasy-LC II system. Each full MS spectrum, acquired with a 60,000 resolution, was followed by 20 MS/MS spectra, where the most abundant multiply charged ions were selected for MS/MS sequencing with a resolution of 30,000, an automatic gain control target of 5e4, an injection time of 100 ms and a collision energy of 25 %.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Peaks 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solution Inc.) and peptide sequences were searched against the lc6 global cancer database that was built using lc6 RNA-sequencing data (reference genome used: GRCh38.88, total number of proteins in database: 2,502,592). For peptide identification, tolerance was set at 10 ppm and 0.01 Da for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Occurrence of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were considered as post-translational modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor-specific antigens (TSAs) represent ideal targets for cancer immunotherapy, but few have been identified thus far. We therefore developed a proteogenomic approach to enable the high-throughput discovery of TSAs coded by potentially all genomic regions. In two murine cancer cell lines and seven human primary tumors, we identified a total of 40 TSAs, about 90% of which derived from allegedly noncoding regions and would have been missed by standard exome-based approaches. Moreover, most of these TSAs derived from nonmutated yet aberrantly expressed transcripts (such as endogenous retroelements) that could be shared by multiple tumor types. Last, we demonstrated that, in mice, the strength of antitumor responses after TSA vaccination was influenced by two parameters that can be estimated in humans and could serve for TSA prioritization in clinical studies: TSA expression and the frequency of TSA-responsive T cells in the preimmune repertoire. In conclusion, the strategy reported herein could considerably facilitate the identification and prioritization of actionable human TSAs.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Mhc class i, Immunopeptidome, Lung cancer primary sample

### Affiliations
IRIC
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4

### Submitter
Courcelles Mathieu

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Department of Biochemistry, Department of Chemistry, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada H3T 1J4


