### Accession
PXD012083

### Title
AML HLA Ligandome reveals mutated NPM1 as a recurrent neoantigen

### Description
Somatic mutations in cancer are a potential source of cancer specific neoantigens. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has common recurrent mutations shared between patients in addition to private mutations specific to individuals. We hypothesized that neoantigens derived from recurrent shared mutations would be attractive targets for future immunotherapy and sought to study the Class I and II HLA ligandomes of thirteen primary AML tumor samples and two AML cell lines (OCI-AML3 and MV4-11) using mass spectrometry. We identified two endogenous, mutation-bearing HLA Class I ligands from NPM1, which are predicted to bind the common HLA haplotypes, HLA-A*03:01 and HLA-A*02:01 respectively. We further derived CD8+ T cells from healthy donor peripheral blood samples which bound mutant-peptide loaded A*03:01 and A*02:01 tetramers, suggesting a new source of NPM1 mutation-specific T cell receptors (TCRs) for future evaluation. Since NPM1 is mutated in approximately one-third of patients with AML, the finding of endogenous NPM1 neoantigens supports future studies evaluating immunotherapeutic approaches against this target, for this subset of patients with AML.

### Sample Protocol
MHC-class I and class II peptidomes were extracted from primary AML tumor samples and two AML cell lines. In brief, cells were lysed and the lysate was subjected to centrifugation and then precleared using rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads (GE Healthcare). For all MHC-1 captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the pan HLA-A-, B-, and C- antibody W6/32 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. For MHC class II captures the precleared lysate was incubated with the HLA-DR specific antibody L243 coupled to rProtein A Sepharose fast-flow beads. Following the immune-capture, the beads were washed with TBS and peptides were eluted from the purified MHC-molecules using 10% acetic acid. The peptides were further purified with a MWCO size filter, followed by a concentration step and then desalted on C18 based StageTips. The isolated peptides were analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
All tandem mass spectra were queried against the AML personalized proteome databases using both SEQUEST (Eng et al., 1994) and PEAKS DB search engines (PEAKS Studio 8) (Zhang et al., 2012). Spectra were also interpreted by de novo sequencing (PEAKS Studio 8) to improve high-confidence peptide identification. For all searches with SEQUEST the msConvert program (v3.0.45) was used to generate peak lists from the original data, and spectra were then assigned to peptides using the SEQUEST (v28.12) algorithm. For all searches with PEAKS the RAW data files were imported into PEAKS and subjected to default data refinement (deisotoping, charge deconvolution, peak centroiding). For all searches, the parent mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.02 Da. For SEQUEST and PEAKS DB, enzyme specificity was set to none and oxidation of methionines and deamidation (N,Q), cysteinylation, and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) was searched as a variable modification. High-confidence peptide identifications were selected at a 1% false discovery rate with the Percolator algorithm (Käll et al., 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Somatic mutations in cancer are a potential source of cancer specific neoantigens. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has common recurrent mutations shared between patients in addition to private mutations specific to individuals. We hypothesized that neoantigens derived from recurrent shared mutations would be attractive targets for future immunotherapeutic approaches. Here we sought to study the HLA Class I and II immunopeptidome of thirteen primary AML tumor samples and two AML cell lines (OCI-AML3 and MV4-11) using mass spectrometry to evaluate for endogenous mutation-bearing HLA ligands from common shared AML mutations. We identified two endogenous, mutation-bearing HLA Class I ligands from nucleophosmin (NPM1). The ligands, AVEEVSLRK from two patient samples and C(cys)LAVEEVSL from OCI-AML3, are predicted to bind the common HLA haplotypes, HLA-A*03:01 and HLA-A*02:01 respectively. Since NPM1 is mutated in approximately one-third of patients with AML, the finding of endogenous HLA ligands from mutated NPM1 supports future studies evaluating immunotherapeutic approaches against this shared target, for this subset of patients with AML.

### Keywords
Homo sapiens, Hla, Acute myeloid leukemia, Neoantigen

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology Stanford University USA

### Submitter
Niclas Olsson

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua E Elias
Department of Chemical & Systems Biology Stanford University USA


