### Accession
PXD031733

### Title
Thermophilic Geobacillus WSUCF1 secretome for saccharification of AFEX and EA pretreated corn stover

### Description
It is difficult to identify individual hydrolyzing enzymes using routine enzyme assays in the laboratory, which only give a collective picture of the secretome enzymatic activity. A proteomic analysis method based on liquid chromatography followed by tandem mass spectrometry (LCMS/MS) has proven significant for profiling CAZymes in secretome and is a powerful tool to identify enzymes that are otherwise impossible to detect. Furthermore, proteomic analysis of secretome against genomic data using different bioinformatics tools provides more details about CAZymes and relative quantifications of enzymes in each sample.

### Sample Protocol
Sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) was used on 50-100 μg of protein in each sample at 100 V for 10 min. Sample lanes were single-handedly cut into small pieces. The gel used was stored in 10% acetic acid until analyzed. Following the Shevchenko method with a few modifications, gel bands were digested in-gel. To summarize, 100% acetonitrile was used to dehydrate SDS-PAGE gel pieces. Then, they were incubated for 45 min. at 56oC under the following conditions: with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate at pH 8. After 45 min. of incubation, the sample was dehydrated for the second time and incubated using 50 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 20 min. in a completely dark setting. After 20 min. incubation, the sample (gel bands) were taken out and washed with ammonium bicarbonate and dehydrated for the third time. In 50 mM NH4HCO3, 0.01 μg/μL of sequencing grade modified trypsin was prepared. About 50μL of the trypsin solution prepared was added to each gel piece until each gel was submerged; the resulting bands were incubated overnight at 37oC. Sonication was then used to extract peptides from the gel in a water bath solution of 60% acetonitrile, 1% tricarboxylic acid, and vacuum dried to ~2-μL using Eppendorf vacufuge. The peptides extracted previously were resuspended into a 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% tricarboxylic acid to a total of 20-μL. Then, the waters nanoAcquity sample manager automatically injected 10-L of resuspended peptides into a Waters Symmetry C18 peptide trap (5mm, 180 mm x 20 mm) and loaded it for 5 min. in 2% ACN/0.1% Formic Acid. By using the Waters nanoAcquity UPLCP (buffer A = 99.9% Water, 0.1% Formic Acid, buffer B = 99.9% Acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic Acid), the bound peptides were eluted onto a Waters BEH130 C18 column (0.150 mm x 100 mm, 1.7 mm) and eluted over 90 min. In 77 min., at a flow rate of 1 L/min., a gradient of 5% B to 30% B was achieved. Michrom ADVANCE nanospray source was used to spray eluted peptides into a ThermoFisher LTQ-FT Ultra Mass Spectrometer. FT survey scans were taken (25,000 resolution at m/z 400), and for each survey scan, In the LTQ, the top ten ions were subjected to collision-induced dissociation at low energy.

### Data Protocol
In BioWorks Browser v3.3.1 (ThermoFisher), the resulting MS/MS spectra are converted into peak lists and searched against all bacterial proteins in NCBI using the default parameters. The results were also compared with two custom databases consisting of Geobacillus sp. Using the Mascot search algorithm, v2.4 (www.matrixscience.com), we searched for ORFs or translated protein sequences appended with common lab contaminants. In addition, Mascot output was analyzed using the Scaffold, v4.0.3 software tool (www.proteinomesoftware.com), using Protein Prophet computer algorithm to validate the identification of proteins probabilistically. Assignments with validations above the Scaffold 95% confidence level are considered valid.

### Publication Abstract
A thermophilic <i>Geobacillus</i> bacterial strain, WSUCF1 contains different carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes) capable of hydrolyzing hemicellulose in lignocellulosic biomass. We used proteomic, genomic, and bioinformatic tools, and genomic data to analyze the relative abundance of cellulolytic, hemicellulolytic, and lignin modifying enzymes present in the secretomes. Results showed that CAZyme profiles of secretomes varied based on the substrate type and complexity, composition, and pretreatment conditions. The enzyme activity of secretomes also changed depending on the substrate used. The secretomes were used in combination with commercial and purified enzymes to carry out saccharification of ammonia fiber expansion (AFEX)-pretreated corn stover and extractive ammonia (EA)-pretreated corn stover. When WSUCF1 bacterial secretome produced at different conditions was combined with a small percentage of commercial enzymes, we observed efficient saccharification of EA-CS, and the results were comparable to using a commercial enzyme cocktail (87% glucan and 70% xylan conversion). It also opens the possibility of producing CAZymes in a biorefinery using inexpensive substrates, such as AFEX-pretreated corn stover and Avicel, and eliminates expensive enzyme processing steps that are used in enzyme manufacturing. Implementing in-house enzyme production is expected to significantly reduce the cost of enzymes and biofuel processing cost.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Geobacillus, Thermofisher ltq-ft ultra mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
University of Houston, College of Technology
Department of Engineering Technology, College of Technology, University of Houston, TX 77479, USA

### Submitter
Mengchuan Zhuang

### Lab Head
Dr Venkatesh Balan
Department of Engineering Technology, College of Technology, University of Houston, TX 77479, USA


