### Accession
PXD025620

### Title
Amyloid-beta Citrullination in Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Amyloid-beta peptides which aggregate and accumulate in Alzheimer’s disease (AD) brain are known to have sequential N-terminal truncations and multiple post-translational modifications (PTM) such as isomerization, pyroglutamate formation, phosphorylation, nitration and dityrosine cross-linking. Here we add to the list of PTM citrullination (deimination) of Arg5 residue in plaque-derived Abeta in sporadic AD brains, identified by tandem mass spectrometry. We quantitated the level of citrullination on multiple N-truncated Abeta isoforms present in plaque-associated fractions and found that almost 30 % of pyroGlu3-Abeta pool was citrullinated in plaques from AD temporal cortex. We also documented citrullinated Abeta peptides in the detergent insoluble fractions from AD frontal cortex with ~ 22 % citrullination in the pyroGlu3-Abeta pool. Citrullination of Abeta is a common PTM, closely associated with pyroglutamate-Abeta formation and Abeta accumulation in AD. This may have implications for Abeta toxicity, auto-antigenicity of Abeta, and may be relevant for the design of diagnostic assays and therapeutic targeting.

### Sample Protocol
Approximately, 100 mg (wet tissue weight) of brain tissue was homogenized in (1:5 dry tissue weight/volume) urea-detergent buffer (8 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4 % CHAPS, 30 mM bicine pH 8.5). The tissue was processed through the Biomasher (Omni International) by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 1 min at room temperature. The tissue was centrifuged at 100,000 g for 30 min and the residual pellet was digested in 200 microL 80 % formic acid (FA) for 2 hours at room temp. This FA fraction enriched in plaques were used after lyophilization.  1 g of fresh frozen frontal cortex tissues from AD brains (n =10) were homogenized in 10 volumes (v/w) of lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 800 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, 10% sucrose) using a probe sonicator. To obtain detergent insoluble fractions, sarkosyl fractionation was performed as previously described.38 The starting brain homogenate was clarified by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 20 mins at 4°C. The crude supernatant was then treated with sarkosyl solution (1 % final concentration) for 1 hour at room temperature followed by 1 hr centrifugation at 100,000 g at 4°C to separate detergent insoluble aggregated proteins. The sarkosyl-insoluble pellet was then resuspended in 300 microL wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 800 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 2mM DTT, 10% sucrose) which went one more round of centrifugation at 100,000 g for 1 hour at 4°C. Finally, the purified sarkosyl-insoluble pellet was resuspended in 50 microL 20mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl and kept frozen at - 80 °C for further analysis. 4 microL of these pellets were digested in 10 L 80 % FA and lyophilized in speed-vacuum for further analysis. Samples were dissovled in urea buffer, reduced and alkylated. These samples were then digested overnight with Lys-N enzyme at 37 C. The samples were quenched and desalted using Waters 96 well microelution HLB desalting columns. The samples were lyophilized and used for proteomics.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS data were additionally analyzed by online Mascot server39 and the peptide list was searched against the Homo sapiens Uniprot protein sequence database (January 2020, only reviewed entries appended with in-house database for Abeta).40 The following settings were applied: Lys-N (specificity set as N-terminal to lysine) with up to two missed cleavages, mass tolerances set to 15 ppm for MS1 and 0.5 Da for the MS2 search. Oxidation of M, acetylation of N-termini, phosphorylation of S, T, acetylation of K, pyroglutamate of N-terminal E and deamidation of N, Q, R were chosen as variable modifications. Label:13C(6)15N(2) (K), Label:13C(6)15N(4) (R) were also chosen for matching labelled peptide MS/MS spectra. The .dat files from Mascot was then imported into Skyline to build a spectral library (.blib)41 and Abeta peptide peak areas were imported in MS1 filtering mode using the accurate mass of the top three isotopic peaks. The respective light and heavy peptide spectra were evaluated for variability, MS1 error, elution times, and interfering signals by manual analysis. Peak boundaries were manually inspected and reassigned as needed to ensure correct peak detection and accurate integration.

### Publication Abstract
Protein citrullination (deimination of arginine residue) is a well-known biomarker of inflammation. Elevated protein citrullination has been shown to colocalize with extracellular amyloid plaques in <i>postmortem</i> AD patient brains. Amyloid-&#x3b2; (A&#x3b2;) peptides which aggregate and accumulate in the plaques of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have sequential N-terminal truncations and multiple post-translational modifications (PTM) such as isomerization, pyroglutamate formation, phosphorylation, nitration, and dityrosine cross-linking. However, no conclusive biochemical evidence exists whether citrullinated A&#x3b2; is present in AD brains. In this study, using high-resolution mass spectrometry, we have identified citrullination of A&#x3b2; in sporadic and familial AD brains by characterizing the tandem mass spectra of endogenous N-truncated citrullinated A&#x3b2; peptides. Our quantitative estimations demonstrate that &#x223c; 35% of pyroglutamate3-A&#x3b2; pool was citrullinated in plaques in the sporadic AD temporal cortex and &#x223c; 22% in the detergent-insoluble frontal cortex fractions. Similarly, hypercitrullinated pyroglutamate3-A&#x3b2; (&#x223c; 30%) was observed in both the detergent-soluble as well as insoluble A&#x3b2; pool in familial AD cases. Our results indicate that a common mechanism for citrullination of A&#x3b2; exists in both the sporadic and familial AD. We establish that citrullination of A&#x3b2; is a remarkably common PTM, closely associated with pyroglutamate3-A&#x3b2; formation and its accumulation in AD. This may have implications for A&#x3b2; toxicity, autoantigenicity of A&#x3b2;, and may be relevant for the design of diagnostic assays and therapeutic targeting.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Ad, Amyloid-beta

### Affiliations
Washington University at St Louis School of Medicine
Florey Institute

### Submitter
Soumya Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr Soumya Mukherjee
Florey Institute


