### Accession
PXD037450

### Title
Integrated glycomic and proteomic signatures of butyrate-stimulated colorectal cancer cell line differentiation

### Description
It was previously observed that changes in the expression of specific proteins as well as protein glycosylation occur with differentiation. In this study, specific mucin O-glycans were identified that mark butyrate-induced epithelial differentiation of the intestinal cell line CaCo-2, by applying porous graphitized carbon nano-liquid chromatography with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (PGC-nanoLC-MS/MS). Moreover, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to decipher changes in the cell proteome. By performing an integrative approach, we generated hypotheses about glycosylation signatures of specific cell adhesion proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, digestion and TMT labeling was performed as described previously35. In short, ~1.0 x 106 Caco-2 cells were lysed in SDS lysis buffer (SDS [5 %], Tris-HCl [100 mM, pH 7.6]) at 95°C for 4 min. Protein concentration was determined by Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Around 100 µg of protein was used for subsequent reduction with 5 mM TCEP, alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide and quenching with 10 mM DTT. Protein lysates were purified by methanol-chloroform precipitation. The resulting protein pellets were resuspended in 40 mM HEPES pH 8.4 and digested with trypsin (10 µg) for 16 hrs at 37 °C. Peptide concentration was measured with Pierce BCA assay.  The 10 different conditions together with common reference samples were arranged in triplicate in three TMTpro 13-plex experiments. Of each peptide preparations, 10 µg was dissolved in 25 µl of HEPES buffer (40 mM, pH 8.4) and incubated with 40 µg of one of 13 amino reactive TMTpro Label for 1h at ambient temperature. Excess TMT label was quenched by addition of 6 μL 5 % hydroxylamine and incubation for 15 min at ambient temperature. Labeled peptide samples were then mixed and freeze-dried. TMT-labeled mixtures were dissolved in 1 mL 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate and fractionated on 1cc C18 SPE cartridges (Oasis HLB, Waters) using 5 %, 10 %, 15 %, 20 %, 25 % and 35 % MeCN in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate.  TMT-labeled peptides were dissolved in water/formic acid (100/0.1 v/v) and subsequently analyzed twice by on‐line C18 nanoHPLC MS/MS with a system consisting of an Ultimate3000nano gradient HPLC system (Thermo, Bremen, Germany), and an Exploris480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). Fractions were injected onto a cartridge precolumn (300 μm × 5 mm, C18 PepMap, 5 um, 100 A, and eluted via a homemade analytical nano-HPLC column (50 cm × 75 μm; Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 um, 120 A (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The gradient was run from 2 % to 40 % solvent B (20/80/0.1 water/acetonitrile/formic acid (FA); v/v/v) in 120 min. The nano-HPLC column was drawn to a tip of ∼10 μm and acted as the electrospray needle of the MS source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent MS/MS mode for a cycle time of 3 s, with a HCD collision energy at 30 V and recording of the MS2 spectrum in the orbitrap, with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 Da. In the master scan (MS1) the resolution was 120,000, the scan range 400-1500, at standard AGC target at maximum fill time of 50 ms. A lock mass correction on the background ion m/z at 445.12 was used. Precursors were dynamically excluded after n = 1 with an exclusion duration of 45 s, and with a precursor range of 20 ppm. Charge states 2-5 were included. For MS2 the first mass was set to 120 Da, and the MS/MS scan resolution was 45,000 at an AGC target of 200 % at maximum fill time of 60 ms.

### Data Protocol
In a post-analysis process, raw data were first converted to peak lists using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Electron), and submitted to the Uniprot database (Homo sapiens, 20596 entries), using Mascot v.2.2.07 (www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification. Mascot searches were with 10 ppm and 0.02 Da deviation for precursor and fragment mass, respectively, and trypsin as enzyme. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Methionine oxidation and acetyl on protein N-terminus were set as a variable modification; carbamidomethyl on Cys, TMTpro on N-terminus and Lys were set as a fixed modification. Protein FDR was set to 1 %. Normalization was performed on total peptide amount.

### Publication Abstract
Gut microbiota of the gastrointestinal tract provide health benefits to the human host via bacterial metabolites. Bacterial butyrate has beneficial effects on intestinal homeostasis and is the preferred energy source of intestinal epithelial cells, capable of inducing differentiation. It was previously observed that changes in the expression of specific proteins as well as protein glycosylation occur with differentiation. In this study, specific mucin O-glycans were identified that mark butyrate-induced epithelial differentiation of the intestinal cell line CaCo-2 (Cancer Coli-2), by applying porous graphitized carbon nano-liquid chromatography with electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry. Moreover, a quantitative proteomic approach was used to decipher changes in the cell proteome. It was found that the fully differentiated butyrate-stimulated cells are characterized by a higher expression of sialylated O-glycan structures, whereas fucosylation is downregulated with differentiation. By performing an integrative approach, we generated hypotheses about the origin of the observed O-glycome changes. These insights pave the way for future endeavors to study the dynamic O-glycosylation patterns in the gut, either produced via cellular biosynthesis or through the action of bacterial glycosidases as well as the functional role of these patterns in homeostasis and dysbiosis at the gut-microbiota interface.

### Keywords
Caco-2, Differentiation

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen 
CPM, Leiden University Medical Center

### Submitter
Katarina Madunic

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Wuhrer
CPM, Leiden University Medical Center


