### Accession
PXD027637

### Title
4D-Quantitative Proteomic Signature of Human Sperms between Normo- and Asthenozoospermia

### Description
In this study, state-of-the-art 4D-quantitative proteomic analysis was used to compare the protein profiling between 7 normozoospermic and 11 asthenozoospermic sperm samples. Overall, 4718 proteins were identified and 1430 differential abundant proteins were found in the two groups. The differentially expressed proteins were analyzed by GO and KEGG.

### Sample Protocol
The sperm pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (1% Triton X-100，1% protease inhibitor cocktail，3 M TSA，50 mM NAM) and sonicated on ice using a Focused-Ultrasonicator (Covaris Inc., MA, USA). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12000g at 4oC for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and protein concentration was determined by BCA kit (Thermo Fisher, China).     Equal amount of protein from each sample was subjected to enzymatic digestion and lysis buffer was used to adjust the volume of samples to the same. TCA was added to samples slowly at a final concentration of 20%. The samples were vortexed to mix well and settle at 4°C for 2 hours. The samples were centrifuged at 4500g for 5min and the pellets were resuspended and precipitated with pre-cooled acetone for 2-3 times. After drying the pellet, triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) was added at a final concentration of 200 mM and the pellets were ultrasonically dispersed. The samples were digested with trypsin at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) overnight. The proteins was reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) at a final concentration of 5 mM (56°C for 30 min), then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) at a final concentration of 11 mM (15 min at room temperature in the dark).

### Data Protocol
The prepared sperm proteins from the same group were pooled together and subjected to the-state-of-the-art 4D-quantitative proteomic analysis in PTM Biolabs (Hangzhou, China). Briefly, the tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water) and separated with solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) on a nanoElute high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Bruker Daltonics Inc., USA). Liquid gradient was set as follows: 0-70 min, 6%~24% B; 70-84 min, 24%~35% B; 84-87 min, 35%~80% B; 87-90 min, 80% B, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min.     The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics Inc., USA) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.75 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 400 to 1500 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.     The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta  database (20,395 sequences). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in both first search and main search. Spectrums, peptide and protein false discovery rate (FDR) were adjusted to <1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human; sperm; proteomics; asthenozoospermia

### Affiliations
Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center

### Submitter
Bo Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Bo Yang
Shenzhen PKU-HKUST Medical Center


