### Accession
PXD027108

### Title
Crosstalk between Drp1 phosphorylations during mitochondrial remodelling and their impact on metabolic adaptation - Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mass spectrometry-based proteomic data

### Description
Mitochondria constantly undergo fusion and fission events, referred as mitochondrial dynamics, which determine intracellular mitochondrial architecture and bioenergetics. Cultured cell studies demonstrate that mitochondrial dynamics are acutely regulated by phosphorylation of the mitochondrial fission orchestrator Drp1, at S579 or S600.  This dataset is linked to a study reporting on how in differentiated mouse tissues Drp1 phosphorylation at S600 acted as an upstream event for S579 phosphorylation, leading to mitochondrial fragmentation.  We performed liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS) analyses in phospho-Drp1 immunoprecipitates from BAT of vehicle or CL316,243-treated mice, following digestion with endoproteinase Glu-C to assess whether S600 and S579 phosphorylations were both occurring in the same Drp1 proteoforms or individually in different pools of Drp1 proteins. Our results certify that upon PKA stimulation, S600 and S579 phosphorylations occurred simultaneously on the same Drp1 molecular form.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. Mice were intraperitoneally injected with PBS (as vehicle) or CL316,243 (1 mg/kg). Then, one hour later, the BAT was collected and flash frozen. Proteins were extracted and 10 mg of proteins were used to pull down phosphorylated Drp1 using either Drp1 P-S579 or P-S600 antibodies. The immunoprecipitated material was then separated with SDS-PAGE and the area surrounding the molecular weight of Drp1 was isolated and cut into 2 mm2 pieces. In gel-digestion was performed according to a standard protocol, including disulfide bridge reduction with dithiothreitol, thiol alkylation with iodoacetamide and enzymatic digestion (Shevchenko et al., 2006). We used Glu-C (Promega), that produces longer peptides and does not cleave Drp1 between S579 and S600. Glu-C should generate peptide KSKPIPIMPAS579PQKGHAVNLLDVPVPVARKLS600ARE, that can be used to probe whether the phosphorylation of S579 and S600 can occur at the same time. Isotopically labelled (using heavy K and R amino acids as indicated by asterisks thereafter) and S-phosphorylated (noted [Phos]) peptide K*SK*PIPIMPAS[Phos]PQKGHAVNLLDVPVPVAR*KLS[Phos]AR*E (MW = 3941.43 Da) was synthetized by Synpeptide, to be used as a reference standard.  RP-LC MS/MS. In-gel digested samples were spiked with peptide K*SK*PIPIMPAS[Phos]PQKGHAVNLLDVPVPVAR*KLS[Phos]AR*E and analysed with  reversed-phase (RP)-LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as previously described (Dayon et al., 2021). Specific modifications were made as indicated thereafter. LC separation was performed with a higher gradient of acetonitrile to optimize the elution of the peptide of interest. A parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) method was used to target different charge states (i.e., 3+, 4+, 5+ and 6+) of the endogenous and reference standard peptides. Two MS experiments ran in parallel. An MS survey scan was performed in profile mode with an Orbitrap resolution of 15000 (automatic gain control (AGC) of 400000), m/z scan range from 300 to 1500, RF lens set at 30%, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The second experiment performed MS/MS scans on the list of m/z targets using higher-energy collisional dissociation at 31% of the normalized collision energy (CE). AGC target was set to 50000 (isolation width of 0.7 in the quadrupole), with a resolution of 120000, and maximum injection time of 246 ms with the Orbitrap acquiring in profile mode from m/z 350 to 1000.

### Data Protocol
The Skyline software (version 20.2.0.343) was used to treat LC-PRM-MS data. A spectral library obtained from the LC-PRM-MS analysis of peptide K*SK*PIPIMPAS[Phos]PQKGHAVNLLDVPVPVAR*KLS[Phos]AR*E only was used to help the identification of the endogenous and isotopically labelled forms of the doubly phosphorylated peptide in the samples. Data were transformed with Savitzky-Golay smoothing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Mouse, Prm, Drp1

### Affiliations
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences

### Submitter
Loïc Dayon

### Lab Head
Dr Loïc Dayon
Nestlé Research – Nestlé Institute of Food Safety & Analytical Sciences


