### Accession
PXD005148

### Title
Lipases from Metagenomic Sources

### Description
Functional Metaproteomic approach was used to discover lipolytic enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Manually excised protein spots from 2D gels were destained twice with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 30% acetonitrile and dried completely. The spots were tryptically (Promega, Fitchburg, USA) digested overnight (6.25 ng/µl in destaining solution; 37°C). Peptides were eluted into ultrapure water containing 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid using an ultrasonic bath for 15 min. Eluates were loaded on a trap column (C18, pore size 100 Å, particle diameter 5 μm, inner diameter 180 μm, length 20 mm) and were then eluted using a gradient of acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid (350 nl/min, linear gradient 0.5-5 % in 4 min, 5- 60% in 45 min) from an analytical column at 40 °C (C18, pore size 130 Å, particle diameter 1.7 μm, inner diameter 75 μm, length 150 mm) followed by mass spectrometry. Spectra were recorded in positive resolution mode over a mass range of 50 to 1800 m/z with 1 s/scan using the MSE technology with a collision ramp of 14- 35 eV. The parameters used for the NanoLockSpray source are as follows: Capillary voltage of 2.2 kV; Sampling cone voltage of 30 V; source temperature of 100°C; desolvation temperature of 150°C; cone gas flow of 50l/h and desolvation gas flow of 500l/h. Leucine enkephaline serving as lock mass analyte (m/z 556.2771) was fed through the lock spray channel.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the ProteinLynxGlobalServer 2.5.2 (PLGS; Waters, Eschborn, Germany) software. Mass spectra were processed using the parameters as follows: chromatographic peak width set to automatic; MS ToF resolution set to automatic; lock mass window of 0.25 Da;low energy threshold of 50 counts; elevated energy threshold of 15 counts; elution time of 5-45 mins; intensity threshold of 500 counts. A metagenomics-derived database was used for protein identification using the parameters as follows: peptide tolerance set to automatic; fragment tolerance set to automatic; minimal fragment ion matches per peptide of 2; minimal fragment ion matches per protein of 2; minimal peptide matches per protein of 1; maximum protein mass of 250 kDa; primary digest reagent was trypsin; missed cleavages was set to 2; carbamidomethyl C was set as fixed modifications; deamidation N and Q, oxidation M were set as variable modifications and false positive rate was set at 4%.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial biocatalysts play a key role in our transition to a bio-based, post-petroleum economy. However, the discovery of new biocatalysts is currently limited by our ability to analyze genomic information and our capacity of functionally screening for desired activities. Here, we present a simple workflow that combines functional metaproteomics and metagenomics, which facilitates the unmediated and direct discovery of biocatalysts in environmental samples. To identify the entirety of lipolytic biocatalysts in a soil sample contaminated with used cooking oil, we detected all proteins active against a fluorogenic substrate in sample's metaproteome using a 2D-gel zymogram. Enzymes' primary structures were then deduced by tryptic in-gel digest and mass spectrometry of the active protein spots, searching against a metagenome database created from the same contaminated soil sample. We then expressed one of the novel biocatalysts heterologously in Escherichia coli and obtained proof of lipolytic activity.

### Keywords
Metagenomics, Metaproteomics, Biocatalysts, Lipases

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr University Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Premankur Sukul

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Lars I. Leichert
Institute for Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Ruhr University Bochum


