### Accession
PXD036909

### Title
Lateral interactions between B7-H3 and CD147 are essential for stemness in breast cancer: a novel insight from proximal proteome analysis

### Description
Oncogenic cell-surface membrane proteins contribute to the phenotypic and functional characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSCs). We quantitatively analyzed cell-surface membrane proteins that are in close proximity to CD147 in CSCs using proximity-labeling proteomic approach. Moreover, we compared CSCs to non-CSCs to identify CSC-specific cell-surface membrane proteins that are the nearest neighbors of CD147 and revealed that lateral interaction between CD147 and CD276 (B7H3) concealed within the lipid raft microdomain in CSCs confers resistance to docetaxel, known to treat many types of cancer patients including metastatic breast cancer. Furthermore, we found that co-expression of CD147 and CD276 in patients with HER2+ breast cancer who received chemotherapy had poor disease-free survival (DFS) and Overall survival (OS) rates (p = 0.04 and 0.08, respectively). Subsequent immunohistochemical analysis indicated that co-expression of CD147 and CD276 may be associated with poor response to chemotherapy in an independent HER2+ BC cohort. Altogether, our study suggests that the lateral interaction between CD147 and its proximal partners, such as CD276, may be related to a poor prognostic factor in BC and a predictive marker for the critical phenotypic determinant of breast cancer stemness.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling of CD147 proximal proteins by anti-CD147-HRP Cleavable tyramide-biotin was prepared by mixing 5 mg of EZ-LinkTM-biotin (Thermo Scientific) with 1.55 mg of tyramide hydrochloride (Sigma–Aldrich) in 100 µL of dimethyl sulfoxide in 2 mL of PBS. The mixture was incubated overnight at room temperature in the dark. After filtration, the tyramide-biotin was stored at −20°C until use. HRP was conjugated to anti-CD147 and huIgG using the EZ-LinkTM Plus Activated Peroxidase kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For proximity labeling, cells (2 × 107) were washed with ice-cold PBS and incubated with anti-CD147-HRP Ab or huIgG-HRP (negative control) for 2 h at 4°C. Following incubation, the cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and biotinylated for 15 min with tyramide-labeled buffer. After removal of unreacted reagents, the cells were lysed using RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo Scientific) via sonication on ice. Protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Scientific). Biotin-labeled CD147 proximal proteins by anti-CD147-HRP were isolated using streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  SDS-PAGE fractionation and in-gel digestion Protein samples (100 µg) were fractionated on 4%–12% Bis-Tris Gels (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and stained using Instant Blue (Sigma–Aldrich). In-gel digestion was performed following the general protocol. Briefly, the protein bands were cut, destained, and washed. Proteins were reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 60°C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. After dehydration, the proteins were digested with 13 ng/µL sequencing-grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega Corporation, Madison, WI, USA) in 50-mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel slices using 50% v/v ACN in 0.1% v/v FA, and 80% v/v ACN in 0.1% v/v FA and dried under vacuum.  Mass spectrometry analysis Peptides were resuspended in 20 μL solvent A (0.1% FA in water), and 9 μL of the sample was injected through a trap column (PepMap™RSLC C18 column 75 μm ID*2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) fused with an analytic column (PepMap™RSLC C18 column 75 μm ID*50 cm, 2 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated using a linear gradient of 5%–35% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN) for 90 min at a flow rate 300 nL/min. Samples were analyzed in duplicate on a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap MS, interfaced with a high-performance LC system. The spray voltage was set to 2.2 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250°C. The full scans were acquired using the mass analyzer at 400-1,400 m/z with a resolution of 70,000. The MS/MS scans were obtained at a resolution of 17,500 using normalized collision energy of 27 eV for high-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation. The advanced gain control target and maximum injection time were 5 × 104 and 120 ms, respectively. The isolation window was set at 3 m/z. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode with one survey MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans, and the duration of dynamic exclusion was 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein database search Collected MS/MS data were converted into mzXML files using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (version 4.5) software and searched against the decoy Uniprot Human database (version 3.83, 186 578 entries) to estimate the false discovery rate using the SEQUEST® (version 27; Thermo Fisher Scientific) program in the Peaks Studio ver. 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada) database search platform. Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme with a maximum allowance of up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and differential modification search, respectively. The Scaffold software package (version 3.4.9; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification. Peptide and protein identification were accepted if they could be established at >95% and >99% probability, respectively, as specified by the Peptide and Protein Prophet algorithm, and if the protein identification had at least two identified peptides with a false discovery rate <0.1%. Spectral counting-based semi-quantitative proteome analysis was used to determine relative changes in the abundance of proteins. The MS/MS data were normalized to compare protein abundances between samples using the Scaffold software (version 3.4.9; Proteome Software Inc.). Statistically significant changes in proteins between two cells were determined by comparing normalized spectral numbers via duplicate analysis using the R program and power law global error model. The subcellular localization and functional annotation of the identified proteins were categorized using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity Systems) and PANTHER (Protein Analysis Through Evolutionary Relationships) Classification System (v7.2). Protein–protein interactions and networks of the identified proteins were annotated using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Oncogenic cell-surface membrane proteins contribute to the phenotypic and functional characteristics of cancer stem cells (CSCs). We employed a proximity-labeling proteomic approach to quantitatively analyze the cell-surface membrane proteins in close proximity to CD147 in CSCs. Furthermore, we compared CSCs to non-CSCs to identify CSC-specific cell-surface membrane proteins that are closely interact with CD147 and revealed that lateral interaction between CD147 and CD276 concealed within the lipid raft microdomain in CSCs, confers resistance to docetaxel, a commonly used chemotherapy agent for various cancer types, including metastatic breast cancer. Moreover, we investigated the clinical relevance of CD147 and CD276 co-expression in HER2+ breast cancer (BC) and triple-negative breast cancer patients who underwent chemotherapy. We observed poor disease-free survival and Overall survival rates in patients of CD147 and CD276 (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.04 and 0.08, respectively). Subsequent immunohistochemical analysis in independent cohorts of HER2+ BC support for the association between co-expression of CD147 and CD276 and a poor response to chemotherapy. Collectively, our study suggests that the lateral interaction between CD147 and its proximal partners, such as CD276, may serve as a poor prognostic factor in BC and a predictive marker for the critical phenotypic determinant of BC stemness.

### Keywords
Lipid raft, Protein-protein interaction, Proximal proteome analysis, Breast cancer, Cancer stem cells, Drug resistance, Cd147, Cd276

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea

### Submitter
Eugene C Yi

### Lab Head
Dr Eugene C. Yi
Department of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of Convergence Science and Technology and College of Medicine or College of Pharmacy, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea.


