### Accession
PXD006039

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis under nitric oxide stress

### Description
To study the entire transcriptional and translational M. tuberculosis response from initial survival to eventual escape from nitric oxide (NO) stress, we exposed exponentially growing M. tuberculosis to 1 mM diethylenetriamine/nitric oxide (DETA/NO) and followed the adaptive response over 48 hours. Samples were obtained from two independent experiments performed in triplicate and we sampled aliquots for transcriptome profiling by RNA sequencing at 20 min, 2 h and 24 h and for mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics at 20 min, 40 min, 1 h, 2 h, 4 h, 8 h, 12 h, 24 h and 48 h post NO exposure.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses, samples were harvested from triplicate cultures immediately before addition of NO and 20 minutes, 6, 12, 24 and 48 hours after NO addition. For each sample, 25 mL of culture were spun down. Bacterial cell pellets were dissolved in lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea and 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer and were disrupted by applying two 40-second cycles with FastPrep®-24 (MP Biomedicals). Protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay according to manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and the resulting free cysteine residues were alkylated by iodoacetamide. Excessive iodoacteamide was captured by addition of N-acetyl cysteine. Extracted protein samples were diluted with ammonium bicarbonate buffer to reach a urea concentration of <2 M and then digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega). To stop the tryptic digest and to precipitate RapiGest the pH was lowered to 2 using 50% trifluoro acetic acid (TFA). Water-immiscible degradation products of RapiGest were pelleted by centrifugation and the cleared peptide solution was desalted with C18 reversed-phase columns (Sep-Pak Vac C18, Waters), dried under vacuum, and re-solubilised to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml.  One µg of each peptide sample was analysed on a nano-LC system (Eksigent Technologies) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on a fused silica microcapillary column (10 cm x 75 µm, New Objective) packed in-house with C18 resin (Magic C18 AQ 3 µm diameter, 200 Å pore size, Michrom BioResources) with a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (98% acetonitrile/0.1% formic) to 35% solvent B over 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one MS1 scan in the orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000 full width at half maximum followed by collision induced dissociation of the five most abundant precursor ions with a dynamic exclusion for 30 s. MS2 spectra were acquired in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were converted into mzXML format using ProteoWizard. The acquired MS2 spectra were searched with OMSSA and XTandem against an M. tuberculosis H37Rv protein database (TubercuList v2.6) additionally containing reversed sequences of all proteins in the database. Search parameters were as follows: semi-tryptic peptides (proteolytic cleavage after lysine and arginine unless followed by proline) and maximally one missed cleavage were allowed, mass tolerance for the precursor ions was set to 15 ppm and for the fragment ion to 0.4 Da. Carbamidomethylation at cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The output of the search engine was processed using PeptideProphet and iProphet as part of the TPP. Only peptides at a false discovery rate of less than 1% were taken into consideration for further analysis. For MS1-based label-free quantification the openMS framework was used. Signals were normalised on peptide feature level such that the median signal in each sample is the same. Abundances of the three most intense peptides were averaged to get a protein abundance value. The same peptides were used for protein quantification across all samples and proteins with less than three peptides were included.

### Publication Abstract
Mycobacterium tuberculosis has succeeded as a human pathogen for tens of thousands of years thanks to its ability to resist and adapt to the adverse conditions it encounters upon infection. Bacterial adaptation to stress is commonly viewed in the context of transcriptional regulation, with the implicit expectation that an initial transcriptomic response is tightly coupled to an ensuing proteomic response. However, after challenging M. tuberculosis with nitric oxide we found that the rapid transcriptional responses, detectable within minutes of nitric oxide exposure, typically took several hours to manifest on the protein level. Furthermore, early proteomic responses were dominated by the degradation of a set of proteins, specifically those containing damaged iron-sulphur clusters. Overall, our findings are consistent with transcriptional responses participating mostly in late-stage recovery rather than in generating an immediate resistance to nitric oxide stress, suggesting that survival of M. tuberculosis under acute stress is contingent on mechanisms other than transcriptional regulation. These findings provide a revised molecular understanding of an important human pathogen.

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Shotgun proteomics, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

### Submitter
Olga T. Schubert

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


