### Accession
PXD029728

### Title
Characterization of biofilm associated protein (Bap) in Staphylococcus xylosus

### Description
The biofilm associated protein (Bap) is recognised as the essential component for biofilm formation in Staphylococcus aureus V329 and other species. Although Bap orthologs are also present in most S. xylosus strains, their contribution to biofilm formation has not yet been determined. In this study, different experimental approaches were used to elucidate the effect of Bap on biofilm formation in S. xylosus and the motif structure of two biofilm-forming S. xylosus strains TMW 2.1023 and TMW 2.1523 was compared to Bap of S. aureus V329. We found that despite an identical structural arrangement into four regions, Bap from S. xylosus differs in key factors to Bap of S. aureus i.e. isoelectric point of aggregation prone Region B, protein homology and type of repeats. Disruption of bap had no effect on aggregation behavior of selected S. xylosus strains and a significant reduction in biofilm was only observed for one strain (TMW 2.1523) under neutral conditions. Further we could not observe any typical characteristics of a S. aureus Bap positive phenotype such as functional impairment by calcium addition and rough colony morphology on CRA. A predominant role of Bap in cell aggregation and biofilm formation as reported for S. aureus V329 was not observed. We therefore suggest that biofilm formation follows different, multifactorial mechanisms, and cannot be referred to as the primary function of Bap in S. xylosus.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteome analysis of S. xylosus cells, 0.1% of overnight cultures were diluted in fresh Lac+ and incubated in Erlenmeyer flasks under agitation (planktonic, 5 ml) or statically in NunclonTM delta surface (Thermo scientific) tissue culture plates (sessile, 2 ml) for 24 h at 37 °C. Cell lysis and in-solution digest were performed with minor changes according to the SPEED protocol (Doellinger et al., 2020). Shortly, 2 ml of planktonic cells were harvested, washed twice with ice-cold PBS and resuspended in 100 µl absolute Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Sessile cells were also washed twice with ice-cold PBS to remove any non-adherent cells as well as to remove as many media proteins as possible and dissolvement of adherent cells was performed by carefully resuspending the biofilm in 100 µl (TFA). All TFA cell suspensions were neutralized to pH 8.1 - 8.3 by adding nine volumes of Tris (2 M, pH not adjusted). Incubation for 5 min at 55 °C, 450 rpm and short centrifugation followed. Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assay (B6916, Sigma-Aldrich) according to manufacturer’s instructions. 15 µg of total protein amount were reduced, alkylated (10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA; 5 min, 95 °C) and afterwards diluted with water (1:1). Trypsin digest was performed in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 overnight at 30 °C with mild agitation (400 rpm) and then stopped with 3% Formic acid (FA). Three discs of Empore C18 (3M) material were packed in 200-µL pipette tips. The resulting desalting columns were conditioned (100% acetonitrile, ACN) and equilibrated (40% ACN/0.1% FA followed by 2% ACN/0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded, washed (2% ACN/0.1% FA) and eluted (40% ACN/0.1% FA). For the determination of expression levels of Bap in sessile versus planktonic cultures, around 250 ng peptides of three biological replicates were subjected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All acquisition parameters were the same as described in Kolbeck et al., (2020). Proteomic analysis of the mutant strains was done in single measurements. Around 250 ng peptides were subjected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). All parameters were set as described in Bechtner et al., (2020).Since TMW 2.1523 is a well biofilm former in TSBN (Schiffer et al., 2019), it was chosen that planktonic as well as sessile data was sampled for this particular strain not just in Lac+ but also in TSBN.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed using MaxQuant (v1.6.3.4) with Andromeda97 (Cox et al., 2011; Tyanova et al., 2016a). MS2 spectra were searched against the NCBI proteome databaste of S. xylosus 2.1023 and 2.1523, respectively, common contaminants were included (built-in option in MaxQuant). Trypsin/P was specified as proteolytic enzyme. Precursor tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm. Results were adjusted to 1% FDR on peptide spectrum match level and protein level employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Minimal peptide length was defined as 7 AA; the “match-between-run” function disabled. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus xylosus, Bap, Aggregation, Biofilm, Knockout

### Affiliations
BayBioMS
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Christina Ludwig
BayBioMS


