### Accession
PXD035737

### Title
Crosstalk of Protein Expression and Lysine Acetylation in Response to TMV Infection in Nicotiana benthamiana

### Description
Kac, a reversible PTM, plays essential roles in various biological processes, including those involving metabolic pathways, pathogen resistance and transcription, in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. TMV, the major factor that causes poor quality of Solanaceae crops worldwide, directly alters many metabolic processes in tobacco. However, the extent and function of Kac during TMV infection have not been determined. Here, using LC−MS/MS in conjunction with highly sensitive immune-affinity purification, we comprehensively analyzed the changes in the proteome and acetylome of TMV-infected tobacco (Nicotiana benthamiana) seedlings. In total, 2082 lysine-acetylated sites on 1319 proteins differentially expressed in response to TMV infection were identified. Extensive bioinformatic studies disclosed changes in acetylation of proteins engaged in cellular metabolism and biological processes. The vital influence of Kac in fatty acid degradation and alpha-linolenic acid metabolism was also revealed in TMV-infected seedlings. This study first revealed Kac information in N. benthamiana under TMV infection and expands upon the existing landscape of acetylation in pathogen infection.

### Sample Protocol
Tobacco samples were ground and resuspended in lysis buffer comprising 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1% Triton X-100, 8 M urea, and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail. Next, the extracts were sonicated three times on ice, and the debris was centrifuged at 20,000× g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the proteins were precipitated with cold 20% trifluoroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20 °C. The supernatant was removed after centrifugation at 4 °C and 12,000× g for 10 min, and the remaining protein precipitate was subsequently rinsed with cold acetone three times. The protein content in the supernatant was measured by a 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, USA) following the manufacturer’s protocol. The protein solution was reduced using 5 mM DTT for 45 min at 30 °C and then alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 h in darkness. The sample was then diluted by the addition of 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) such that the urea concentration was adjusted to less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin (1/25 protein mass) was used for primary digestion for 12 hours at 37°C; the reaction was ended with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Then, the samples were desalted with a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and dried in vacuum. The peptides were reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB following the producer’s protocol for a 6-plex TMT kit (Thermo, Waltham, USA). One unit of TMT reagent (the amount of reagent needed to label 5 mg of protein) was thawed and reconstituted in 420 μL of acetonitrile (ACN). The samples and four TMT reagents (126, 127, 128, 129, 130, and 131) were mixed separately, incubated for 2 h, pooled together, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, the labeled samples were resuspended in water and mixed for acetylation enrichment and proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Gene Ontology (GO) classification information was obtained from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), which resulted in the classification of lysine-acetylated proteins into biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions. Functional domains were interpretated by the InterProScan online service tool (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was applied to annotate the protein pathways by the KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS), and the results were mapped by KEGG Mapper. We used WoLF PORT software (http://wolfpsort.org/) to analyze the subcellular localizations. Motif-X software (http://motif-x.med.harvard.edu/) was used to analyze the sequences constituted with amino acids at specific positions of modifying 21-mers (10 aa upstream and downstream of the acetylation site). All protein sequences were used as background parameters. The 'heatmap.2' function in the 'gplot2' R package (v.2.0.3) was used to represent the cluster memberships in a heatmap format. NetSurfP software was used to determine the secondary structures of the proteins.46 The involved functions and pathways of the modified proteins were subjected to functional enrichment analyses. GO functional enrichment, KEGG pathway and protein domain analyses were conducted using the DAVID v.6.7 bioinformatic resources. Two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was utilized to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed proteins against all acetylated proteins. Any term with an adjusted p value of < 0.05 in any cluster was considered significant. For TMT quantification, comparison of protein expression was conducted by two-sample, two-sided t tests. The threshold values of differentially expressed modified and unmodified proteins were selected as a fold-change ≥1.30 or ≤0.77 and p <0.05. A protein–protein interaction (PPI) network of the determined proteins was described via STRING software (http://string-db.org/). We use Cytoscape (v.3.7.0) software (http://www.cytoscape.org/) to visualize the PPI network map. Densely connected regions were analyzed with molecular complex detection (MCODE).

### Publication Abstract
Lysine acetylation (K<sup>ac</sup>), a reversible PTM, plays an essential role in various biological processes, including those involving metabolic pathways, pathogen resistance, and transcription, in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. TMV, the major factor that causes the poor quality of Solanaceae crops worldwide, directly alters many metabolic processes in tobacco. However, the extent and function of K<sup>ac</sup> during TMV infection have not been determined. The validation test to detect K<sup>ac</sup> level and viral expression after TMV infection and Nicotinamide (NAM) treatment clarified that acetylation was involved in TMV infection. Furthermore, we comprehensively analyzed the changes in the proteome and acetylome of TMV-infected tobacco (<i>Nicotiana benthamiana</i>) seedlings via LC-MS/MS in conjunction with highly sensitive immune-affinity purification. In total, 2082 lysine-acetylated sites on 1319 proteins differentially expressed in response to TMV infection were identified. Extensive bioinformatic studies disclosed changes in acetylation of proteins engaged in cellular metabolism and biological processes. The vital influence of K<sup>ac</sup> in fatty acid degradation and alpha-linolenic acid metabolism was also revealed in TMV-infected seedlings. This study first revealed K<sup>ac</sup> information in <i>N. benthamiana</i> under TMV infection and expanded upon the existing landscape of acetylation in pathogen infection.

### Keywords
Nicotiana benthamiana, Lysine acetylation, Proteome, Tmv

### Affiliations
Tobacco Research Institute of CAAS
Micrometer Biotech

### Submitter
Xianliang Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Jinguang Yang
Tobacco Research Institute of CAAS


