### Accession
PXD025876

### Title
BEMAP analysis of glycosylated YghJ

### Description
In the present study we have further investigated the extent of YghJ glycosylation and coupled this inherent O-linked protein glycosylation to an increased antigenic potential of YghJ. We have expressed and purified glycosylated YghJ from the canonical ETEC strain H10407 and performed an in depth BEMAP analysis to identify glycosylated Ser/Thr residues

### Sample Protocol
YghJ isolated from culture supernatant was Trypsin digested and purified. Tryptic peptides were lyophilized after which the BEMAP reaction mixture was added. The BEMAP reaction time and experimental conditions as well as TiO2 enrichment were carried out exactly as described in Boysen et 2016. The BEMAP-enriched peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and separated by nano-LC-MS/MS on an in-house packed 17 cm × 100 μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ column (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) using an Easy-LC nano-HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Germany). The HPLC gradient was 0–34% solvent B (A = 0.1% formic acid; B = 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) in 180 mins at a flow of 250 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). An MS scan (400–2000 m/z) was recorded in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 at 400 m/z for a target of 1e6 ions. The top seven most intense ions were fragmented by HCD MS/MS using the following parameters: activation time = 0.1 ms, normalized energy = 48, dynamic exclusion enabled with repeat count 1, exclusion duration = 30 s, intensity threshold = 5000, target ions = 2e5.

### Data Protocol
Raw data generated on the LTQ Orbitrap Velos or Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) were processed with Proteome Discoverer (Version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and subjected to database searching using an in-house Mascot server (Version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). Database searches were performed with the following parameters: Database: annotated ETEC H10407; semiTrypsin as the enzyme allowing two missed cleavages sites; Carbomidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; Deamidation of Asn and Gln; Oxidation of Met allowed as variable modification; When required BEMAP mass tag 2-AEP ((C(2) H(6) N O(2) P) on Ser/Thr or Heptose on Ser/Thr or GlcNAc on Ser/Thr was set as variable modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Precursor mass range set from 350 Da to 7,000 Da. False discovery rate was set to 5% at peptide level using the Percolator algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bemap, Yghj, Etec, E. coli

### Affiliations
GlyProVac LLC

### Submitter
Anders Boysen

### Lab Head
Dr Anders Boysen
GlyProVac LLC


