### Accession
PXD000953

### Title
The Pan-Human Library: A repository of assays to quantify 10 000 proteins by SWATH-MS

### Description
The “Pan-Human Library” is a compendium of highly specific assays covering more than 10 000 human proteins and enabling their targeted analysis in SWATH-MS datasets acquired from research or clinical specimens.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and Tissue sampling, Protein fractionation (AP, SEC, Depletion, None), Proteolytic digestion (Trypsin, PCT), Peptide fractionation (OGE, 1D GE, SAX, None), LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Shotgun database search (X!Tandem, MyriMatch, OMSSA, Comet), Statistical evaluation (PeptideProphet, iProphet), FDR control (MAYU)

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry is the method of choice for deep and reliable exploration of the (human) proteome. Targeted mass spectrometry reliably detects and quantifies pre-determined sets of proteins in a complex biological matrix and is used in studies that rely on the quantitatively accurate and reproducible measurement of proteins across multiple samples. It requires the one-time, a priori generation of a specific measurement assay for each targeted protein. SWATH-MS is a mass spectrometric method that combines data-independent acquisition (DIA) and targeted data analysis and vastly extends the throughput of proteins that can be targeted in a sample compared to selected reaction monitoring (SRM). Here we present a compendium of highly specific assays covering more than 10,000 human proteins and enabling their targeted analysis in SWATH-MS datasets acquired from research or clinical specimens. This resource supports the confident detection and quantification of 50.9% of all human proteins annotated by UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and is therefore expected to find wide application in basic and clinical research. Data are available via ProteomeXchange (PXD000953-954) and SWATHAtlas (SAL00016-35).

### Keywords
Assay, Targeted proteomics, Phl, Pan-human library, Transition list, Swath-ms, Openswath

### Affiliations
Columbia University
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich

### Submitter
George Rosenberger

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology ETH Zurich


