### Accession
PXD004592

### Title
A metaproteomic analysis of the response of a freshwater microbial community under nutrient enrichment

### Description
Eutrophication can lead to an uncontrollable increase in algal biomass, which has repercussions for the entire microbial and pelagic community. Studies have shown how nutrient enrichment affects microbial species succession, however details regarding the impact on community functionality are rare. Here, we applied a metaproteomic approach to investigate the functional changes to algal and bacterial communities, over time, in oligotrophic and eutrophic conditions, in freshwater microcosms. Samples were taken early during algal and cyanobacterial dominance and later under bacterial dominance. 1048 proteins, from the two treatments and two timepoints, were identified and quantified by their exponentially modified protein abundance index. In oligotrophic conditions, Bacteroidetes express extracellular hydrolases and Ton-B dependent receptors to degrade and transport high molecular weight compounds captured while attached to the phycosphere. Alpha- and Beta-proteobacteria were found to capture different substrates from algal exudate (carbohydrates and amino acids, respectively) suggesting resource partitioning to avoid direct competition. In eutrophic conditions, environmental adaptation proteins from cyanobacteria suggested better resilience compared to algae in a low carbon nutrient enriched environment. This study provides insight into differences in functional microbial processes between oligo- and eutrophic conditions at different timepoints and highlights how primary producers control bacterial resources in freshwater environments.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation  Microcosm samples were concentrated, in triplicate, at days three and 12 of the time course using a Centramate tangential flow filtration (TFF) system fitted with three 0.1 µm pore size Supor TFF membranes. The permeate was then filtered with a 3 µm pore size polycarbonate isopore membrane in order to obtain fractions dominated by free-living bacteria (<3 µm in size) and alga and particle-associated bacteria (>3 µm in size). These fractions were harvested at 10 000 × g for 15 minutes at 4 °C. The resulting cell pellets were further washed in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB) prior to storage at -20°C. Cells were defrosted and resuspended in extraction buffer (250 µL of 0.5 M TEAB, 0.1% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS)) and 1 µL of halt protease inhibitor cocktail) incorporating a sonication bath step for 5 minutes on ice. The resulting suspension was submitted to five freeze-thaw cycles (each cycle corresponds to two minutes in liquid nitrogen and five minutes in a 37°C water bath). The lysed sample was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a LoBind microcentrifuge tube. The remaining cell pellet was resuspended in extraction buffer (125 µL) and homogenized with glass beads (425-600 µm) for ten cycles (each cycle corresponds to two minutes homogenization and two minutes on ice). The lysed sample was centrifuged at 15,000 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants from both extraction methods were combined. 1 µL of benzonase nuclease  was added to the collected supernatants. Extracted proteins were precipitated overnight, at -20°C, using four volumes of acetone. The dried protein pellet was resuspended in 100 µL of 0.5 M TEAB and quantified using the 230/260 spectrophotometric assay described by Kalb and Bernlohr. Biological replicates were pooled before reduction, alkylation and digestion. Protein samples (200 µg) were reduced with 20 mM tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine, at 60 °C for 30 min, followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Samples were digested overnight, at 37 °C, using trypsin (Promega, UK) 1:40 (trypsin to protein ratio) resuspended in 1 mM HCl. The samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator and stored at -20 °C prior to fractionation.  Chromatography and mass spectrometry  The first dimensional chromatographic separation, off-line, was performed on a Hypercarb porous graphitic column (particle size: 3 µm, length: 50 mm, diameter: 2.1 mm, pore size: 5 µm) (Thermo-Dionex, USA) on an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC. Peptides were resuspended in 200 µL of Buffer A (0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 3% (v/v) HPLC-grade acetonitrile (ACN) in HPLC-grade water) and eluted using a linear gradient of Buffer B (0.1% (v/v) TFA and 97% (v/v) ACN in HPLC-grade water) ranging from 5 to 60% over 120 minutes with a flow rate of 0.2 mL min-1. Peptide elution was monitored at a wavelength of 214 nm and with Chromeleon software, version 6.8. Fractions were collected every two minutes, between 10 and 120 minutes, and dried using a vacuum concentrator. Dried fractions were stored at -20 °C prior to mass spectrometry analysis. The second dimensional chromatographic separation of each peptide fraction was performed on a nano-LC-CSI-MS/MS system. In this system a U3000 RSLCnano LC, containing a trap column (300 µm × 5 mm packed with PepMap C18, 5 µm, 100Å wide pore, Dionex) followed by a reverse phase nano-column (75 µm × 150 mm packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm, 100Å wide pore), was coupled to an ultra-high resolution quadrupole time-of-flight (UHR maXis Q-ToF 3G) mass spectrometer equipped with an Advance CaptiveSpray ion source. Peptide fractions were resuspended in loading buffer (0.1% (v/v) TFA and 3% (v/v) ACN in HPLC-grade water) and two injections were made. A 90 minute linear gradient elution was performed using buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) and 3% (v/v) ACN in HPLC-grade water) and buffer B (0.1% (v/v) FA and 97% (v/v) ACN in HPLC-grade water), during which buffer B increased from 4 to 40% at a flow rate of 0.3 µL min-1. On the mass spectrometer, the following settings were specified: endplate Offset -500 V, capillary voltage 1000 V, nebulizer gas 0.4 bar, dry gas 6.0 L min-1, and dry temperature 150 °C. Mass range: 50-2200 m/z, at 4 Hz. Lock mass was used for enabling mass acquisition correction in real time, therefore high mass accuracy data were obtained. Data were acquired for positive ions in a dependent acquisition mode with the three most intense double, triple or quadruple charges species selected for further analysis by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) under collision induced dissociation (CID) conditions where nitrogen was used as collision gas.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  All MS and MS/MS raw spectra were processed using Data Analysis 4.1 software (Bruker, Germany) and the spectra from each Bruker analysis file were output as a mascot generic file (MGF) for subsequent database searches using Mascot Daemon (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science, USA). The peptide spectra were searched against a eukaryotic and a prokaryotic database created by collating all Uniprot entries (retrieved on 24 February 2015) from organisms with an abundance of > 1% in the 16 and 18S rDNA survey of our inoculum (Table 1, full list in Supp. Mat. Table 2 and 3). This search was undertaken utilizing the two-step approach described in Jagtap et al., 2013. Briefly, the initial database search was done without any false discovery rate (FDR) limitation and then was followed by a second search with a 1% FDR threshold against a refined database created by extracting the protein identifications derived from the first search. FDRs for assigning a peptide match were determined from the ratio of the number of peptides that matched to the reversed sequence eukaryotic and prokaryotic databases to the number of peptides matched to the same databases in the forward sequence direction. The following search parameters were applied to both searches: up to one missed cleavage with trypsin, fixed modification of cysteine residues by carbamidomethylation, variable modification of methionine by oxidation, instrument specification ESI Q-ToF, peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+, precursor mass tolerance of ±0.2 Da and fragment-ion mass tolerance of ±0.02 Da. For the second search only matches above a 95% confidence homology threshold, with significant scores defined by Mascot probability analysis, and a 1% FDR cut-off were considered confidently matched peptides. ‘Show sub-sets’ and ‘require bold red’ were applied on initial Mascot results to eliminate redundancy. The highest score for a given peptide mass (best match to that predicted in the database) was used to identify proteins, which in turn were assigned a most probable host. Furthermore, only when two or more unique peptides, per protein, were matched did we consider a protein identified. Protein abundance was relatively estimated through the exponentially modified protein abundance index (emPAI) (Ishihama et al., 2005). emPAI is an approximate, label-free, relative quantitation of the proteins. This method is based on the protein abundance index (PAI) that calculates the number of different observed peptides divided by the number of observable peptides as a measure of abundance. This PAI value is then exponentially modified to derive the emPAI score. A protein abundance is then finally calculated after normalizing the emPAI score for a protein by dividing it by the sum of the emPAI scores for all identified proteins (Ishihama et al., 2005).  Functional classification of proteins  Proteins were semi-automatically attributed a functional classification. Briefly, a list of UniProt accession numbers was collated from each sample and queried utilizing the UniProt Retrieve/ID mapping tool (http://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/). Column options ‘Keywords’ and ‘Gene ontology (biological process)’ were selected. Incomplete or ambiguous annotations were then manually completed by searching for the individual UniProt accession numbers on Pfam (http://pfam.xfam.org/) and EggNOG (http://eggnogdb.embl.de/).

### Publication Abstract
Eutrophication can lead to an uncontrollable increase in algal biomass, which has repercussions for the entire microbial and pelagic community. Studies have shown how nutrient enrichment affects microbial species succession, however details regarding the impact on community functionality are rare. Here, we applied a metaproteomic approach to investigate the functional changes to algal and bacterial communities, over time, in oligotrophic and eutrophic conditions, in freshwater microcosms. Samples were taken early during algal and cyanobacterial dominance and later under bacterial dominance. 1048 proteins, from the two treatments and two timepoints, were identified and quantified by their exponentially modified protein abundance index. In oligotrophic conditions, Bacteroidetes express extracellular hydrolases and Ton-B dependent receptors to degrade and transport high molecular weight compounds captured while attached to the phycosphere. Alpha- and Beta-proteobacteria were found to capture different substrates from algal exudate (carbohydrates and amino acids, respectively) suggesting resource partitioning to avoid direct competition. In eutrophic conditions, environmental adaptation proteins from cyanobacteria suggested better resilience compared to algae in a low carbon nutrient enriched environment. This study provides insight into differences in functional microbial processes between oligo- and eutrophic conditions at different timepoints and highlights how primary producers control bacterial resources in freshwater environments. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004592.

### Keywords
Eutrophic, Lc-msms, Metaproteomics, Oligotrophic, Freshwater, Microbial loop

### Affiliations
University of Sheffield
University of Sheffield, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, UK

### Submitter
David Russo

### Lab Head
Dr Jagroop Pandhal
University of Sheffield, Faculty of Engineering, Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, UK


