### Accession
PXD039882

### Title
Composition of the mitoribosome of Diplonema papillatum

### Description
Biosynthesis of mitochondrial genome-encoded proteins is carried out by the mitoribosome, a specialized apparatus that has evolved and diverged dramatically since its bacterial origin. Recent studies across various eukaryotes have demonstrated widespread structural and compositional diversity of mitoribosomes. We used sucrose gradient centrifugation and Blue-Native PAGE to separate mitoribosomes of Diplonema papillatum, the type species of diplonemids, a widespread group of single-celled marine flagellates.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were extracted as described at https://doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.pkydkxw. Mitochondrial pellets were mixed with the appropriate amount of buffer to obtain a homogenate containing at the final concentration ~10 mg/mL total proteins, 20 or 100 mM KCl, 20 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM DTT, 30 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, and 1× cOmplete EDTA-free. The homogenate was immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and an equivalent of ~1.5 g was pulverized using TissueLyserII (Qiagen) in a 10-mL grinding jar with a 1 mm steel ball, twice for 30s at 30 Hz with intermittent cooling in liquid nitrogen. The fine grindate was stored at −70 °C until further use. Pulverized mitochondria were lysed in 10× sucrose gradient buffer (0.2 or 1 M KCl, 200 mM MgCl2, 25 mM DTT, 300 mM Tris-HCl pH7.6, and 10× cOmplete EDTA-free) plus 1% Triton X-100. After homogenization and a 10-min incubation on ice, the mixture was centrifuged (25,000×g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the resulting supernatant was concentrated to a volume of ~750 µL on a 30-kDa Vivaspin 500 (Sartorius) ultrafiltration device (12,000×g, 10–15 min, 4 °C) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Around 1/20 (~500 µg proteins) was set aside to be later used as the ‘input’ reference, while the remaining 19/20 were loaded on top of a 5-mL 10–30 % sucrose gradient (containing 1× sucrose gradient buffer and 0.02% Triton X-100) and centrifuged in an AH-650 swinging-bucket rotor (247,500×g, 130 min, 4 °C). After centrifugation, gradient fractions of 210 μL were collected from the top, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at −70 °C. Mitoribosome migration was monitored by examining the profile of extracted RNA by agarose gel electrophoresis. Mitochondrial lysate was separated on a Bis-Tris-based BN-PAGE gel (3–7%) essentially as described at https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2006.62. The gel was cut into 5-mm slices and two neighboring BN-PAGE gel fractions at the top of the gel, which were particularly enriched in both the mtSSU and mtLSU rRNAs, were submitted to proteomics technology platforms at the Institut de Recherche en Immunologie et en Cancérologie (IRIC) in Montreal, Canada, for in-gel trypsin digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis using an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo) instrument.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW format was converted to mzML using ThermoRawFileParser v1.3.2. Peptide searches in the raw MS/MS datasets were performed using MSFragger v3.3, followed by filtering and scoring by Philosopher v4.0.0 and quantification by IonQuant v1.7.5. We searched for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) in a custom database of D. papillatum nuclear and mitochondrial proteins supplemented with frequent contaminants and Protein A. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20 ppm. For trypsin digestions, we allowed up to two missed cleavage sites per protein. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal protein acetylation, serine and threonine phosphorylation, and conversion of glutamine and glutamate at peptide N-termini to pyrrolidone-carboxylic acid were specified as variable modifications (up to three per peptide). Minimum and maximum peptide size were set to 7 and 50 amino acid residues and to 500 and 6,000 Da, respectively. False discovery rates for PSM and protein identification probability were determined by the target-reversed decoy approach and set to 1%. IonQuant data processing was done for all ions using the MaxLFQ strategy and included normalization, but not match-between-runs option. Precursor intensity-based protein quantification was done by calculating iBAQ values. Precursor intensities determined by IonQuant were normalized by the theoretical number of trypsin peptides as determined by the MS-Digest tool from the ProteinProspector v6.3.1 suite. We used the following parameters: trypsin digest; no missed cleavage; carbamidomethyl at Cys residues as fixed modification; no variable modification; minimal length of 7 amino acids; and peptide mass range from 900 to 5,000 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondrial ribosome (mitoribosome) has diverged drastically from its evolutionary progenitor, the bacterial ribosome. Structural and compositional diversity is particularly striking in the phylum Euglenozoa, with an extraordinary protein gain in the mitoribosome of kinetoplastid protists. Here we report an even more complex mitoribosome in diplonemids, the sister-group of kinetoplastids. Affinity pulldown of mitoribosomal complexes from Diplonema papillatum, the diplonemid type species, demonstrates that they have a mass of &gt; 5 MDa, contain as many as 130 integral proteins, and exhibit a protein-to-RNA ratio of 11:1. This unusual composition reflects unprecedented structural reduction of ribosomal RNAs, increased size of canonical mitoribosomal proteins, and accretion of three dozen lineage-specific components. In addition, we identified &gt;50 candidate assembly factors, around half of which contribute to early mitoribosome maturation steps. Because little is known about early assembly stages even in model organisms, our investigation of the diplonemid mitoribosome illuminates this process. Together, our results provide a foundation for understanding how runaway evolutionary divergence shapes both biogenesis and function of a complex molecular machine.

### Keywords
['Diplonema papillatum', 'Lc-msms', 'Protist', 'Bn-page', 'Mitoribosome']

### Affiliations
['Université de Montréal', 'Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada']

### Submitter
['Matus Valach']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Université de Montréal, Quebec, Canada', 'email': 'gertraud.burger@umontreal.ca', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Gertraud Burger', 'id': '2513167'}]

