### Accession
PXD042648

### Title
Deciphering the proteome of naturally released extracellular vesicles from Leptospira interrogans serovar Pomona in response to temperature and osmotic stresses

### Description
The biogenesis and functions of Leptospira's extracellular vesicles (EVs) remain unclear. The study aimed to characterize EVs that were naturally released from intact leptospires during in vitro culture, as well as under conditions mimicking the host environment during infection, including temperature or osmolarity shift. The EVs were found to contain a group of proteins from the outer membrane and various cytoplasmic proteins, suggesting that they originated from the outer membrane and cytoplasm. These proteins were primarily involved in Leptospira's growth, survival, adaptation, and pathogenicity. Interestingly, the study revealed that Leptospira secreted multifunctional proteins through EVs but might maintain several virulence and virulence-associated proteins in their cells in response to temperature and osmotic stresses. Thus, native leptospiral EVs might act as decoys for the host immune system, while the virulence factors crucial for direct interaction with host components might be preserved in whole cells. This knowledge may contribute to understanding the role of EVs in the pathogenicity of Leptospira and the development of vaccines against leptospirosis in the future.

### Sample Protocol
Leptospiral EVs were treated with lysis buffer (2% SDS in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, TEAB) and disrupted by sonication (amplitude 35%, pulse of 10 sec, and rest of 5 sec, for a total of 5 min). The protein samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37°C with mild agitation for 30 min and alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. The reaction was quenched by incubation with 10 mM DTT at RT for 15 min. Protein samples were incubated with 6-volume cold acetone at -20°C overnight. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged at 12,000×g at 4°C for 10 min. The pellet was reconstituted with 0.6 M urea in TEAB buffer and then sonicated for 10 min. The samples were digested with porcine trypsin (Thermo Scientific) in a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37°C overnight. Finally, the peptide samples were completely dried in vacuo. The peptide concentrations were measured using Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instruction. The digested peptides were isotopically labeled as previously described 27,28 with some modifications. The EV samples (six biological replicates) from three different conditions: in vitro culture at 30°C, temperature shifted to 37°C, and physiological osmolarity (six biological replicates per condition), were differentially labeled with light, intermediate, and heavy isotopes, respectively. The dried samples were reconstituted with TEAB buffer and incubated with 4% (v/v) CH2O, CD2O, or 13CD2O in formaldehyde solution for light, intermediate, or heavy labeling, respectively. The samples were further incubated with 0.6 M NaBH3CN for light and intermediate labeling or 0.6 M NaBD3CN for heavy labeling at RT with mild agitation for 1 h. The reactions were quenched by incubation with 1% ammonium and then with formic acid (FA). The labeled samples were pooled in a ratio of 1:1:1 (v/v/v) and completely dried. Subsequently, the mixed labeled samples were separated into 10 fractions using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific), following the manufacturer’s instruction. The elution solution contained 5% increasing concentrations of acetonitrile (ACN) from 5% to 50% (v/v) in 0.1% triethylamine. The eluted samples were completely dried and then reconstituted in 0.1% FA before applying them to LC-MS/MS. The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC1000 system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap Plus mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific), as previously described 28 with some modifications. The 5 µl of the peptide mixture (300 ng) was applied to LC-MS/MS. The peptides were eluted with 5−20% ACN containing 0.1% FA for 43 min, followed by 40−98% ACN containing 0.1% FA for 10 min at a 300 nl/min flow rate. The MS methods included a full MS scan at a mass resolution of 70,000, followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans at a resolution of 17,500. The normalized collision energy of HCD fragmentation was set at 27%. An MS scan range of 400 to 1,600 m/z was selected, and monoisotopic precursor ions with unassigned charge states with a charge state of +1 or greater than +8 were excluded. A dynamic exclusion of 30 sec was used.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using the MaxQuant software suite (version 2.1.1.0) with the Andromeda search engine. Raw MS files were searched against the complete sequence of L. interrogans serovar Copenhageni Fiocruz L1-130 protein retrieved from the UniProt database (www.uniprot.org, taxonomic identifier 267671). The default search parameters with some additional settings were used. The false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, Trypsin/P as a specific digesting enzyme with 2 missed cleavage, peptide tolerance first search of 20 ppm, and main search of 4.5 ppm were set. Cysteine carbamidomethylation and different dimethyl isotope labels of N termini and lysine were set as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification. Any contaminants and decoy sequences were removed. The proteins repeatedly identified by at least 3 out of 6 replicates were considered proteins that truly existed within leptospiral EVs. The label-free quantification (LFQ) and intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) of peptide intensities were performed to calculate protein abundance. The default setting of LFQ and iBAQ with the “match between run” feature was employed. Dimethyl labeling was used to calculate the relative abundance of proteins. A monoisotopic mass increment of the light, intermediate and heavy isotopes was 28.0313, 32.0564, and 36.0757 Da, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
Bacterial extracellular vesicles (EVs) are generally formed by pinching off outer membrane leaflets while simultaneously releasing multiple active molecules into the external environment. In this study, we aimed to identify the protein cargo of leptospiral EVs released from intact leptospires grown under three different conditions: EMJH medium at 30&#xa0;&#xb0;C, temperature shifted to 37&#xa0;&#xb0;C, and physiologic osmolarity (EMJH medium with 120&#xa0;mM NaCl). The naturally released EVs observed under transmission electron microscopy were spherical in shape with an approximate diameter of 80-100&#xa0;nm. Quantitative proteomics and bioinformatic analysis indicated that the EVs were formed primarily from the outer membrane and the cytoplasm. The main functional COG categories of proteins carried in leptospiral EVs might be involved in cell growth, survival and adaptation, and pathogenicity. Relative to their abundance in EVs grown in EMJH medium at 30&#xa0;&#xb0;C, 39 and 69 proteins exhibited significant changes in response to the temperature shift and the osmotic change, respectively. During exposure to both stresses, Leptospira secreted several multifunctional proteins via EVs, while preserving certain virulence proteins within whole cells. Therefore, leptospiral EVs may serve as a decoy structure for host responses, whereas some virulence factors necessary for direct interaction with the host environment are reserved in leptospiral cells. This knowledge will be useful for understanding the pathogenesis of leptospirosis and developing as one of vaccine platforms against leptospirosis in the future.

### Keywords
Leptospirosis, Quantitative proteomics, Extracellular vesicle, Osmotic stress, Leptospira

### Affiliations
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, Thailand
Center of Excellence in Systems Biology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok 10330

### Submitter
Jiradej Makjaroen

### Lab Head
Dr Kanitha Patarakul
Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Pathumwan, Bangkok, Thailand


