### Accession
PXD017426

### Title
CARP/Ankrd1 Interacting Proteins in mouse heart

### Description
Identification of CARP/ANKRD1 interacting proteins in heart by Co-immunoprecipitation followed by Mass-spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Identification of CARP interacting proteins by mass-spectrometry was done by immuno-precipitating endogenous CARP from whole cardiac lysates of muscle lim protein (MLP/Csrp3) knockout or CARP knockout mice (transgenic mice reported in Lange et al, 2016). MLP hearts were chosen as these display high levels of CARP protein expression, while CARP knockout hearts served as a negative control for unspecific protein binding to the antibody. Briefly, heart tissues were lysed into lysis buffer (300mM NaCl, 20mM Tris-HCl pH8, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1x Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), 2mM DTT) and sonicated on ice for 2 min. Soluble proteins were separated from insoluble cellular debris by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 15,000 rpm at 4 ºC. The supernatant was transferred into a new container and pre-cleared with Protein-G linked magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Life Technologies) for 1 h at 4 ºC on a shaker to remove proteins that bind non-specifically to the beads. After removal of beads, 1µg of CARP antibody (polyclonal rabbit, Ankrd1-1; Myomedix, Germany) was added to the lysates and incubated over night at 4 ºC. Following the incubation, Protein-G coupled magnetic beads were added to the lysate and incubated on a shaker for 3 h at 4 ºC. Beads were washed 3 times with ice-cold 1 x PBS, supplemented with 0.2% NP-40, followed by 2 washes with ice-cold 10mM Tris-HCl pH8, and 2 washes with ice-cold distilled water. After removal of wash buffer, beads with bound complexes were analyzed by mass-spectrometry for identification of proteins or SDS-page following silver stain (Sigma Aldrich) for visualization of proteins.  For identification of proteins in co-immunoprecipitates of CARP, 25 μl 5% RapiGest (Waters Corporation, 5 Pack of 1 mg Vials, 186001860) in 10 X TNE buffer (100mM Tris-HCl, 2M NaCl, 10mM EDTA, pH 7.4) was mixed with the beads-bound immunocomplexes dissolved in 225µl distilled water. The sample was boiled for 5 min after which the magnetic beads were removed and 375 μl water was added. TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) was added to the final concentration of 1 mM and incubated at 37 ºC for 30 min. Iodoacetamide was then added to the final concentration of 2mM and incubated at 37 ºC for 30 min. Before the addition of trypsin, TCEP was added to the final concentration of 2mM. Trypsin was then added to the final concentration of 1:50 trypsin:protein and incubated overnight at 37ºC. To remove RapiGest, HCl was added to a final concentration of 250mM and incubated at 37ºC for 1 h. The sample was then centrifuged at 14,000 rpm at 4°C for 30 min. The supernatant was removed from the pellet into a fresh tube. The peptides were then extracted using Aspire RP30 desalting columns (Thermo Scientific) before injection into the mass spectrometer. Trypsin-digested peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS with nanospray ionization. All nanospray ionization experiments were performed using a QSTAR-Elite hybrid mass spectrometer (ABSCIEX) interfaced to a nanoscale reversed-phase high-pressure liquid chromatography (Tempo) using a 10 cm-180 ID glass capillary packed with 5-µm C18 ZorbaxTM beads (Agilent). The buffer compositions were as follows: Buffer A was composed of 98% H2O, 2% ACN (Acetonitrile), 0.2% formic acid, 0.005% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid); Buffer B was composed of 100% ACN, 0.2% formic acid, and 0.005% TFA. Peptides were eluted from the C-18 column into the mass spectrometer using a linear gradient of 5–60% Buffer B over 60 min at 400 µl/min. LC-MS/MS data were acquired in a data-dependent fashion by selecting the 6 most intense peaks with charge state of 2 to 4 that exceeds 20 counts, with exclusion of former target ions set to "120 seconds" and the mass tolerance for exclusion set to 100 ppm. Time-of-flight MS were acquired at m/z 400 to 1800 Da for 0.5 seconds with 12 time bins to sum. MS/MS data were acquired from m/z 50 to 2,000 Da by using "enhance all" function and 24 time bins to sum, dynamic background subtract, automatic collision energy, and automatic MS/MS accumulation with the fragment intensity multiplier set to 6 and maximum accumulation of 2 s before returning to the survey scan.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications were made using Mascot (Matrix Sciences) and paragon algorithm executed in Protein Pilot 3.0 (ABSCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
Striated muscle responds to mechanical overload by rapidly up-regulating the expression of the cardiac ankyrin repeat protein, CARP, which then targets the sarcomere by binding to titin N2A in the I-band region. To date, the role of this interaction in the stress response of muscle remains poorly understood. Here, we characterise the molecular structure of the CARP-receptor site in titin (UN2A) and its binding of CARP. We find that titin UN2A contains a central three-helix bundle fold (ca 45 residues in length) that is joined to N- and C-terminal flanking immunoglobulin domains by long, flexible linkers with partial helical content. CARP binds titin by engaging an &#x3b1;-hairpin in the three-helix fold of UN2A, the C-terminal linker sequence, and the BC loop in Ig81, which jointly form a broad binding interface. Mutagenesis showed that the CARP/N2A association withstands sequence variations in titin N2A and we use this information to evaluate 85 human single nucleotide variants. In addition, actin co-sedimentation, co-transfection in C2C12 cells, proteomics on heart lysates, and the mechanical response of CARP-soaked myofibrils imply that CARP induces the cross-linking of titin and actin myofilaments, thereby increasing myofibril stiffness. We conclude that CARP acts as a regulator of force output in the sarcomere that preserves muscle mechanical performance upon overload stress.

### Keywords
Heart, Mlp, Coip, Dilated cardiomyopathy

### Affiliations
 
UC San Diego

### Submitter
Stephan Lange  

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Lange
UC San Diego


