### Accession
PXD023165

### Title
CD9, a key mediator of pancreatic cancer cell aggressiveness driven by CAFs-derived extracellular vesicles

### Description
While of growing interest in pancreatic cancer (PC) field, the stromal-tumor cells crosstalk lags behind in terms of biomarkers and therapeutic options improving the clinical armamentarium. Knowledge on cellular communications was drastically enhanced following the discovery of extracellular vesicles (EVs), a powerful process of intercellular exchanges. We previously described a new stromal-tumor cell crosstalk mediated by Cancer-Associated Fibroblasts (CAFs)-derived ANXA6+-EVs, supporting pancreatic cancer cell aggressiveness in hostile areas of PC. In this study, using mass spectrometry analyses to investigate CAFs-derived EVs' cargo, we report that CD9 is a key member of the ANXA6/LRP1/TSP1 complex present in PC-associated CAFs-derived ANXA6+-EVs. We determined that CD9 is expressed by PC-associated CAFs in vivo as well as in vitro following physiopathologic culture conditions. Targeting CD9 impaired CAFs-derived ANXA6+-EVs uptake by pancreatic cancer cells, which consequently decreases their migratory abilities. Signaling pathway arrays highlighted p38/MAPK as activated in pancreatic cancer cells following CAFs-derived ANXA6+/CD9+-EVs uptake. The use of CD9 blocking antibody, p38 siRNA or chemical inhibitors impaired pancreatic cancer cells abilities following incubation with CAFs-derived ANXA6+/CD9+-EVs. Finally, we revealed CD9 expression as an independent poor-prognosis marker in human PC samples. Collectively our data highlight the key role of CD9 in CAFs-derived ANXA6+-EVs internalization by pancreatic cancer cells and the consequent, and mandatory, activation of p38/MAPK pathway to foster their migratory abilities. Measuring the oncogenic CAFs-derived ANXA6+/CD9+-EVs then limiting their action on pancreatic cancer cells abilities might be a promising option for PC stratification and treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Isolation of extracellular vesicles (EVs) Co-culture experiments were prepared as followed: 600 000 CAFs infected with shRNA Ctrl (C) or shRNA-ANXA6 (461) were first plated in 6 wells and the day after 300 000 Raw 264.7 were plated in culture insert of 0.4 µm (Millipore). Cell-conditioned media were collected 48h later. EVs were isolated from these media by three sequential centrifugation steps at 4 °C: 10 min at 500 × g, to remove cells; then 30 min at 10,000 × g, to remove cell debris and large extracellular vesicles; and 3 h at 100,000 × g, to pellet EVs, followed by one wash (suspension in PBS/centrifugation at 100,000 × g), to remove soluble serum and secreted proteins. The high speed pellet was then suspended in 100 µL of PBS for further analysis. For comparative analyses, the HSP was collected from equivalent amounts of culture medium, conditioned by equivalent amounts of cells. For this study, EVs were prepared from three different CAFs (derived either shC (Control) or sh461 (RNA-ANXA6). Mass spectrometry analysis.  Briefly, protein extract corresponding to EVs from CAFs derived either shC or sh461 (RNA-ANXA6) were stacked on NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris acrylamide gels (Life Technologies) in a single band, stained with Imperial Blue (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and cut from the gel. Gels pieces were submitted to an in-gel trypsin digestion as previously described 1 . Peptides mixtures were extracted, dried down with speed vacuum and reconstituted with 0.1% TFA in 4% acetonitrile (ACN) before analysis by LC-MS/MS using an LTQ Velos Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) online with a an Ultimate 3000RSLCnano chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Sunnyvale, CA). Each sample was analyzed thrice by LC-MSMS. For each run, 10% on the Peptide mixture was separated on a PepMap RSLC C18 column. First peptides were concentrated and purified on a pre-column (C18 PepMap100, 2 cm × 100 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 5 µm particle size) in solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). In the second step, peptides were separated on a reverse phase LC EASY-Spray C18 column (PepMap RSLC C18, 15 cm × 75 µm I.D, 100 Å pore size, 2 µm particle size) at 300 nL/min flow rate. After column equilibration using 4% of solvent B (20% water - 80% acetonitrile - 0.1% formic acid), peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a two steps linear gradient (4-22% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 110 min and 22-32% acetonitrile/H2O; 0.1 % formic acid for 10 min). For peptide ionization in the EASY-Spray nanosource, spray voltage was set at 1.9 kV and the capillary temperature at 275 °C. The LTQ velos Orbitrap was used in data dependent mode to switch consistently between MS and MS/MS. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap in the range of m/z 300-1700 at a FWHM resolution of 30 000 measured at 400 m/z. For internal mass calibration the 445.120025 ions was used as lock mass. The more abundant precursor ions were selected and collision-induced dissociation fragmentation was performed in the ion trap on the 10 most intense precursor ions measured to have maximum sensitivity and yield a maximum amount of MS/MS data. The signal threshold for an MS/MS event was set to 500 counts. Charge state screening was enabled to exclude precursors with 0 and 1 charge states. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, exclusion list size 500 and exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification.  Relative intensity-based label-free quantification (LFQ) was processed using the MaxLFQ algorithm2 from the freely available MaxQuant computational proteomics platform, version 1.5.2.8.3 The acquired raw LC Orbitrap MS data were first processed using the integrated Andromeda search engine.4 Spectra were searched against the Human database (UniProt Proteome reference, date 201508; 20197 entries), the Mouse database (date 201508; 16717 entries) and a set of 177 abundant proteins from bovine serum used for cells culture. The following parameters were used for searches: (i) trypsin allowing cleavage before proline; (ii) two missed cleavages were allowed; (ii) monoisotopic precursor tolerance of 20 ppm in the first search used for recalibration, followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search and 0.5 Da for fragment ions from MS/MS ; (iii) cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.02146) as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation (+15.99491) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106) as variable modifications; (iv) a maximum of five modifications per peptide allowed; and (v) minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. The match between runs option was enabled to transfer identifications across different LC-MS/MS replicates based on their masses and retention time within a match time window of 0.7 min and using an alignment time window of 20min. The quantification was performed using a minimum ratio count of 1 (unique+razor) and the second peptide option to allow identification of two co-fragmented co-eluting peptides with similar masses. The false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide and protein levels were set to 1% and determined by searching a reverse database. For protein grouping, all proteins that cannot be distinguished based on their identified peptides were assembled into a single entry according to the MaxQuant rules. The statistical analysis was done with Perseus program5 (version 1.5.1.6) from the MaxQuant environment (www.maxquant.org). The LFQ normalised intensities were uploaded from the proteinGroups.txt file. First, proteins marked as contaminant, reverse hits, and “only identified by site” were discarded. Protein LFQ normalized intensities were base 2 logarithmized to obtain a normal distribution. Quantifiable proteins were defined as those detected in at least 70% of the samples in one or more condition. Missing values were replaced using data imputation by randomly selecting from a normal distribution centred on the lower edge of the intensity values that simulates signals of low abundant proteins using default parameters (a downshift of 1.8 standard deviation and a width of 0.3 of the original distribution). To determine whether a given detected protein was specifically differential a two-sample t-test were done using permutation based FDR-controlled at 0.05 and employing 250 permutations. The p value was adjusted using a scaling factor s0 with a value of 0.2.

### Publication Abstract
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC), signaling from stromal cells is implicated in metastatic progression. Tumor-stroma cross-talk is often mediated through extracellular vesicles (EVs). We previously reported that EVs derived from cancer-associated stromal fibroblasts (CAFs) that are abundant in annexin A6 (ANXA6<sup>+</sup> EVs) support tumor cell aggressiveness in PDAC. Here, we found that the cell surface glycoprotein and tetraspanin CD9 is a key component of CAF-derived ANXA6<sup>+</sup> EVs for mediating this cross-talk. CD9 was abundant on the surface of ANXA6<sup>+</sup> CAFs isolated from patient PDAC samples and from various mouse models of PDAC. CD9 colocalized with CAF markers in the tumor stroma, and CD9 abundance correlated with tumor stage. Blocking CD9 impaired the uptake of ANXA6<sup>+</sup> EVs into cultured PDAC cells. Signaling pathway arrays and further analyses revealed that the uptake of CD9<sup>+</sup>ANXA6<sup>+</sup> EVs induced mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway activity, cell migration, and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). Blocking either CD9 or p38 MAPK signaling impaired CD9<sup>+</sup>ANXA6<sup>+</sup> EV-induced cell migration and EMT in PDAC cells. Analysis of bioinformatic datasets indicated that CD9 abundance was an independent marker of poor prognosis in patients with PDAC. Our findings suggest that CD9-mediated stromal cell signaling promotes PDAC progression.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer (pc), Lc-msms, Extra-cellular vesicles (evs), Migration, Cd9, Cancer-associated fibroblasts (cafs), Stromal compartment, P38/mapk pathway

### Affiliations
Marseille Proteomic, Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de Marseille, Inserm UMR1068, CNRS UMR7258, Aix Marseille Université U105, Institut Paoli Calmettes, 27 Boulevard Leï Roure CS30059 13273 Marseille Cedex 09 France 
1INSERM, U1068, Cancer Research Center of Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, UMR7258, and University Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France

### Submitter
AUDEBERT Stephane

### Lab Head
Dr Tomasini Richard
1INSERM, U1068, Cancer Research Center of Marseille, Institut Paoli-Calmettes, CNRS, UMR7258, and University Aix-Marseille, Marseille, France


