### Accession
PXD043407

### Title
High-throughput screening and proteomic characterization of compounds targeting myeloid-derived suppressor cells

### Description
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells are a heterogeneous cell population of incompletely differentiated immune cells. They are known for suppressing T cell activity and are implicated in multiple chronical diseases, which makes them an attractive drug target for the pharmaceutical industry. Here, we differentiated mouse MDSC from a progenitor cell line and used quantitative (phospho)proteomics to quantify more than 7,000 proteins and phosphorylation sites that enable the characterization of MDSC on a molecular level. Based on this differentiation protocol, we investigated the effects of the well-studied MDSC drugs Entinostat and Mocetinostat on a proteomewide level and established a high-throughput drug screening platform. We assessed the effects on T cell proliferation and INF-γ secretion of ~21,000 small molecules in a MDSC/T cell coculture setup. The most promising candidates were further validated in a screening setup using human MDSC. Finally, a proteomics experiment showed the significant upregulation of several proteins associated with the reduction of reactive oxygen species, suggesting the potential mode of action of this compound.

### Sample Protocol
Cell treatment for proteomic compound characterization For cell treatment, NUP-MDSC were generated as described before and the expression of cell surface markers was checked using flow cytometry. Cells were plated in a 6-well plate and incubated with 3xEC50 of compound 2 or 10 µM compound 3 for 72h at 37°C and 5% CO2. For the treatment with the HDAC inhibitors Entinostat and Mocetinostat, NUP-MDSC were generated as described before and plated in 6-well plates. Next, cells were treated with DMSO, 30 µM, or 300 µM of Entinostat or Mocetinostat, respectively, for 72 hours. After the treatment, medium was removed, cells were washed twice with PBS, and the cell pellet was further subjected to proteomic sample preparation. Proteomic sample preparation The cell pellet was reconstituted in 2% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5 and lysed by heating to 95°C for 10 min. 1 μl 100% TFA was added to each sample to hydrolyze DNA and the pH was subsequently adjusted to 8.5 with 3 M Tris solution. Disulfide bonds were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 45 min at 37°C, followed by alkylation of cysteines with 55 mM CAA for 30 min at room temperature. Prior to tryptic digestion, the detergent was removed from lysates by SP3 cleanup on a Agilent BRAVO system (Agilent Technologies), following the protocol first described by Hughes et al. (Hughes et al., 2019). Briefly, lysate containing 200 μg of protein was mixed with SP3 beads, and proteins were precipitated onto a 50:50 mixture of Sera-Mag Speed Bead types A and B (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 58% acetonitrile. Beads were washed three times with 80% ethanol in water and once with acetonitrile. Tryptic digest was performed in 100 μL of digestion buffer (2 mM CaCl2 in 25 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) with a 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio. Bead-precipitated proteins were digested at 37°C overnight. On the next day, the supernatant of each sample was transferred to a new well and vacuum dried. Dried peptides were reconstituted in water and labelled with the respective TMT10plex labelling reagent as described previously (Zecha et al., 2019) with a protein to TMT reagent ratio of 1:2. Labeled samples were pooled, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA prior to desalting on SepPAC50 columns (waters corp.). Peptides were fractionated using a Dionex Ultra 3000 HPLC system with a Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 um 2.1 x 250 mm column as described previously (Bian et al., 2020). 96 fractions were collected and pooled to 48. For the full proteome analysis, one fifth of each fraction was transferred to a new 96 well plate and both plates were vacuum dried. For the phosphopeptide analysis, dried peptides were reconstituted in 55 μL 0.1% TFA in 30% ACN, pooled from 48 to 12 fractions, and mixed with 70 μL priming buffer (0.1% TFA, 100% ACN). Phosphopeptides were enriched from each of the 12 fractions using Fe(III)-IMAC-NTA cartridges on the AssayMAP BRAVO (Agilent Technologies) platform as described previously (Bian et al., 2020). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 60 μL 1% ammonia, vacuum dried and stored at -20°C prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis Peptide, protein, and phosphorylation site identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.3.3) with standard settings for reporter ion MS3 unless described otherwise (S. Tyanova et al., 2016). Isotope impurities of the TMT lot were specified to allow MaxQuant the automated correction of TMT intensities. Raw files for full and phosphoproteome analysis were searched separately against the mouse reference proteome (UP000000589, canonical, download 10/2019) and common contaminants. Carbamidomethylated cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine (only phosphoproteme samples) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Results were adjusted to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectrum, protein, and site match, employing a target-decoy approach using reversed protein sequences. Data processing MaxQuant output tables were filtered for contaminants, reversed sequences, and proteins only identified based on modified peptides. For the NUP-MDSC profiling experiment, protein abundance estimation was based on corrected TMT reporter intensities and the TMT intensities for each sample were total sum normalized. Phosphorylation site intensities were normalized with the full proteome total sum intensity ratios. Unless stated otherwise, displayed protein abundances were log2 transformed. Statistical analysis was performed with the student’s t-test function in Perseus (v.1.5.3.3, (Stefka Tyanova et al., 2016)) using a permutation based FDR of 0.05 and calculated S0 value (Tusher et al., 2001). Slight modification were made for the proteomics experiment investigating the effects of compound 2 and 3 as well as the treatment with the HDAC inhibitors. The corrected TMT intensity of each channel was median-centered to the median intensity across all TMT channels. Statistical analysis was also performed with the Student’s t-test function in Perseus (v.1.5.3.3, (Stefka Tyanova et al., 2016)) using a Benjamini-Hochberg corrected FDR of 0.05 and calculated S0 values. GO term enrichment (GOBP, KEGG, Keywords) was also done in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) are a heterogeneous cell population of incompletely differentiated immune cells. They are known to suppress T cell activity and are implicated in multiple chronic diseases, which make them an attractive cell population for drug discovery. Here, we characterized the baseline proteomes and phospho-proteomes of mouse MDSC differentiated from a progenitor cell line to a depth of 7000 proteins and phosphorylation sites. We also validated the cellular system for drug discovery by recapitulating and identifying known and novel molecular responses to the well-studied MDSC drugs entinostat and mocetinostat. We established a high-throughput drug screening platform using a MDSC/T cell coculture system and assessed the effects of &#x223c;21,000 small molecule compounds on T cell proliferation and IFN-&#x3b3; secretion to identify novel MDSC modulator. The most promising candidates were validated in a human MDSC system, and subsequent proteomic experiments showed significant upregulation of several proteins associated with the reduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS). Proteome-wide solvent-induced protein stability assays identified Acyp1 and Cd74 as potential targets, and the ROS-reducing drug phenotype was validated by measuring ROS levels in cells in response to compound, suggesting a potential mode of action. We anticipate that the data and chemical tools developed in this study will be valuable for further research on MDSC and related drug discovery.

### Keywords
Screening, Phosphorylation, Mdsc, Proteomics, Ptm

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich

### Submitter
Johannes Krumm

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Kuster
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Munich


