### Accession
PXD003102

### Title
Sulfolobus islandicus HCD+ETD, including LFQ

### Description
Protein posttranslational methylation and acetylations have been reported to occur in archaea, including members of the genus Sulfolobus, but have not been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Sulfolobus chromatin proteins are known to be methylated and acetylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in this respect. We utilized bottom-up and top-down proteomic approaches to perform a global and deep methylation study in the hyperthermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus LAL 14/1 with a particular focus on chromatin proteins. Without specific enrichment, 1931 methylation sites on 731 protein were found by bottom-up proteomic analysis. The dynamics of protein methylation has been investigated on 424-526 proteins throughout 3 cell culture growth stages. We also confirm the relaxed specificity and steady abundance of the previously described methyltransferase aKMT4 which is implicated in the massive proteome methylation. We also detected an abundant N-terminal acetylation of S. islandicus proteins, with more than one third of the detected N-terminal peptides being acetylated

### Sample Protocol
Proteins of the cytosolic subcellular fraction were precipitated with cold acetone. The cytosolic proteins were digested using Lys-C (4h) and trypsin (overnight), purified using C-18 Seppak or C-18 Omics tips and subjected to LC-MSMS analysis. For SCX experiment, the digested peptides after C-18 Seppak purification were reconstituted in ammonium formate buffer and were separated using SCX resin-containing centrifuge tip using ammonium formate concentration gradient into 1 flowthrough fraction and 5 eluted fractions. The fractions were dried in Speedvac and reconstituted for LC-MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5 was used for database search. Sulfolobus islandicus LAL 14/1 fasta database was downloaded from Uniprot (July 2015). 2 missed cleavages were allowed, . Default LFQ settings were used for LFQ quantitation. Methyaltion (K) was used as a variable modification and not used for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Protein post-translational methylation has been reported to occur in archaea, including members of the genus Sulfolobus, but has never been characterized on a proteome-wide scale. Among important Sulfolobus proteins carrying such modification are the chromatin proteins that have been described to be methylated on lysine side chains, resembling eukaryotic histones in that aspect. To get more insight into the extent of this modification and its dynamics during the different growth steps of the thermoacidophylic archaeon S. islandicus LAL14/1, we performed a global and deep proteomic analysis using a combination of high-throughput bottom-up and top-down approaches on a single high-resolution mass spectrometer. 1,931 methylation sites on 751 proteins were found by the bottom-up analysis, with methylation sites on 526 proteins monitored throughout three cell culture growth stages: early-exponential, mid-exponential, and stationary. The top-down analysis revealed 3,978 proteoforms arising from 681 proteins, including 292 methylated proteoforms, 85 of which were comprehensively characterized. Methylated proteoforms of the five chromatin proteins (Alba1, Alba2, Cren7, Sul7d1, Sul7d2) were fully characterized by a combination of bottom-up and top-down data. The top-down analysis also revealed an increase of methylation during cell growth for two chromatin proteins, which had not been evidenced by bottom-up. These results shed new light on the ubiquitous lysine methylation throughout the S. islandicus proteome. Furthermore, we found that S. islandicus proteins are frequently acetylated at the N terminus, following the removal of the N-terminal methionine. This study highlights the great value of combining bottom-up and top-down proteomics for obtaining an unprecedented level of accuracy in detecting differentially modified intact proteoforms. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD003074 and PXD004179.

### Keywords
Sulfolobus islandicus, Etd, Strong cation exchange, Archaea, Hcd, Label-free quantitation

### Affiliations
Structural Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Unit, Structural Biology and Chemistry Department, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France
Proteomics Core Facility, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Egor Vorontsov

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Structural Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Unit, Structural Biology and Chemistry Department, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France


