### Accession
PXD044235

### Title
A lysine residue at the C-terminus of MHC class I ligands correlates with low C-terminal proteasomal cleavage probability

### Description
The majority of peptides presented by MHC class I results from proteasomal protein turnover. The specialized immunoproteasome, which is induced during inflammation, plays a major role in antigenic peptide generation. However, other cellular proteases can, either alone or together with the proteasome, contribute peptides for MHC class I loading non-canonically. We used an im-munopeptidomics workflow combined with a prediction software for proteasomal cleavage probabilities to analyze how inflammatory conditions affect proteasomal processing of immune epitopes presented by A549 cells. Treatment of A549 cells with IFNγ enhanced proteasomal cleavage probability of MHC class I ligands for both, the constitutive proteasome and the im-munoproteasome. Furthermore, IFNγ alters the contribution of the different HLA allotypes to the immunopeptidome. When we calculated HLA allotype-specific proteasomal cleavage probabili-ties for MHC class I ligands, peptides presented by HLA-A*30:01 showed characteristics hinting at a reduced C-terminal proteasomal cleavage probability independently of the type of proteasome. This was confirmed by HLA-A*30:01 ligands from the immune epitope database, which also showed this effect. Furthermore, two additional HLA allotypes, namely HLA-A*03:01 and HLA-A*11:01, presented peptides with a markedly reduced C-terminal proteasomal cleavage probability. Peptides eluted from all three HLA allotypes shared a peptide binding motif with a C-terminal lysine residue suggesting that this lysine residue impairs proteasome-dependent HLA ligand production and might, in turn, favor peptide generation by other cellular proteases.  The mass spectrometry raw files used in this study were originally produced for a previous publication, where they were utilized to address the influence of cigarette smoke on the antiviral T-cell immune response. Here, we have reanalyzed the data to investigate processing of MHC class I ligands by c20S or i20S, respectively.  Original publication: Chen, J.; Wang, X.; Schmalen, A.; Haines, S.; Wolff, M.; Ma, H.; Zhang, H.; Stoleriu, M.G.; Nowak, J.; Nakayama, M.; et al. Antiviral CD8(+) T cell immune responses are impaired by cigarette smoke and in COPD. Eur Respir J 2023, doi:10.1183/13993003.01374-2022.

### Sample Protocol
100 million cells per sample were lysed with a buffer containing 0.25% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1x cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Merck, Taufkirchen, Germany), 1 mM Phenylmethyl-sulfonylfluoride, 1% Octyl-beta-D-glucopyranoside in PBS. 10 µg per sample were used for subsequent proteome analysis. Lysates for immunopeptidomics analysis were cleared by centrifugation (51,200 × g for 50 min at 4°C) and native MHC class I complexes were precipitated with the pan-MHC class I specific antibody W6/32 (HB-95, ATCC/ LGC Standards, Wesel, Germany) coupled to protein G sepharose 4 Fast Flow beads (Merck, Taufkirchen, Germany) as described. Co-precipitated immunopeptides were eluted with 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and purified using Sep-Pak tC18 columns containing 100 mg sorbent (Waters, Eschborn, Germany). Elution of peptides from the tC18 sorbent was conducted in two steps, first with 28% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% TFA and consecutively with 32% ACN in 0.1% TFA. Both eluates were volume reduced using a vacuum evaporator until almost all liquid was evaporated. Peptides were then resolved with 2% ACN in 0.5% TFA and stored at -80 °C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) online coupled to a UItimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC (Dionex, Sunnyvale, United States). For total proteome analyses, peptides from FASP digestion were automatically injected and loaded onto a C18 trap column (300 μm inner diameter (ID) × 5 mm, Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, LC Packings) at 30 μl/min flow rate prior to C18 reversed phase chromatography on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250 nl/min flow rate in a 95 minutes non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. Profile precursor spectra from 300 to 1500 m/z were recorded at 60000 resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 30 ms. The 15 most abundant peptide ions of charges 2 to 7 were selected from the MS scan and fragmented by HCD with anormalized collision energy of 28 and isolation window of 1.6 m/z, and a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. MS/MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 15,000 with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. This method was adapted for immunopeptidome measurements as follows: recording the profile precursor spectrum from 300 to 1650 m/z at 60 000 resolution, top 15 fragment spectra of charges 1 to 5 were recorded at 30 000 resolution and a dynamic exclusion for 15 seconds. The Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (version 2.5.0.400; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against the SwissProt Human database (Release 2020_02, 20435 sequences; 11490581 residues). Furthermore, the workflow for the identification of the immunopeptidome included the INFERYS rescoring node [17]. Database search was performed with full tryptic specificity and allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage site (proteome) or with unspecified peptide cleavage (immunopeptidome), respectively. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as static 16 modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Peptide spectrum matches and peptides were validated with the Percolator algorithm

### Publication Abstract
The majority of peptides presented by MHC class I result from proteasomal protein turnover. The specialized immunoproteasome, which is induced during inflammation, plays a major role in antigenic peptide generation. However, other cellular proteases can, either alone or together with the proteasome, contribute peptides to MHC class I loading non-canonically. We used an immunopeptidomics workflow combined with prediction software for proteasomal cleavage probabilities to analyze how inflammatory conditions affect the proteasomal processing of immune epitopes presented by A549 cells. The treatment of A549 cells with IFN&#x3b3; enhanced the proteasomal cleavage probability of MHC class I ligands for both the constitutive proteasome and the immunoproteasome. Furthermore, IFN&#x3b3; alters the contribution of the different HLA allotypes to the immunopeptidome. When we calculated the HLA allotype-specific proteasomal cleavage probabilities for MHC class I ligands, the peptides presented by HLA-A*30:01 showed characteristics hinting at a reduced C-terminal proteasomal cleavage probability independently of the type of proteasome. This was confirmed by HLA-A*30:01 ligands from the immune epitope database, which also showed this effect. Furthermore, two additional HLA allotypes, namely, HLA-A*03:01 and HLA-A*11:01, presented peptides with a markedly reduced C-terminal proteasomal cleavage probability. The peptides eluted from all three HLA allotypes shared a peptide binding motif with a C-terminal lysine residue, suggesting that this lysine residue impairs proteasome-dependent HLA ligand production and might, in turn, favor peptide generation by other cellular proteases.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics; proteasome-independent; non-canonical mhc class i ligands; hla-a*03:01; hla-a*11:01; hla-a*30:01; proteasomal cleavage probability; peptide origin; peptide processing

### Affiliations
Core Facility - Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany
Chair of Physiology, Department of Veterinary Sciences, LMU Munich, Martinsried, Germany;
Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Center Munich, Germany


### Submitter
Adrian Schmalen

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie M. Hauck
Core Facility - Metabolomics and Proteomics Core, Helmholtz Center Munich, German Research Center for Environmental Health (GmbH), Neuherberg, Germany


