### Accession
PXD033854

### Title
A deeply conserved protease, acylamino acid-releasing enzyme (AARE), acts in aging in Physcomitrella and Arabidopsis

### Description
Protein oxidation results from the reaction of amino-acid side chains with reactive oxygen species (ROS) and is mostly irreversible. In non-photosynthetic tissues, mitochondria are a main source of ROS, whereas plastids are the major source in photosynthetic tissues. Oxidized proteins suffer from decreased structural integrity and even loss of function, and their accumulation ultimately leads to cytotoxic aggregates. In mammals, this correlates with aging and is linked to several age-related pathologies. Mammalian proteolytic pathways for clearance of oxidized proteins are under intensive research, while mechanistic insights into this process in plants is scarce. AARE enzymes are ATP-independent serine proteases presumably acting on oxidized proteins and operating in a dual exo-/endopeptidase mode. They are found in all domains of life. Here, we investigated AARE enzymes in the moss Physcomitrella and the angiosperm Arabidopsis and identified three homologous nuclear genes in Physcomitrella (PpAARE1-3) and a single nuclear gene in Arabidopsis (AtAARE). Surprisingly, we observed triple localization of the proteins AtAARE and PpAARE1 to plastids, mitochondria and the cytosol in vivo, likely conserved across the plant lineage. This represents an ATP-independent possibility for degradation of oxidized proteins in the major source organelles of ROS in plants, which is distinct to mammals. Combinatorial knockout plants and protein interaction analysis revealed specific interactions of the moss AARE isoforms and functions in progressive aging. Analysis of an AtAARE T-DNA mutant further suggests conservation of AARE function in age-related development.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation was performed using GFP-Trap Magnetic Particles M-270 (Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany) as recommended by the manufacturer with modifications. 300 mg protonema was homogenized in a 2 mL reaction tube using a tungsten and a glass bead. For each line three biological replicates were realized. The extraction buffer was chosen according to the manufacturers recommendations for plant samples and contained 25 mM HEPES-KOH, pH7.5, 2 mM EDTA, 100 mM NaCl, 200 nM DTT, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1% plant protease inhibitor cocktail (PPI, P9599, Sigma Aldrich). Ground plant material was dissolved in a final volume of 2 mL ice-cold extraction buffer and incubated for 10 min in a water quench ultrasonic device. Samples were centrifuged at 4°C at 20.00xg for 30 min. For each sample 25 µL magnetic particle slurry was washed with 500 µL extraction buffer. The sample supernatant was transferred on the cleaned beads and incubated rotating for 1 h at 6°C. Subsequently, beads were washed with 1 mL extraction buffer without Triton and PPI and again with 500 µL. Beads were then dissolved in 500 µL wash buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA), transferred to a new reaction tube and washed again in 500 µL wash buffer. A RapiGest solution (0.2% in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5; RapiGest SF Surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) was mixed 3:1 with 5 mM DTT in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5. 30 µL of the resulting mixture were applied on each sample. Samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 min under continuous shaking. Samples were cooled down to RT and 5 µL of a trypsin (V5117, P) solution (0.025 µg/µL in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5) were added to each sample. Digestion on the beads was performed for 30 min at 32°C under continuous shaking. Supernatants were transferred to new reaction tubes and the remaining beads were washed twice with 50 µL 5 mM Iodoacetamide solution (in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.5). The wash supernatants were combined with the trypsin-containing supernatant and incubated over night at 30°C under continuous shaking. Acid-catalyzed cleavage of the RapiGest surfactant was performed as recommended by the manufacturer. Samples were purified using C18-STAGE-Tips as described in Hoernstein et al. (2018; https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M115.057190) and eluted from the Tip in 30% ACN in 0.1% FA. MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described in Top et al. (2021; https://doi.org/10.1038/s42003-021-02486-3).

### Data Protocol
Database search and label-free quantitation was performed using MaxQuant software V 1.6.0.16 (Cox & Mann, 2008; https://doi.org/10.1038/nbt.1511) as described in Hoernstein et al. (2018; https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M115.057190). For each Co-IP a specific database was employed containing all V3.3 proteins of Physcomitrella (Lang et al., 2018; https://doi.org/10.1111/tpj.13801) as well as the sequence of the fusion protein. Additionally, the contaminant list provided by the software was included. Decoys were generated on the fly by reverting the given protein sequences. Variable modifications were formation of pyro Glu (N term Q, −17.026549 Da), oxidation (M, +15.994915 Da), acetylation (N-term, +42.010565 Da) and deamidation (N, +0.9 84016 Da). Carbamidomethylation (C, +57. 021464 Da) was specified as fixed modification. Enzymatic specificity was set to tryptic with semi-specific free N-terminus. An FDR of 0.01 was set for protein identification. LFQ values (Cox et al., 2014; https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591) were used as quantitative values. Interaction analysis was performed in Perseus V 1.6.12.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016; https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901). Missing values were imputed from a normal distribution with a down-shift of 1.8 and distribution width of 0.3 (for histograms of imputed values see Fig. S12). Interaction partners were accepted at an FDR of 0.01 and a p-value less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are constant by-products of aerobic life. In excess, ROS lead to cytotoxic protein aggregates, which are a hallmark of ageing in animals and linked to age-related pathologies in humans. Acylamino acid-releasing enzymes (AARE) are bifunctional serine proteases, acting on oxidized proteins. AARE are found in all domains of life, albeit under different names, such as acylpeptide hydrolase (APEH/ACPH), acylaminoacyl peptidase (AAP), or oxidized protein hydrolase (OPH). In humans, AARE malfunction is associated with age-related pathologies, while their function in plants is less clear. Here, we provide a detailed analysis of AARE genes in the plant lineage and an in-depth analysis of AARE localization and function in the moss Physcomitrella and the angiosperm Arabidopsis. AARE loss-of-function mutants have not been described for any organism so far. We generated and analysed such mutants and describe a connection between AARE function, aggregation of oxidized proteins and plant ageing, including accelerated developmental progression and reduced life span. Our findings complement similar findings in animals and humans, and suggest a unified concept of ageing may exist in different life forms.

### Keywords
Physcomitrium, Physcomitrella, Protein oxidation, Arabidopsis, Ageing, Ros

### Affiliations
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany
Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg (Chair Plant Biotechnology), Schaenzlestr. 1, D-79104 Freiburg

### Submitter
Ralf Reski

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Reski
Head, Chair Plant Biotechnology Faculty of Biology University of Freiburg Schaenzlestrasse 1 D-79104 Freiburg Germany


