### Accession
PXD026927

### Title
Oestrogen Activates the MAP3K1 Cascade and -catenin to Promote Granulosa-Like Cell Fate in a Human Testis-Derived Cell Line

### Description
: Sex determination triggers the differentiation of the bi-potential gonad into either an ovary or testis. In non-mammalian vertebrates, the presence or absence of oestrogen dictates gonad differ-entiation, while in mammals, this mechanism has been supplanted by the testis determining SRY gene. Exogenous oestrogen can override this genetic trigger to shift somatic cell fate in the gonad towards ovarian developmental pathways by limiting the bioavailability of the key testis factor SOX9 within somatic cells. Our previous work has implicated the MAPK pathway in mediating the rapid cellular response to oestrogen. We performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic anal-yses to investigate the precise mechanism through which oestrogen impacts these pathways to ac-tivate -catenin—a factor essential for ovarian development. We show that oestrogen can activate -catenin within 30 minutes, concomitant with the cytoplasmic retention of SOX9. This occurs through changes to the MAP3K1 cascade, suggesting this pathway is a mechanism through which oestrogen influences gonad somatic cell fate. We demonstrate that oestrogen can promote the shift from SOX9 pro-testis activity to -catenin pro-ovary activity through activation of MAP3K1. Our findings define a previously unknown mechanism through which oestrogen can promote a switch in gonad somatic cell fate and provided novel insights into the impacts of exogenous oestrogen exposure on the testis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from control and labelled NT2/D1 cells treated with EE2 for either 30 minutes (n = 4) or 48 hours (n = 3). Each sample was lysed in RIPA buffer (25mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 % (w/v) SDS, 1% (v/v) Triton X-100) supplemented with Halt Protease and Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 20 minutes at 4°C. Proteins were pre-cipitated with acetone, and subsequently re-dissolved in digestion buffer (8 M urea in 50 mM TEAB [pH 8.0]). Protein concentrations were measured using a Pierce Bradford Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Protein samples (1 mg) from corresponding control and EE2 treated cells were mixed 1:1 and reduced, alkylated and digested (Pierce Trypsin Protease, Thermo Scientific, USA). An aliquot of 100 μg of the digested peptides were fractionated into 8 fractions using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and used to determine the global proteome. The remaining peptides were acidified and purified by solid phased extraction using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA) and used for phosphopeptide enrichment using a titanium dioxide (TiO2) enrichment method. Eluted phosphorylated peptides were freeze-dried before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS using the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) fitted with nanoflow reversed-phase-HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex).

### Data Protocol
All raw data were processed using MaxQuant [64] for SILAC-based approaches [65]. Database searches were conducted against the Swissprot reviewed Homo Sapiens database (www.uniprot.org, downloaded April 2019). Default parameters in MaxQuant were used wherever applicable. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% on both protein and peptide level and only peptides with a length of a minimum of 7 amino acids were considered. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. For phos-phoproteomics data, phospho(STY) was included as variable modifications. The appro-priate SILAC labels were selected and match between runs feature activated. Protein identification required a minimum of two peptides with at least one razor or unique peptide. Protein groups identified in MaxQuant were imported into Perseus [66] for further analysis. Results were filtered to remove potential contaminants, reverse hits, and hits only identified by site. For phosphoproteomic data, the phospho(STY)sites.txt file was imported into Perseus software for analysis. We removed any phosphopeptides with a localisation probability of < 0.75. Normalised heavy/light (H/L) ratios were log2 trans-formed and represent the fold change of proteins following EE2 treatment. Values have been presented as averages for each treatment. Significance was determined by one sample T-test with Benjamin-Hochberg FDR adjusted p < 0.05. To analyse enrichment of Gene Ontology (GO) terms, proteins that significantly changed in abundance (p < 0.05, log2FC > or < 0.25) were searched using the PANTHER database (http://www.pantherdb.org; [45] for biological processes and cellular components that were statistically enriched (Fisher’s exact test, FDR p < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Sex determination triggers the differentiation of the bi-potential gonad into either an ovary or testis. In non-mammalian vertebrates, the presence or absence of oestrogen dictates gonad differentiation, while in mammals, this mechanism has been supplanted by the testis-determining gene <i>SRY</i>. Exogenous oestrogen can override this genetic trigger to shift somatic cell fate in the gonad towards ovarian developmental pathways by limiting the bioavailability of the key testis factor SOX9 within somatic cells. Our previous work has implicated the MAPK pathway in mediating the rapid cellular response to oestrogen. We performed proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses to investigate the precise mechanism through which oestrogen impacts these pathways to activate &#x3b2;-catenin-a factor essential for ovarian development. We show that oestrogen can activate &#x3b2;-catenin within 30 min, concomitant with the cytoplasmic retention of SOX9. This occurs through changes to the MAP3K1 cascade, suggesting this pathway is a mechanism through which oestrogen influences gonad somatic cell fate. We demonstrate that oestrogen can promote the shift from SOX9 pro-testis activity to &#x3b2;-catenin pro-ovary activity through activation of MAP3K1. Our findings define a previously unknown mechanism through which oestrogen can promote a switch in gonad somatic cell fate and provided novel insights into the impacts of exogenous oestrogen exposure on the testis.

### Keywords
Oestrogen, Map3k1, Beta-catenin, Sox9

### Affiliations
Peter Maccallum Cancer Centre
School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Melanie Stewart

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew John Pask
School of BioSciences, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


