### Accession
PXD005985

### Title
SILAC proteomics analysis to discover effect sensors of EGFR inhibition

### Description
Targeted therapies against EGFR show clinical benefit, but resistance to these agents invariably develops. Thus, there is a need for dynamic biomarkers - effect sensors - that reflect treatment with EGFR therapeutics during therapy. Making use of SILAC-labeling we aimed to discover plasma membrane proteins that become differentially expressed after treatment with EGFR inhibitor erlotinib in three erlotinib-sensitive breast cancer cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Stable isotope labeling of cell lines was done using RPMI or DMEM-high glucose media with normal Arg and Lys (light) or Arg10 and Lys8 (heavy) (Silantes). SKBR3 and SUM149 cells were cultured in DMEM, BT474 in RPMI, all supplemented with 10% FCS. Cells were treated for 48hours with 10 uM erlotinib or with DMSO as control. For SILAC-MS detection of membrane proteins, cell membranes were isolated using the ‘subcellular fractionation kit’ (Pierce) and protein concentrations were measured with the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). Lysates of membrane fractions were then mixed in 1:1 ratio protein of erlotinib-heavy/control-light (batch 1) and label-swapped control-heavy/erlotinib-light (batch 2), and subjected to gel-electrophoresis for size-separation.

### Data Protocol
Gel lanes were cut into 24 slices for in-gel trypsin digestion. Each slice was further cut into 1 mm pieces and completely destained using 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) in 50% acetonitrile (ACN). A reduction and alkylation step was performed to block cysteins. Briefly, 10 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC was added to the gel pieces and incubated for 45 min at 55°C. Next, 55 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC was added and incubated for 30 min at room temperature. Gel pieces were dehydrated and re-swelled in 10 ng/µl trypsin solution in 40 mM ABC and 10% ACN at 37°C overnight. Peptides were fully extracted by adding 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to the gel pieces, repeated by extraction with 33% ACN, 1.3% TFA and followed by 66% ACN, 0.7% TFA. Extracted peptides were combined and then completely dried in a SpeedVac centrifuge. The resulting peptide mixtures were resuspended in 5% formic acid and separated on a capillary column (C18 PepMap 300, 75 μm × 100 mm, 3-μm particle size, Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) mounted in line with a pre-column (EASY- Column C18, 100 μm × 20 mm, 5-μm particle size, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) on a Proxeon Easy-LC II system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark). Solutions of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 100% acetonitrile were used as the mobile phases. A gradient from 2 to 35% acetonitrile was performed in 90 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed using a linear ion trap-Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Scientific). The LTQ-Orbitrap was operated in data-dependent mode in which one full MS scan was followed by MS/MS scan with dynamic exclusion set to: 1 repeat count, 15 seconds exclusion duration and 500 exclusion list size. MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap in the range from 250 to 2,000 m/z, with a resolution of 60,000 (full- width at half-maximum). The 7 most intense ions per scan were submitted to MS/MS fragmentation (35% Normalized Collision EnergyTM) and detected in the linear ion trap. The capillary temperature was set at 200 °C, spray voltage was 1.6 kV, and capillary voltage was 36 V. The MS raw data were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) containing the integrated Andromeda search engine, and searched against the human proteome downloaded from the UniProt database, using a false discovery rate of 0.01 at the protein and peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Tumor responses to cancer therapeutics are generally monitored every 2-3 months based on changes in tumor size. Dynamic biomarkers that reflect effective engagement of targeted therapeutics to the targeted pathway, so-called "effect sensors", would fulfill a need for non-invasive, drug-specific indicators of early treatment effect. Using a proteomics approach to identify effect sensors, we demonstrated MUC1 upregulation in response to epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)-targeting treatments in breast and lung cancer models. To achieve this, using semi-quantitative mass spectrometry, we found MUC1 to be significantly and durably upregulated in response to erlotinib, an EGFR-targeting treatment. MUC1 upregulation was regulated transcriptionally, involving PI3K-signaling and STAT3. We validated these results in erlotinib-sensitive human breast and non-small lung cancer cell lines. Importantly, erlotinib treatment of mice bearing SUM149 xenografts resulted in increased MUC1 shedding into plasma. Analysis of MUC1 using serial blood sampling may therefore be a new, relatively non-invasive tool to monitor early and drug-specific effects of EGFR-targeting therapeutics.

### Keywords
Egfr silac breast cancer biomarkers erlotinib

### Affiliations
Medical Oncology University Medical Center Groningen Groningen
University Medical Center Groningen

### Submitter
Rolf de Boer

### Lab Head
Dr Marcel A.T.M. van Vugt
Medical Oncology University Medical Center Groningen Groningen


