### Accession
PXD034335

### Title
Identification of ubiquitination targets of UHRF1

### Description
The reversible attachment of ubiquitin governs the interaction, activity and degradation of proteins whereby the type and target of this conjugation determine the biological response. The investigation of this complex and multi-faceted protein ubiquitination mostly relies on painstaking biochemical analyses. Here, we employ recombinant binding domains to identify the UHRF1 dependent ubiquitinated proteins by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
SILAC labeling of mouse ES cells was performed at 37°C in ESCs medium supplemented with 100 µg/ml of light (L) or heavy (H) arginine and lysine isotopes, for L: Arg0 and Lys0 (L-arginine and L-lysine, Sigma-Aldrich), for H: Arg10 and Lys8 (arginine-13C6, 15N4 and lysine-13C6, 15N2, Silantes). In addition to the specific lysine and arginine, the completed ESC medium contained knockout DMEM (Silantes), 10% dialyzed serum, 6% knockout serum replacement, 2 mM L-glutamine, 0.1 mM non-essential amino acids, 50 µM 2-mercaptoethanol, 1000 units/ml leukemia inhibitory factor LIF, 1 µM MEK inhibitor PD and 3 µM GSK-3 inhibitor CHIR (2i, Axon Medchem). To assess the SILAC labeling efficiency, cells were cultured in SILAC medium for 10 passages and tested by MS. For identification of the targets, mESCs were first transfected with an expression vector for GFP-2UBA, the immunoprecipitation assay was then conducted as described below with minor modifications. Wt and Uhrf1-deficient cells were lysed in buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.5), 2.5 mM MgCl2, 2 mM phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride and 0.5% NP-40, 1x Protease Inhibitor (Serva) and 1 µg/ul DNAase on ice for 30 min and cleared by centrifugation (20,000g for 15 min) at 4°C. Protein concentrations of cleared cell lysates were measured using the PierceTM 660 nm protein assay kit. Equal amounts (~500 µg) of cell extracts were combined and incubated with the GFP-Trap for 2 h at 4°C under gentle rotation. The samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and prepared for LC-MS/MS as described below. As a control, 500 µg of cell extracts from Uhrf1-deficient mESCs (light) expressing GFP were equally mixed with clear cell lysates from Uhrf1-deficient mESCs (heavy) expressing GFP-2UBA for immunoprecipitation with the GFP-Trap. A standardized protocol was used for in-gel digestion with minor modifications (Shevchenko et al., 2000; Wilm et al., 1996). The digested peptides were evaporated to 5 µl and re-suspended in 30 µl of 0.1% TFA solution prior to desalting by C18 Stage tips. Samples were evaporated to dryness and re-suspended in 30 µl of 0.1% formic acid solution and stored at -20°C until LC-MS analysis.  For LC-MS/MS purposes, desalted peptides were injected in an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo), separated in a 15-cm analytical column (75μm ID with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50 min gradient from 5 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The effluent from the HPLC was directly electrosprayed into a LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo). The MS instrument was operated in a data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 – 2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of R=60,000 at m/z 400 (after accumulation to a ‘target value’ of 500,000 in the linear ion trap). The six most intense peptide ions with charge state between 2 and 4 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 10,000 and fragmented in the linear ion trap by collision induced dissociation (CID). For all measurements with the Orbitrap mass analyzer, 3 lock-mass ions from ambient air (m/z=371.10123, 445.12002, 519.13882) were used for internal calibration. Usual MS conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 200ºC; normalized collision energy 35% for CID in LTQ. The threshold for ion selection was 10,000 counts for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.2.2.5 was used to identify proteins and quantify with the following parameters: Database, ipi.MOUSE.v3.68.fasta; MS tol, 10ppm; MS/MS tol, 0.5 Da; Peptide FDR, 0.1; Protein FDR, 0.01 Min. peptide Length, 5; Variable modifications, Oxidation (M); Fixed modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C); Peptides for protein quantitation, razor and unique; Min. peptides, 1; Min. ratio count, 2.

### Publication Abstract
The reversible attachment of ubiquitin governs the interaction, activity and degradation of proteins whereby the type and target of this conjugation determine the biological response. The investigation of this complex and multi-faceted protein ubiquitination mostly relies on painstaking biochemical analyses. Here, we employ recombinant binding domains to probe the ubiquitination of proteins in living cells. We immobilize GFP-fused proteins of interest at a distinct cellular structure and detect their ubiquitination state with red fluorescent ubiquitin binders. With this ubiquitin fluorescent three-hybrid (ubiF3H) assay we identified HP1&#x3b2; as a novel ubiquitination target of UHRF1. The use of linkage specific ubiquitin binding domains enabled the discrimination of K48 and K63 linked protein ubiquitination. To enhance signal-to-noise ratio, we implemented fluorescence complementation (ubiF3Hc) with split YFP. Using in addition a cell cycle marker we could show that HP1&#x3b2; is mostly ubiquitinated by UHRF1 during S phase and deubiquitinated by the protease USP7. With this complementation assay we could also directly detect the ubiquitination of the tumor suppressor p53 and monitor its inhibition by the anti-cancer drug Nutlin-3. Altogether, we demonstrate the utility of the ubiF3H assay to probe the ubiquitination of specific proteins and to screen for ligases, proteases and small molecules controlling this posttranslational modification.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination, Protein degradation, Dna methylation, Posttranslational modifications (pmt), Heterochromatin binding protein (hp1), Uhfr1

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Faculty of Biology,  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,  Großhaderner Str. 2,  82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Heinrich Leonhardt
Faculty of Biology,  Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München,  Großhaderner Str. 2,  82152 Planegg-Martinsried, Germany


