### Accession
PXD008576

### Title
Hippocampal synaptoneurosomes-1

### Description
Hippocampal synaptoneurosomes from WT and Ts1Cje mice were analyzed by 4-plex iTRAQ. Technical replicates were included.

### Sample Protocol
Synaptoneurosomal proteins were extracted using a lysis buffer that contained SDS, supplemented with protease inhibitors, phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II (Sigma), and benzoase. After incubation for 1 h, the sample was centrifugated for 15 min (14,000 rpm in a bench-top microfuge at 4ºC) and proteins present in the supernatant were quantified. iTRAQ labeling (AB ScieX) was essentially performed following the manufacturer’s instructions, omitting the protein precipitation step in order to conserve minority proteins. 50 micrograms of proteins were labeled.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo), setting the False Discovery Rate(FDR) of both proteins and peptides identification to be less than 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
Several proteomic analyses have been performed on synaptic fractions isolated from cortex or even total brain, resulting in preparations with a high synaptic heterogeneity and complexity. Synaptoneurosomes (SNs) are subcellular membranous elements that contain sealed pre- and post-synaptic components. They are obtained by subcellular fractionation of brain homogenates and serve as a suitable model to study many aspects of the synapse physiology. Here the proteomic content of SNs isolated from hippocampus of adult mice, a brain region involved in memory that presents lower synaptic heterogeneity than cortex, is reported. Interestingly, in addition to pre- and post-synaptic proteins, proteins involved in RNA binding and translation are overrepresented in this preparation. These results validate the protocol previously reported for SNs isolation, and, as reported by other authors, highlight the relevance of local synaptic translation for hippocampal physiology.

### Keywords
Mouse, Synaptoneurosomes

### Affiliations
Universidad de Sevilla AND Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Sevilla, SPAIN
Universidad de Sevilla

### Submitter
María Luz Montesinos

### Lab Head
Dr María Luz Montesinos
Universidad de Sevilla AND Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Sevilla, SPAIN


