### Accession
PXD020562

### Title
Calreticulin enhances the secretory trafficking of a polymerogenic alpha1-antitrypsin

### Description
α-1-antitrypsin (AAT) regulates protease activity in the lungs and liver. The presence of one or more copies of a mutant Z allele (AAT (E342K), called ATZ), results in low serum levels of ATZ along with intracellular inclusions of polymeric forms, causing lung emphysema and liver cirrhosis. Our experiments show that calreticulin (CRT), an endoplasmic reticulum (ER) glycoprotein chaperone, promotes the secretory trafficking of ATZ, enhancing the media to cell ratio. This effect is more specific for ATZ compared with AAT, and is only partially dependent on the glycan-binding site of CRT. The CRT-related chaperone calnexin (CNX) does not promote enhanced ATZ secretory trafficking, despite the higher cellular abundance of CNX-ATZ complexes. CRT deficiency alters the distributions of ATZ-ER chaperone complexes, increasing ATZ-BiP binding and inclusion body (IB) formation, and reducing ATZ interactions with components required for ER-Golgi trafficking. These findings indicate a novel role for CRT in promoting the secretory trafficking of a polymerogenic protein. Inefficient secretory trafficking of ATZ in the absence of CRT is coincident with enhanced accumulation of ER-derived ATZ IBs.

### Sample Protocol
The GFP-Trap agarose beads from the IP procedure (of 4 mg total cell lysate) were resuspended in 50 µl of 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH~8). Cysteines were reduced by adding 50 µl of 10 mM DTT and incubating at 45C for 30 minutes. Samples were cooled to room temperature and alkylation of cysteines was achieved by incubating with 65 mM 2-chloroacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. An overnight digestion with 1 µg sequencing grade, modified trypsin was carried out at 37C with constant shaking in a Thermomixer. Digestion was stopped by acidification and peptides were desalted using SepPak C18 cartridges using manufacturer’s protocol (Waters). Samples were completely dried using vacufuge. Resulting peptides were dissolved in 8 µl of 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution. 2 µl of the peptide solution were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 50 cm, Thermo) using a 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile (Buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid/95% acetonitrile (Buffer B) gradient at 300 nl/min over a period of 180 minutes (2-22% buffer B for 110 min, 22-40% buffer B for 25 min, 40-90% buffer B for 5 min followed by holding in 90% buffer B for 5 min and reequilibration with Buffer A for 25 min). Eluent was directly introduced into the Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) or into a Q exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo) using an EasySpray source. MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution (AGC target=1x106; max IT=50 ms) or at 60K resolution (AGC target=3x106; max IT=50 ms). Data-dependent collision induced dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired using Top speed method (3 seconds) following each MS1 scan (NCE ~28-32%; AGC target 1x105; max IT 45 ms).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the MS/MS data against H. sapiens (UniProt; 20353 reviewed entries; downloaded on 06-29-2019) using Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo). Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator and proteins/peptides with a FDR of ≤1% were retained for further analysis. Three independent MS replicates were performed of samples from GFP-Trap IPs from lysates of eYFP-ATZ transfected CRT ko and the corresponding WT Huh7.5 cells. Three independent MS replicates were separately performed of GFP-Trap IPs from lysates of eYFP-ATZ transfected CNX ko and the corresponding WT Huh7.5 cells.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Copii, Secretory trafficking, Calreticulin, Alpha1-antitrypsin, Calnexin

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA

### Submitter
Boning Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Malini Raghavan
Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Michigan Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA


