### Accession
PXD027962

### Title
Functional analysis of Arabidopsis LSH8 protein involved in ABA signaling pathway

### Description
Functional analysis of Arabidopsis LSH8 protein involved in ABA signaling pathway

### Sample Protocol
In order to compare the proteomics of col4 and lsh8 mutant, 7 d-old seedlings were treated with ABA for 3 h. Approximately 0.5 g of seedlings were extracted with protein lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 1% SDS,  8M Urea, 20 mM Dithiothreitol, 1x EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Tablets). Protein was digested using a filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Digested peptides were dried using a CentriVap (Thermo Fisher) and pre-fractionated with Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptide was analyzed by on-line nanospray LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion coupled to an EASY-nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 2.1)and Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.7.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR)

### Publication Abstract
Phytohormone ABA regulates the expression of numerous genes to significantly affect seed dormancy, seed germination and early seedling responses to biotic and abiotic stresses. However, the function of many ABA-responsive genes remains largely unknown. In order to improve the ABA-related signaling network, we conducted a large-scale ABA phenotype screening. LSH, an important transcription factor family, extensively participates in seedling development and floral organogenesis in plants, but whether its family genes are involved in the ABA signaling pathway has not been reported. Here we describe a new function of the transcription factor <i>LSH8</i> in an ABA signaling pathway. In this study, we found that <i>LSH8</i> was localized in the nucleus, and the expression level of <i>LSH8</i> was significantly induced by exogenous ABA at the transcription level and protein level. Meanwhile, seed germination and root length measurements revealed that <i>lsh8</i> mutant lines were ABA insensitive, whereas <i>LSH8</i> overexpression lines showed an ABA-hypersensitive phenotype. With further TMT labeling quantitative proteomic analysis, we found that under ABA treatment, ABA-responsive proteins (ARPs) in the <i>lsh8</i> mutant presented different changing patterns with those in wild-type Col4. Additionally, the number of ARPs contained in the <i>lsh8</i> mutant was 397, six times the number in wild-type Col4. In addition, qPCR analysis found that under ABA treatment, <i>LSH8</i> positively mediated the expression of downstream ABA-related genes of <i>ABI3</i>, <i>ABI5</i>, <i>RD29B</i> and <i>RAB18</i>. These results indicate that in Arabidopsis, <i>LSH8</i> is a novel ABA regulator that could specifically change the expression pattern of APRs to positively mediate ABA responses.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis lsh8 protein aba signaling pathway

### Affiliations
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University
机构

### Submitter
李 志芳

### Lab Head
Dr Zhifang Li
Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


