### Accession
PXD017263

### Title
Serum and urinary proteomes between healthy dogs and dogs with renal dysfunction in babesiosis using label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomics

### Description
The aim of the study was to analyse differences in serum and urinary proteomes between healthy dogs and dogs with renal dysfunction in babesiosis using label-based high-resolution quantitative proteomic approach. In the study 8 healthy control dogs (group H) and 22 dogs with naturally occurring babesiosis were enrolled. Dogs with babesiosis were divided into 3 groups: group A consisted of 6 non-azotaemic dogs (serum creatinine <140 μmol/L) with normal UPC (UPC < 0.5), group B of 10 non-azotaemic dogs with proteinuria (UPC > 0.5) and group C of 6 azotaemic dogs (serum creatinine > 140 μmol/L) and significant proteinuria (UPC > 2).

### Sample Protocol
Serum and urine samples were collected from all dogs and analysed separately in serum and urine proteomic experiments. Serum and urine protein samples were individually labelled using isobaric Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labels and then grouped into sets. In both serum and urine proteomic experiments, samples were grouped into 6 sixplex experimental sets so that each set contained samples of healthy dogs, dogs of groups A, B and C and an internal standard sample (IS). IS was made as a pool of equal protein amount from all 30 samples. High resolution LC-MS/MS analysis of TMT-labelled peptides was carried out using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and desalted on the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm) for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Eluent was ionised using a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, USA) mounted within nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Data dependent acquisition in positive ion mode was performed using a DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1×106, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×105. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analysed for protein identification and quantification using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.0., ThermoFisher Scientific). Database search against Canis lupus FASTA files (downloaded from NCBI database on 14/10/2016, 41787 sequences) was performed according to the following parameters: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and TMT sixplex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow. At least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required for reporting confidently identified proteins.  Protein relative quantification was accomplished by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from tandem mass spectra to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. The internal standard was used to combine the results for each protein within the TMT experiments (sixplexes).

### Publication Abstract
Canine babesiosis is a tick-borne disease caused by Babesia canis, with acute kidney injury as one of the common complications. In the study 8 healthy control dogs and 22 dogs with naturally occurring babesiosis were enrolled, with the aim to analyse differences in serum and urinary proteomes between healthy dogs and dogs with different degree of renal dysfunction in babesiosis using a label-based high-throughput quantitative proteomic approach. In serum, 58 proteins were found differentially abundant between healthy controls and groups of dogs with different degrees of renal dysfunction in babesiosis, while in urine there were 259 differentially abundant proteins. In addition, altered biological pathways were detected in the diseased dogs using bioinformatics tools and validation of several candidate biomarkers was performed. SIGNIFICANCE: The main aim of this comprehensive study was to perform analyses of serum and urinary proteomes of dogs with renal dysfunction in babesiosis compared to healthy dogs using, for the first time, a high-throughput proteomic method and functional enrichment analyses. Serum and urine samples of the same dogs were investigated in order to gain a more complete picture of pathologic changes taking place in renal dysfunction in babesiosis. We highlighted two putative biomarkers validated herein which could be of importance for early diagnosis of renal dysfunction in canine babesiosis, as they are easily accessible from urine and their concentration rises before the appearance of azotaemia: urinary neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL) and urinary liver-type fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP).

### Keywords
Urine, Serum, Canine babesiosis, Kidney dysfunction, Tmt, Lc-ms/sm

### Affiliations
University of Zagreb, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK

### Submitter
Anita Horvatic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter David Eckersall
VetMedZg Laboratory,Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia      Institute of Biodiversity, Animal Health & Comparative Medicine, College of Medicine, Veterinary Medicine and Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK


