### Accession
PXD043541

### Title
Molecular mechanisms underlying intraspecific variation in snake venom

### Description
Elucidating the molecular mechanisms underlying snake venom variability provides important clues for understanding how the biological functions of this powerful toxic arsenal evolve. We analyzed in detail individual transcripts and venom protein isoforms produced by five specimens of a venomous snake (Bothrops atrox) from two nearby but genetically distinct populations from the Brazilian Amazon rainforest which show functional similarities in venom properties. Individual variation was observed among the venoms of these specimens, but the overall abundance of each general toxin family was conserved both in transcript and in venom protein levels. However, when expression of independent paralogues was analyzed, remarkable differences were observed within and among each toxin group, both between individuals and between populations. Transcripts for functionally essential venom proteins (“core function” proteins) were highly expressed in all specimens and showed similar transcription/translation rates. In contrast, other paralogues (“adaptive” proteins) showed lower expression levels and the toxins they coded for varied among different individuals. These results provide support for the inferences that (a) expression and translational differences play a greater role in defining adaptive variation in venom phenotypes than does sequence variation in protein coding genes and (b) convergent adaptive venom phenotypes can be generated through different molecular mechanisms. Significance: Analysis of individual transcripts and venom protein isoforms produced by specimens of a venomous snake (Bothrops atrox), from the Brazilian Amazon rainforest, revealed that transcriptional and translational mechanisms contribute to venom phenotypic variation. Our finding of evidence for high expression of toxin proteins with conserved function supports the hypothesis that the venom phenotype consists of two kinds of proteins: conserved “core function” proteins that provide essential functional activities with broader relevance and less conserved “adaptive” proteins that vary in expression and may permit customization of protein function. These observations allowed us to suggest that genetic mechanisms controlling venom variability are not restricted to selection of gene copies or mutations in structural genes but also to selection of the mechanisms controlling gene expression, contributing to the plasticity of this important phenotype for venomous snakes.

### Sample Protocol
Replicates of each individual venom sample (50 μg of protein) were reduced and alkylated before treatment with trypsin solution (0.2 μg/μL), as previously described [Biochimie (2007), 89:1332–1342]. The tryptic digests were desalted using in-house made columns packed with Poros R2 resin (Life Technologies, USA) and subjected to reversed-phase nanochromatographycoupled to nanoelectrospray high resolution mass spectrometry for peptide analysis. Each digest was analyzed in triplicate in the mass spectrometer. Initially, 4 μL of desalted tryptic peptides were applied to a 2-cm long (100 μm internal diameter) trap column packed with 5 μm, 200 Å Magic C18 AQ matrix (Michrom Bioresources, USA) at 2 μL/min followed by separation on a 30-cm long (75 μm internal diameter) column that was packed with the same matrix directly on a self-pack 15 μm PicoFrit empty column (New Objective, USA) at 200 nL/min. Chromatography was carried out on an EASY-nLC II instrument (Thermo Scientific, USA). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water while mobile phase B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile and gradient conditions were as follows: 2 to 40% B during 162 min; up to 80% B in 4 min, maintaining at this concentration for 2 min more. The eluted peptides were directly introduced to an LTQ XL/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, USA) for analysis. Spray voltage of 1.9 kV, a capillary temperature of 200 °C and a tube lens voltage of 100 V were used for ionization. MS1 spectra were acquired using the orbitrap analyzer (300 to 1700 m/z) at a 60,000 resolution (for m/z 445.1200) and for each spectrum, the 7 most intense ions were submitted to CID fragmentation (minimum signal required of 10,000; isolation width of 2; normalized collision energy of 35.0; activation Q of 0.25 and activation time of 30 ms) followed by MS2 acquisition on the linear trap analyzer. The monoisotopic precursor selection feature was enabled and the dynamic exclusion option was activated for the following parameters: repeat count = 1; repeat duration = 30 s; exclusion list size = 500; exclusion duration = 45 s and exclusion mass width = 10 ppm. The charge rejection option was set for unitary and unassigned charge states.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the PatternLab for Proteomics V pipeline available at http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org/. The database used to identify the MS/MS spectra was composed of the full-length precursor proteins predicted from the transcriptomes of the same five specimens of B. atrox described previously [Journal of Proteomics (2018), 181:60-72] and a common contaminants database [Journal of Proteome Research (2022),21:2104-2113] and decoy (reverse) sequences for all entries. MS data from each run were searched against this database using the Comet search tool, integrated into PatternLab. The parameters were set as follows: precursor mass error tolerance of 35 ppm, trypsin as the enzyme, semi-tryptic cleavage, and a maximum number of cleavage loss of 2. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while deamidation of asparagine or glutamine, carbamidomethylation of aspartic acid, glutamic acid, histidine, and lysine, as well as methionine oxidation, were set as variable modifications. Settings for fragment bin tolerance, fragment bin offset, and theoretical fragment ions were 1.0005, 0.4, and “M peak only”, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Snake venom, Toxin function, Plasticity, Transcriptome, Proteome, Evolution

### Affiliations
Fundação Oswaldo Cruz
Laboratory of Toxinology FIOCRUZ - Rio de Janeiro - Brazil

### Submitter
Richard Hemmi Valente

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Hemmi Valente
Laboratory of Toxinology FIOCRUZ - Rio de Janeiro - Brazil


