### Accession
PXD015701

### Title
Confident identification of citrullinated peptides from P gingivalis

### Description
Porphyromonas gingivalis is a key pathogen in the development of chronic periodontitis and has recently been linked to the development of rheumatoid arthritis and Alzheimer’s disease. In this project the outer membrane vesicles (OMV) from Pg have been analyzed using a two-dimensional HFBA-based separation system combined with LC-MS. Three strains from P. gingivalis was analyzed in order to elucidate their citrullinome: wild-type (WT), a mutant with the active site cysteine mutated to alanine (C351A), as well as a knock-out mutant of peptidyl arginine deiminase (ΔPPAD). For optimal and positive identification and validation of citrullinated peptides and proteins, high resolution mass spectrometers and strict MS criteria were utilized. This may have compromised the total number of identified citrullination, but increased the confidence of the validation. A new 2D separation system proved to increase the strength of validation, and along with the use of an in-house build program, Citrullia, we establish a fast and easy semi-automatic (manual) validation of citrullinated peptides. For WT we identified 78 citrullinated proteins having a total of 161 citrullination sites. For C351A a single citrullination site was found and no citrullinations was found for ΔPPAD.

### Sample Protocol
OMV were reduced by the addition of dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 10 mM. The samples were then incubated for 30 min at 50-57°C, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide (IAA) added to a final concentration of 24 mM and incubation in the dark for 20 min. Excess IAA was removed by treatment with DTT and proteins in the sample were digested by overnight incubation at 37°C with 2% w/w in-house methylated trypsin [REF]. For complete analysis without fractionation, the samples were micro purified essentially as described41, dried down and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA). For analysis by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) fractionation, each sample was dried down and resuspended in 0.05 % heptafluorobutyric acid (HFBA) prior to off-line separation. Samples were run on an EASY- nLC 1000 Liquid Chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 3 µm trap column (100 µm inner diameter, 5 µm Reprosil pur 120 C18, GmbH, Germany) and a 18 cm analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 3µm Reprosil pur 120 C18), coupled online to a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer Thermo Fisher Scientific. The methods applied on the mass spectrometer had these settings in common: positive mode, an MS1 resolution of 120,000, AGC target of 3e6, maximum injection time of 100 ms, and a scan rage of 300-1400 m/z. The common MS2 settings were: resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 1e6, isolation window of 0.8 m/z, and a fixed first mass of 110.0 m/z. Furthermore, peptides with charges ranging from +1 to +6 were included, while +7 and above were excluded along with isotopes.

### Data Protocol
In order to improve the validation of citrullinations and enable manual validation within a reasonable timeframe, we developed a program called Citrullia in C# version 7.2 for Windows. In addition, the .NET framework v. 4.5.6 was used in Visual Studio 2017/2019 integrated development environment and the Metro Modern UI (Dennis Magno)43 was used for visual user interface elements. As search engine we chose the publicly available X! Tandem program (www.thegpm.org)44. As we deemed it necessary also to validate that the correct parent ion isotope had been picked, we used a new mass file format based on the Mascot Generic File format (mgf), but extended with ms1 information. The format named mgx (Mascot Generic eXtended) has been developed by MassAI Bioinformatics (www.massai.dk) and contains the MS1 level information interspersed with the MS2 level data but recognized by a new keyword “MSLEVEL=”. These files can easily be separated in ms1 and ms2 information for making the standard mgf format files suitable for standard search engines. X! Tandem was called with the following parameters: Parent ion precision: 10 ppm, ms2 precision: 0.02 Da, enzyme specificity: Cleavage after Lys and Arg, no cleavage before Pro, number of missed cleavages: <= 2. Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl [C], variable modifications: deamidation [N, Q], oxidation [M]. The database searched was downloaded on 01.10.2018 from UniProt (www.uniprot.org) and contained all sequences from P. gingivalis strain W83 and ATCC. The total number of proteins in the database was 4.417 sequences.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Porphyromonas gingivalis</i> is a key pathogen in chronic periodontitis and has recently been mechanistically linked to the development of rheumatoid arthritis via the activity of peptidyl arginine deiminase generating citrullinated epitopes in the periodontium. In this project the outer membrane vesicles (OMV) from <i>P. gingivalis</i> W83 wild-type (WT), a W83 knock-out mutant of peptidyl arginine deiminase (&#x394;PPAD), and a mutant strain expressing PPAD with the active site cysteine mutated to alanine (C351A), have been analyzed using a two-dimensional HFBA-based separation system combined with LC-MS. For optimal and positive identification and validation of citrullinated peptides and proteins, high resolution mass spectrometers and strict MS search criteria were utilized. This may have compromised the total number of identified citrullinations but increased the confidence of the validation. A new two-dimensional separation system proved to increase the strength of validation, and along with the use of an in-house build program, <i>Citrullia,</i> we establish a fast and easy semi-automatic (manual) validation of citrullinated peptides. For the WT OMV we identified 78 citrullinated proteins having a total of 161 citrullination sites. Notably, in keeping with the mechanism of OMV formation, the majority (51 out of 78) of citrullinated proteins were predicted to be exported via the inner membrane and to reside in the periplasm or being translocated to the bacterial surface. Citrullinated surface proteins may contribute to the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. For the C351A-OMV a single citrullination site was found and no citrullinations were identified for the &#x394;PPAD-OMV, thus validating the unbiased character of our method of citrullinated peptide identification.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Proteins, Phorphyromonas gingivalis, Citrulline, Hfba

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
PR group, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark

### Submitter
Peter Højrup

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Højrup
PR group, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Denmark


