### Accession
PXD028842

### Title
Identification of novel cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for parkinsonism using a proteomics approach

### Description
The aim of our study was to investigate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tryptic peptide profiles as potential diagnostic biomarkers for the discrimination of parkinsonian disorders. CSF samples were collected from individuals with parkinsonism, who had an uncertain diagnosis at the time of inclusion and who were followed for up to 12 years in a longitudinal study. We performed shotgun proteomics to identify tryptic peptides in CSF of Parkinson’s disease (PD, n=10), multiple system atrophy patients (MSA, n=5) and non-neurological controls (n=10). We validated tryptic peptides with differential levels between PD and MSA using a newly developed selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay in CSF of PD (n=46), atypical parkinsonism patients (AP; MSA, n=17; Progressive supranuclear palsy; n=8) and non-neurological controls (n=39). We identified 191 tryptic peptides that differed significantly between PD and MSA, of which 34 met our criteria for SRM development. For 14/34 peptides we confirmed differences between PD and AP. These tryptic peptides discriminated PD from AP with moderate-to-high accuracy. Random forest modelling including tryptic peptides plus either clinical assessments or other CSF parameters (neurofilament light chain, phosphorylated tau protein) and age improved the discrimination of PD vs. AP. Our results show that discovery of tryptic peptides by untargeted and subsequent validation by targeted proteomics is a suitable strategy to identify novel potential CSF biomarkers for PD versus AP. Furthermore, the tryptic peptides, and corresponding proteins, that we identified as differential biomarkers may increase our current knowledge about the disease-specific pathophysiological mechanisms of parkinsonism.

### Sample Protocol
For both the discovery and validation experiments, we included participants from a longitudinal study 40, who all had clear clinical signs of parkinsonism, but with an yet unclear diagnosis at the time of inclusion, and who had been recruited from our movement disorders outpatient clinic between January 2003 and December 2006 at the Radboud University Medical Center (Nijmegen, the Netherlands). In total, 25 CSF samples were included in the discovery experiment (PD, n = 10; MSA, n = 5; non-neurological controls, n = 10). All CSF samples included in this study were collected in polypropylene tubes, centrifuged at 800*g, aliquoted and stored in polypropylene tubes at −80°C until use.Total protein concentration in CSF was determined by using the 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, UK), according to the manufacturer’s protocol and 400 µg total protein was used as input for profiling. All samples were loaded on an affinity removal column for depletion of the 14 most abundant proteins (MARS-14, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). After tryptic digestion, CSF samples were fractionated in 20 fractions using high pH reversed-phase C18 LC and each fraction was subsequently analysed by nanoflow liquid chromatography (Bruker Daltonics; nano-Advance) connected online to an ultra-high resolution quadrupole time-of-flight tandem mass spectrometer (Qq-TOF; Bruker Daltonics; maXis 4G ETD) as described previously (doi:10.1007/s12035-018-1426-9).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data was analysed by MaxQuant software version 1.5 with pre-defined Qq-ToF parameter settings against the RefSeq (release 55) human protein sequence database. We set cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification, whereas N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and deamidation of glutamine and/or asparagine were set as variable modifications. LFQ was performed with match-between-runs enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of our study was to investigate cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tryptic peptide profiles as potential diagnostic biomarkers for the discrimination of parkinsonian disorders. CSF samples were collected from individuals with parkinsonism, who had an uncertain diagnosis at the time of inclusion and who were followed for up to 12 years in a longitudinal study. We performed shotgun proteomics to identify tryptic peptides in CSF of Parkinson's disease (PD, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10), multiple system atrophy patients (MSA, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) and non-neurological controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;10). We validated tryptic peptides with differential levels between PD and MSA using a newly developed selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay in CSF of PD (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;46), atypical parkinsonism patients (AP; MSA, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;17; Progressive supranuclear palsy; n&#x2009;=&#x2009;8) and non-neurological controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;39). We identified 191 tryptic peptides that differed significantly between PD and MSA, of which 34 met our criteria for SRM development. For 14/34 peptides we confirmed differences between PD and AP. These tryptic peptides discriminated PD from AP with moderate-to-high accuracy. Random forest modelling including tryptic peptides plus either clinical assessments or other CSF parameters (neurofilament light chain, phosphorylated tau protein) and age improved the discrimination of PD vs. AP. Our results show that the discovery of tryptic peptides by untargeted and subsequent validation by targeted proteomics is a suitable strategy to identify potential CSF biomarkers for PD versus AP. Furthermore, the tryptic peptides, and corresponding proteins, that we identified as differential biomarkers may increase our current knowledge about the disease-specific pathophysiological mechanisms of parkinsonism.

### Keywords
Parkinsonism, Human, Biomarker, Protein expression

### Affiliations
Radboudumc
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Hans Wessels

### Lab Head
Dr Alain J. van Gool
Translational Metabolic Laboratory, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Radboudumc, Nijmegen, The Netherlands


