### Accession
PXD005914

### Title
Western blot validation - The goal is to define guidelines for Ab western blot validation

### Description
The goal is to define guidelines for Ab western blot validation

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested, resuspended and lysed in the lysis buffer (1% SDC, PBS 1x, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 tablet of Complete mini EDTA‐free mixture (Roche Applied Science) and one tablet of PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture per 10 mL of lysis buffer (Roche Applied Science)). Sample were reduced by 2 mM DTT and alkylated  with 4 mM CAA; digested by Lys-C/Trypsin O.N.; labeled by TMT according to the manifactuer instructions and mixed 1:1. They were then fractionated by basic reverse phase: Two hundred μg of peptide mixture from each set were fractionated using a Waters XBridge BEH300 C18 3.5 μm 2.1×250 mm column on a Agilent 1200 series operating at 200 μL/min. Buffer A consisted of 20 mM NH3, while buffer B of 80% ACN / 20 mM NH3. The fractionation gradient was: 3-88% B in 63 min; 88% B for 15 min; and ramped to 100% B in 2.5 min; 100% B for 13.5 min. Fractions were collected into a polypropylene V-96 well microtiterplates (Microplate, 96 well PP, V-Bottom; Grainer BIO-ONE). At 97 min, fraction collection was halted, and the gradient was held at 3% B for 20 min. The total number of concatenated fractions was set to 12. Each plate was dried at room temperature using a Speed Vac (SPD 111V, Thermo).  Plates were stored at -20°C till LC/MS/MS analysis. Each fraction was analyzed on a HF Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher, Germany) connected to a Dionex UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The UHPLC was equipped with a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoviper, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) and an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm x 50 cm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Mobile‐phase buffers for nLC separation consisted of 0.1% FA in water (solvent A) and 80% ACN/0.1% FA (solvent B). The peptides were eluted during a 2 h gradient and directly sprayed into the mass spectrometer. The flow rate was set at 250 nL/min, and the LC gradient was as follows: 3-6% solvent B within 3 min, 6-35% solvent B within 117 min, 35–47% solvent B within 5 min, 47-100% solvent B within 5 min and 100% B for 8 min and 1% solvent B for 5 min. Nano spray was achieved with an applied voltage of 1.8 kV. The mass spectrometer was programmed in a data‐dependent acquisition mode (top 10 most intense peaks) and was configured to perform a Fourier transform survey scan from 370 to 1,600 m/z (resolution 60,000), AGC target 3 e6, maximum injection time 250 ms. MS2 scans were acquired on the 10 most-abundant MS1 ions of charge state 2–7 using a Quadrupole isolation window of 1 m/z for HCD fragmentation. Collision energy was set at 34%; resolution = 30 000; AGC target 2 e5, maximum injection time 200 ms; dynamic exclusion 15 s.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) {{371 Cox 2008;}}. Andromeda {{449 Cox 2011;}} was used to search the MS/MS data against the UniProt Homo sapiens database (containing canonical and isoforms_42144 entries downloaded on 21st March 2016) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. TMT10plex was chosen as platform. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) was used as variable modification. In addition, for the phosphosproteome analysis phosphorylation of STY Peptide identification was use as variable as well. The database search was performed with a mass deviation of the precursor ion of up to 4.5 ppm (main search), and the allowed fragment mass deviation was set to 0.5 Da for ITMS. Data filtering was carried out using the following parameters: peptide and protein FDRs were set to 1%, minimum peptide length was set to 7 and Andromeda minimum score for modified peptides was set to 40. Match between runs was enabled. The reverse and common contaminant hits were removed from MaxQuant output.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wester blot, Transcriptomics, Tmt, Prm

### Affiliations
Scilifelab, KTH,
KTH

### Submitter
Gianluca Maddalo

### Lab Head
Dr Mathias Uhlen
Scilifelab, KTH,


