### Accession
PXD010381

### Title
Systems-based approaches enable the development of industrial yeast strains with improved phenotypesSystems-based approaches enable the development of industrial yeast strains with improved phenotypes

### Description
Although metabolic engineering approaches have benefited the development of industrial strains enormously, they are often only partially successful, such that additional rounds of modification are generally needed to ensure microbial strains meet all the requirements of a particular process. Systems biology approaches can aid in yeast design providing an integrated view of yeast physiology and helping to identify targets for modification. Among other phenotypes, the generation of wine yeasts that are able to produce wines with reduced ethanol concentrations has been the focus of extensive research. However, while producing low-alcohol wines, these strains generally produce off-flavour metabolites as metabolic by-products. We therefore used transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics to investigate the physiological changes of such an engineered low-ethanol wine strain during wine fermentation to determine possible strategies for by-product remediation. Integration of ‘omics data led to the identification of several processes, including reactions related to the pyruvate node and redox homeostasis, as significantly different compared to a non-engineered parent strain, with acetaldehyde and 2,4,5-trimethyl 1,3-dioxolane identified as the main off-flavour metabolites. Gene remediation strategies were applied to decrease the formation of these metabolites, while maintaining the ‘low-alcohol’ phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets were obtained from 10 mL of culture according to the procedure described by Schmidt et al. (2013). This method utilises biphasic extraction to yield material suitable for both metabolomic and proteomic analyses from a single sample. Dried protein extracts were rehydrated with 1 mL of solubilisation solution (0.25 M triethylammonium bicarbonate TEAB, 0.1% w/v SDS), sonicated for 2 × 10 s on ice using a probe sonicator (Branson sonifier 450, John Morris Scientific, Chatswood, Australia) and centrifuged to remove insoluble material. Two pooled samples, 1631_mix and 2531_mix, were made using equal amounts of all AWRI1631 and AWRI2531 samples, respectively. Protein concentrations were determined using the PierceTM BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Scoresby, Australia). An amount of 100 μg of each sample was reduced with tris-(2-carboxyethyl)-phosphine (TCEP), alkylated with methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) and digested with trypsin (5 ng/μL, Sigma, St Louis, USA) overnight at 37 °C. Trypsin digestion was quenched adding 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Digested proteins were labelled using iTRAQ (Isobaric Tags for Relative and Absolute Quantitation) 8-plex reagents according to manufacturer’s instructions (AB SCIEX, Mt Waverley, Australia). Labelled samples were mixed and cleaned to remove SDS using strong anion exchange prior to IPG-isoelectric focussing of peptides (pH 3-10) and fractionation into 24 fractions (Agilent 3100 OFFGEL fractionator, Agilent Technologies, Mulgrave, Australia). These 24 fractions were consolidated into 12, each of which was cleaned and concentrated using an OMIX C18 tip (Agilent Technologies, Mulgrave, Australia).  Samples (10 μL) were pre-concentrated and desalted on a peptide Captrap cartridge (Bruker Michrom, Bruker Corporation, Coventry, UK) with 0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile (ACN) at 5 μL/min for 10 min. An Eksigent Ultra nanoLC system (Eksigent Technologies, California, USA) was used to separate peptides using a ProtCol C18, 300Å, 3 μm, 150 μm × 10 cm column (SGE Analytical Science, Trajan Scientific, Ringwood, Australia). Peptides were eluted from the column using a linear gradient from 2% – 90% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid at 600 nL/min over 100 min. uPLC eluates were ionized using a positive ion nanoflow electrospray and spectra obtained using a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Mt Waverley, Australia) in an information dependant acquisition (IDA) mode. A survey scan was acquired (m/z 400-1200, 0.25 s) with the ten largest multiply charged ions (counts >150) sequentially subjected to MS/MS analysis. MS/MS spectra were accumulated for 200 ms (m/z 100 – 1500) with increased rolling collision energy enhancing iTRAQ reporting intensities.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using ProteinPilotTM Software (version 4.2, revision 1340) using the ParagonTM algorithm. Spectra were used to search the Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast) subset of the SwissProt _2012.fasta database using the following search parameters; Sample type: iTRAQ 8plex, Cys alkylation: MMTS, digestion: trypsin, ID focus: Biological modifications, Search effort: thorough, FDR analysis: Yes, User modified parameter files: No. The detected protein threshold (unused ProtScore) was set as larger than 1.3 (better than 95% confidence).  In order to accommodate the number of samples (2 strains x 5 time points x 3 replicates) into a manageable number of iTRAQ runs, replicate samples were pooled, and pooled samples were labelled according to the iTRAQ 8-plex schema presented in Table S4. This avoided inter run bias when comparing between matching time points while still permitting consolidated analysis through the common reference mix. Label bias was avoided through assignment of strain samples to different iTRAQ labels in different runs.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wine; yeast; systems biology; low-alcohol; itraq

### Affiliations
The Australian Wine Research Insistute
The Australian Wine Research Institute

### Submitter
Simon Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Anthony Schmidt
The Australian Wine Research Insistute


