### Accession
PXD015037

### Title
Development of Photocrosslinking Probes Based on Huwentoxin-IV to Map the Site of Interaction on Nav1.7

### Description
This study reports on the design of a library of photoprobes based on the potent spider toxin Huwentoxin-IV and the determination of the toxin binding interface on VSD2 of Nav1.7 through a photocrosslinking and tandem mass spectrometry approach. Our Huwentoxin-IV probes selectively crosslink to extracellular loop S1-2 and helix S3 of VSD2 in a chimeric channel system. Sample preparation of purified chimeric channels crosslinked with the photoprobes was based on the FASP protocol. Various digestion enzymes were evaluated in order to maximise the sequence coverage of this membrane protein. Finally, MeroX was employed in order to identify the sites of crosslinking. Our results provide a strategy that will enable mapping of sites of interaction of other ICK peptides on Nav channels.

### Sample Protocol
The FASP protocol (Wisniewski et al., 2009) was employed with some modifications to prepare proteomics samples from purified and photocrosslinked VSD2-NavAb. Digestion was performed using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega), Glu-C (Promega), Proteinase K (New England Biolabs) or chymotrypsin (Promega) with either a 1:50 or 1:100 w/w enzyme/protein ratio and 0.05% w/v ProteaseMAX (Promega). All samples were shaken overnight at 37 oC except for proteinase K (37 oC, 3 h) and chymotrypsin (25 oC, overnight). Digestion peptides were collected into a clean Vivacon tube with 40 μL washes of AMBIC solution (50 mM) and NaCl (0.5 M). The peptides were acidified with 0.5% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using StageTip method (Wollscheid et al., 2009). Elution from the sorbent (SDB-XC poly(styrenedivinylbenzene) copolymer, from 3M) with 79% v/v MeCN in water was followed by speed-vac assisted solvent removal. The analysis was performed using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column 50 cm x 75 mm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 1 h MeCN gradient (2–55% v/v) in 0.1% v/v aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nL min-1. Easy nLC-1000 was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to 10 of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge 2+ or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 10^6 and for MS/MS to 10^5, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 x 10^2.

### Data Protocol
PEAKS data analysis for sequence coverage of VSD2-NavAb - PEAKS 8.5 was used for the analysis of VSD2-NavAb. The database search was performed against the sequence of VSD2-NavAb. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed, and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da, the maximum allowed variable PTMs and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to 5. Non-specific cleavages were allowed at one end of the peptide. The cleavage site for each enzyme were at the C-terminus of: R/K for trypsin, R/K/D/E for LysC/Trypsin, F/L/M/W/Y for chymotrypsin, K/D/E for GluC/LysC, and A/C/G/M/F/S/Y/W for proteinase K.   MeroX data analysis for identification of crosslinks - Photocrosslinking experiments were analysed using MeroX 1.6.6. The search database contained the VSD2-NavAb sequence and the respective HTMp probe sequence. For each enzyme predicted cleavage site, three missed cleavages were allowed and the option for semi-unspecific digestion was selected. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and represented as B. Methionine oxidation (m) was set as variable modification with a maximum of two occurrences per peptide. The photoprobe sequence in the provided database contained L-photomethionine represented by p. In the search, the crosslinker was set as p (C6H9N3O) requiring loss of N2 and all amino acids were considered as potential crosslinking sites. Modification of fragments of the photomethionine-containing peptide was set to -28.0061 for loss of N2 and -9.9956 for loss of N2 and addition of H2O. The precursor and fragment ion tolerance was 10 ppm and the FDR cut-off for reported spectra was set to 0.05. The peptide crosslink identifications that were considered as significant always had a higher score than the decoy hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nav1.7, Diazirine, Photoaffinity labelling, Huwentoxin-iv, Peptide mapping

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
Imperial College London

### Submitter
Foteini Tzakoniati

### Lab Head
Dr Edward William Tate
Department of Chemistry, Imperial College London, United Kingdom


