### Accession
PXD046077

### Title
Triticum turgidum-Triticum boeoticum amphiploids  UPLC–Orbitrap-MS

### Description
This data set extends the original data from the UPLC–Orbitrap-MS portion of this article:Molecular cytogenetic identification and nutritional composition evaluation of newly synthesized Triticum turgidum-Triticum boeoticum amphiploids (AABBAbAb)

### Sample Protocol
1. Weigh an appropriate amount of sample into the reaction bottle. 2. Add 1 mL of 6M hydrochloric acid, acidolyze at 110°C for 24 hours, and take 200 μL of liquid. 3. Add 100 μL of 2M sodium hydroxide to neutralize, vortex to mix, and dilute to an appropriate multiple with AccQ•Tag Ultra Borate buffer; 4. Take 10 μL sample into the bottle, add 70 μL AccQ•Tag Ultra Borate buffer and 20 μL AccQ•Tag reagent. 5. Heat the reaction mixture at 55°C for 10 minutes, cool and put on the machine.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired on the Q Exactive instrument using Xcalibur 4.1 (Thermo Scientific) and processed using TraceFinder™4.1 Clinical (Thermo Scientific). The quantified data were output in Excel format.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Triticum boeoticum</i> Boiss. (A<sup>b</sup>A<sup>b</sup>, 2n = 2x = 14) is a wheat-related species with the blue aleurone trait. In this study, 18 synthetic <i>Triticum turgidum</i>-<i>Triticum boeoticum</i> amphiploids were identified, which were derived from crosses between <i>T. boeoticum</i> and <i>T. turgidum</i>. Three probes (Oligo-pTa535, Oligo-pSc119.2, and Oligo-pTa713) for multicolor fluorescence <i>in situ</i> hybridization (mc-FISH) were combined with genomic <i>in situ</i> hybridization (GISH) to identify chromosomal composition. Seven nutritional indices (anthocyanins, protein, total essential amino acids TEAA, Fe, Zn, Mn and Cu) were measured, and the nutritional components of 18 synthetic amphiploids were comprehensively ranked by principal component analysis (PCA). The results showed that all three synthetic amphiploids used for cytological identification contained 42 chromosomes, including 14&#xa0;A, 14 B, and 14 A<sup>b</sup> chromosomes. The average anthocyanin content was 82.830 &#x3bc;g/g to 207.606 &#x3bc;g/g in the whole meal of the 17 blue-grained lines (Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-1 to Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-17), which was obviously higher than that in the yellow-grained line Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-18 (6.346 &#x3bc;g/g). The crude protein content was between 154.406 and 180.517 g/kg, and the EAA content was 40.193-63.558 mg/g. The Fe, Zn, Mn and Cu levels in the 17 blue-grained lines were 60.55 to 97.41 mg/kg, 60.55-97.41 mg/kg, 35.11 to 65.20 mg/kg and 5.74 to 7.22 mg/kg, respectively, which were higher than those in the yellow-grained line. The contribution of the first three principal components reached 84%. The first principal component was mainly anthocyanins, Fe, Zn and Mn. The second principal component contained protein and amino acids, and the third component contained only Cu. The top 5 <i>Triticum turgidum</i>-<i>Triticum boeoticum</i> amphiploids were Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-11, Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-17, Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-5, Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-8 and Syn-ABA<sup>b</sup>-4. These amphidiploids exhibited the potential to serve as candidates for hybridization with common wheat, as indicated by comprehensive score rankings, toward enhancing the nutritional quality of wheat.

### Keywords
Uplc–orbitrap-ms, Amphiploids

### Affiliations
Sichuan Agricultural University
Triticeae Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Wenjiang, Chengdu, 611130, China

### Submitter
Xin Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xin Liu
Triticeae Research Institute, Sichuan Agricultural University, Wenjiang, Chengdu, 611130, China


