### Accession
PXD003371

### Title
Proteome identification of the silkworm middle silk gland

### Description
The middle silk gland (MSG) is an important silkworm sub-organ for synthesis and secretion of sericin proteins. To investigate the proteome differences among the anterior, middle, and posterior regions of silkworm MSG at the third day of the fifth instar, the extracted tissue proteins were digested in gel with trypsin followed by shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were dissected in pre-cooled physiological saline and were mechanically homogenized on ice in lysis buffer that containing 2.5% SDS, 10% glycerin, 5% β-mercaptoethanol, and 62.5 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8. The homogenate was further subjected to sonication treatment in an ice-bath. The extracted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE using a 12.5% resolving gel followed by CBB staining. The gel bands were sliced into several pieces and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin overnight at 37oC. The digested peptide sample was analyzed by an Ettan MDLC nanoflow/capillary LC system coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The detail can be obtained from our research article titled “Comparative proteomic analysis of the silkworm middle silk gland reveals the importance of ribosome biogenesis in silk protein production” published in Journal of Proteomics.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted from the raw data files by Mascot Deamon with the extract_msn program and searched against an in-house database on a local Mascot server. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerances were 50ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively, and up to two missed cleavages were permitted for fully tryptic peptides. Carboxamidomethyl modification on cysteine and oxidized modification on methionine were set as ﬁxed and variable modiﬁcations, respectively. The resultant .dat files were subjected to Trans- Proteomic Pipeline for further validation process using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet programs with the probability thresholds at 0.7 and 0.9, respectively. The detail can be obtained from our research article titled “Comparative proteomic analysis of the silkworm middle silk gland reveals the importance of ribosome biogenesis in silk protein production” published in Journal of Proteomics.

### Publication Abstract
To investigate the functional differentiation among the anterior (A), middle (M), and posterior (P) regions of silkworm middle silk gland (MSG), their proteomes were characterized by shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis with a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. To get better proteome identification and quantification, triplicate replicates of mass spectrometry analysis were performed for each sample. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium (Vizca&#xed;no et al., 2014) [1] via the PRIDE partner repository (Vizcaino, 2013) [2] with the dataset identifier PXD003371. The peptide identifications that were further processed by PeptideProphet program in Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) after database search with Mascot software were also available in .XML format files. Data presented here are related to a research article published in Journal of Proteomics by Li et al. (2015) [3].

### Keywords
Proteomics, Shotgun lc-ms/ms, Middle silk gland, Silkworm

### Affiliations
Hangzhou Normal University
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Jian-ying Li

### Lab Head
Dr Boxiong Zhong
Zhejiang University


