### Accession
PXD035553

### Title
A transcriptional switch controls sex determination in Plasmodium falciparum - TurboID

### Description
We aim to characterize the function of P. falciparum Md1 protein in sex determination.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed five times in cold PBS to eliminate excess biotin. 80 μL streptavidin-coated magnetic beads were washed three times in lysis buffer supplemented with proteinase inhibitor cocktail, then incubated with clarified lysates overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel. The beads were subsequently washed twice with lysis buffer, once with 1 mL of 1 M KCl, once with 1 mL of 0.1 M Na2CO3, once with 1 mL of 2 M urea in 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), and twice with 1 mL lysis buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE gel using a short migration. Single pieces of gel were excised for each sample and protein were in-gel digested using Trypsin (Gold,Promega).

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was performed using the MaxQuant software with default settings (v2.0.3.0). All MS/MS spectra were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the UniProt Reference proteome of Plasmodium falciparum (isolate 3D7, Proteome ID UP000001450) (release 2022_01; https://www.uniprot.org/), Streptavidin and truncated PF3D7_1438800 sequences and 250 frequently observed contaminants as well as reversed sequences of all entries. Default search parameters were applied. Oxidation and Acetylation were used as variable modifications and Carbamidomethyl was used as fixed modification. FDR was set to 1% for peptides and proteins. A representative protein ID in each protein group was automatically selected using an in-house bioinformatics tool (Leading v3.4). Graphical representation and some statistical analysis of MS/MS data were performed using Perseus (v1.6.10.43).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Malaria, Sex determination, Affinity purification, Turboid

### Affiliations
FPP CNRS
MIVEGEC, Université de Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France.

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Talman
MIVEGEC, Université de Montpellier, IRD, CNRS, Montpellier, France.


### SDRF
- organism: Plasmodium falciparum
- organism part: not applicable
- cell type: not applicable
- disease: not applicable
- label: label free sample 
- instrument: Q Exactive HF

