### Accession
PXD031828

### Title
Composition of raft-like cell membrane microdomains resistant to styrene-maleic acid copolymer (SMA) solubilization

### Description
An advantageous alternative to the use of detergents in biochemical studies on membrane proteins have recently been styrene-maleic acid (SMA) amphipathic copolymers. These cut the membrane into nanodiscs (often called SMA-lipid particles, SMALPs), which contain membrane proteins surrounded by their relatively native lipid environment. In our recent study [1] we demonstrated that  using this approach, most T cell membrane proteins were fully solubilized (presumably in small nanodiscs), while two types of raft proteins, GPI-anchored proteins and Src family kinases, were mostly present in much larger (>250 nm) membrane fragments markedly enriched in typical raft lipids, cholesterol and lipids containing saturated fatty acid residues. In the present study we demonstrate that disintegration of membranes of several other cell types by means of SMA copolymer follows a similar pattern and we provide a detailed proteomic and lipidomic characterization of these SMA-resistant membrane fragments (SRMs).

### Sample Protocol
2.7. Proteomic analysis LFQ MS analysis was performed as described previously [12]. Briefly, sedimented SMALPs (see section 2.5.) were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB with 1% sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Samples were digested with trypsin, and detergent was removed by liquid-liquid extraction  [13]. Alternatively, samples of total cell lysates (see section 2.4.) mixed 1:1 with 2x SDS sample buffer were processed with Single-pot method [14].  Tryptic peptides were injected on a nano reverse-phase liquid chromatograph coupled with MS (nanoLC-MS) using a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Mass spectrometer as described previously  [12]. Briefly, peptides were separated and analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific). Peptides were firstly loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap300 trap column (300 µm x 5 mm) packed with C18 (5 µm, 300 Å) in loading buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile) for 4 min at 15 μL/min and then separated in a EASY-Spray column (75 µm x 50 cm) packed with C18 (2 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in water) and mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) were used to establish a 60-min gradient from 4 % to 35 % B. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray. A full MS spectrum (350-1,400 m/z range) was acquired at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 100 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra were acquired in iontrap in rapid mode and normalized collision energy was set to 30% with maximum ion accumulation time of 35 ms.  An isolation width of 1.6 m/z units was used for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant version 2.0.2. [15] . Searches were performed using the human database from Uniprot  (release 6/2021 entries). Trypsin cleaving specifity was used and two missed cleavages were allowed. The protein modifications were set as follows: cysteine (unimod nr: 39) as static and methionine oxidation (unimod: 1384) and protein N-terminus acetylation (unimod: 1) as variable. Search mass tolerances were used in MaxQuant default settings for Orbitrap and Iontrap. The precursor ion mass tolerance in the initial search was 20 ppm, the tolerance in the main search was 4.5 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 0.5 Da. The false discovery rates for peptides and for proteins were set to 1%. Raw data and Maxquant serch is available on PRIDE repository [16], dataset : Intensities of proteins were expressed as fractions of the total protein intensity. The ratio of these values was calculated for the total lysate of a given cell line and the corresponding SRM-containing sample.  Proteins with this ratio in at least 3 cell lines higher than five or unique for the SRM-containing sample were selected for further processing. We consider four posttraslation modifications (palmitoylation, GPI-anchor, prenylation and myristoylation) as markers of membrane raft proteins proteins [17] [18] [19]. Sources of protein modification annotation  were as follows: Palmitoylation (SwissPalm) , GPI-anchor (UniProt annotation), Prenylation (UniProt annotation), and myristoylation (MYR Predictor, Myristoylator).                                                    Although the data for SRMs containing fractions were measured separately for fractions 1 - 3 and 4 + 5, for the sake of simplicity they are here (Fig. 1, Tab. S1) presented as single samples, i.e. corresponding to pooled fractions 1 – 5.

### Publication Abstract
An advantageous alternative to the use of detergents in biochemical studies on membrane proteins are the recently developed styrene-maleic acid (SMA) amphipathic copolymers. In our recent study <sup>[1]</sup> we demonstrated that using this approach, most T cell membrane proteins were fully solubilized (presumably in small nanodiscs), while two types of raft proteins, GPI-anchored proteins and Src family kinases, were mostly present in much larger (&gt;250&#xa0;nm) membrane fragments markedly enriched in typical raft lipids, cholesterol and lipids containing saturated fatty acid residues. In the present study we demonstrate that disintegration of membranes of several other cell types by means of SMA copolymer follows a similar pattern and we provide a detailed proteomic and lipidomic characterization of these SMA-resistant membrane fragments (SRMs).

### Keywords
Sma, Lipid rafts

### Affiliations
Charles University
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vídeňská 1083 142 20 Praha 4, Czechia

### Submitter
Karel Harant

### Lab Head
Dr Václav Hořejší
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences, Vídeňská 1083 142 20 Praha 4, Czechia


