### Accession
PXD004725

### Title
Time-resolved analysis of proteome dynamics by TMT-SILAC hyperplexing

### Description
In this project, a more efficient methodology for obtaining multi-timepoint kinetic data for proteome-wide analyses of protein turnover is developed and used to globally measure the kinetics of protein turnover in primary human fibroblasts (HCA2-hTert). This approach takes advantage of the multiplexing capabilities of isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT) to measure fractional SILAC labeling of multiple time-points in a single LC-MS/MS run. Human dermal fibroblasts (HCA2-hTert) (19, 20) were maintained in Eagle’s Minimum Essential Medium (ATCC) supplemented with 15% fetal bovine serum (Invitrogen), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 U/mL streptomycin at 37℃ with 5% CO2. The media utilized for isotopic labeling was Eagle’s minimum essential medium (ATCC) supplemented with 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 U/ml streptomycin. Cells were gradually adapted to the labeling media and were then plated at a density of 500,000 cells per 10 cm plate. For dividing cells, one day after plating, the cultures were switched to MEM labeling media for SILAC (Thermo Scientific) supplemented with L-arginine:HCl (13C6, 99%) and L-lysine:2HCl (13C6, 99%; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) at concentrations of 0.1264 g/l and 0.087 g/l and 15% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (Thermo Scientific) and were subsequently collected after 0, 24, 48, 72 hours of labeling. For quiescent cells, the cultures were grown for 8 days to achieve a state of quiescence by contact inhibition. The confluent quiescent cultures were switched to the labeling media and cells were collected after 0, 6, 12, 24, 36, 48, 72, 96, 144, 192, 336 hours of labeling. All cells were washed with PBS and frozen as cell pellets prior to further analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed and trypsinization following as described before (Cell reports 14.10 (2016): 2426-2439). Samples were then desalted with 100 uL C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific) to remove primary amines that would interfere with TMT labeling. After drying down, the samples were re-suspended in 100 uL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). TMT ten-plex reagents (0.8 mg) (Thermo Scientific) were removed from -20°C and allowed to reach room temperature before being re-suspended in 40 µL of acetonitrile.  10 µL of each reagent was added to the corresponding sample. For analysis of degradation kinetics in quiescent cells, the ten samples derived from different SILAC labeling time-points were tagged with TMT-126, TMT-127N, TMT-127C, TMT-128N, TMT-128C, TMT-129N, TMT-129C, TMT-130N, TMT-130C and TMT-131 in order of increasing time. For comparison of degradation and synthesis kinetics between dividing and quiescent cells, the dividing cells SILAC labeled for 0, 24, 48 and 72 hours were tagged with TMT-126, TMT-127N, TMT-127C and TMT-128N, respectively, and the quiescent cells were labeled SILAC labeled for 0, 48, 96 and 144 hours were tagged by TMT-129C, TMT-130N, TMT-130C and TMT-131, respectively. After the addition of TMT tags, the samples were vortexed and incubated at room temperature for 1 hour before being quenched with 8 µL of 5% hydroxylamine for 15 minutes. 10 µg of each TMT-labeled samples were combined according to the experimental and dried down in the SpeedVac (Labconco). Digested samples were reconstituted in 300 µL of 0.1% TFA and were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific). The remaining labeled peptides were left un-mixed for quantitation using the precursor MS1 SILAC peaks. Un-mixed labeled peptides were desalted with 100 µL C18 tips, and dried down in the Speed Vac.   Dried samples were suspended in 50uL of 0.1% TFA and proceeded to mass spectrometry analysis. 6 µL of each high pH fraction was analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an Easy nLC-1000 pump (Thermo Scientific) and a Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification     All LC-MS/MS runs were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science) within Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) against the SwissProt human database.  The eight fractions that were run on each instrument were searched together to create one report.  A 10 ppm MS1 error tolerance was used, with a 25 mmu error used for MS2 product ions on the Q Exactive Plus, and 0.8 Da on the Fusion, since the MS2’s were done in the ion trap.  Trypsin was set as the enzyme, while allowing for 1 missed cleavage.  Methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) was set as a variable modification, and carbamidomethyl (57.021464 Da) on cysteines was set as a static modification for all searches.  Because we could not search the heavy lysine as a dynamic modification with the TMT6 plex on lysine as a static modification, we had to do separate searches to get data for both the unlabeled and labeled SILAC peptides.  When searching for the unlabeled SILAC peak, TMT6 plex modifications (229.162932 Da) on both lysine and peptide N-termini were used.  When searching for the labeled SILAC peak, a new modification was created that added the heavy lysine mass with the TMT6 plex mass, for a total mass of 235.183061 Da.  This was set as a static modification, along with heavy labeled arginine (6.020129 Da), TMT6 plex on peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethyl on cysteine.  Percolator was used as the false discovery rate calculator, and all peptides were filtered at the “Strict” Target FDR level of 0.01. SILAC Quantitation     SILAC peptides and protein quantification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using the Precursor Ions Quantifier node.  For each peptide, the H/L ratio was determined by a regression model fitted to all isotopic peaks within all scans that the peptide eluted in. H/L ratio for each protein was determined as the median of all the peptides assigned to the protein.  For a given protein, fractional labeling was calculated as the H/(H+L) ratio based on the H/L ratio from Proteome Discoverer outputs. Peptide fractional labeling measurements at all time-points were combined to obtain an aggregated plot for the kinetics of labeling. The aggregated plots were fitted to a single exponential function by least-square fitting to obtain first order degradation rate constant (kdeg) for each protein. TMT Quantitation     For peak integration of the TMT product ions, an error tolerance of 15 ppm with the integration method set to “Centroid with the Smallest Delta Mass” within the “Reporter Ions Quantifier” node was used. The MS Order was set to MS2 for the Q Exactive Plus data, and MS3 when searching the Fusion data.  Reporter abundances were based on Signal/Noise ratio (S/N) if all spectrum files had a S/N value. Otherwise, reporter abundances were based on signal intensities. Peptides with an isolation interference of greater than 30% were not used for quantitation. Fractional labeling of PSMs at all time-points were combined to obtain an aggregated plot for the kinetics of labeling.

### Publication Abstract
Recent advances in mass spectrometry have enabled system-wide analyses of protein turnover. By globally quantifying the kinetics of protein clearance and synthesis, these methodologies can provide important insights into the regulation of the proteome under varying cellular and environmental conditions. To facilitate such analyses, we have employed a methodology that combines metabolic isotopic labeling (Stable Isotope Labeling in Cell Culture - SILAC) with isobaric tagging (Tandem Mass Tags - TMT) for analysis of multiplexed samples. The fractional labeling of multiple time-points can be measured in a single mass spectrometry run, providing temporally resolved measurements of protein turnover kinetics. To demonstrate the feasibility of the approach, we simultaneously measured the kinetics of protein clearance and accumulation for more than 3000 proteins in dividing and quiescent human fibroblasts and verified the accuracy of the measurements by comparison to established non-multiplexed approaches. The results indicate that upon reaching quiescence, fibroblasts compensate for lack of cellular growth by globally downregulating protein synthesis and upregulating protein degradation. The described methodology significantly reduces the cost and complexity of temporally-resolved dynamic proteomic experiments and improves the precision of proteome-wide turnover data.

### Keywords
Tmt-silac, Human primary fibroblasts, Protein synthesis, Hyperplexing, Proteome dynamics, Tmt, Silac, Protein degrdation

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF ROCHESTER
Biology Department, University of Rochester

### Submitter
Tian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sina Ghaemmaghami
Biology Department, University of Rochester


