### Accession
PXD000551

### Title
Structural, molecular and cellular impact of the Ogden syndrome mutant N-terminal acetyltransferase hNaa10-Ser37Pro

### Description
Abstract still has to be written.  The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Samples were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 um internal diameter (I.D.) x 20 mm, 5 um beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). After back-flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on a reverse-phase column (made in-house, 75 um I.D. x 150 mm, 5 um beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 2% acetonitrile), and were separated with a linear gradient from 2% solvent A' (0.05% formic acid) to 55% solvent B' (0.05% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min followed by a wash reaching 100% solvent B'. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the six most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at a target value of 1E6 with a resolution of 60,000. The six most intense ions were then isolated for fragmentation in the linear ion trap, with a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. Peptides were fragmented after filling the ion trap at a target value of 1E4 ion counts. From the MS/MS data in each LC run, Mascot Generic Files were created using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3.01, Matrix Science). While generating these peak lists, grouping of spectra was allowed with a maximum intermediate retention time of 30 s and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5 was used where possible. Grouping was done with 0.005 Da precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no de-isotoping and the relative signal to noise limit was set at 2. These peak lists were then searched with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.3, Matrix Science).   Spectra were searched against the human (H. sapiens) Swiss-Prot database. 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications for the N-terminal COFRADIC analyses. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation and acetylation of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine was additionally set as a variable modification. Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot's C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing no missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. Quantification of the degree of Nt-Acetylation was performed as described previously (1). All data management was done in ms_lims (2).

### Sample Protocol
N-terminal COFRADIC analyses were performed as described previously (Staes, Impens et al. 2011). To enable the assignment of in vivo Nt-acetylation events, all primary protein amines were blocked making use of a (stable isotopic encoded) N-hydroxysuccinimide ester at the protein level (i.e. NHS ester of 13C2D3). The obtained peptide mixtures were introduced into an LC-MS/MS system, the Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) in-line connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described previously (Arnesen, Van Damme et al. 2009, Van Damme, Hole et al. 2011).

### Data Protocol
The generated MS/MS peak lists were searched with Mascot using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.2.0, Matrix Science). Searches were performed in the Swiss-Prot database with taxonomy set to human. 13C2D3-acetylation of lysine side-chains, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide were set as fixed modifications for the N-terminal COFRADIC analyses. Variable modifications were 13C2D3-acetylation and acetylation of protein N-termini. Pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine was additionally set as a variable modification. For the differential N-terminal COFRADIC analyses performed (fibroblast samples), a 12C6 L-arginine versus 13C615N4 L-arginine quantification option was additionally selected for identification and quantification, and carried out using the Mascot Distiller Quantitation Tool (version 2.2.1). Mass tolerance on precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s C13 option set to 1) and on fragment ions to 0.5 Da. Endoproteinase semi-Arg-C/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was set as enzyme allowing no missed cleavages. The peptide charge was set to 1+, 2+, 3+ and instrument setting was put to ESI-TRAP. Only peptides that were ranked one and scored above the threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. Quantification of the degree of Nt-Acetylation was performed as described previously (Van Damme, Hole et al. 2011). In all cases, two isotopic envelopes could clearly be distinguished (i.e. those of the in vivo acetylated (Ac) and in vitro acetylated forms (13C2D3)). All data management was done in ms_lims (Helsens, Colaert et al. 2010).

### Publication Abstract
The X-linked lethal Ogden syndrome was the first reported human genetic disorder associated with a mutation in an N-terminal acetyltransferase (NAT) gene. The affected males harbor an Ser37Pro (S37P) mutation in the gene encoding Naa10, the catalytic subunit of NatA, the major human NAT involved in the co-translational acetylation of proteins. Structural models and molecular dynamics simulations of the human NatA and its S37P mutant highlight differences in regions involved in catalysis and at the interface between Naa10 and the auxiliary subunit hNaa15. Biochemical data further demonstrate a reduced catalytic capacity and an impaired interaction between hNaa10 S37P and Naa15 as well as Naa50 (NatE), another interactor of the NatA complex. N-Terminal acetylome analyses revealed a decreased acetylation of a subset of NatA and NatE substrates in Ogden syndrome cells, supporting the genetic findings and our hypothesis regarding reduced Nt-acetylation of a subset of NatA/NatE-type substrates as one etiology for Ogden syndrome. Furthermore, Ogden syndrome fibroblasts display abnormal cell migration and proliferation capacity, possibly linked to a perturbed retinoblastoma pathway. N-Terminal acetylation clearly plays a role in Ogden syndrome, thus revealing the in vivo importance of N-terminal acetylation in human physiology and disease.

### Keywords
Cofradic, Hnaa10p, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Ghent University, VIB
University of Ghent

### Submitter
Petra Van Damme

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
Ghent University, VIB


