### Accession
PXD038840

### Title
Immunization with a heat-killed Prm1 deletion strain protects the host from Cryptococcus neoformans infection

### Description
Systemic infection with Cryptococcus neoformans, a dangerous and contagious pathogen found throughout the world, frequently results in lethal cryptococcal pneumonia and meningoencephalitis, and no effective treatments of cryptococcosis are available. Here, we describe Prm1, a novel regulator of virulence in C. neoformans. C. neoformans prm1 cells exhibit extreme sensitivity to various environmental stress conditions. Furthermore, prm1 cells show deficiencies in the biosynthesis of chitin, chitosan, and mannoprotein, which in turn result in impairment of cell wall integrity. Treatment of mice with heat-killed prm1 cells was found to facilitate the host immunological defence against infection with wild-type C. neoformans. Further investigation demonstrated that prm1 cells strongly promote pulmonary production of interferon- and Th1 responses, leading to activation of macrophage M1 differentiation and inhibition of M2 polarization. Therefore, our findings suggest that C. neoformans Prm1 may be a viable target for the development of anti-cryptococcosis medications and, cells lacking Prm1 represent a promising candidate for a vaccine. 

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis was performed by the Jingjie PTM BioLab Co. Inc. Hangzhou, China. Wildtype and mutant strains were subcultured to the mid-log phase (A600=1.0) in YPD at 30°C and then washed twice with PBS. Fungal cells were boiled for 5 min in PBS at 100°C. Supernatant was recovered after 5 min of centrifugation at 3000 rpm. Bruker's Tims TOF PRO and NanoElute liquid chromatographs were used.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against Cryptococcus_neoformans_var._grubii_serotype_A_strain_H99_235443 uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic infection with <i>Cryptococcus neoformans</i>, a dangerous and contagious pathogen found throughout the world, frequently results in lethal cryptococcal pneumonia and meningoencephalitis, and no effective treatments and vaccination of cryptococcosis are available. Here, we describe Prm1, a novel regulator of <i>C. neoformans</i> virulence<i>. C. neoformans prm1&#x394;</i> cells exhibit extreme sensitivity to various environmental stress conditions. Furthermore, <i>prm1&#x394;</i> cells show deficiencies in the biosynthesis of chitosan and mannoprotein, which in turn result in impairment of cell wall integrity. Treatment of mice with heat-killed <i>prm1&#x394;</i> cells was found to facilitate the host immunological defence against infection with wild-type <i>C. neoformans</i>. Further investigation demonstrated that <i>prm1&#x394;</i> cells strongly promote pulmonary production of interferon-&#x3b3;, leading to activation of macrophage M1 differentiation and inhibition of M2 polarization. Therefore, our findings suggest that <i>C. neoformans</i> Prm1 may be a viable target for the development of anti-cryptococcosis medications and, cells lacking Prm1 represent a promising candidate for a vaccine.

### Keywords
Cryptococcus neoformans; mmp; cell wall; fungal vaccine; ifn-γ; macrophage polarization; drug targets.

### Affiliations
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University

### Submitter
超 李

### Lab Head
Dr Chao li
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University


