### Accession
PXD037898

### Title
Hypercoagulability and Inflammatory Markers in a Case of Congenital Thrombotic Thrombocytopenic Purpura Complicated by Fetal Demise

### Description
Patients who are diagnosed with thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) during pregnancy are at increased risk of maternal and fetal complications including fetal demise. We present a case of a 32-year-old G3P0 (gravida 3, para 0) who presented at 20 weeks’ gestation with a new diagnosis of congenital TTP (cTTP) and fetal demise. Methods: We describe the pathophysiology of pregnancy complications in a patient with cTTP using platelet procoagulant membrane dynamics analysis and quantitative proteomic studies, compared to 4 pregnant patients with gestational hypertension, 4 pregnant patients with preeclampsia and 4 healthy pregnant controls. Results: The cTTP patient had increased P-selectin, tissue factor expression, annexin-V binding on platelets and neutrophils, and localized thrombin generation, suggestive of hypercoagulability. Among 15 proteins that were upregulated, S100A8 and S100A9 were distinctly overexpressed.Conclusions: There is platelet-neutrophil activation and interaction, platelet hypercoagulability and proinflammation in our case of cTTP with fetal demise.

### Sample Protocol
We derived platelet-rich-plasma fractions by centrifuging whole blood at 180 g for 17 minutes, followed by a careful extraction of both the upper plasma-platelet fraction (PRP) and the buffy coat. A total of 100 μg per sample was analyzed. Samples incubated with 10 mM DTT in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate at the reduce the disulfide bonds. Next, 50 mM iodoacetamide in HPLC water was added to the sample, and samples were incubated in the dark for 25 minutes. Sample were moved ontl a 10 Kda cut off fileter. The filter was washed three times with Urea 8M in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8:, followed by three washes with 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. Proteins were digested with trypsin in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate at 37 °C for 18 h (enzyme to protein ratio (v/w) of 1:100). Next the peptides were eluted off the filter by three washes 100 mM Ammonium in The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted by using SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges (Acording to manufacters directions. Samples were then lyophilised at 30 °C in a vacuum concentrator and stored at − 80 °C until further analysis. Sample were resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. TMT-6plex Isobaric Labeling Reagents were resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile and added to each sample (41 μl of TMT-6plex per 100-μl sample) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The TMT labeling reaction was quenched by 2.5% hydroxylamine for 15 min at room temperature. TMT-labeled samples were combined and acidified in 100% trifluoroacetic acid to pH <3.0 and subjected to SepPak C18 solid-phase extraction cartridges, according to manufacturer recommendations. Samples were stored at −80 °C before lyophilization, followed by resuspension in 1% formic acid before liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data acquired from the mass spectrometer were matched to peptide sequences using MaxQuant software (v.1.6.0.1).A human proteome from the UniProt database was used at a peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). Relative quantification was set as TMT 6-plex labels 126 to 131. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. First search peptide tolerance was set to 10, re-quantify and match between runs were enabled, minimum peptide length of 5, maximum peptide mass of 6600 Da, and minimum score for modified peptides set to 20.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Platelets; thrombosis; procoagulant membrane dynamics; inflammatory markers; congenital; thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura; fetal demise

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


