### Accession
PXD009741

### Title
A complex of C9ORF72 and p62 uses arginine methylation to eliminate stress granules by autophagy - PART 2

### Description
Mutations in proteins like FUS which cause Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) result in the aberrant formation of stress granules while ALS-linked mutations in other proteins impede elimination of stress granules. Repeat expansions in C9ORF72, the major cause of ALS, reduce C9ORF72 levels but how this impacts stress granules is uncertain. Here, we demonstrate that C9ORF72 associates with the autophagy receptor p62 and controls elimination of stress granules by autophagy. This requires p62 to associate via the Tudor protein SMN with proteins, including FUS, that are symmetrically arginine-methylated by PRMT5. Mice lacking p62 accumulate arginine-methylated proteins and alterations in FUS-dependent splicing.  Finally, patients with C9ORF72 repeat expansions accumulate symmetric arginine dimethylated proteins which co-localize with p62. This suggests that C9ORF72 initiates a cascade of ALS-linked proteins (C9ORF72, p62, SMN, FUS) to recognize stress granules for degradation by autophagy and hallmarks of a defect in this process are observable in ALS patients.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were treated with either 0.5 mM sodium arsenite and harvested after 30 minutes. Endogenous p62/SQSTM1 was immunoprecipitated in a sterile environment to reduce keratin contamination, run on a precast protein gel and processed for silver staining. Excised gel pieces were then shrunk using 100% acetonitrile, reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested following standard procedures. Derived peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The peak lists of the raw files were processed and analyzed with MaxQuant (Version 1.5.2.8) against UniProt human protein database, including commonly observed contaminants. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and arginine methylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, not allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline. Up to two missing cleavages of trypsin were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance was 20 ppm. Razor and unique peptides were used for LFQ quantitation. FDR was set at 0.01 on protein, peptide and modification of specific sites; a minimum length of seven amino acids was used for peptide identification. For protein identification, if the identified peptide sequence of one protein was equal to or contained another protein’s peptide set, these two proteins were grouped together by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. MaxQuant ProteinGroups.txt and Dimethyl(KR)Sites.txt output files were imported into Microsoft Excel for subsequent analyses. Additionally, Protein intensity values obtained from MaxQuant were used for the statistical confidence assessment of C9ORF72 interactions by SAINTq. For each protein, SAINTq compares its intensity values in the biological replicates of the immunoprecipitations (IPs) against those in the IgG control replicates under the same experimental conditions. SAINTq then assigns each protein a Bayesian False Discovery Rate (BFDR) that is based on the level of significance of the intensity difference between the IPs and the controls. Proteins with a BFDR < 0.05 were considered as high-confidence protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in proteins like FUS which cause Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) result in the aberrant formation of stress granules while ALS-linked mutations in other proteins impede elimination of stress granules. Repeat expansions in C9ORF72, the major cause of ALS, reduce C9ORF72 levels but how this impacts stress granules is uncertain. Here, we demonstrate that C9ORF72 associates with the autophagy receptor p62 and controls elimination of stress granules by autophagy. This requires p62 to associate via the Tudor protein SMN with proteins, including FUS, that are symmetrically methylated on arginines. Mice lacking p62 accumulate arginine-methylated proteins and alterations in FUS-dependent splicing. Patients with C9ORF72 repeat expansions accumulate symmetric arginine dimethylated proteins which co-localize with p62. This suggests that C9ORF72 initiates a cascade of ALS-linked proteins (C9ORF72, p62, SMN, FUS) to recognize stress granules for degradation by autophagy and hallmarks of a defect in this process are observable in ALS patients.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Sqstm1, Lc-msms, Als

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Maneka Chitiprolu

### Lab Head
Dr Derrick Gibbings
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa, 451 Smyth Road, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1H 8M5


