### Accession
PXD006767

### Title
Characterisation of protein methyltransferases Rkm1, Rkm4, Efm4, Efm7, Set5 and Hmt1 reveals extensive post-translational modification

### Description
Protein methylation is one of the major post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the cell. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, over twenty protein methyltransferases (MTases) and their respective substrates have been identified. However, the way in which these MTases are modified, and potentially subject to regulation, remains poorly understood. Here, we investigated six S. cerevisiae protein MTases (Rkm1, Rkm4, Efm4, Efm7, Set5 and Hmt1) to identify PTMs of potential functional relevance. We identified 51 PTM sites across the six MTases, including phosphorylation, acetylation and methylation. 45 sites are novel. We contextualised the PTM sites in structural models of the MTases and revealed that many fell in catalytic pockets or enzyme-substrate interfaces. These may regulate MTase activity. Finally, we compared PTMs on Hmt1 with those on its human homologs PRMT1, PRMT3, CARM1, PRMT6 and PRMT8. This revealed that several PTMs are conserved from yeast to human, whereas others are only found in Hmt1.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were resuspended in 20 mL lysis buffer (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8), 500 mM NaCl, 40 mM imidazole, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (v/v) Triton X-100) complemented with cOmplete, EDTA free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche). We lysed the cells with a Mini Beadbeater 24 (BioSpec Products) for three cycles of shaking for 30 s and ice incubation for 2 min in between shaking. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 40 min at 14,000 g at 4°C and we immediately proceeded with the purification of MTases. His tag purification was carried with 1 mL Ni NTA Superflow Cartridges (Qiagen) following manufacturer’s instructions. Eluates were concentrated and buffer exchanged with phosphate-buffered saline (50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.4), 200 mM NaCl) with Amicon® Ultra - 0.5 mL Centrifugal Filters Ultracel® 3K (Merck Millipore) until a volume of 200 µL was attained. Samples were kept at -20°C until mass spectrometry sample preparation.  Each concentrated eluate was run in three separate wells on Bolt™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus Gels (Invitrogen) in 1X Bolt® MES SDS Running Buffer (Invitrogen) according to manufacturer’s instructions. We fixed the gels in an isopropanol fixing solution (25% (v/v) isopropanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid) for 15 min, followed by a 1 h wash in water, and stained the bands with methanol free QC Colloidal Coomassie Stain (Bio-Rad) overnight. Gels were then destained in water until excess Coomassie stain was removed. Gel bands to be analysed were excised and destained, then reduced and alkylated following the procedure described in (Shevchenko et al., 1996). We digested each sample with either trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) (50 ng in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate), LysargiNase (Proteolysis Lab) (100 ng in the provided reaction buffer), or Asp N (Promega, sequencing grade) (100 ng in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 16 h at 37°C. Following digests, peptide extraction was performed as described in (Hart-Smith et al., 2014).  Samples were analysed by Liquid Chromatography-Higher-energy Collisional Dissociation Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-HCD-MS/MS) on a Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described in (Hamey et al., 2016) and by Liquid Chromatography-Electron Transfer Dissociation Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-ETD-MS/MS) on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro hybrid linear ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as described in (Hart-Smith et al., 2012). ETD was performed with a 130 ms reaction time, supplemental activation employed and at a target value of 10,000 ions; target values for fluoranthene anions ranged from 8×105 to 1×106. We prepared inclusion lists of all potential singly, doubly, triply and quadruply charged phosphopeptides ranging from m/z values of 350 to 2000 for each recombinant MTase and for all three protease digests. We specified phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications in the generation of the inclusion lists and allowed up to three missed cleavages. We used these lists for the selection of precursor ions for fragmentation. For LC HCD MS/MS, data dependent acquisition was employed in combination with the inclusion lists as described in (Hamey et al., 2016). For LC ETD MS/MS, up to the four most abundant ions from the inclusion lists, followed by up to the six most abundant ions (>5,000 counts) were sequentially isolated and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
Sequence database searches were performed using the Proteome Discoverer mass informatics platform (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific), using the search program Mascot (version 2.5.1, Matrix Science). In the spectrum processing node, minimal and maximal precursor ion masses were set to 350 Da and 5000 Da, respectively, and all other parameters were left as default. The peak lists output from this node was then sent to four different Mascot search nodes to identify peptides with different sets of post translational modifications (PTMs). In these nodes, instrument type was ETD-TRAP for LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro and ESI-TRAP for Q Exactive™ Plus derived data. Precursor ion and peptide fragment mass tolerances were ±5 ppm and ±0.4 Da, respectively, for LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro derived data and ±5 ppm and ±0.02 Da, respectively, for Q Exactive Plus derived data. Variable modifications included in all four nodes were carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M) and acetylation (N-term); additional variable modifications included in each separate node were phosphorylation (S, T, Y); acetylation (K, protein N-term); monomethylation (K, D, E), dimethylation and trimethylation (Lys); monomethylation (R, D, E) and dimethylation (R). Enzyme specificity was trypsin, LysArginase, or Asp N_ambic with up to three missed cleavages; the SWISS PROT database (October, 2015 release, 549,646 sequence entries, 195,983,064 residues) was searched using sequences from S. cerevisiae only. For PSM validation, the outputs of each Mascot search node were combined in a single Percolator node to apply the algorithm described by Käll et al. (Kall et al., 2007) to calculate false discovery rates (FDR) based on q values for each PSM. Only peptides deemed with q values < 0.1 were considered for manual curation, whereby we manually verified the fragmentation spectra of each peptide and the unambiguous localisation of PTMs.

### Publication Abstract
Protein methylation is one of the major post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the cell. In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, over 20 protein methyltransferases (MTases) and their respective substrates have been identified. However, the way in which these MTases are modified and potentially subject to regulation remains poorly understood. Here, we investigated six overexpressed S. cerevisiae protein MTases (Rkm1, Rkm4, Efm4, Efm7, Set5 and Hmt1) to identify PTMs of potential functional relevance. We identified 48 PTM sites across the six MTases, including phosphorylation, acetylation and methylation. Forty-two sites are novel. We contextualized the PTM sites in structural models of the MTases and revealed that many fell in catalytic pockets or enzyme-substrate interfaces. These may regulate MTase activity. Finally, we compared PTMs on Hmt1 with those on its human homologs PRMT1, PRMT3, CARM1, PRMT6 and PRMT8. This revealed that several PTMs are conserved from yeast to human, whereas others are only found in Hmt1. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD006767.

### Keywords
Hmt1, Post-translational modifications, Metyltransferases, Set5, Rkm4, Efm4, Rkm1, Efm7

### Affiliations
UNSW Sydney
UNSW

### Submitter
Daniel Winter

### Lab Head
Dr Marc R. Wilkins
UNSW Sydney


