### Accession
PXD034776

### Title
Drug Affinity Responsive Target Stability unveils Filamins as biological targets for Artemetin, an anti-cancer flavonoid.

### Description
Artemetin is a valuable 5-hydroxy-3,6,7,3',4'-pentamethoxyflavone found in many different medicinal plants with a very good oral bioavailability and drug-likeness values endowed with numerous bioactivities such as anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer ones. Here, a multi-disciplinary strategy has been developed and applied for identifying Artemetin target(s) to fully address its mechanism of action, based on drug affinity response target stability and targeted limited proteolysis. Both approaches point to the identification of Filamins A and B as major Artemetin targets in HeLa cell lysates, giving also detailed insights into the ligand/proteins interaction sites. Interestingly, also the 8-prenyl-Artemetin, which is a more permeable semisynthetic analog, directly interacts with Filamin A and B. Both compounds alter filamins conformation in living HeLa cells with an effect on cytoskeleton disassembly and on the disorganization of the F-actin filaments, mediated by the dissociation of filamins. Both the natural compound and its derivative are able to block cell migration, expectantly acting on tumor metastasis’s occurrence and development.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed in PBS 0.1% v/v Igepal supplied with a protease inhibitor mixture (final concentration 1x, Sigma Aldrich). The lysate was centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min (4°C) and the protein concentration of the obtained supernatant was determined by Bradford assay. Then, DARTS experiments were carried out: different amounts of Art or 8-p-Art (1 μM, 10 μM and 100 μM) were incubated with 300 μg of HeLa cell lysate for 1 hour at room temperature under rotary shaking. The samples were then submitted to limited proteolysis, for 30 minutes at 25°C, at a ratio of 1:1500 w/w of subtilisin (Sigma Aldrich) in respect of proteins amount. Two samples of cell lysates were treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and one of them with subtilisin, as control experiments. Then, the protease was quenched by adding PMSF (phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, Sigma-Aldrich, 1 mM final concentration) to each sample. Then, all samples were boiled in Laemmli buffer (60 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 2% SDS, 0.001% bromophenol blue, 1% glycerol, 2% β-mercaptoethanol) and 20 μg were loaded on a 4-12% Bis-Tris CriterionTM XT Precast Gel (Bio-Rad Laboratories S.r.l.) which was then stained with a Coomassie solution and submitted to a densitometric analysis through ImageJ. This experiment was carried out in triplicate for Art, and it was repeated incubating with 8-p-Art at the same concentrations. Protein bands were cut out from the gels and submitted to an in situ tryptic digestion protocol. Briefly, gel slices were reduced with DTT (1,4-dithiothreitol), alkylated with IAA (iodoacetamide), washed and rehydrated on ice for 1 h in a 12 ng/µl trypsin solution. Then, the enzyme excess was removed and replaced with ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic, 50 mM, pH 8.5), allowing protein digestion to proceed overnight at 37 °C. Subsequently, supernatants were collected and peptides were extracted from each gel slice, shrinking them in 100% ACN (acetonitrile). The obtained peptides mixtures were dried under vacuum and dissolved in formic acid (FA, 10%) for the LC-MSMS analysis. 1 µl of each peptide sample was injected into a nano-UPLC system (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) separating peptides on an EASY-Spray PepMAPTM RSLC C18 column (3µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen) at a flow rate of 0.3 ml/min. Peptides elution was achieved at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with the following gradient: 1 min at 3% B, 1 min to 40 min to 28% B, 40 min to 41 min to 70% B, 41 min to 49 min at 70% B and 50 min to 60 min back to 3% B (A: 95% H2O, 5% ACN, 0.1% AcOH; B: 95% ACN, 5% H2O, 0.1% AcOH). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired with the following settings: scan range 400–2000 m/z, full-scan automatic gain control (AGC) target 1e6 at 70000 resolution, maximum injection time 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were generated for up to 10 precursors (normalized collision energy of 30%) and the fragment ions acquired at a resolution of 17500 with an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Subsequently, database searches were carried out on Mascot Deamon, employing the SwissProt database and the following settings: two missed cleavages; carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (ST) as variable modifications; peptide tolerance 30 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.8 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Artemetin is a valuable 5-hydroxy-3,6,7,3',4'-pentamethoxyflavone present in many different medicinal plants with very good oral bioavailability and drug-likeness values, owing to numerous bioactivities, such as anti-inflammatory and anti-cancer ones. Here, a multi-disciplinary plan has been settled and applied for identifying the artemetin target(s) to inspect its mechanism of action, based on drug affinity-responsive target stability and targeted limited proteolysis. Both approaches point to the disclosure of filamins A and B as direct artemetin targets in HeLa cell lysates, also giving detailed insights into the ligand/protein-binding sites. Interestingly, also 8-prenyl-artemetin, which is an artemetin more permeable semisynthetic analog, directly interacts with filamins A and B. Both compounds alter filamin conformation in living HeLa cells with an effect on cytoskeleton disassembly and on the disorganization of the F-actin filaments. Both the natural compound and its derivative are able to block cell migration, expectantly acting on tumor metastasis occurrence and development.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Cytoskeleton, Anti-cancer., Drug affinity responsive target stability, Bioactive natural compounds

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmacy, Università di Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II 132, Fisciano, 84084 Salerno, Italy
Dept Pharmacy University of Salerno

### Submitter
Maria Chiara Monti

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Chiara Monti
Department of Pharmacy, Università di Salerno, Via Giovanni Paolo II 132, Fisciano, 84084 Salerno, Italy


