### Accession
PXD016308

### Title
MS-based analysis of enzymatic methylation of an in vitro-transcribed lncRNA

### Description
The field of epitranscriptomics is growing in importance, with chemical modification of RNA being associated with a wide variety of biological phenomena. Mass spectrometry (MS) enables the identification of modified RNA residues within their sequence contexts, by using analogous approaches to shotgun proteomics. We have developed a free and open-source database search engine for RNA MS data, called NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE), as part of the OpenMS software framework. NASE allows the reliable identification of (modified) RNA sequences from LC-MS/MS data in a high-throughput fashion. For this validation dataset, we prepared two samples of an in vitro-transcribed yeast lncRNA (NME1, 340 nt long), one of which was treated with an RNA methyltransferase (NCL1) catalyzing the 5-methylcytidine (m5C) modification. These samples were subsequently digested with an RNA endonuclease (RNase) to generate oligonucleotide sequences of a length amenable to mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
NME1 is a 340 nt long Saccharomyces lncRNA. NME1 RNA was generated by in vitro transcription, and two samples with and without NCL1 enzyme treatment were prepared. NCL1 is a yeast RNA methyltransferase that catalyses the 5-methylcytidine (m5C) modification. RNA was extracted and digested with RNase T1 prior to nanoflow LC-MS/MS. This endonuclease generates shorter oligonucleotides by cleaving immediately after guanosine residues. The RNA samples were separated by reversed-phase ion-pair liquid chromatography (using 200 mM HFIP + 8.5 mM TEA in H2O as eluent A, and 100 mM HFIP + 4.25 mM TEA in methanol as eluent B) and characterised by negative ion MS/MS in a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Fisher). A gradient of 2.5 to 25% eluent B eluted oligonucleotides over 50 min from nanoflow Acclaim PepMap C18 solid phase (Thermo Fisher) at 200 nL/min. Precursor ion spectra were collected at a scan range of 600 to 3500 m/z at 120k resolution in data-dependent mode, with the top five MS1 species selected for fragmentation (NCE: 20) and MS2 at 60k resolution. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The proprietary raw files were converted to mzML format without compression and with vendor peak-picking using MSConvert (https://github.com/ProteoWizard). In the analysis with NASE, the full list of fragment ion types (a-B, a, b, c, d, w, x, y, z) was considered for peak matching. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were both set to 3 ppm. For precursor mass correction, offsets of -1 to 3 neutron masses were considered. For this dataset, RNase T1 digestion with one allowed missed cleavage were selected. m5C was set as a variable modification; up to two modifications per oligonucleotide were considered. Na+ and K+ were specified as potential adducts. The sequence database contained the NME1 (target) sequence as well as a shuffled decoy sequence. Results were filtered to 10% FDR at spectrum-match level using the target-decoy strategy. NASE produced two output files containing the search results: An mzTab-like text file suitable for further analysis, and an idXML file suitable for visualisation in OpenMS’ TOPPView. In addition to NASE, the data was also processed with two other publicly available RNA identification engines: Ariadne and RNAModMapper (RAMM). To this end, the raw files were converted to MGF format using MSConvert. Cleavage and variable modification settings in the searches were the same as for NASE and appropriate for the samples. For Ariadne, the online version at http://ariadne.riken.jp was used in July 2019. The “Calc as partial modifications” option was enabled. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were left at their default values (5 and 20 ppm). For RAMM, a program version from July 2018 was used with settings recommended by the author, Ningxi Yu. All available ion types (a-B, w, c, y) were enabled; precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 0.02 and 0.1 Da, respectively. Based on the NASE search results, label-free quantification using an OpenMS pipeline was performed. Target coordinates (chemical sum formulas, charge states, median retention times) for oligonucleotides identified at 1% FDR were exported from NASE. Based on these coordinates, feature detection in the LC-MS raw data (mzML files) was carried out with the OpenMS tool FeatureFinderMetaboIdent. The results were exported to text format using OpenMS’ TextExporter.

### Publication Abstract
The field of epitranscriptomics continues to reveal how post-transcriptional modification of RNA affects a wide variety of biological phenomena. A pivotal challenge in this area is the identification of modified RNA residues within their sequence contexts. Mass spectrometry (MS) offers a comprehensive solution by using analogous approaches to shotgun proteomics. However, software support for the analysis of RNA MS data is inadequate at present and does not allow high-throughput processing. Existing software solutions lack the raw performance and statistical grounding to efficiently handle the numerous modifications found on RNA. We present a free and open-source database search engine for RNA MS data, called NucleicAcidSearchEngine (NASE), that addresses these shortcomings. We demonstrate the capability of NASE to reliably identify a wide range of modified RNA sequences in four original datasets of varying complexity. In human tRNA, we characterize over 20 different modification types simultaneously and find many cases of incomplete modification.

### Keywords
Epitranscriptomics, Rna, Lncrna, M5c, Nme1, 5-methylcytidine

### Affiliations
STORM Therapeutics Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom
STORM Therapeutics Limited

### Submitter
Hendrik Weisser

### Lab Head
Dr Byron Andrews
STORM Therapeutics Limited, Cambridge, United Kingdom


