### Accession
PXD022623

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Histoplasma capsulatum

### Description
Histoplasma capsulatum is a thermally dimorphic fungus with worldwide distribution, and high incidence in the Americas. It is the etiologic agent of histoplasmosis, an important life-threatening systemic mycosis. Dimorphism is an important feature for fungal survival in different environments and it has been related to the virulence of H. capsulatum, and essential to the establishment of infection. Proteomic profiles have brought important contributions to the knowledge of metabolism and pathogenicity in several biological models. However, studies of the H. capsulatum proteome have been underexplored. In the present study, we report the first proteomic comparison between the mycelium and the yeast cells of H. capsulatum. Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry was used to evaluate the proteomic profile of the two phases of H. capsulatum. In summary, 214 proteins were only detected/or preferentially abundant in mycelium, while the same occurred to 335 proteins in yeast cells. In mycelium, enzymes related to the glycolytic pathway and to the alcoholic fermentation showed greater abundance, suggesting a higher use of anaerobic pathways for energy production. In yeast cells, proteins related to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and response to temperature stress showed high abundance. Proteins related to oxidative stress response or involved with cell wall metabolism were identified with differential abundance in both conditions. Validation of proteomic data was performed by enzymatic activity determination, western blot assays, or immunofluorescence microscopy. These experiments corroborated, directly or indirectly, the abundance of isocitrate lyase, 2-methylcitrate synthase, catalase B, and mannosyl-oligosaccharide-1,2-alpha-mannosidase in the mycelium and heat shock protein (HSP) 30, HSP60, glucosamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase, glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase, and N-acetylglucosamine-phosphate mutase in yeast-cells. The proteomic profile associated functional classification analyzes of proteins provided a better understanding of the metabolic reorganization and cell wall remodeling on the yeast form of H. capsulatum.

### Sample Protocol
Enzymatic digestion of proteins was processed according to the protocol described by Murad and colleagues (2011). Then, 150 μg of protein from each sample was added to 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5, and RapiGESTTM SF (0.2% v/v) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA), and incubated at 80 ºC for 15 min. Disulfide bonds were reduced by incubation with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) at 60 ºC for 30 min and then alkylated by incubation with 300 mM iodocetamide (GE Healthcare, Piscataway, NJ, USA) at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC through the addition of 30 μL of a 0.05 μg/μL trypsin solution (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Digestion was stopped with 30 μL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (v/v), followed by incubation at 37 ºC for 90 min. The samples were centrifuged, and supernatant was dried in a speed vacuum. The peptides were suspended in a solution containing 20 mM ammonium formate and 150 fmol/μL of PHB (Rabbit Phosphorylase B) (Waters, Manchester, UK) as an internal standard.  The tryptic peptides were separated by Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography according to Pigosso and colleagues (2017). Then, 1,660 ng peptides from each sample were injected to the nanoACQUITYTM UPLC system (Waters, Manchester, UK). The nanoscale capillary separation of peptides was performed on an analytical reversed-phase column (BEH130 C18 1.7 µm, 100 µm x 100 mm) (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). These peptides were separated in five fractions, the gradient elution was performed as follows: 11.4, 14.7, 17.4, 20.7 and 50% of acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid, with a flow rate of 2,000 µL/min.  Data independent acquisition using MSE mode was performed with Synapt G1 MSTM (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The collected data range was 50-2000 m/z and scan-time 0.4 second. Ion, 785.8426 m/z, corresponding double charged GFP [Glu]1-Fibrinopeptide B human (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), was used for calibration during the sample analysis. Triplicate runs for each sample were acquired.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed together using the ProteinLynx Global Server software version 3.0.2 (PLGS) (Waters, Manchester, UK). Protein identifications were carried out using algorithms previously described (Geromanos et al., 2009) and a search against the H. capsulatum genome database available in the NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/bioproject/PRJNA12653). The parameters were as follows: (i) the detection of at least 2 fragment ions per peptide, (ii) 5 fragments per protein, (iii) the determination of at least 1 peptide per protein, (iv) maximum protein mass (600 kDa), (v) one missed cleavage site was allowed for trypsin, (vi) carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification, (vii) methionine oxidation and phosphoryl STY as a variable modification, (viii) and a maximum 4% false-positive discovery rate, in at least two out of three technical replicate injections. Correct and reversed sequences databases were used to estimate false-positive rates (FPR).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Histoplasma capsulatum</i> is a thermally dimorphic fungus distributed worldwide, but with the highest incidence in the Americas within specific geographic areas, such as the Mississippi River Valley and regions in Latin America. This fungus is the etiologic agent of histoplasmosis, an important life-threatening systemic mycosis. Dimorphism is an important feature for fungal survival in different environments and is related to the virulence of <i>H. capsulatum</i>, and essential to the establishment of infection. Proteomic profiles have made important contributions to the knowledge of metabolism and pathogenicity in several biological models. However, <i>H. capsulatum</i> proteome studies have been underexplored. In the present study, we report the first proteomic comparison between the mycelium and the yeast cells of <i>H. capsulatum</i>. Liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry was used to evaluate the proteomic profile of the two phases of <i>H. capsulatum</i> growth, mycelium, and yeast. In summary, 214 and 225 proteins were only detected/or preferentially abundant in mycelium or yeast cells, respectively. In mycelium, enzymes related to the glycolytic pathway and to the alcoholic fermentation occurred in greater abundance, suggesting a higher use of anaerobic pathways for energy production. In yeast cells, proteins related to the tricarboxylic acid cycle and response to temperature stress were in high abundance. Proteins related to oxidative stress response or involved with cell wall metabolism were identified with differential abundance in both conditions. Proteomic data validation was performed by enzymatic activity determination, Western blot assays, or immunofluorescence microscopy. These experiments corroborated, directly or indirectly, the abundance of isocitrate lyase, 2-methylcitrate synthase, catalase B, and mannosyl-oligosaccharide-1,2-alpha-mannosidase in the mycelium and heat shock protein (HSP) 30, HSP60, glucosamine-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase, glucosamine-6-phosphate deaminase, and <i>N</i>-acetylglucosamine-phosphate mutase in yeast cells. The proteomic profile-associated functional classification analyses of proteins provided new and interesting information regarding the differences in metabolism between the two distinct growth forms of <i>H. capsulatum</i>.

### Keywords
Yeast, Fungal biology, Histoplasma capsulatum, Proteomic analysis, Dimorphism, Mycelium

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and molecular biology department, Universidade Federal de Goias, Brazil 
Federal University of Goias

### Submitter
CLAYTON BORGES

### Lab Head
Dr CLAYTON LUIZ BORGES
Federal University of Goias


