### Accession
PXD003334

### Title
Podophyllum hexandrum Royle MS/MS

### Description
In order to study the molecular mechanisms of cold-adaption and PPT accumulation to understand why P. hexandrum adapts to chilling temperature, the  differentially expressed proteins (DAPs) of P. hexandrum seedling exposed to chilling temperatures (4 and 10°C, 22°C as control) were conducted by using 2-DE in combination with MALDI-TOF-MS, a total of 35 DAP spots were detected and identified. Interestingly, 14 of the 35 DAPs played key roles in PPT biosynthesis, and 21 proteins participated in growth and development. These protein spots were classified into 7 functional categories, including PPT biosynthesis, primary metabolism, transcription and protein synthesis, cell growth/division, defense, transport, and energy. The present data would be useful in better understanding the molecular basis of chilling temperature response in P. hexandrum.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to MS analysis, DAP spots were manually excised from acrylamide gel and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin to generate peptide fragments. Briefly, gel slices were washed with water for 30 min and then destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile for 30 min. Then, the gel slices were dehydrated with 100% (v/v) acetonitrile, and incubated with 25 mM NH4CO3 for 1.5 h. The spots were treated with buffer modified trypsin at 37 °C overnight.

### Data Protocol
Significant spots with at least a 1.5-fold difference (P＜0.05) were excised and digested with trypsin (In-gel trypsin digestion kit, Pierce, USA). Tryptic-digested peptides were extracted according to the protocol described by Lee et al. (2007). The tryptic-digested peptides were used for Voyager-DE STR MALDI-TOF-MS (PerSeptive Biosystems, Framingham, MA, USA) protein identification according to Lee et al. (2007). All obtained PMFs were analyzed using Protein Prospector (http://prospector.ucsf.edu) (Lee et al., 2009).For evaluation of the probability that the sample protein is the specific protein, an automated database search was carried out using the MASCOT program (Matrix Science Ltd., London, U.K.). MS/MS data were used to perform protein identification by searching in a non-redundant protein sequence database (NCBI) using a MOWSE algorithm as implemented in the MASCOT search engine version 3.5 (Matrix science: www.matrixscience.com) for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Podophyllotoxin (PPT) and its derivatives, isolated from the rhizome of Podophyllum hexandrum Royle (P. hexandrum), are typically used in clinical settings for anti-cancer and anti-virus treatments. Empirical studies have verified that P. hexandrum had stronger tolerance to chilling, due to involving PPT accumulation in rhizome induced by cold stress. However, the cold-adaptive mechanism and its association with PPT accumulation at a molecular level in P. hexandrum are still limited. In this study, the morpho-physiological traits related to plant growth, PPT accumulation and key gene expressions controlling PPT biosynthesis were assessed by exposing P. hexandrum seedlings to different temperatures (4&#xa0;&#xb0;C and 10&#xa0;&#xb0;C as chilling stress and 22&#xa0;&#xb0;C as the control). The results showed that chilling significantly increased chlorophyll content, net photosynthetic rate, stomatal conductance, and plant biomass, whereas it greatly decreased transpiration rates and intercellular CO2 concentration. Compared to the control, the chilling treatments under 4&#xa0;&#xb0;C and 10&#xa0;&#xb0;C conditions induced a 5.00- and 3.33-fold increase in PPT contents, respectively. The mRNA expressions of six key genes were also up-regulated by chilling stresses. The findings are useful in understanding the molecular basis of P. hexandrum response to chilling.

### Keywords
Growth and development, Chilling temperature, Podophyllotoxin biosynthesis, Podophyllum hexandrum royle, Proteomics, Gene expression

### Affiliations
Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, Gansu, P.R. China
Gansu Agricultural University

### Submitter
Meng-Fei LI

### Lab Head
Dr LI Wei
Key Lab of Aridland Crop Science, Gansu Agricultural University, Lanzhou, Gansu, P.R. China


