### Accession
PXD011391

### Title
The Hanks-type kinase PknB, targeting the divisome, is not the single player in the Streptococcus thermophilus protein phosphorylation process

### Description
This work focus on  in the role of Ser/Thr/Tyr protein phosphorylation in Streptococcus thermophilus, the only streptococcal species used in food fermentation. During technological processes, S. thermophilus has to adapt to various nutrition and physical-chemical stresses that require rapid adjustments. In this study, we investigated a way for S. thermophilus to regulate specific pathways namely post-translational protein modifications and more specifically protein serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation. We would like to assess the specific role of the only predicted Hanks-type kinase, named PknB. We performed in parallel a global shotgun proteomics and a specific phosphoproteomics analyses on both the wild type strain and its Hanks-type kinase deletion mutant. All the analysis were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid.  We showed that the S. thermophilus Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome is of the same order of magnitude than the other streptococci ones as peptides belonging to 106 proteins (410 phosphopeptides corresponding to 161 peptide sequences with different phosphosite positions) from various metabolic pathways were found phosphorylated in one bacterial growth condition. The phosphorylation occurred for 43 % on serine, 33 % on threonine and 23 % on tyrosine.  We demonstrated that the Hanks-type kinase, named PknB in S. thermophilus, targets the divisome and is only one of the players in the Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation process. Consistent with these results, the pknB deletion mutant exhibits a clear phenotype with longer whimsical chains and affected division process.

### Sample Protocol
Protocole :  Proteomic and phosphoproteomic of  S. thermophilus LMD-9 and  ΔpknB mutant strain Streptococcus thermophilus strain LMD-9 (WT) and its ΔpknB mutant (Mut) were grown in M17 medium (Difco) supplemented with 10 g.L-1 lactose (M17Lac) at 42 °C until the end of the exponential growth phase. At an OD600 of 0.7, bacteria were harvested by centrifugation (10 min at 8000 rpm, 4 °C). The cell pellet was washed twice with phosphate buffered saline (200 mM, pH 6.4) and resuspended in lysis buffer (Tris‑HCl 50 mM pH 8.0; 50 µl/ml Protease Inhibitor Cocktail P8465, Sigma; 10 µl/ml Halt Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 78420, Thermo Scientific). Cells were lysed using a Cell Disruptor (One Shot 0.75 kW, Constant Systems Ltd.) and non-lysed cells as well as cell debris were separated from the protein-containing supernatant by centrifugation (15 min at 13100 rpm, 4°C). The protein content was measured using the Bradford assay (Bradford, 1976) and the protein extract was used for the proteome as well as for the phosphoproteome analyses. Proteomic:  10 µg of protein extract were used for a short migration 1D gel electrophoresis. The proteins were reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated by 55 mM iodoacetamide and digested with 200 ng trypsin. The peptides resuspended in 50 µl loading buffer (0.08 % v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 2 % v/v acetonitrile) for LC‑MS/MS proteome analysis (4 µl = 800 ng peptide per injection). Peptide labeling for phosphoproteome analysis :  3 mg of protein extract were denatured using 6 M urea and 2 M thiourea as well as 0.1 % w/v of RapiGest (RapiGest SF Surfactant, Waters). Reduction and alkylation were achieved by 5 mM dithiothreitol and 15 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested by Lys-C (Lysyl Endopeptidase®, Mass Spectrometry Grade, Wako; enzyme/substrate ratio of 1:50 w/w) and, after a dilution to 1 M urea, by trypsin (Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin, Promega; 1:50 w/w). The reaction was terminated with 0.1 % v/v trifluoroacetic acid.  The samples were labeled on SepPak C18 cartridge columns 3 cc (Waters): light labelling, intermediate labelling,  heavy labelling and at the end we have 4 triplex. Phosphopeptide Enrichment The experimental protocol for phosphoproteomics used in this study involved a titane beads enrichment step. (Titansphere TiO, 10 µm, GL Sciences). Samples were reduced in a concentrator to a volume of 1 µl and taken up in 30 µl loading buffer (0.08 % v/v trifluoroacetic acid, 2 % v/v acetonitrile) for LC‑MS/MS phosphoproteome analysis. The mass shift caused by light, intermediate and heavy dimethylation was +28 Da, +32 Da and +36 Da, respectively. Liquid Chromatography – Mass Spectrometry Mass spectrometry was performed on the PAPPSO platform (MICALIS, INRA, Jouy‑en‑Josas, France; http://pappso.inra.fr/). An Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM  (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used.  A 4 μl sample was loaded at 20 μl/min on a precolumn (µ-Precolumn, 300 µm i.d x 5 mm, C18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher) and washed with loading buffer. After 3 min, the precolumn cartridge was connected to the separating column (Acclaim PepMap®, 75 μm x 500 mm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher). Buffer A consisted of 0.1 % formic acid in 2 % acetonitrile and buffer B of 0.1 % formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile.  The proteome runs were executed at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 0 to 45 % buffer B for 118 min. Including regeneration (98 % buffer B), one run took 137 min. Ionization (1.6 kV ionization potential) and capillary transfer (275 °C) were performed with a liquid junction and a capillary probe. Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 3.1.66.10 with the following machine setup in CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) mode: 1) full MS scan in Orbitrap (scan range [m/z] = 400–1500) and 2) MS/MS using CID (35 % collision energy) in Ion Trap (AGC target = 4.0 x 103, max. injection time = 300 ms, data type = centroid). Analyzed charge states were set to 2-7, the dynamic exclusion to 60 s and the intensity threshold was fixed at 5.0 x 103. The peptide separation for the phosphoproteome analysis was achieved at 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 0 to 35 % buffer B for 48 min and 35 % to 45 % for 5 min. One run took 65 min, including the regeneration step at 98 % buffer B. Ionization (1.6 kV ionization potential) and capillary transfer (275 °C) were performed with a liquid junction and a capillary probe (SilicaTip™ Emitter, 10 μm, New Objective). Peptide ions were analyzed using Xcalibur 3.1.66.10. In HCD (Higher-energy  Collisional Dissociation) mode the machine settings were as follows: 1) full MS scan in Orbitrap (scan range [m/z] = 400–1600) and 2) MS/MS using HCD (30 % collision energy) in Orbitrap (AGC target = 5.0 x 104, max. injection time = 55 ms, data type = centroid). Analyzed charge states were set to 2-5, the dynamic exclusion to 40 s and the intensity threshold was fixed at 104.

### Data Protocol
The search engine X!TandemPipeline 3.4.2 was used for identification using the following parameters In the database used, the proteins where initially annotated using a Blast against the genomes of the strains CNRZ1066 and LMG18311 The proteome identification was run with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da  Protein filters : - Peptide e-value : 0.05 - Peptide number per protein : 2 - Protein e-value : -4 Phosphoprotein  filters :  - Peptide e-value : 0.001 - Peptide number per protein : 1 - Protein e-value : -2

### Publication Abstract
Protein phosphorylation especially on serine/threonine/tyrosine residues are frequent in many bacteria. This post-translational modification has been associated with pathogenicity and virulence in various species. However, only few data have been produced so far on generally recognized as safe bacteria used in food fermentations. A family of kinases known as Hanks-type kinases is suspected to be responsible for, at least, a part of these phosphorylations in eukaryotes as in bacteria. The objective of our work was to establish the first phosphoproteome of <i>Streptococcus thermophilus</i>, a lactic acid bacterium widely used in dairy fermentations in order to identified the proteins and pathways tagged by Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylations. In addition, we have evaluated the role in this process of the only Hanks-type kinase encoded in the <i>S. thermophilus</i> genome. We have constructed a mutant defective for the Hanks type kinase in <i>S. thermophilus</i> and established the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of the wild type and the mutant strains. To do that, we have enriched our samples in phosphopeptides with titane beads and used dimethyl tags to compare phosphopeptide abundances. Peptides and phosphopeptides were analyzed on a last generation LC-MS/MS system. We have identified and quantified 891 proteins representing half of the theoretical proteome. Among these proteins, 106 contained phosphorylated peptides. Various functional groups of proteins (amino acid, carbon and nucleotide metabolism, translation, cell cycle, stress response, &#x2026;) were found phosphorylated. The phosphoproteome was only weakly reduced in the Hanks-type kinase mutant indicating that this enzyme is only one of the players in the phosphorylation process. The proteins that are modified by the Hanks-type kinase mainly belong to the divisome.

### Keywords
Streptococcus thermophilus, Shotgun, Pknb, Phosphoproteome

### Affiliations
PAPPSO, MICALIS, INRA
INRA

### Submitter
HENRY CELINE

### Lab Head
Dr Céline Henry
PAPPSO, MICALIS, INRA


