### Accession
PXD020160

### Title
Comparision of  an AGCVIII kinase mutant with wild type in sorghum internode tissues

### Description
An AGCVIII kinase (Dw2) regulates sorghum stem internode growth, but the underlying mechanism and signaling network are unknown. Here we provide evidence that mutation of Dw2 reduces cell proliferation in internode intercalary meristems, inhibits endocytosis, and alters the distribution of heteroxylan and mixed linkage glucan in cell walls. Phosphoproteomic analysis showed that Dw2 signaling influences the phosphorylation of proteins involved in lipid signaling (PLDδ), endomembrane trafficking, hormone, light and receptor signaling, and photosynthesis. Together

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomics: Isolation of phosphopeptides was performed as previously described Humphrey, S.J., Karayel, O., James, D.E., and Mann, M. (2018). High-throughput and high-sensitivity phosphoproteomics with the EasyPhos platform. Nat. Protoc. 13: 1897–1916.) Each sample was injected twice, onto a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer using 90-min LC gradients as indicated. Six biological replicates were performed for each genotype.  Isolated phosphopeptides were re-suspended in 2%ACN/0.1%TFA to 15uL.  Injections of 10uL were automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5min with buffer A.  Bound peptides were then eluted over 125min onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075mm x 500mm resolving column with a gradient of 5%B to 25%B at 90min, ramping to 42%B at 114min, to 100% B at 115min and held at 100%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min.  Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany).  Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (60,000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 10 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 15000 resolution.   Shotgun Proteomics: Samples were digested according to Kulack, et.al(Kulak, N.A., Pichler, G., Paron, I., Nagaraj, N., and Mann, M. (2014). Minimal, encapsulated proteomic-sample processing applied to copy-number estimation in eukaryotic cells. Nat. Methods 11: 319–324.).  Peptides were then subjected to C18 solid phase cleanup using StageTips(Rappsilber et al., 2007) to remove salts.  Peptide eluates were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20C. Five biological replicates were performed for each genotype. Peptide samples were then re-suspended in 100uL of 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labeled with TMT reagents from Thermo Scientific (www.thermo.com) according to manufacturers’ instructions.  Aliquots of 2uL were taken from each labeled sample and reserved for testing the labeling/mixing efficiency by MS.  Remaining labeled peptides were mixed 1:1 by volume and purified by solid phase extraction using c18 StageTips.  Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation to ~2uL and stored at -20C.   The combined peptide sample was re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile (ACN)/0.1%TFA to 50uL and fractionated by high pH reverse phase chromatography.  The entire sample was injected onto a Waters Acquity UPLC BEH 1.7um, 2.1mm x 100mm c18 column using a Waters Acquity H-class UPLC.  Bound peptides were washed using 0.1% TFA in water for 2min and then separated over 60min using a gradient of 1%B to 25%B at 49min, raised to 60%B at 53min, raised to 70%B at 55min and held at 70%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH10, in water; Buffer B = 10mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH10, in 90% acetonitrile) at a constant flow rate of 0.3mL/min.  Column temperature was maintained at 50C using an integrated column heater.  Fractions were collected at 1min intervals using a Gilson FC403B fraction collector and then concatenated into 12 total fractions post-run.  Fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and frozen at -20C. Each fraction was re-suspended in 2%ACN/0.1%TFA to 20uL and diluted 1:10 in the same buffer, on-plate.  Injections of 5uL were automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5min with buffer A.  Bound peptides were then eluted over 95min onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.075mm x 500mm resolving column with a gradient of 5%B to 8%B at 5min, ramping to 42%B at 83min, to 90% B at 85min and held at 90%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B = 80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% Water) at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min.  Column temperature was maintained at a constant temperature of 50oC using and integrated column oven (PRSO-V2, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Phosphoproteomics: Data files from the LC-MS/MS analysis were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) to identify proteins and calculate isobaric tag intensities using the Andromeda search engine using the default parameters and with an FDR of < 0.01 at the protein and peptide levels. The Sorghum bicolor v3.1.1.  proteome obtain from Phytozome containing 47121proteins was used for the search. Perseus (version1.6.2.3) was used to compare the two genotypes. Phophosites with location probabilities lower than 0.75 were removed as were peptides from the reverse databases and probable contaminants. The intensities were log2 transformed and phosphosites with less than 3 valid values in one of the two genotypes were removed. Missing values were imputated using a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8.  A two-sided Student’s T-test was conducted, and a permutation-based multiple testing correction was applied as implemented in Perseus.  Shotgun Proteomics:  Data files from the LC-MS/MS analysis were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) to identify proteins and calculate isobaric tag intensities using the Andromeda search engine using the default parameters and with an FDR of < 0.01 at the protein and peptide levels. The Sorghum bicolor v3.1.1. obtain from Phytozome containing 47121proteins was used for the search. Perseus (version1.6.2.3) was used to compare the two genotypes. The intensities were log2 transformed and normalized by subtracted the mean intensity value for that sample from each value.  A two-sided Student’s T-test was conducted, and a permutation-based multiple testing correction was applied as implemented in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sorghum agcviii kinase phosphoproteomics dw2 cell proliferation internode

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843

### Submitter
Curtis Wilkerson

### Lab Head
Dr John E. Mullet
Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843


### SDRF

