### Accession
PXD010894

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of the dog serum phosphoproteome reveals novel and conserved phosphorylation sites:  phosphoprotein patterns in babesiosis caused by Babesia canis, a case study

### Description
Phosphorylation is the most commonly studied protein post-translational modification (PTM) in biological systems due to its importance in controlling cell division, survival, growth, etc. Despite the thorough research in phosphoproteomics of cells and tissues there is little information on circulating phosphoproteins. We compared serum from 10 healthy dogs and 10 dogs affected by B. canis-caused babesiosis with no organ dysfunctions by employing gel-free LC-MS/MS analysis of individual samples and tandem mass tag (TMT) label-based quantitative analyses of pools, both supported by phosphopeptide enrichment. Results showed a moderate number of phosphorylated proteins (50-55), with 89 phosphorylation sites not previously published for dogs although a number of them matched phosphorylation sites found in mammalian orthologs. Three phosphopeptides showed significant variation in babesiosis-affected dog sera compared to controls: Serum amyloid A (SAA) phosphorylated at serine 101 (up-regulation), kininogen 1 phosphorylated at threonine 326, and fibrinogen α phosphorylated at both threonine 20 and serine 22 (down-regulation). 71.9 % of the detected phosphorylated sites were phosphoserine, 16.8 % phosphothreonine and only 11.2 % phosphotyrosine residues. TMT label-based quantitative analysis showed α-2-HS-glycoprotein / Fetuin A to be the most abundant phosphoprotein (50-70% of all phosphoproteins) followed by kininogen-1 (10-20%). The alterations of phosphorylated proteins observed in canine babesiosis caused by Babesia canis suggest new insights into the largely neglected role of extracellular protein phosphorylation in health and disease, encouraging urgent further research on this area. To the best of our knowledge the present study represents the first attempt to characterize canine serum phosphoproteome.

### Sample Protocol
Protein incubation, digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment We performed filter aided sample preparation (FASP) using 10kDa cut-off filters. 10 control serum samples and 10 serum samples from dogs with babesiosis (7 µl per sample) were incubated for 30 min in 20% acetonitrile / 80% 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (18µl) at room temperature to allow the release of peptides bound to albumin in the presence of phosphatase inhibitor cocktail set V 50x (Merck Millipore, MA USA) diluted 50-fold. 5µl of 200mM DTT was added to each sample and reduction was allowed to proceed for 30 min at room temperature. After reduction, 20µl of 200mM IAA was added and samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature.After alkylation, 20µl of 200 mM DTT was added to reduce any excess IAA and samples were incubated for 30 min at RT. Digestion was performed by adding 1µg of Trypsin Gold to each sample (trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:100, w/w). Digestion was allowed to proceed overnight at 37ºC and peptides were dissolved in 80% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid. Peptides were kept at -20 ºC prior to phosphopeptide analysis.   Phosphopeptide enrichment PierceTM phosphopeptide enrichment containing TiO2 magnetic microbeads (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used to enrich phosphopeptides. Briefly, 30 µl of bead mixture for every sample was equilibrated with binding buffer by washing the microbeads three times on a magnetic support. Serum peptides obtained after digestion were added to the microbeads and resuspended by repeated pipetting. After a short incubation (2 min) at room temperature, non-bound peptides were washed off from the microbeads by adding binding buffer and washing on a magnetic support (3 times). After binding, washing buffer was added quickly and then removed completely. Elution buffer (30 µl) was added, the sample resuspended repeatedly and allowed to stand for 10 min at room temperature after which eluted phosphopeptides were collected, quantified using nanodrop and kept at -20ºC for further LC-MS/MS analysis.    Peptide mixture desalting  For identification, prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, enriched tryptic peptides were desalted using ZipTip C18 (Merck Millipore, Darmstadt, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s procedure and vacuum-dried.   TMT labeling of pooled serum samples Sera from 10 healthy dogs were pooled. Separately, sera from 10 Babesia-infected dogs were pooled and both pools were mixed with protease inhibitors.  The protein concentration of healthy and Babesia-infected pools was determined by BCA assay. Peptides were labelled using two different tags from a TMTsixplex isobaric label reagent set  (m/z 128 and m/z 129 isobaric tags) according to the manufacturer’s procedure (Thermo Scientific, Waltham. MA, USA) with some modifications. In short, 35 µg of total protein was diluted to a final volume of 50 µl using 0.1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5). A volume of 2.5µl of 200 mM DTT was added to each sample followed by incubation for 1 h at 55°C. Alkylation was performed by adding 2.5 µl of 375 mM IAA and incubating for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were acetone-precipitated (overnight at -20°C) and centrifuged at 8000 xg for 10 min at 4°C. Protein pellets were reconstituted in 50 µl of 0.1 M TEAB and trypsin digested (trypsin-to-protein ratio 1:30, w/w) at 37°C overnight. TMT reagents were dissolved according to manufacturer recommendations. For the labelling reaction, 18 µl of freshly prepared TMT reagent was added to each sample and incubated for 1h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched by adding 8 µl of 5% (w/v) hydroxylamine HCl solution (incubation for 15 min). Finally, equal amounts of differentially TMT-labelled peptides were combined into the final sample. 10 µg of the final sample was vacuum-dried and stored at -80°C for LC-MS/MS analysis. The remaining sample was used for phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and phosphorylation/kinase database search Proteome DiscovererTM (version 2.0.0.802) software performing SEQUEST search of Canis lupus familiaris fasta files (downloaded from NCBInr database 2016/10/13) was employed for data analysis. Static peptide modification included carbamidomethylation (C), dynamic oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T and Y). One trypsin missed cleavage was allowed. Precursor tolerance and ion fragment tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Confidence levels were set to 1% FDR (high confidence) and 5% FDR (middle confidence). On average 90% of the identified phosphopeptides showed high confidence (FDR 1% or lower).   Proteome Discoverer node ptmRS was used for analysis and mapping of peptide/protein phosphorylation sites. ptmRS Best Site Probabilities displays the most likely positions of the modifications and their site score for each PSM. For each modification site, this value is an estimate of the probability (0–100%) that the site is truly modified. Any ptmRS site probabilities above 75% indicate that a site is truly modified. In multiply phosphorylated peptides ptmRS site probabilities often drop below 50% although the same phosphorylation site was observed in the same monophosphorylated peptide at higher ptmRS probabilities. In the present study only phosphorylation sites reaching 95% or higher ptmRS probabilities were considered.  For peptide groups, this column shows the best site probabilities of the first PSM. ptmRS Modification Site Probabilities: Displays the modification site probabilities for all possible modification positions for a single modification. In the column title, Modification is replaced by the name of the actual modification, for example, Phosphorylation Site Probabilities (44). Phosphorylation sites detected were matched to phosphorylation sites found in PhosphoSitePlus database (https://www.phosphosite.org/homeAction) (45). Assignment of putative kinases and corresponding score calculation for the experimentally observed phosphorylation sites was performed using NetPhos 3.1 server (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/NetPhos/)(46). Weblogo sequence alignment analysis was performed using protein sequences from 10 mammalian species by means of web server https://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi (47).

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is the most commonly studied protein post-translational modification (PTM) in biological systems due to its importance in controlling cell division, survival, growth, etc. Despite the thorough research in phosphoproteomics of cells and tissues there is little information on circulating phosphoproteins. We compared serum from 10 healthy dogs and 10 dogs affected by B. canis-caused babesiosis with no organ dysfunctions by employing gel-free LC-MS/MS analysis of individual samples and tandem mass tag (TMT) label-based quantitative analyses of pools, both supported by phosphopeptide enrichment. Results showed a moderate number of phosphorylated proteins (50-55), with 89 phosphorylation sites not previously published for dogs although a number of them matched phosphorylation sites found in mammalian orthologs. Three phosphopeptides showed significant variation in babesiosis-affected dog sera compared to controls: Serum amyloid A (SAA) phosphorylated at serine 101 (up-regulation), kininogen 1 phosphorylated at threonine 326, and fibrinogen &#x3b1; phosphorylated at both threonine 20 and serine 22 (down-regulation). 71.9% of the detected phosphorylated sites were phosphoserine, 16.8% phosphothreonine and only 11.2% phosphotyrosine residues. TMT label-based quantitative analysis showed &#x3b1;-2-HS-glycoprotein / Fetuin A to be the most abundant phosphoprotein (50-70% of all phosphoproteins) followed by kininogen-1 (10-20%). The alterations of phosphorylated proteins observed in canine babesiosis caused by Babesia canis suggest new insights into the largely neglected role of extracellular protein phosphorylation in health and disease, encouraging urgent further research on this area. To the best of our knowledge the present study represents the first attempt to characterize canine serum phosphoproteome.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Phosphorylation sites, Babesiosis, Serum phosphopeptides, Phosphopeptide enrichment

### Affiliations
ERA Chair laboratory, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia
1 ERA Chair FP7, Internal diseases, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Heinzelova 55, 10 000 Zagreb,


### Submitter
Asier Galan

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
ERA Chair laboratory, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Croatia


