### Accession
PXD002958

### Title
Mouse Skin LC-MS/MS

### Description
Previously, we reported that a null mutation of the Zdhhc13 gene caused by ethylnitrosourea (ENU) mutagenesis in mice resulted in severe systematic phenotypes with amyloidosis, alopecia, dermatitis and osteoporosis. In this study we continued to delineate the pathological mechanism for the dermatitis phenotype and to explore potential palmitoylation substrates of ZDHHC13, which potentially explain the loss-of-function phenotype of ZDHHC13 in skin. Our data clearly suggested that protein S-palmitoylation of a constellation of skin barrier components by ZDHHC13 is crucial for their protein stability, functions, and overall barrier integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Extracted membrane proteins were prepared by acyl-biotin exchange (ABE) and resin-assisted capture (RAC) with several modifications, respectively. For western blotting, biotinylated proteins were enriched by streptavidin agarose (Sigma) and detected by primary antibody of the target. For quantitative proteomics, the resin-captured proteins were enzymatically digested using trypsin and eluted by TCEP. The eluted peptides were desalted by C18 ziptip and analyzed on an Orbitrap XL LC-MS/MS platform (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS data and label-free quantitation were analyzed by MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). The peak list resulting from the MS/MS spectra was exported to mgf format using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 by the following criteria: the precursor peak charge range on MS and MS/MS processing was 2 to 5; the precursor mass range was 400-4000 and the precursor m/z tolerance was 0.3; S/N ≥ 3. The datasets were batch searched and combined searched with Mascot v2.2 (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) against the SwissProt database (v57.8, total 509,019 sequences, 20,329 sequences among which are Mus musculus) using the following constraints: only tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed, and the mass tolerance for peptides was 10 ppm and MS/MS fragment ions was 0.6 Da. Nethylmaleimide (Cys), carbamidomethyl (Cys), and oxidation (Met) were specified as variable modifications. Peptides were considered to be identified if their Mascot individual ion score was higher than the Mascot identity score (p < 0.05, ion score cut-off is 30). To evaluate the false discovery rate in protein identification, a decoy database search against a randomized decoy database created by Mascot using identical search parameters and validation criteria was also performed.

### Publication Abstract
Deficiency of the palmitoyl-acyl transferase ZDHHC13 compromises skin barrier permeability and renders mice susceptible to environmental bacterial infection and inflammatory dermatitis. It had been unclear how the lack of ZDHHC13 proteins resulted in cutaneous abnormalities. In this study, we first demonstrate that enzymatic palmitoylation activity, rather than protein scaffolding, by ZDHHC13 is essential for skin barrier integrity, showing that knock-in mice bearing an enzymatically dead DQ-to-AA ZDHHC13 mutation lost their hair after weaning cyclically, recapitulating knockout phenotypes of skin inflammation and dermatitis. To establish the ZDHHC13 substrates responsible for skin barrier development, we employed quantitative proteomic approaches to identify protein molecules whose palmitoylation is tightly controlled by ZDHHC13. We identified over 300 candidate proteins that could be classified into four biological categories: immunological disease, skin development and function, dermatological disease, and lipid metabolism. Palmitoylation of three of these candidates-loricrin, peptidyl arginine deiminase type III, and keratin fiber crosslinker transglutaminase 1-by ZDHHC13 was confirmed by biochemical assay. Palmitoylation was critical for in&#xa0;vivo protein stability of the latter two candidates. Our findings reveal the importance of protein palmitoylation in skin barrier development, partly by promoting envelope protein crosslinking and the filaggrin processing pathway.

### Keywords
Mouse skin tissue, Palmitoylation, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica


