### Accession
PXD009139

### Title
Comparative serum proteomics of Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasias and pacreatic adenocarcinoma

### Description
IPMN tumors are considered precancerous and starting from low grade dysplasia some of them develop IPMN associated or concomitant pancreatic cancer. The prognosis of IPMN is good if the tumor is operated before malignant transformation occurs.  On the other hand, not nearly all IPMNs undergo malignant transformation during the patient’s life time. differences in proteins found in serum samples could provide a way to differentiate IPMNs with different states of dysplasia. The aim of our study was to compare the serum protein profiles in sera of patients with IPMN with low or high grade dysplasia, IPMN associated carcinoma and healthy controls. We have quantified 436 serum proteins with two or more unique peptides from 55 serum samples including 11 healthy controls. These proteomic dataset was analyzed with advanced multivariate statistical data analysis techniques to find the protein features which could be used as potential biomarkers of various grades of dysplasia as well as to differentiate dysplasia samples from pancreatic carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
Top 12 abundant proteins were removed from the serum samples followed by total protein estimation and trypsin digestion. Tryptic peptides were deaslted using C18 spin cartirdges and elution was dried and redissolved in 0.1% formic acid. samples were analyzed by UDHMSE mode in Synapt G2 Si Mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
UDHMSE runs were imported into Porgenesis QI for Proteomics software using lock mass correction with 785.8426 m/z, corresponding to doubly charged Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B. Default parameters for peak picking and alignment algorithm were used. The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR to less than 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. These are default parameters in the software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pancreatic adneocarcinoma, Udhmse, Intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasias, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland and HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation Laboratory, Faculty of Medicine, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland and HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland


