### Accession
PXD014820

### Title
Systematic discovery of endogenous ribonucleoprotein complexes - RNA DIF-FRAC Human HEK293T Cells Replicate2

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from size exclusion chromatographic separations of Human HEK293T with and without RNAse A treatment.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells (ATCC CRL3216) cultured in DMEM (Gibco) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) FBS (Life Technologies) were continually split over 7 days to give four 10-cm dishes of adherent cells. For the control fractionation sample, two 10-cm dishes of cells were harvested at 80-100 % confluence without trypsin by washing in ice cold phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.2 (0.75 mL; Gibco) and placed on ice. Cells (approximately 0.1 g wet weight) were lysed on ice (5 min) by resuspension in Pierce IP Lysis Buffer (0.8 mL; 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40 and 5% glycerol; Thermo Fisher) containing 1x protease inhibitor cocktail III (Calbiochem). The resulting lysate was clarified (17,000g, 10 min, 4°C) and left at room temperature (30 min). The sample was filtered (Ultrafree-MC filter unit (Millipore); 12,000g, 2 min, 4°C) to remove insoluble aggregates. RNase A treated samples were prepared on the same day in an identical manner, except RNase A (8 μL, 80 μg, Thermo Fisher, catalogue #EN0531) was added after lysate clarification and the sample left at room temperature (30 min) before filtration.  All lysates were subject to size exclusion chromatography (SEC) using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, ON, Canada) with a multi-phase chromatography protocol as previously described (Havugimana et al., 2012). Soluble protein (1.25 mg, 250 μL) was applied to a BioSep-SEC-s4000 gel filtration column (Phenomenex) equilibrated in PBS, pH 7.2 (HEK 293T and mESC lysate) or pH 7.4 (erythrocytes) at a flow rate of 0.5 mL min-1. Fractions were collected every 0.375 mL. The elution volume of molecular weight standards (thyroglobulin (Mr= 669 kDa); apoferritin (Mr = 443 kDa); albumin (Mr = 66 kDa); and carbonic anhydrase (Mr = 29 kDa); Sigma) was additionally measured to calibrate the column.  Fractions were filter concentrated to 50 μL, denatured and reduced in 50 % 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 55 °C for 45 minutes, and alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (55 mM, 30 min, RT). Samples were diluted to 5 % TFE in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 2 mM CaCl2, and digested with trypsin (1:50; proteomics grade; 5 h; 37 °C). Digestion was quenched (1 % formic acid), and the sample volume reduced to ~100 μL by speed vacuum centrifugation. The sample was washed on a HyperSep C18 SpinTip (Thermo Fisher), eluted, reduced to near dryness by speed vacuum centrifugation, and resuspended in 5 % acetonitrile/ 0.1 % formic acid for analysis by LC-MS/MS.  Peptides were separated on a 75 μM x 25 cm Acclaim PepMap100 C-18 column (Thermo) using a 3-45 % acetonitrile gradient over 60 min and analyzed online by nanoelectrospray-ionization tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Fusion or Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition was activated, with parent ion (MS1) scans collected at high resolution (120,000). Ions with charge 1 were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation spectrum acquisition (MS2) in the ion trap, using a Top Speed acquisition time of 3-s. Dynamic exclusion was activated, with a 60-s exclusion time for ions selected more than once. MS from HEK 293T cells was acquired in the UT Austin Proteomics Facility.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were searched against the human Uniprot proteome (reviewed). Output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+ and X!Tandem) were combined using MSBlender.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play essential roles in biology and are frequently associated with human disease. Although recent studies have systematically identified individual RNA-binding proteins, their higher-order assembly into ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes has not been systematically investigated. Here, we describe a proteomics method for systematic identification of RNP complexes in human cells. We identify 1,428 protein complexes that associate with RNA, indicating that more than 20% of known human protein complexes contain RNA. To explore the role of RNA in the assembly of each complex, we identify complexes that dissociate, change composition, or form stable protein-only complexes in the absence of RNA. We use our method to systematically identify cell-type-specific RNA-associated proteins in mouse embryonic stem cells and finally, distribute our resource, rna.MAP, in an easy-to-use online interface (rna.proteincomplexes.org). Our system thus provides a methodology for explorations across human tissues, disease states, and throughout all domains of life.

### Keywords
Rbp, Ribonucleoprotein complex, Rnp, Interactome, Proteomics, Biochemical fractionation, Dif-frac, Protein complexes, Rna binding protein

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Kevin Drew

### Lab Head
Dr Edward Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


