### Accession
PXD023809

### Title
Reduced mGluR5 activity modulates mitochondrial function in the synapse

### Description
The metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) is a G-protein coupled receptor with an important role in synaptic function at multiple levels. In physiological conditions, mGluR5 is an essential modulator of synaptic plasticity, learning and memory; whereas in pathological conditions, it is an acknowledged therapeutic target that has been implicated in multiple brain disorders. However, the underlying mechanisms by which mGluR5 acts in these diverse synaptic functions and processes is only partly understood. In this study, we dissected the molecular synaptic modulation mediated by mGluR5 using genetic and pharmacological mouse models to chronically and acutely reduce mGluR5 activity. Using SWATH proteomic analysis, we found that next to dysregulation of synaptic proteins, the major regulation in protein expression in both models concerned specific processes in mitochondria, such as oxidative phosphorylation. Second, we observed morphological alterations in shape and area of specifically postsynaptic mitochondria in mGluR5 KO synapses using electron microscopy. Third, computational and biochemical assays suggested an increase of mitochondrial function in neurons, with increased level of NADP/H and oxidative damage in mGluR5 KO. Altogether, our observations provide diverse lines of evidence of the modulation of synaptic mitochondrial function by mGluR5. This connection suggests a role for mGluR5 as a mediator between synaptic activity and mitochondrial function, a finding which might be a relevant for the improvement of the clinical potential of mGluR5.

### Sample Protocol
Grm5 knock-out mice were bred and maintained on a C57Bl/6J background in our facility. Male wild type C57Bl/6J mice aged 2-3 months were treated by intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 2 mg/kg 2-chloro-4-((2,5-dimethyl-1-(4-(trifluoromethoxy)phenyl)-1H-imidazol-4-yl)ethynyl)pyridine (CTEP). Animals were sacrificed 2 hours or 1 day after treatment. After removing the brains, the hippocampus was dissected and stored at −80 °C until further use. Synaptosomal fraction was individually prepared from 6 WT and 6 KO mice, as well as 6 WT mice treated with CTEP or vehicle and further processed by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) with some modifications. In short, 20 μg of protein mixed and incubated with 75 μL 2% SDS, 1 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine for 1 hour at 55°C. Samples were incubated with 0.5 μL 200 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate for 15 min to block the cysteines. Samples were mixed with 200 μL 8 M urea in Tris (pH 8.8) and transferred to Microcon-30 filter tubes (Millipore). Next, the samples were centrifuged 15 min at 14,000 x g and sequentially washed four times with 200 μL 8 M urea in Tris buffer and 4 times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein digestion was performed with 0.7 μg Trypsin/Lys-C Mix (MS grade, Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight at 37 °C.  Peptide samples were analyzed by micro LC-MS/MS. We used an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex, Thermo Scientific) with a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300μm i.d., 5μm particle size, Dionex) to trap the peptides and a 200 mm AlltimaC18 column (300μm i.d., 3μm particle size) for fractionation. A linear gradient of acetonitrile was applied in the mobile phase at a flow rate of 5μL/min, from 5 to 18% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min and to 90% in 2 min. Peptides were electro-sprayed with a micro-spray needle (at 5500 V) into a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (Sciex).The data-independent acquisition method consisted of a parent ion scan of 150 ms followed by SWATH windows of 8 Da with 80 ms scan time, stepped through 450-770 m/z mass range.

### Data Protocol
Spectronaut Pulsar (v12.0.20491) was used for data analysis with a spectral library generated from synapse-enriched samples containing spike-in iRT reference peptides (Biognosys). Cross-run normalization was enabled and all other parameters were set at default.

### Publication Abstract
The metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 (mGluR5) is an essential modulator of synaptic plasticity, learning and memory; whereas in pathological conditions, it is an acknowledged therapeutic target that has been implicated in multiple brain disorders. Despite robust pre-clinical data, mGluR5 antagonists failed in several clinical trials, highlighting the need for a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying mGluR5 function. In this study, we dissected the molecular synaptic modulation mediated by mGluR5 using genetic and pharmacological mouse models to chronically and acutely reduce mGluR5 activity. We found that next to dysregulation of synaptic proteins, the major regulation in protein expression in both models concerned specific processes in mitochondria, such as oxidative phosphorylation. Second, we observed morphological alterations in shape and area of specifically postsynaptic mitochondria in mGluR5 KO synapses using electron microscopy. Third, computational and biochemical assays suggested an increase of mitochondrial function in neurons, with increased level of NADP/H and oxidative damage in mGluR5 KO. Altogether, our observations provide diverse lines of evidence of the modulation of synaptic mitochondrial function by mGluR5. This connection suggests a role for mGluR5 as a mediator between synaptic activity and mitochondrial function, a finding which might be relevant for the improvement of the clinical potential of mGluR5.

### Keywords
Brain, Mitochondria, Synapse, Mglur5, Swath, Mice, Ctep, Dia, Metabotropic glutamate receptor 5, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit, Amsterdam

### Submitter
Miguel A. Gonzalez-Lozano

### Lab Head
Dr Ka Wan Li
Department of Molecular and Cellular Neurobiology, Center for Neurogenomics and Cognitive Research, Amsterdam Neuroscience, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, The Netherlands


