### Accession
PXD009140

### Title
LIver Glycogen SWATH Proteomics

### Description
Identification and relative quantification of proteins associated with mammalian liver glycogen.

### Sample Protocol
SEC enrichment of liver glycogen and separation of alpha particles from beta particles, digestion of glycogen with alpha-amylase, digestion with trypsin, protein identificaiton with Data Dependent Acquisition, relative quantification of proteins in alpha and beta particles with SWATH.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification with ProteinPilot, peptide-level quantification with PeakView. Comparison of relative peptide abundance with MSstats.

### Publication Abstract
Glycogen is a highly branched glucose polymer which plays an important role in glucose storage and the maintenance of blood sugar homeostasis. The dimeric protein glycogenin can self-glucosylate to act as a primer for glycogen synthesis, eventually resulting in small (&#x223c;20 nm diameter) glycogen &#x3b2; particles with a dimer of glycogenin at their core. In the liver, glycogen is also found in the form of &#x3b1; particles: large bound composites of many &#x3b2; particles. Here, we provide evidence using qualitative and quantitative proteomics and size-exclusion chromatography from healthy rat, mouse, and human liver glycogen that glycogenin is the binding agent linking &#x3b2; particles together into &#x3b1; particles.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Rat, Glycogen, Liver, Glycogenin

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
The University of Queensland, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences

### Submitter
Benjamin Schulz

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Luke Schulz
The University of Queensland, School of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences


