### Accession
PXD008797

### Title
Exoproteome analysis of Staphylococcus aureus clinical isolates belonging to different clonal complexes (C22, CC8 and CC398)

### Description
Studies on S. aureus sub-populations revealed that genomes are well conserved between isolates from the same lineages despite geographic, temporal and selective diversity. However, variation of hundreds of genes can occur between isolates from different lineages and these genes could be involved in interaction with host components. In this study, we aimed to investigate the diversity of secreted virulence factors in human and zoonotic S. aureus isolates from different clonal complexes. We focused on the S. aureus clonal complexes (CC) 8 and CC22 as dominant human lineages, and CC398 as dominant livestock-associated MRSA (LA-MRSA) which is disseminating rapidly. To study the diversity of secreted virulence factors, we compared their extracellular proteomes using label-free LC-MS/MS analysis. A common protein database was created based on DNA sequencing data and PAN genome IDs.

### Sample Protocol
8 different Staphylococcus aureus isolates were inoculated at OD580 =0.1 and grown in TSB for 9hours at 37C shaking. Cultures were then harvested, and centrifuge at 4C, 10 min 8500 rpm. Supernatants were filtered and TCA precipitation was performed overnight at 4C. Protein precipitates were pelleted at 13000 g for 30 min and washed 3 times in ice-cold ethanol. Proteins were then resolved in a solution of Urea 7M/Thiourea 2M and 20 µg was run on a preparative gel prior to LC-MS analysis. Samples were prepared as described in Kublik et al 2016 (doi:10.1111/1462-2920.13200)

### Data Protocol
All MS raw data files were processed together in MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Andromeda search engine integrated in the MaxQuant framework performed the spectra search against an in-house database obtained from the sequencing data of 16 S. aureus isolates. Standard settings were used for MaxQuant searches. Two miscleavages were allowed, the parent ion mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the fragment ion mass tolerance was 1.00 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The spread of methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (MRSA) in the community, hospitals and in livestock is mediated by highly diverse virulence factors that include secreted toxins, superantigens, enzymes and surface-associated adhesins allowing host adaptation and colonization. Here, we combined proteogenomics, secretome and phenotype analyses to compare the secreted virulence factors in selected <i>S. aureus</i> isolates of the dominant human- and livestock-associated genetic lineages CC8, CC22, and CC398. The proteogenomic comparison revealed 2181 core genes and 1306 accessory genes in 18 <i>S. aureus</i> isolates reflecting the high genome diversity. Using secretome analysis, we identified 869 secreted proteins with 538 commons in eight isolates of CC8, CC22, and CC398. These include 64 predicted extracellular and 37 cell surface proteins that account for 82.4% of total secretome abundance. Among the top 10 most abundantly secreted virulence factors are the major autolysins (Atl, IsaA, Sle1, SAUPAN006375000), lipases and lipoteichoic acid hydrolases (Lip, Geh, LtaS), cytolytic toxins (Hla, Hlb, PSM&#x3b2;1) and proteases (SspB). The CC398 isolates showed lower secretion of cell wall proteins, but higher secretion of &#x3b1;- and &#x3b2;-hemolysins (Hla, Hlb) which correlated with an increased Agr activity and strong hemolysis. CC398 strains were further characterized by lower biofilm formation and staphyloxanthin levels because of decreased SigB activity. Overall, comparative secretome analyses revealed CC8- or CC22-specific enterotoxin and Spl protease secretion as well as Agr- and SigB-controlled differences in exotoxin and surface protein secretion between human-specific and zoonotic lineages of <i>S. aureus</i>.

### Keywords
Virulence factors, Exoproteome, Secretome, Clonal complex, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany ( lab head )
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute for Biology-Microbiology, D-14195 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Tobias Busche

### Lab Head
Dr Haike Antelmann
Freie Universität Berlin Institut für Biologie-Mikrobiologie Königin-Luise-Straße 12-16 14195 Berlin Germany ( lab head )


