### Accession
PXD014535

### Title
Characterization of the Response of A549 Cells to Aspergillus fumigatus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa: A Proteomic Perspective

### Description
The following describes additional preliminary data to that outlined in Project PXD014022 and specifically describes the 12-hour co-exposure and P. aeruginosa 12 hour exposure preliminary experiments.  Aspergillus fumigatus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa are the most prevalent fungal and bacterial pathogens associated with cystic fibrosis-related infections, respectively. P. aeruginosa eventually predominates as the primary pathogen, though it is unknown why this is the case. Label-free quantitative (LFQ) proteomics was employed to characterize the cellular response to co-exposure of A. fumigatus and P. aeruginosa using the type II alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, as a model of the alveolar surface. Proteomic data revealed that P. aeruginosa replication increased exponentially when co-cultured with A. fumigatus. Comparative analysis using LFQ proteomics revealed similarities and distinct differences in the response of A549 cells to A. fumigatus, or P. aeruginosa and sequential exposure to both pathogens. In total, 2264 proteins were identified. Analysis of statistically significant (p<0.05; ±1.5 fold change) differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins, revealed an increase in the relative abundance of proteins associated with biological processes common to all pathogen-exposed groups.

### Sample Protocol
The following describes additional preliminary data to that outlined in Project PXD014022 and specifically describes the 12-hour co-exposure and P. aeruginosa 12 hour exposure preliminary experiments.  Aliquots of the conidial and/or bacterial suspension were added to each of three sub-confluent flasks of A549 cells to give a final concentration of 2 x 104 conidia/ml and 1 x 106 CFU/ml, respectively. A549 cells were incubated for 12 hours as described previously, before being subjected to protein extraction. Aliquots of media were removed from flasks of A549 cells co-exposed to A. fumigatus and P. aeruginosa at zero and 12 hours, and diluted several times in PBS. Bacterial dilutions were spread on nutrient agar plates containing amphotericin B (12.5 µg/50 µl, Gibco) and incubated for 24 hours at 37°C. CFU counts were performed and growth was measured as a percentage of the CFU count taken from the flasks prior to incubation (0 hour).  P. aeruginosa was incubated at a density of 1 x106 CFU/ml with and without A. fumigatus (2 x 104 conidia/ml) in cell culture medium for 12 hours and at a density of 2 x 105/ml for four hours. CFU counts were performed on the higher density at zero and 12 hours and on the lower density at zero, two and four hours. P. aeruginosa (1 x106 CFU/ml) was incubated with and without A. fumigatus (2 x 104 conidia/ml) in cell culture medium for 12 hours in the absence of A549 cells. The supernatants from the individual culture and co-culture were filter sterilized through 0.2 µm filters (Filtropur S 0.2, Sarstedt) and added to sterile flasks. P. aeruginosa was added to give a final concentration of 1x106 CFU/ml. The bacterial suspension was incubated for 12 hours and CFU counts were performed as described previously.  A549 cells were harvested by trypsinization using 1ml trypsin buffer (trypsin (0.25%, w/v)-EDTA (0.022%, w/v) in PBS) for 5 minutes, or until the cells had detached. An equal volume of trypsin neutralisation medium (DMEM 95 %, v/v) FCS (5 %, v/v)) was added to inhibit the action of trypsin, followed by centrifugation of the cell suspension at 200 g for 5 minutes. The cell pellet was resuspended in 3ml PBS, and the centrifugation step was repeated. Ex situ cell lysis was performed by re-suspending the cell pellet in 500µl cell lysis buffer (8M urea, 2M thiourea, and 0.1M tris-HCl (pH 8.0) dissolved in HPLC grade dH2O), supplemented with protease inhibitors (aprotinin, leupeptin, pepstatin A, and TLCK (10 μg/ml)), and phosphatase inhibitors (phosphatase inhibitor cocktail 2). Cell lysates were kept at room temperature on a rotary wheel (Stuart Rotator SB2, Bibby Scientific Limited, Staffordshire, UK) for 2 hours. The cell lysate was subjected to centrifugation (Eppendorf Centrifuge 5418) for 5 minutes at 14500 g to pellet cellular debris. The supernatant was removed and quantified using the Bradford method. 100 µg of each sample was subjected to overnight acetone precipitation. The protein was pelleted by centrifugation for 10 minutes at 14,500 g. The acetone was removed and the protein pellet was re-suspended in 25µl sample resuspension buffer. 125µl ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) was added to the remaining 20 µl of each sample. The protein sample was reduced by adding 1 μl 0.5M dithiothreitol (DTT) (prepared 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide at room temperature, in the dark for 15 minutes. The remainder of the sample processing protocol followed that of PRIDE identifier PXD014022.

### Data Protocol
The following describes additional preliminary data to that outlined in Project PXD014022 and specifically describes the 12-hour co-exposure and P. aeruginosa 12 hour exposure preliminary experiments.  Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of proteinabundance for subsequent analysis. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group, i.e. A. fumigatus-exposed A549 cells versus the control (unexposed cells),  P. aeruginosa-exposed A549 cells versus the control, and sequential infection versus the control. Proteins not found in three out of three replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this SD.   Normalised intensity values were used for a principal component analysis (PCA). Exclusively expressed proteins (those that were uniquely expressed or completely absent in one group) were identified from the pre-imputation dataset and included in subsequent analyses.  Gene ontology (GO) mapping was also performed in Perseus using the UniProt gene ID for all identified proteins to query the Perseus annotation file (downloaded October 2016) and extract terms for biological process, molecular function and Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) name. Proteins of non-human origin (i.e. with Uniprot IDs for A. fumigatus or P. aeruginosa), of which there were six, were considered contaminants and removed from further analysis.   To visualise differences between two samples, pairwise Student’s t-tests were performed for all using a cut-off of p<0.05 on the post-imputated dataset. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p-values on the y-axis and log2 fold-change values on the x-axis for each pairwise comparison. The ‘categories’ function in Perseus was utilized to highlight and visualise the distribution of various pathways and processes on selected volcano plots. Statistically significant (ANOVA, p<0.05) and differentially abundant proteins (SSDA), i.e. with fold change of plus or minus 1.5 were chosen for further analysis.  An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed for multiple-samples across all four groups using a permutation based false discovery rate of 5% and below to indicate statistically significant differentially abundant (SSDA) proteins. The log2 transformed LFQ intensities for all SSDA proteins were Z-score normalised and used for hierarchical clustering of samples and SSDA proteins using Euclidean distance and average linkage.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> are the most prevalent fungal and bacterial pathogens associated with cystic-fibrosis-related infections, respectively. <i>P. aeruginosa</i> eventually predominates as the primary pathogen, though it is unknown why this is the case. Label-free quantitative proteomics was employed to investigate the cellular response of the alveolar epithelial cell line, A549, to coexposure of <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i>. These studies revealed a significant increase in the rate of <i>P. aeruginosa</i> proliferation where <i>A. fumigatus</i> was present. Shotgun proteomics performed on A549 cells exposed to either <i>A. fumigatus</i> or <i>P. aeruginosa</i> or to <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> sequentially revealed distinct changes to the host cell proteome in response to either or both pathogens. While key signatures of infection were retained among all pathogen-exposed groups, including changes in mitochondrial activity and energy output, the relative abundance of proteins associated with endocytosis, phagosomes, and lysosomes was decreased in sequentially exposed cells compared to cells exposed to either pathogen. Our findings indicate that <i>A. fumigatus</i> renders A549 cells unable to internalize bacteria, thus providing an environment in which <i>P. aeruginosa</i> can proliferate. This research provides novel insights into the whole-cell proteomic response of A549 cells to <i>A. fumigatus</i> and <i>P. aeruginosa</i> and highlights distinct differences in the proteome following sequential exposure to both pathogens, which may explain why <i>P. aeruginosa</i> can predominate.

### Keywords
Aspergillus; cellular response; cystic fibrosis; fungal infection;  pseudomonas

### Affiliations
Biology
Department of Biology, Maynooth University,Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University,Maynooth, Co Kildare, Ireland


