### Accession
PXD017836

### Title
Multi-omic detection of Mycobacterium leprae in archaeological human dental calculus

### Description
Mineralised dental plaque (calculus) has proven to be an excellent source of ancient biomolecules. In this study we present a Mycobacterium leprae genome (6.6-fold), the causative agent of leprosy, recovered via shotgun sequencing of 16th century human dental calculus from an individual from Trondheim, Norway. Moreover, ancient mycobacterial peptides were retrieved via mass spectrometry-based proteomics, further validating the presence of the pathogen. M. leprae can readily be detected in the oral cavity and associated mucosal membranes, which likely contributed to it being incorporated into this individual’s dental calculus. This individual showed some possible, but not definitive, evidence of skeletal lesions associated with early stage leprosy. This study is the first known example of successful multi-omics retrieval of M. leprae from archaeological dental calculus. Furthermore, we offer new insights into dental calculus as an alternative sample source to bones or teeth for detecting and molecularly characterizing M. leprae in individuals from the archaeological record.

### Sample Protocol
The calculus were demineralized in 1 ml of 15% acetic acid overnight then spun for ten minutes, after which the supernatant was removed. The pellet was then resuspended in 2M guanidine hydrochloride solution and the pH adjusted with ammonium hydroxide to around 8.0. The pellet was physically crushed using sterile micro-pestles to ensure maximum coverage of the lysis buffer. Protein denaturation occurred by heating for ten minutes at 99 ºC, after which the protein concentration was measured by Bradford Assay. Samples were digested under agitation at 37ºC for three hours with 0.2µg of rLysC (Promega, Sweden) after pH adjustment. The samples were then diluted to a final concentration of 0.6M guanidine hydrochloride using 25mM Tris in 10% acetonitrile (ACN). This was followed by overnight digestion with 0.8µg of Trypsin (Promega, Sweden) per sample. To quench the digestion, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added until the pH was less than 2.0. The samples were washed on in-house made C18 stage tips and stored in the freezer until the mass spectrometry analysis. Samples were eluted from the stage tips directly into a 96 well plate with 20 µl of 40% ACN followed by 10 µl of 60% ACN. Samples were SpeedVaced until ~3 μl was left and 5 µl of 1 % TFA , 5 % ACN was added. The samples were separated on a 50 cm PicoFrit column (75 μm inner diameter) in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch) on an EASY-nLC 1000 system connected to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The peptides were separated with a 165 min gradient. The Q-Exactive HF was operated in data-dependent top 10 mode. Full scan mass spectra were recorded at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 over the m/z range 300–1750 with a target value of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms. HCD-generated product ions were recorded with a maximum ion injection time set to 108 ms through a target value set to 2e5 and recorded at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Raw LC-MS/MS files of the sample and the extraction blank were processed together in a single run by MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using default Orbitrap settings. Search parameters included a fixed modification of Carbamidomethylation for cysteine (C), and variable modifications for methionine oxidation (M) and deamidation (N,Q). Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine against a concatenated FASTA file of the human reference proteome, entire SwissProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2015) and the Human Oral Microbiome Database (HOMD, (Chen et al., 2010), retrieved August 2014), (PRIDE accession: PXD008601) ;  and applying a 1% FDR cut-off. Enzyme specificity was set to ‘Trypsin’ with one missed cleavage allowed and the minimum score for unmodified peptides was set to 40. Resulting protein and peptide identifications were filtered for potential Mycobacterium identifications. All peptides of interest were then searched in BLASTp against the NCBI database (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi) to validate species identifications and further validated in MQ viewer for spectrum inspection.

### Publication Abstract
Mineralized dental plaque (calculus) has proven to be an excellent source of ancient biomolecules. Here we present a <i>Mycobacterium leprae</i> genome (6.6-fold), the causative agent of leprosy, recovered via shotgun sequencing of sixteenth-century human dental calculus from an individual from Trondheim, Norway. When phylogenetically placed, this genome falls in branch 3I among the diversity of other contemporary ancient strains from Northern Europe. Moreover, ancient mycobacterial peptides were retrieved via mass spectrometry-based proteomics, further validating the presence of the pathogen. <i>Mycobacterium leprae</i> can readily be detected in the oral cavity and associated mucosal membranes, which likely contributed to it being incorporated into this individual's dental calculus. This individual showed some possible, but not definitive, evidence of skeletal lesions associated with early-stage leprosy. This study is the first known example of successful multi-omics retrieval of <i>M. leprae</i> from archaeological dental calculus. Furthermore, we offer new insights into dental calculus as an alternative sample source to bones or teeth for detecting and molecularly characterizing <i>M. leprae</i> in individuals from the archaeological record. This article is part of the theme issue 'Insights into health and disease from ancient biomolecules'.

### Keywords
Dental calculus, Palaeoproteomics

### Affiliations
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Globe Insitute, University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Anna  Fotakis

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas P. Gilbert
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, Globe Insitute, University of Copenhagen


