### Accession
PXD013304

### Title
VEX1-GFP Pull-downs - Affinity-purified VEX1GFP-associated proteins using cryomilling and high-affinity nanobodies

### Description
We affinity-purified VEX1GFP-associated proteins using cryomilling and high-affinity nanobodies. The procedure was carried out initially in insect-stage T. brucei, for which protocols were established, and then in bloodstream-form T. brucei. Quantitative proteomic analysis revealed tag-dependent enrichment of GFP and the same set of five proteins in four independent experiments; VEX1 was enriched, as expected, but also Tb927.11.13380, an ortholog of the nonsense-mediated mRNA-decay (NMD) ATP-dependent superfamily 1-type helicases, UPF1/SMG2/NAM7/Rent1 19), now designated VEX2 (predicted 224-kDa, 2026 residues). The other three proteins that displayed tag-dependent enrichment were all three components of chromatin assembly factor 1 (CAF-1; CAF-1a, Tb927.8.3980; CAF-1b, Tb927.10.7050, CAF-1c, Tb927.11.4970a), the evolutionary conserved hetero-trimeric replication-associated histone chaperone.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity-enrichment of VEX1-interactors: 1 x 1010 insect or bloodstream form T. brucei cells with or without a C-terminal GFP-tagged endogenous copy of VEX1 were washed three times in ice cold PBS with protease inhibitors (Roche, EDTA free) and subsequently cryomilled into a fine grindate, in a planetary ball mill (Retsch) as described 18; protein-protein interactions are effectively preserved under these conditions.  6 x 50 mg of frozen grindate was thawed into ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 1 mM MgCl2, 10 uM CaCl2, protease inhibitor cocktail) containing either 100 mM NaCl or 250 mM citrate and either 0.1% Tween, 0.1% Brij58, 0.1% Triton X-100 or 0.1% Chaps, and pipetted to homogenise. The samples were then subjected to sonication (three pulses at 60% amp) and placed on ice. Samples were spun for 10 min at 20,000g at 4ºC to pellet the debris. The supernatant was removed and added to a 1.5 ml eppendorf containing dimeric α-GFP nanobodies 53 conjugated to magnetic beads (dynabeads – Thermo Scientific) and agitated at 4ºC for 2 h. The samples were then placed on a magnetic rack and washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer. Samples were eluted with a non-reducing SDS–PAGE loading buffer or equivalent. The resulting proteins were fractionated by 1D SDS-PAGE and visualized by silver staining. Quantitative mass spectrometry: affinity-enriched samples were run 2 cm into a NuPAGE® Novex Bis-Tris 10% gel with NuPAGE® MOPS SDS running buffer (Life Technologies) and subjected to overnight (16 h) trypsin digestion (Modified Sequencing Grade, Roche). Peptides were then extracted, dried in a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific), resuspended in 50 µl 1% formic acid, centrifuged and transferred to HPLC vials. 5 µl was typically analysed on a Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) and EasySpray column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode with a single MS survey scan from 335-1,800 m/z followed by 20 sequential m/z dependent MS2 scans. The 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collision dissociation (HCD). The MS1 isolation window was set to 1.4 Da and the resolution set at 60,000. MS2 resolution was set at 15,000. The AGC targets for MS1 and MS2 were set at 3e6 ions and 2e5 ions, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set at 27%. The maximum ion injection times for MS1 and MS2 were set at 50 ms and 19 ms, respectively. The peptides from each fraction were separated using a mix of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in MS grade water) and B (0.08% formic acid in 80% MS grade CH3CN) and eluted from the column using a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a linear gradient from 5% to 40% buffer B over 68 min. The column temperature was set at 50 °C.

### Data Protocol
RAW data files were extracted and converted to mascot generic files (.mgf) using MSC Convert. Data were searched against the MaxQuantTbrucei database using the Mascot Search Engine (Mascot Daemon Version 2.3.2). Fold-change, relative to a sample lacking GFP-tagged VEX1, was used to derive an “enrichment score“.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vex1; vsg; allelic exclusion; trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
Professor of Parasite Molecular Biology Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research (WCAIR) School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee
Wellcome Trust Centre for Anti-infectives Research, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Joana Faria

### Lab Head
Dr David Horn
Professor of Parasite Molecular Biology Biological Chemistry and Drug Discovery Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research (WCAIR) School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


