### Accession
PXD010877

### Title
Tungsten stress response of soy bean (glycine max), LC-MSMS

### Description
The transition metal tungsten (W) finds increasing application in military, aviation and household appliance industry, opening new paths for the heavy metal into the environment. Since tungsten shares certain chemical properties with the essential plant micro nutrient molybdenum, it is proposed to inhibit enzymatic activity of molybdoenzymes by replacing the Mo-ion bound to the co-factor. However, recent studies suggest the inhibition of enzymatic activity might not be the only effect W has on plants and that, much like other heavy metals, tungsten exerts toxicity on its own. Still, our understanding of the mechanisms behind the apparent phytotoxicity remains limited.This study investigates the effects of W on growth, nutrient levels (ionome, ICP-MS), starch levels and nitrogen nutrition (IRMS, enzyme activity assays) as well as root and nodule proteome (LC-MS/MS) of Glycine max cv. Primus. Plants were inoculated with Bradyrhizobium japonicum and grown in a semi hydroponic set up using three different tungsten concentrations (zero, 0.1 mM and 0.5 mM). To identify possible benefits of a functional bacterial symbiosis on W induced stress response, two different environmental growth conditions, one with suppressed N-fixation, supplied with Nitrate (10 mM KNO3) and one solely relying on symbiotic N-fixation (zero KNO3), were applied. Glycine max was able to take up considerable amounts of W (703 ± 136 mg kg-1). However, high W resulted in a strong reduction of shoot biomass of both N regimes and of root biomass (N fed only). Irrespective of N regime, NR activity and total N decreased with increasing W concentrations. Similarly, nitrogenase precursor levels as well as N2-fixation, nodule fixation activity (mg N g-1 nodule dry weight) and nodulation were reduced, indicating that nitrogenase synthesis  and activity were negatively affected by W stress. However, along a N fix nodule specific induction of the secondary and phytohormone metabolism, it appears that N2 fixation of remaining nodules was not as severely affected by increasing levels of tungsten than nitrate reduction.  Besides N metabolism, plants exhibited an imbalance in nutrient and a failure of carbon metabolic pathways accompanied by an accumulation of starch at high tungsten concentrations, independent of N-regime. Proteomic data demonstrated that the response to high W concentrations is independent of nodule functionality and dominated by several peroxidases and other general stress related proteins. Based on an evaluation of several W responsive proteotypic peptides, we identified a set of protein markers of W stress and possible targets for improved stress tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plant material was ground to a fine powder on LN2 using a porcelain mortar. Sixty milligrams (fresh-weight) were then used for protein extraction according to an adapted version of the integrative extraction procedure for proteins and metabolites as described by Morgenthal et al. (2007). All samples were extracted by adding 1 ml of methanol/chloroform/water (MCW) (2.5:1:0.5 [v/v/v]). After vortexing and centrifugation (14.000 x g, 4 minutes, 4°C), the supernatant was removed and the protein pellet washed three times with methanol/chloroform (1:1 [v/v]) and air-dried on ice. The pellet from  MCW extraction was solubilized in 1 ml of protein extraction buffer (0.05 M TRIS/HCl, pH 7.6, 1.5% SDS, 1% ß-mercaptoethanol; 0.6 M sucrose) and incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. After adding 1 ml of TE buffer equilibrated phenol (pH 7.5-8), the samples were incubated for 1 hour at 37°C and later centrifuged (16.000 x g, 20 minutes, 30°C). The upper phenolic phase containing soluble proteins was covered with 6 volumes of ice-cold ammonium acetate in methanol and proteins precipitated at -20°C overnight. Following a 10 min centrifugation at 4°C with 4000 g, the pellet was subjected to consecutive washing steps with 1 ml ice cold ammonium acetate, 1 ml ice-cold methanol and 1 ml acetone and then air dried at room temperature for 5-10 min. The pellet was re-dissolved in buffer containing 8 M urea and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) for protein content determination, using a Quick Start Bradford protein assay from Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc. and a Perkin Elmer photometer (EnSpire 2300 Multilable Reader). Protein content was determined using a standard curve of Quick Start Bovine Serum Albumin standards, also obtained from Bio-Rad. Sample concentration was adjusted to 10 μg protein in 8 M urea buffer. In order for the Lys-C pre-digestion, urea was diluted from 8 M to 4 M by one volume of 20% acetonitrile, 100 mM AmBic as well as 0.1 μg Lys-C and then incubated in dark at 30°C for 5 hours with 500 rpm (Niessen et al., 2006; Song and Liu, 2015). For trypsin digestion, another volume of 10% Acetonitrile, 25 mM AmBic, 10 mM CaCl2 and 5 mM DTT was added to the sample resulting in a final urea concentration of 2M. After adding trypsin beads (Poroszyme, Applied Biosystems) samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. After centrifugation at 10.000 x g at 4°C supernatant was transferred into a new low-bind for desalting. Agilent Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette-based SPE stage tips from Agilent Technologies were used for desalting, according to the manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a vacuum concentrator (ScanSpeed MaxiVac) and stored at -80°C until measurement. Protein digests were re-dissolved in 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% formic acid (FA), ultra-sonicated for 15 seconds and subsequently centrifuged at 4°C for 10 minutes at 21.000 x g. An uHPLC system (Dionex Ultimate 3000) with a flow rate of 300 μl min-1 was used; and the column (Thermo scientific Easy Spray column) loaded with 1 μg protein performing a 145 min gradient from 2% to 90% ACN 0.1% FA. MS analysis with 21 scan events, 1 MS1 scan (FTMS) with a scan range of 350-1800 m/z and 20 MS2 scans (ITMS) of the most abundant m/z ratios acquired from MS1 was carried out using a Thermo scientific velos rvo ion trap and Thermo scientific LTQ Orbitrap Elite. Default charge state was set to 2-fold charge; unassigned charge states as well as +1 charge states were rejected. Minimal required signal was set to 10,000, size of exclusion mass list was set to 500 (with a duration of 60 s) and exclusion mass width was set to 5 ppm with one repeated count of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectral data was performed using MaxQuant (1.5.3.8). Raw files were searched against a combined FASTA file for Glycine max and Bradyrhizobum japonicum with 82928 entries (http://www.uniprot.org/ 21.10.2015). Tryptically digested peptides were allowed a maximum of 2 missed cleavages as well as a maximum of three modifications per peptide (oxidation, N-terminal acetylation). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (FTMS) and 0.6 Da (ITMS). To eliminate matching by chance, data was searched against a database of revert sequences in a target-decoy approach. Only high confidence peptides (FDR <0.01%) as well as proteins with at least two distinct identified peptides passed the criteria for identification. Additionally, the FDR based “matching between runs” algorithm was used (Cox and Mann, 2008). For relative quantification LFQ intensities were used.  Proteins were functionally categorized on basis of sequence similarity with proteins of other organisms via BLAST and RPS-BLAST against reference databases (ORYZA, PPAP, TAIR, KOG, CDD) using the Mercator sequence annotation tool (http://plabipd.de/portal/mercator-sequence-annotation) (Lohse et al., 2014)).  For statistical analysis of the protein data, only proteins detected in three or more replicates of at least one treatment were used. Missing values were imputed with the smallest value detected for each protein throughout all samples divided by two. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Tukey HSD post hoc test, indicating a statistical significant difference at p<.05, was performed using R-studio. Averaged intensities for each treatment were used to calculate the ratios between control and high tungsten treatments. Proteins were considered significantly changing when they showed a ≥ 2-fold change as well as a p-value below 0.05. A principal component analysis (PCA) was performed for root and nodule proteins taking only those proteins that were detected in more than 3 replicates per treatment. The PCA was performed with R (prcomp-package) using the log2 transformed data, clustering was done using Euclidian distance with complete linkage (Team, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Tungsten (W) finds increasing application in military, aviation and household appliance industry, opening new paths into the environment. Since W shares certain chemical properties with the essential plant micronutrient molybdenum (Mo), it is proposed to inhibit enzymatic activity of molybdoenzymes [e.g., nitrate reductase (NR)] by replacing the Mo-ion bound to the co-factor. Recent studies suggest that W, much like other heavy metals, also exerts toxicity on its own. To create a comprehensive picture of tungsten stress, this study investigated the effects of W on growth and metabolism of soybean (<i>Glycine max</i>), depending on plant nitrogen regime [nitrate fed (N fed) vs. symbiotic N<sub>2</sub> fixation (N fix)] by combining plant physiological data (biomass production, starch and nutrient content, N<sub>2</sub> fixation, nitrate reductase activity) with root and nodule proteome data. Irrespective of N regime, NR activity and total N decreased with increasing W concentrations. Nodulation and therefore also N<sub>2</sub> fixation strongly declined at high W concentrations, particularly in N fix plants. However, N<sub>2</sub> fixation rate (g N fixed g<sup>-1</sup> nodule dwt) remained unaffected by increasing W concentrations. Proteomic analysis revealed a strong decline in leghemoglobin and nitrogenase precursor levels (NifD), as well as an increase in abundance of proteins involved in secondary metabolism in N fix nodules. Taken together this indicates that, in contrast to the reported direct inhibition of NR, N<sub>2</sub> fixation appears to be indirectly inhibited by a decrease in nitrogenase synthesis due to W induced changes in nodule oxygen levels of N fix plants. Besides N metabolism, plants exhibited a strong reduction of shoot (both N regimes) and root (N fed only) biomass, an imbalance in nutrient levels and a failure of carbon metabolic pathways accompanied by an accumulation of starch at high tungsten concentrations, independent of N-regime. Proteomic data (available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010877) demonstrated that the response to high W concentrations was independent of nodule functionality and dominated by several peroxidases and other general stress related proteins. Based on an evaluation of several W responsive proteotypic peptides, we identified a set of protein markers of W stress and possible targets for improved stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Soy bean, Tungsten, Glycine max, Heavy metal, Legume

### Affiliations
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Plant-Systems Interaction Group, University of Vienna
University of Vienna

### Submitter
Julian Preiner

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Wienkoop
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology, Plant-Systems Interaction Group, University of Vienna


