### Accession
PXD019808

### Title
Receptor-independent modulation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase and protein phosphatase 2A signaling in cardiac myocytes by nitroxyl

### Description
Sympathetic activation is the main driver of cardiac inotropy and lusitropy. Stimulation of the -adrenoceptor (AR) signaling cascade leads to activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and subsequent cardiac protein phosphorylation, which is counteracted by the corresponding protein phosphatases 2A (PP2A). Both, kinase and phosphatase are sensitive to oxidation. For PKA, the oxidant-mediated mode of regulation has been described to occur by interdisulfide formation between type I regulatory subunits (PKA-RI). Furthermore, oxidant-mediated intradisulfide formation in the catalytic subunit of PKA and PP2A was shown to inhibit kinase or phosphatase activity, respectively. Nitroxyl donors exert positive inotropic and lusitropic effects in cardiac myocytes.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion was done following Shevchenko et al. [Shevchenko, A., Tomas, H., Havlis, J., Olsen, J. V., and Mann, M. (2006) In-gel digestion for mass spectrometric characterization of proteins and proteomes. Nat Protoc 1, 2856-2860]. Shrinking and swelling was performed with 100 % ACN and 100 mM NH4HCO3. In-gel reduction was achieved with 10 mM dithiothreitol (dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3). Alkylation was performed with 55 mM iodacetamide (dissolved in 100 mM NH4HCO3). Proteins in the gel pieces were digested by covering them with a trypsin solution (8 ng/µL sequencing-grade trypsin, dissolved in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing 10% ACN) and incubating the mixture at 37°C for overnight. Tryptic peptides were yielded by extraction with 2% FA, 80% ACN. The extract was evaporated. For LC-MS/MS analysis, samples were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% FA

### Data Protocol
With Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) the LC-MS/MS data were processed. Identification of the proteins from the MS/MS spectra were performed with the search engine Sequest HT using the Rattus norvegicus database (release June 2016, 7961 entries; www.uniprot.org) and a contaminant database. For the searches the following parameters were applied: Precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance: 0.2 Da. Fully tryptic digestion. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues as a variable modification was used for the search. Peptides with a FDR of 1% using Percolator were identified. At least two unique peptides per protein were used as a condition for a reliable identification.

### Publication Abstract
The contraction and relaxation of the heart is controlled by stimulation of the &#x3b2;1-adrenoreceptor (AR) signaling cascade, which leads to activation of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and subsequent cardiac protein phosphorylation. Phosphorylation is counteracted by the main cardiac protein phosphatases, PP2A and PP1. Both kinase and phosphatases are sensitive to intramolecular disulfide formation in their catalytic subunits that inhibits their activity. Additionally, intermolecular disulfide formation between PKA type I regulatory subunits (PKA-RI) has been described to enhance PKA's affinity for protein kinase A anchoring proteins, which alters its subcellular distribution. Nitroxyl donors have been shown to affect contractility and relaxation, but the mechanistic basis for this effect is unclear. The present study investigates the impact of several nitroxyl donors and the thiol-oxidizing agent diamide on cardiac myocyte protein phosphorylation and oxidation. Although all tested compounds equally induced intermolecular disulfide formation in PKA-RI, only 1-nitrosocyclohexalycetate (NCA) and diamide induced reproducible protein phosphorylation. Phosphorylation occurred independently of &#x3b2;<sub>1</sub>-AR activation, but was abolished after pharmacological PKA inhibition and thus potentially attributable to increased PKA activity. NCA treatment of cardiac myocytes induced translocation of PKA and phosphatases to the myofilament compartment as shown by fractionation, immunofluorescence, and proximity ligation assays. Assessment of kinase and phosphatase activity within the myofilament fraction of cardiac myocytes after exposure to NCA revealed activation of PKA and inhibition of phosphatase activity thus explaining the increase in phosphorylation. The data suggest that the NCA-mediated effect on cardiac myocyte protein phosphorylation orchestrates alterations in the kinase/phosphatase balance.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Nitroxyl, Rat, Kinase, Oxidation, Cardiac myocyte, Phosphatase

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf
Institute of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine
Mass Spectrometric Proteomics
Institute of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology; University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf

### Submitter
Christoph Krisp

### Lab Head
Dr Friederike Cuello
Institute of Experimental Pharmacology and Toxicology; University Medical Center Hamburg-Eppendorf


