### Accession
PXD039877

### Title
Phosphorylation of RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 by Photoregulatory Protein Kinases

### Description
RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 (RCD1) is a multidomain protein with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) separating its highly structured domains. RCD1 regulates plant development and stress tolerance by interacting with numerous transcription factors (TFs) through its C-terminal RST domain. It has been shown to interact in a non-RST-dependent manner with Photoregulatory Protein Kinases (PPKs). In Arabidopsis, this recently discovered family of protein kinases is comprised of four members that localize to nuclear bodies (NBs), subnuclear non-membrane bound complexes of mostly unknown function. PPK-dependent phosphorylation has been shown to target proteins for degradation, thereby playing an essential role in protein turnover.  Mass spectrometric analysis of the in vitro phosphorylated GST-RCD1 revealed several PPK-dependent RCD1 phosphopeptides that were also identified in the in vivo pull-down experiments. Most of these phosphosites were clustered in the IDR2, the intrinsically disordered region between the WWE and PARP-like domains. Using transgenic lines expressing non-phosphorylatable version of RCD1 we showed that phosphorylation of the IDR2 is involved in the regulation of the RCD1 affecting its subnuclear distribution to NBs of different size and number. Moreover, phosphorylation of IDR2 facilitates degradation of RCD1 and possibly also its partner TFs. Thus, it is necessary for the function of RCD1 as a negative transcriptional co-regulator.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro kinase assays using recombinant proteins were performed in a total volume of 20 µL of kinase buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 15 mM MgCl2, and 5 mM EGTA). The reaction was started with 1.5 mM unlabeled ATP and incubated at room temperature for 30 min. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 5 µL of 4x SDS loading buffer. Proteins were resolved by SDS-PAGE followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining and were digested by trypsin (Promega).  Phosphopeptides were enriched from tryptic digests using TiO2 microcolumns (GL Sciences Inc., Japan). Enriched phosphopeptides were analyzed by a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Easy NanoLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15-cm C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (80:20 [v/v]) with 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (solvent B). A linear 60-min gradient from 6 to 42% (v/v) B was used to elute peptides. Mass spectrometry data were acquired automatically by using Xcalibur 3.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information-dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap mass spectrometry survey scan of mass range 300 to 2000 m/z (mass-to-charge ratio) followed by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation for 10 most intense peptide ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were searched for protein identification by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4) connected to in-house Mascot (v. 2.6.1) server. Phosphorylation site locations were validated using phosphoRS algorithm. A SwissProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/) was used with a taxonomy filter Arabidopsis. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide mass tolerance ± 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance ± 0.02 D were used. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification and Met oxidation, acetylation of protein N-terminus, and phosphorylation of Ser and Thr were included as variable modifications. Only peptides with a false discovery rate of 0.01 were used.

### Publication Abstract
Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation (PARylation) is a reversible post-translational protein modification that has profound regulatory functions in metabolism, development and immunity, and is conserved throughout the eukaryotic lineage. Contrary to metazoa, many components and mechanistic details of PARylation have remained unidentified in plants. Here we present the transcriptional co-regulator RADICAL-INDUCED CELL DEATH1 (RCD1) as a plant PAR-reader. RCD1 is a multidomain protein with intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs) separating its domains. We have reported earlier that RCD1 regulates plant development and stress-tolerance by interacting with numerous transcription factors (TFs) through its C-terminal RST domain. This study suggests that the N-terminal WWE and PARP-like domains, as well as the connecting IDR play an important regulatory role for RCD1 function. We show that RCD1 binds PAR in vitro via its WWE domain and that PAR-binding determines RCD1 localization to nuclear bodies (NBs) in vivo. Additionally, we found that RCD1 function and stability is controlled by Photoregulatory Protein Kinases (PPKs). PPKs localize with RCD1 in NBs and phosphorylate RCD1 at multiple sites affecting its stability. This work proposes a mechanism for negative transcriptional regulation in plants, in which RCD1 localizes to NBs, binds TFs with its RST domain and is degraded after phosphorylation by PPKs.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Arabidopsis, Rcd1, Ppk

### Affiliations
Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, and Viikki Plant Science Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
University of Helsinki

### Submitter
Julia Vainonen

### Lab Head
Dr Jaakko Kangasjärvi
Organismal and Evolutionary Biology Research Programme, Faculty of Biological and Environmental Sciences, and Viikki Plant Science Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland


