### Accession
PXD027251

### Title
Insights into transcriptome surveillance and alternative splicing regulation by the EJC-associated splicing factor RNPS1

### Description
Alternative splicing of pre-mRNAs increases the potential for regulation and complexity of gene expression. The exon junction complex (EJC) and its associated splicing factor RNPS1 were recently shown to suppress mis-splicing resulting from the usage of cryptic and reconstituted 5’ and 3’ splice sites in the vicinity of the EJC. Here, we aimed to further investigate the mechanisms underlying splicing regulation by RNPS1. A transcriptome-wide analysis identified hundreds of splice events affected by the knockdown (KD) of RNPS1 in HeLa cells. These included alternative splice site usage as well as intron retention, exon skipping and inclusion. However, only a fraction of these RNPS1-dependent splice events was fully or partially rescued by the expression of the RNPS1 RRM. These results indicated that another domain of RNPS1 is involved in the regulation of the majority of splicing events. Deletion experiments revealed that the N-terminus and S-domain, and in particular the C-terminus of RNPS1 strongly regulate these events. Several splicing factors, including SR proteins and U1 snRNP components, were strongly reduced in the interactome of RNPS1 lacking the C terminus. We conclude that RNPS1 interacts with many splicing factors to direct the assembly of EJC-dependent and-independent splicing complexes.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free Mass spec, samples were immunoprecipitated as described above and after addition of 1 volume of 5% SDS in PBS reduced with DTT and alkylated with CAA (final concentrations 5 mM and 55 mM, respectively). For tryptic protein digestion, a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol was used as described below (14). Samples were reduced with 5 mM Dithiothreitol followed by alkylation using 40 mM Chloroacetamide. Afterwards, proteins were supplemented with paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Cytiva) and mixed in a 1:1-ratio with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). After 8 min incubation, protein-beads-complexes were captured using an in-house build magnetic rack, washed twice with 70% EtOH, and washed once with 100% ACN. After airdrying and reconstitution in 5 µl 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, samples were supplemented with 0.5 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg LysC and incubated overnight at 37◦C. The beads were resuspended on the next day and mixed with 200 µl ACN, followed by 8 min incubation. Subsequently, the samples were placed on the magnetic rack to wash the tryptic peptides once with 100% ACN. Samples were airdried, dissolved in 4% DMSO, transferred into new PCR tubes, and acidified with 1 µl of 10% formic acid. Proteomics analysis was performed by the proteomics core facility at CECAD via data-dependent acquisition using an Easy nLC1200 ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system connected via nano electrospray ionization to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (all Thermo Scientific) running in DDA Top10 mode. Peptides were separated using a chromatographic gradient of 60 min with a binary system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) with a constant flow of 250 nl/min. Separation was achieved on an in-house made analytical column (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 μm) containing 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell EC120 beads (Agilent) heated to 50 °C in a column oven (Sonation). Over a time period of 41 min, Buffer B was linearly increased from 3% to 30% followed by an  increase to 50% in 8 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 1 min followed by 10 min washing step at 95% B. Full MS spectra (300-1,750 m/z) were recorded with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. In each full MS spectrum, the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 27) with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.8 m/z and 10 s dynamic exclusion. The MS/MS spectra were then measured with a 35,000 resolution, an injection time of maximum 110 ms and an AGC target of 5e5.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW files were then analyzed with MaxQuant suite (version 1.5.3.8) on standard settings. By matching against the human UniProt database the peptides were then identified using the Andromeda scoring algorithm (16). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. The digestion protein was Trypsin/P. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used to identify peptide-spectrum matches and to quantify the proteins. Data processing, statistical analysis, as well as clustering and enrichment anlysis were performed in the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0) (17).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Exon junction complex, Rnps1, Mrna splicing

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics,  UzK, Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics,  UzK, Cologne, Germany


