### Accession
PXD039840

### Title
Quantitative proteomic characterization of Foreign Body Response towards silicone breast implants identifies chronological disease-relevant biomarker dynamics

### Description
The aim of this work was to enlighten the disease progression from implant insertion and immediate tissue damage response reflected in (a) the acute wound proteome, and (b) the adsorption of chronic inflammatory wound proteins at implant surfaces. An intra-individual relative quantitation TMT-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry approach was applied to profile wound proteome formed around SMI the first five days post-implantation.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins in the wound fluid and plasma samples were enzymatically digested and the resulting peptides were labeled with TMT reagents. In order to be able to compare the samples or subjects with one another, 1/6 of each digest was pooled and labeled separately. Subsequently, wound bed fluid and plasma samples were combined into the TMT 6-plex sets of 5 samples one patient/side (1x subject; 5 samples (D1-D5); 1x tissue expander roughness type) and 1 standard each (e.g., patient 1, WBF formed around 60µM CPX4 expander from day 1-5 post-surgery). The plasmas were assessed in a separate TMT 6-plex set. In order to increase protein identification numbers, the pooled samples were chromatographically separated into 8 fractions using a high-pH column prior to the nanoLC-MS analysis.  After removal of devices in re-operation between 24 to 28 weeks after initial expander implantation, 6 pieces of approx. 1cm² were removed from each SMI surface (SMIa and SMIb) and transferred into separate test tubes. The proteins adhering to the silicone surface were then digested, with 3 pieces washed with PBS beforehand. The quantification is based on the integrated peak areas per peptide, which are summed up at the protein level and result in a protein abundance. Peptide digests were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 nano‐HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source.

### Data Protocol
The MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Sequest HT engine against a Uniprot human reference proteome database (last modified 02/02/2022). For label-free quantification of tissue expander samples, the Minora Feature Detector node was set to high confidence PSM (peptide spectrum matches) only with at least two isotopic peaks present in the isotope pattern. For quantitation of TMT-labeled wound bed fluid samples, the protein fold changes were calculated based on TMT reporter ion intensities present in MS2. Only peptides that were unique to a given protein or protein group were considered for quantitation.  Data normalization was performed only in the course of TMT experiments. Therefore, the average of the total abundance of 29 highest abundant proteins was calculated for all control samples. All samples were then proportionally scaled up or down based on their individual total abundance of the same 29 proteins. The proteins used for normalization were high abundant in serum as well as in wound fluid samples but none of them was a previously depleted high abundant plasma protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Smi (silicone mammary implants); fbr (foreign body response); wound healing; wound infection; capsular fibrosis; implant encapsulation; early-stage fibrosis; surface adsorption; immunomics; biomarkers

### Affiliations
Innsbruck Medical University, Biocenter
Innsbruck Medical University, Biocenter, Institute of Medical Biochemistry

### Submitter
Klaus Faserl

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Faserl
Innsbruck Medical University, Biocenter, Institute of Medical Biochemistry


