### Accession
PXD010012

### Title
Online parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF) with a novel trapped ion mobility mass spectrometer

### Description
In bottom-up proteomics, peptides are separated by liquid chromatography with elution peak widths in the range of seconds, while mass spectra are acquired in about 100 microseconds with time-of-fight (TOF) instruments. This allows adding ion mobility as a third dimension of separation. Among several formats, trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) is attractive due to its small size, low voltage requirements and high efficiency of ion utilization. We have recently demonstrated a scan mode termed parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity (Meier et al., PMID: 26538118). Here we introduce the timsTOF Pro instrument, which optimally implements online PASEF. It features an orthogonal ion path into the ion mobility device, limiting the amount of debris entering the instrument and making it very robust in daily operation. We investigate different precursor selection schemes for shotgun proteomics to optimally allocate in excess of 100 fragmentation events per second. More than 800,000 fragmentation spectra in standard 120 min LC runs are easily achievable, which can be used for near exhaustive precursor selection in complex mixtures or re-sequencing weak precursors. MaxQuant identified more than 6,000 proteins in single run HeLa analyses without matching to a library, and with high quantitative reproducibility (R > 0.97). Online PASEF achieves a remarkable sensitivity with more than 2,000 proteins identified in 30 min runs of only 10 ng HeLa digest.  We also show that highly reproducible collisional cross sections can be acquired on a large scale (R > 0.99). PASEF on the timsTOF Pro is a valuable addition to the technological toolbox in proteomics, with a number of unique operating modes that are only beginning to be explored.

### Sample Protocol
Human cervical cancer cells (HeLa S3, ATCC, USA) were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium with 10% fetal bovine serum, 20 mM glutamine and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (all PAA Laboratories, Germany). Escherichia coli (strain: XL1 blue) was cultured at 37 °C in LB medium until logarithmic phase (optical density = 0.5, λ = 600 nm). Cells were collected by centrifugation. Following a washing step with cold phosphate buffered saline, they were pelleted and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C.  One-device cell lysis, reduction, and alkylation was performed in sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer with chloroacetamide (PreOmics GmbH, Germany) according to our previously published protocol (32). Briefly, the cell suspension was twice boiled for 10 min at 95 °C and subsequently sonicated for 15 min at maximum energy (Bioruptor, Diagenode, Belgium). Proteins were enzymatically hydrolyzed overnight at 37 °C by LysC and trypsin (1:100 enzyme:protein (wt/wt) for both). To stop the digestion, the reaction mixture was acidified with five volumes of isopropanol with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were de-salted and purified in two steps, first on styrenedivinylbenzene-reversed phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS), and second on C18 sorbent. The dried eluates were re-constituted in water with 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and 0.1% TFA for direct LC-MS analysis or high pH reverse-phase fractionation.  High pH reversed-phase fractionation was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to a ‘spider fractionator’ (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) as detailed in ref. (33). Purified peptides were separated on a 30 cm x 250 µm reversed-phase column (PreOmics) at a flow rate of 2 µL/min at pH 10. The binary gradient started from 3% buffer B (PreOmics), followed by linear increases to first 30% B within 45 min, to 60% B within 17 min, and finally to 95% B within 5 min. Each sample was automatically concatenated into 24 fractions in 90 s time intervals. The fractions were dried in a vacuum-centrifuge and re-constituted in water with 2% ACN and 0.1% TFA for LC-MS analysis. - An EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) ultra-high pressure nano-flow chromatography system was coupled online to a hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry – quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, Bruker Daltonics) with a modified nano-electrospray ion source (10) (CaptiveSpray, Bruker Daltonics). Liquid chromatography was performed at 60 °C and with a constant flow of 400 nL/min on a reversed-phase column (50 cm x 75 µm i.d.) with a pulled emitter tip, packed with 1.9 µm C18-coated porous silica beads (Dr. Maisch, Germany). Mobile phases A and B were water with 0.1% formic acid (vol/vol) and 80/20/0.1% ACN/water/formic acid (vol/vol/vol), respectively. In 120 min experiments, peptides were separated with a linear gradient from 7.5 to 27.5% B within 60 min, followed by an increase to 37.5% B within 30 min and further to 55% within 10 min, followed by a washing step at 95% B and re-equilibration. In 60 min separations, the gradient increased from 10 to 30% B within 30 min, followed by an increase to 40% B within 15 min and further to 57.5% B within 5 min before washing and re-equilibration. In 30 min separations, the initial 10-30% B step was 15 min, followed by a linear increase to 40% B (7.5 min) and 57.5% B (2.5 min) before washing and re-equilibration.  For some experiments we used the Evosep One (Evosep, Odense, Denmark), a new HPLC instrument employing an embedded gradient and capable of fast turnaround between analyses (34). Samples were eluted from Evotips at low pressure into the storage loop with a gradient offset to lower the percentage of organic buffer. Separation was performed on a customized 5.6 min gradient (200 samples/day method) at a flow rate of 1.5 µL/min on a 4 cm x 150 µm i.d. reversed-phase column  packed with 3 µm C18-coated porous silica beads (PepSep, Odense, Denmark).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (37) version 1.6.1.12, which has been extended to incorporate the additional ion mobility dimension and adapted to handle the TIMS data format. This new version of MaxQuant is publicly available and will be described in detail separately (Cox and co-workers, in preparation). Briefly, it assembles four-dimensional isotope clusters - defined by m/z, retention time, ion mobility and intensity - from the TIMS-MS spectra and extracts ion mobility separated MS/MS spectra from the PASEF scans. Each MS/MS spectrum is assigned to its respective precursor ions by quadrupole isolation m/z and ion mobility values, and in case a precursor has been fragmented multiple times in one acquisition cycle, the respective spectra are collapsed to a single spectrum with increased signal-to-noise. The ‘TIMS half width’ parameter was set to 4 TOF triggers,the ‘TIMS step width’ to 3, the ‘TIMS mass resolution’ to 32,000 and MS/MS peaks with an intensity below 1.5 units were discarded.  The MS/MS spectra were matched to in silico derived fragment mass values of tryptic peptides from a reference proteome (Uniprot, 2016/05, HeLa: 91,618 entries including isoforms, E.coli: 4,313 entries including isoforms) and 245 potential contaminants by the built-in Andromeda search engine (38). A maximum of two missing cleavages were allowed, the required minimum peptide sequence length was 7 amino acids, and the peptide mass was limited to a maximum of 4,600 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini as variable modifications. The initial maximum mass tolerances were 70 ppm for precursor ions and 35 ppm for fragment ions. We employed a reversed sequence library to control the false discovery rate (FDR) at less than 1% for peptide spectrum matches and protein group identifications.

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up proteomics, peptides are separated by liquid chromatography with elution peak widths in the range of seconds, whereas mass spectra are acquired in about 100 microseconds with time-of-flight (TOF) instruments. This allows adding ion mobility as a third dimension of separation. Among several formats, trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) is attractive because of its small size, low voltage requirements and high efficiency of ion utilization. We have recently demonstrated a scan mode termed parallel accumulation - serial fragmentation (PASEF), which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity (Meier <i>et al.</i>, PMID: 26538118). Here we introduce the timsTOF Pro instrument, which optimally implements online PASEF. It features an orthogonal ion path into the ion mobility device, limiting the amount of debris entering the instrument and making it very robust in daily operation. We investigate different precursor selection schemes for shotgun proteomics to optimally allocate in excess of 100 fragmentation events per second. More than 600,000 fragmentation spectra in standard 120 min LC runs are achievable, which can be used for near exhaustive precursor selection in complex mixtures or accumulating the signal of weak precursors. In 120 min single runs of HeLa digest, MaxQuant identified more than 6,000 proteins without matching to a library and with high quantitative reproducibility (R &gt; 0.97). Online PASEF achieves a remarkable sensitivity with more than 2,500 proteins identified in 30 min runs of only 10 ng HeLa digest. We also show that highly reproducible collisional cross sections can be acquired on a large scale (R &gt; 0.99). PASEF on the timsTOF Pro is a valuable addition to the technological toolbox in proteomics, with a number of unique operating modes that are only beginning to be explored.

### Keywords
Pasef, Tims, Technological

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried Germanry
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Proteomics and Signal Transduction Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried Germanry


