### Accession
PXD020560

### Title
An organometallic gold(I) bis-N-heterocyclic carbene complex with a multimodal mode of action in ovarian cancer cells

### Description
The organometallic gold(I) bis-N-heterocyclic carbene complex [Au(9-methylcaffeine-8-ylidene)2]+ (AuTMX2) was previously shown to selectively and potently stabilise telomeric DNA G-quadruplex (G4) structures. This study sheds light onto the molecular reactivity and mode of action of AuTMX2 in the cellular context by using mass spectrometry-based shotgun proteomics in A2780 ovarian cancer cells. In contrast to other metal-based anticancer agents, this organogold compound showed a minor tendency for forming coordinative bonds and is expected to exert its drug effects mainly by non-covalent interactions. Global protein expression changes of treated cancer cells revealed a multi-modal mode of action of AuTMX2 by alterations in the nucleolus, telomeres, actin stress-fibers and stress-responses, which were further supported by pharmacological assays, fluorescence microscopy and cellular accumulation experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture The ovarian cancer cell line (A2780) was kindly provided by Thomas Grunt (Medicinal University of Vienna, Austria). A2780 cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium including L-glutamine (Gibco, Life Technologies, UK). All media contained 10% fetal calf serum (FCS, ATCC, USA) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin (ATCC, USA). Cells were grown in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 and 95% air at 37 °C (HeraCell 150i, CO2 incubator, ThermoFisher Scientific). Before reaching confluency, the cells were detached using Trypsin/EDTA solution (0.25%, Sigma) and split. Cells were counted using an automated cell counter (Moxi Z, Orflo, USA).  Treatment for Proteomics Analysis  A2780 ovarian cancer cells were seeded in T25 flasks at 5×106 cells and left to adhere for 24 h in complete medium. Then, the medium was exchanged for fresh medium + DMSO (controls) or fresh medium containing freshly dissolved AuTMX2 (treatments, 8 µM from a 10 mM stock solution in DMSO) and incubated for another 24 h. Six biological replicates were analysed per condition.  Protein Sample Preparation After the 24 h treatment, cells were fractionated into cytoplasmic and nuclear extracts as previously described. All steps were performed on ice. Briefly, the cells were extensively washed with PBS (1×). Isotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES, 10 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 0.25 M Sucrose, 0.5% Triton X-100) containing protease inhibitors (1% PMSF and 1% protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche) was added, the cells were scraped off and transferred into labelled 15 mL Falcon tubes (17 × 120 mm, Corning). The cellular membrane was ruptured using shear stress by pressing the cell suspension through a syringe multiple times. After centrifugation (3500 rpm, 5min), the supernatant was transferred into ice-cold ethanol (1 : 5) and precipitated over night at –20 °C. The pellet containing the nuclei was incubated with a hypertonic solution (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5 M NaCl) and subsequently with NP-40 buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA and 0.5% NP-40) containing protease inhibitors (1% PMSF from Sigma and 1% protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail from Roche). After centrifugation (3500 rpm, 5 min), the soluble nuclear proteins were also transferred into ice-cold ethanol (1 : 5) and precipitated over night at –20 °C. The precipitated proteins were pelleted, dried under vacuum and dissolved in sample buffer (100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% sodium dodecyl sulfate) and the protein concentration was determined using a Bradford assay.  Digestion Protocol The samples were digested in-solution as previously described according to the FASP protocol. Equal amounts of 20 µg protein per sample were reduced with DTT at 37 °C and then loaded on 10 kDa centrifugal filters (Microcon-10, Merck, Millipore) and pre-concentrated. The samples were carbamidomethylated with iodacetamide. The samples were then digested over night with trypsin/lys-C (Promega, Germany) at 37 °C. Filters were washed with 0.5% TFA and the eluates were dried with a miVac duo concentrator (GeneVac Ltd, UK) and stored at –20 °C until analysis.  LC-MS/MS analyses The data was acquired on a QExactive orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Germany), which was coupled with a nanoLC-system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Germany), equipped with a C-18 separation column (Dionex, Acclaim PepMap RSCL, 75 µM × 50 cm) and C-18 trapping column (2 cm × 100 µm). Dried samples were dissolved in formic acid (30%, 5 µL) containing four synthetic peptides (Glu1-fribrinopeptide B, EGVNDNEEGFFSAR; M28, TTPAVLDSDGSYFLYSK; HK0, VLETKSLYVR and HK1, VLETK(ε-AC)SLYVR)  and diluted with mobile phase A (40 µL), which consisted of 98% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase B consisted of 20% water, 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Each biological sample was recorded once by injecting 2 µL per analysis. Samples were analysed over a 135 min chromatographic run containing a 90 min gradient from 8–40% mobile phase B. MS1 resolution was 70k with 50 ms injection time and MS2 resolution was 17.5k with 75 ms injection time. A top 8 method was used in the mass range of 400–1400.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria) running Mascot 2.4 (Matrix Science, UK) was used for protein identification searching against the SwissProt Database (version 01/2018 with 20 258 entries) allowing a mass tolerance of 50ppm for MS spectra and 100mmu for MS/MS spectra, a FDR < 0.01 and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Furthermore, search criteria included carbamidomethylation on cysteines as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as well as N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The organometallic Au<sup>I</sup> bis-N-heterocyclic carbene complex [Au(9-methylcaffeine-8-ylidene)<sub>2</sub> ]<sup>+</sup> (AuTMX<sub>2</sub> ) was previously shown to selectively and potently stabilise telomeric DNA G-quadruplex (G4) structures. This study sheds light on the molecular reactivity and mode of action of AuTMX<sub>2</sub> in the cellular context using mass spectrometry-based methods, including shotgun proteomics in A2780 ovarian cancer cells. In contrast to other metal-based anticancer agents, this organogold compound is less prone to form coordinative bonds with biological nucleophiles and is expected to exert its drug effects mainly by non-covalent interactions. Global protein expression changes of treated cancer cells revealed a multimodal mode of action of AuTMX<sub>2</sub> by alterations in the nucleolus, telomeres, actin stress-fibres and stress-responses, which were further supported by pharmacological assays, fluorescence microscopy and cellular accumulation experiments. Proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD020560.

### Keywords
Gold complexes • n-heterocyclic carbenes • g-quadruplexes • telomeres • proteomics • cancer

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
Department of Analytical Chemistry, University of Vienna, Austria


