### Accession
PXD010354

### Title
In-depth evaluation of the acetylome in major human fungal pathogens elucidates the essential role of lysine acetylation in regulation of fungal pathogenicity

### Description
Fungal pathogens cause deadly diseases in living organisms. Numerous studies suggest that lysine acetylation is a critical regulator in pathogenic fungi, but an in-depth and cross-species analysis of the acetylome in major pathogenic fungi is lacking, and our knowledge of the mechanism of acetylation in manipulating fungal pathogenicity is limited. Here, we show that lysine acetylation plays essential roles during cryptococcosis through modulating the gene expression of important virulence factors and the activity of key players in important pathways. We show that the Cryptococcus TOR pathway and translational elongation process are functionally regulated by acetylation via the HDAC and sirtuin families, respectively. Through comparative acetylome network analysis among pathogens and baker’s yeast, we demonstrate significant correlation between acetylation sites and virulence factors, indicating a unique selective pressure on lysine acetylation motifs in pathogenic fungi. These results provide a basis for understanding the regulation of fungal pathogenicity by posttranslational lysine acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures of C. neoformans H99 were diluted in fresh YPD medium and incubated at 30 or 37°C for 6 hrs. C. albicans (SC5314) cultures were diluted in YPD medium at 30°C for 6 hrs or DMEM (15% of FCS) at 37°C with 5% CO2 for 6 hrs. A. fumigatus (Af293) cultures were diluted in fresh YPD medium and incubated at 30°C or 37°C until cell density reached the exponential phase. For the analysis of the Kac levels in dac2Δ and dac4Δ, mutant cells and wild-type cells were subcultured, and cells at the exponential phase were used. Cells were then washed twice in PBS buffer supplemented with TSA/NAM. Cell pellets were resuspended in acetylome lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton X-100, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM and 2 mM EDTA), and solution mixtures were sonicated three times on ice using a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). Protein samples were precipitated using TCA, resuspended in 8 M urea solution, and quantified using a BCA assay. Protein samples were treated with DTT (5 mM) and iodoacetamide (11 mM), diluted and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Digested protein samples were desalted and vacuum dried. The peptides were resuspended in 0.5 M TEAB and processed for the 6-plex TMT Kit according to the manufacturer’s manual. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 1.8 mg of peptides) was reconstituted in 80 μl ACN (acetonitrile) buffer. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 hrs at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried. The labeled peptides were then fractionated using an HPLC with a BetaSil C18 column (5 μm film thickness, 10 mm X 250 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Fractionated peptides were resuspended in IP buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0). The suspended samples were then mixed with anti-Kac pan antibody conjugated agarose beads (PTM Bio, China) and incubated at 4°C overnight. The beads were washed 4 times with IP buffer and 2 times with water and eluted 3 times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid solution (Sigma, USA). The samples were desalted according to the C18 ZipTips manual.   The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and loaded onto a homemade reversed-phase analytical column (15 cm in length, 75 μm in diameter). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% in 0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile over 26 mins, 23% to 35% in 8 mins and climbing to 80% in 3 mins then holding at 80% for the last 3 mins, at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were then subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in a Q Exactive Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan and 20 MS/MS scans with 15 s dynamic exclusion was performed. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 50000.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (version 1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt database (http://www.uniprot.org) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme, and up to 4 missing cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as a fixed modification, and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. The FDR was adjusted to < 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.  For the analysis of differentially expressed Kac in dac2Δ and dac4Δ, whole proteome analysis was also performed as described above, except the antibody enrichment step. The acetylome data of dac2Δ and dac4Δ were then normalized to the proteome data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein posttranslational modification, Cryptococcus neoformans, Virulence, Human fungal pathogens, Acetylation

### Affiliations
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Hai-Long Li

### Lab Head
Dr Cheney Ding
College of Life and Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Shenyang, China


