### Accession
PXD011200

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
Six biological replicates of Arabidopsis thaliana were subjected to protein extraction, ten-temperature gradient precipitation, TMT labeling, off-line alkaline fractionation, and LC-MS/MS. The resulting data was used downstream for untargeted modeling of protein unfolding and melting temperature estimation.

### Sample Protocol
Roughly 10-50 μg (depending on temperature) protein was extracted from each temperature-gradient-precipitated aliquot using methanol/chloroform and resuspended in 8M urea. Samples were diluted to 4M urea, reduced with 5mM DTT and alkylated with 15mM IAA. Protein was digested with LysC at a 1:60 enzyme:protein ratio at 37°C for 2 hr. Samples were diluted to 1.2 M urea and digested with trypsin at a 1:40 enzyme:protein ratio at 37°C overnight. De-salting was performed using OMIX C18 tips. Digests were partially dried and resuspended in 25 μL of 150 mM TEAB, 5% ACN. TMT-10plex reagents and protein digests were mixed to achieve a 3:1 label:protein ratio in a 40 μL volume at 60% TEAB and 40% ACN. Samples were labeled for 2 hrs at RT, quenched by adding 5 μL of 5% hydroxylamine solution for 15 min at RT, and pooled. Samples were vacuum centrifuged to remove ACN and subjected to off-line high-pH RP-HPLC fractionation using a Waters 2795 Separation Module HPLC, Gemini C18 5 μm 110A 4.6mm×250mm column, and a Gibson model 201 fraction collector. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 0.1% FA for LC-MS injection in an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo). Inline nanoflow HPLC was performed on a C18 column at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. MS1 scans were acquired at 120,000 resolving power and a mass range of 380–1800 m/z. Data-dependent MS2 scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at 30,000 resolving power using HCD fragmentation of precursor ions with a 2.0 m/z isolation window.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were converted to centroided MzML using msconvert from the Proteowizard distribution. MzML files were searched using Comet against the TAIR10 database including the cRAP contaminant sequences and reverse decoy sequences. Merging of search results from multiple fractions and PSM posterior probability calculations were performed by PeptideProphet.

### Publication Abstract
Modern tandem MS-based sequencing technologies allow for the parallel measurement of concentration and covalent modifications for proteins within a complex sample. Recently, this capability has been extended to probe a proteome's three-dimensional structure and conformational state by determining the thermal denaturation profile of thousands of proteins simultaneously. Although many animals and their resident microbes exist under a relatively narrow, regulated physiological temperature range, plants take on the often widely ranging temperature of their surroundings, possibly influencing the evolution of protein thermal stability. In this report we present the first in-depth look at the thermal proteome of a plant species, the model organism <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> By profiling the melting curves of over 1700 Arabidopsis proteins using six biological replicates, we have observed significant correlation between protein thermostability and several known protein characteristics, including molecular weight and the composition ratio of charged to polar amino acids. We also report on a divergence of the thermostability of the core and regulatory domains of the plant 26S proteasome that may reflect a unique property of the way protein turnover is regulated during temperature stress. Lastly, the highly replicated database of Arabidopsis melting temperatures reported herein provides baseline data on the variability of protein behavior in the assay. Unfolding behavior and experiment-to-experiment variability were observed to be protein-specific traits, and thus this data can serve to inform the design and interpretation of future targeted assays to probe the conformational status of proteins from plants exposed to different chemical, environmental and genetic challenges.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Arabidopsis, Tpp

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Jeremy Volkening

### Lab Head
Dr Michael R Sussman
University of Wisconsin-Madison


