### Accession
PXD037492

### Title
Improved analysis of crosslinking mass spectrometry data with Kojak 2.0, advanced by integration into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline

### Description
Fragmentation ion spectral analysis of chemically crosslinked proteins is an established technology in the proteomics research repertoire for determining protein interactions, spatial orientation, and structure. Here we present Kojak version 2.0, a major update to the original Kojak algorithm, which was developed to identify crosslinked peptides from fragment ion spectra using a database search approach. A substantially improved algorithm with updated scoring metrics, support for cleavable crosslinkers, and identification of crosslinks between 15N-labeled homomultimers are among the newest features of Kojak 2.0 presented here. Kojak 2.0 is now integrated into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, enabling access to dozens of additional tools within that suite. In particular, the PeptideProphet and iProphet tools for validation of crosslinks improve the sensitivity and accuracy of correct crosslink identifications at user-defined thresholds. These new features improve the versatility of the algorithm, enabling its use in a wider range of experimental designs and analysis pipelines. Kojak 2.0 remains open-source and multi-platform.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine Arp2/3 complex was purified from calf thymus (Pel-Freez) as previously described30 with an additional ion exchange column (MonoQ) step used as a final polishing step. After loading on the MonoQ column, the complex was eluted with a gradient of 25-300 mM NaCl in 10mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT. Pure fractions were dialyzed into 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl, concentrated, and flash frozen. Crosslinking reactions were 100 µL and consisted of 25.32 uL Arp2/3 (60 µg total protein) plus 270 µL HB100D plus 2.34 µL 25 mM CK-666 plus 9.96 µL 14.5 mM BS2 (in HB100D) or 9.96 µL of DSS in DMSO.   Saccharomyces cerevisiae Spc1101-276-SpyCatcher and -SpyTag were transformed into BL21(DE3) CodonPlus RIL (Agilent). Both constructs bore the Spc110-C225S mutation to prevent disulfide-mediated oligomerization. To generate 14N-Spc1101-276-Spc110-SpyTag, cultures were grown in Terrific Broth. A 200 µL crosslinking reaction was made by mixing 23.6 uL desalted Spc110 (42 µg total protein) with 169.6 µL HB100 and adding 6.8 µL 14.5 mM BS3 (in HB100). The reaction was allowed to proceed for 2.5 minutes in an Eppendorf thermomixer at 21°C shaking at 1,000 rpm after which 50 uL was quenched by transfer to fresh 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube containing 5 µL 1M ammonium bicarbonate plus 1 µL 2M β-Mercaptoethanol. 18 µL of crosslinked protein was loaded onto an SDS-PAGE gel (Biorad, Any kD Mini-PROTEAN TGX Precast Protein Gel; catalogue number 4569033) and run according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A single band corresponding to the crosslinked Spc110 dimer was excised from the gel and subjected to in gel digestion.

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometer data files were converted to mzML using msconvert (--mzML –zlib –filter “peakPicking true 1-“ –filter “zeroSamples removeExtra”) from ProteoWizard34 prior to analysis. All computational analyses were performed using Kojak version 2.0 within the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline using the automated decoy sequence generation.  Additional analyses were performed using a previously published ground truth crosslinking dataset. These data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD014337.

### Publication Abstract
Fragmentation ion spectral analysis of chemically cross-linked proteins is an established technology in the proteomics research repertoire for determining protein interactions, spatial orientation, and structure. Here we present Kojak version 2.0, a major update to the original Kojak algorithm, which was developed to identify cross-linked peptides from fragment ion spectra using a database search approach. A substantially improved algorithm with updated scoring metrics, support for cleavable cross-linkers, and identification of cross-links between <sup>15</sup>N-labeled homomultimers are among the newest features of Kojak 2.0 presented here. Kojak 2.0 is now integrated into the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline, enabling access to dozens of additional tools within that suite. In particular, the PeptideProphet and iProphet tools for validation of cross-links improve the sensitivity and accuracy of correct cross-link identifications at user-defined thresholds. These new features improve the versatility of the algorithm, enabling its use in a wider range of experimental designs and analysis pipelines. Kojak 2.0 remains open-source and multiplatform.

### Keywords
Trans-proteomic pipeline, Computational proteomics, Iprophet, Kojak, Xl-ms, Proteomics, Crosslinking mass spectrometry, Protein interaction, Software tools, Peptideprophet

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Institute for Systems Biology, USA

### Submitter
Michael Hoopmann

### Lab Head
Dr Robert L. Moritz
Institute for Systems Biology, USA


