### Accession
PXD010888

### Title
Protein abundance changes in response to high light treatment

### Description
To characterize Arabidopsis proteomics and transcritomics changes in response to high  light treatment. We quantify specific transcipts and protein abundance changes under  both control and high light stress conditions. We aim to investigate the causality and  interconnection of transcription and protein abundance change by an in-depth analysis of  protein turnover, RNA-seq and 15N spike-in quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins (100 µg) from 14N grown plant were combined with the fully 15N labelled  protein reference (100 µg) and then separated high pH HPLC. Twentyone samples were in- solution digested and fractionated into 126, and run in Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion raw (.raw) files were first transferred to .mzml by  MSconvert and then to .mgf by TPP. The .mgf files were searched by Mascot and output  files exported as .dat files. 126.mz files and 126 .dat files are provided.

### Publication Abstract
Photoinhibitory high light stress in Arabidopsis leads to increases in markers of protein degradation and transcriptional up-regulation of proteases and proteolytic machinery, but proteostasis is largely maintained. We find significant increases in the in vivo degradation rate for specific molecular chaperones, nitrate reductase, glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase, and phosphoglycerate kinase and other plastid, mitochondrial, peroxisomal, and cytosolic enzymes involved in redox shuttles. Coupled analysis of protein degradation rates, mRNA levels, and protein abundance reveal that 57% of the nuclear-encoded enzymes with higher degradation rates also had high light&#x2013;induced transcriptional responses to maintain proteostasis. In contrast, plastid-encoded proteins with enhanced degradation rates showed decreased transcript abundances and must maintain protein abundance by other processes. This analysis reveals a light-induced transcriptional program for nuclear-encoded genes, beyond the regulation of the photosystem II (PSII) D1 subunit and the function of PSII, to replace key protein degradation targets in plants and ensure proteostasis under high light stress.

### Keywords
High light, 15n spike-in, Arabidopsis, Shoot

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Lei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia


