### Accession
PXD005840

### Title
Proteomic changes in HepaRG cells exposed to mycotoxins

### Description
Proteomic changes associated with the individual and combined exposures of deoxynivalenol (DON) and zearalenone (ZEA) were investigated in human hepatocytes (HepaRG cell line) after only 1h exposure and at low cytotoxicity levels using liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic interrogations, biotriplicate samples of HepaRG cells exposed to mycotoxins were prepared by exposing 3×10^6 HepaRG cells for 1 h to DON and ZEA alone and in combination at concentrations of 0.2 μM and 20 μM respectively. These doses corresponded to 10% growth inhibition concentrations (IC10) (concentrations previously obtained using a mitrochondrial tetrazolium salt (MTS) cytotoxicity assay after 48 h exposure). The final concentration of solvent in cell culture containing mycotoxins was maximum 0.5%. Appropriate control cultures without mycotoxin but containing the same amount of solvent were included as controls. Cellular preparations for proteomic analyses were completed as follows: cells were harvested and washed twice in ice-cold PBS by centrifugation at 400 × g for 10 minutes at 4°C. Supernatants were removed and pellets were lysed in 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 8 M urea on ice. Protein concentrations were measured on each sample using the Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFischer Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were diluted to yield a final concentration 1 µg/µl and 100 µl was transferred in a new tube for digestions. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced with 6.6 μl of 1.5 M tris pH 8.8 and 2.5 μl of 200 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (37oC, 1 h). To alkylate the proteins, 20 μl of 200 mM iodoacetamide were added and samples were then vortexed, and incubated for 1h at room temperature in the dark. To absorb excess iodoacetamide, 20 μl of 200 mM dithiolthreitol were added, followed by vortexing and incubation at room temperature for 1 h. Samples were diluted with 800 μl of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 200 μl of methanol followed by digestion with Promega Trypsin (1:20; enzyme : protein) overnight at 37°C. Samples were then evaporated on the speed vac to near dryness. Dilute formic acid was added (100 µl, 0.1%) to reduce the pH and the samples were evaporated on the speed vac to dryness. Prior to mass spectrometry, samples were desalted using microspin C18 columns following manufacturer's guidelines (Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA). After desalting, the remaining solvent was evaporated using a speed vac. Peptide samples were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and frozen at −80°C until LC-MS/MS analyses were performed. Samples were separated and introduced into the mass spectrometer (MS) by reverse-phase chromatography using a 30 cm long, 75 μm i.d., fused silica capillary column packed with C18 beads: Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ 3µm (Dr. Maisch GmBH, Ammerbuch, Germany) in 30% isopropyl alcohol, 70% acetonitrile, and fitted with a 2 cm long, 100 μm i.d. precolumn (C18-AQ 3µm Dr. Maisch GmBH). Peptides were eluted using an acidified (formic acid, 0.1% v/v) water-acetonitrile gradient (5–35% acetonitrile in 60 min). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Thermo Fisher (San Jose, CA) QExactive (QE). The top 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 acquisition from precursor ion scans of 400–1400 m z−1. Quality control (QC) peptide mixtures (Pierce mixed peptide PRTC standards) were analyzed every 12th injection to monitor chromatography and MS sensitivity. Skyline was used to determine that QC standard retention time and isotopic distribution did not deviate >10% through all analyses. For quantitative analyses, biotriplicate samples from each suite of cells exposed to either DMSO, DON, ZEA and DON+ZEA were analyzed on the QE in technical triplicates using data-dependent acquisition (DDA), culminating in a total of nine analyses per treatment.

### Data Protocol
Following methods detailed by Nunn et al. (2015), all tandem MS results were searched and interpreted with COMET which is an open source tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) sequence database search engine for peptide identification. The protein database used for correlating spectra with protein identifications was a recent Human database consisting of 21030 proteins (Human fasta 10-22-2015 from Swiss-prot database with isoforms). Then, data were analyzed using Trans Proteomic Pipeline which includes PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet. Only proteins with more than 1 peptide and >90% probability were retained for final data interpretations. The common method of spectral counting was selected to determine relative protein abundance. Spectral counting sums up the number of identified peptide tandem mass spectra resulting from a specific protein in order to estimate abundance of that protein relative to other proteins in the sample. Proteomics data were interrogated at the protein level using QSpec to determine relative quantities of proteins observed between control conditions and the different treatments (e.g., DON, ZEA and DON+ZEA). QSpec was designed specifically for analyzing differential protein expression data using label-free tandem mass spectrometry spectral counts spectral count. QSpec normalizes spectral count data based on protein length as well as by average spectral count across all proteins. QSpec is reported using a fold change difference in abundance on a log base 2 scale. This provides an easy way to examine the data because a reported positive fold change indicates significant increases in abundance and a negative fold change indicates significant decreases in abundance. A reported fold change of zero indicates no significant difference was measured between the treatments. Proteins were considered to be significantly increased or decreased in abundance if the reported Z score was ≥ 2 or ≤ −2 and the fold difference observed was ≥ 0.5 or ≤ −0.5. The Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID v6.7) was used to identify biological significance within the large data set. Proteins that were determined to be at significantly greater or lower abundance in response to each treatment condition were examined by this functional annotation tool. All proteins identified across biological and technical replicates were used as the background gene list.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hepatocytes, Co-exposure, Lc-ms/ms, Zearalenone, Deoxynivalenol

### Affiliations
Ph.D Student
Université de Brest, EA 3882, France

### Submitter
Marie-Caroline Smith

### Lab Head
Dr Laboratoire Universitaire de Biodiversité et Ecologie Microbienne, Plouzané
Université de Brest, EA 3882, France


