### Accession
PXD020305

### Title
CDS composition drives differential regulation of mRNA fate by the Ccr4-Not complex

### Description
Regulation of protein output at the level of translation allows for a swift response to dynamic changes in the requirements of the cell. This is achieved by a complex set of biochemical processes that regulate protein synthesis and mRNA stability. A major factor coordinating this regulation is the Ccr4-Not complex. Despite playing a role in most stages of the mRNA life cycle, no attempt has been made to take a global integrated view of how the Ccr4-Not complex affects gene expression. Bioreplicate one for this paper is available at the Proteome xchange identifier: PXD014764

### Sample Protocol
These experiments were conducted as described in Wilczynska et al 2019 (replicate 1 – forward and reverse - is the data used in Wilczynska et al 2019). In brief, HEK293 cells were cultured and siRNA treated for 30 hours. This media was then replaced with DMEM that does not contain Arginine or Lysine (Life Technologies). For the medium-heavy isotope containing medium, a supplement of [13C6] L-arginine (Arg-6) and [2H4] L-lysine (Lys-4) was added (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). For the heavy isotope containing medium, [13C6][15N4] L-arginine (Arg-10) and [13C6][15N2] L-lysine (Lys-8) were added (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories). Both forward (heavy CNOT1 siRNA/medium-heavy control siRNA) and reverse (medium-heavy CNOT1 siRNA/heavy CNOT1 siRNA) replicates were conducted for each biological repeat. After 14 hrs cells were lysed in SDS-free RIPA buffer, pooled in a 1:1 ratio, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The samples were then trypsin digested and fractionated using reverse phase chromatography. For the exact details of the analysis of the samples by mass spectrometry and the data analysis with MaxQuant software (Tyanova Nature Protocols 2016) see Wilczynska et al 2019.

### Data Protocol
A protein was retained for downstream analysis if it was detected in the forward and reverse replicate for a given biological repeat, and if detected in at least two of the biological repeats

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Pulse-silac

### Affiliations
CRUK Beatson Institute
Head of Proteomics, CRUK Beatson Institute, UK

### Submitter
Kelly Hodge

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Zanivan
Head of Proteomics, CRUK Beatson Institute, UK


### SDRF

