### Accession
PXD009061

### Title
Comparison of proteomic sample preparation and data analysis methods by means of human follicular fluids

### Description
In-depth proteome exploration of complex body fluids is a challenging task that requires optimal sample preparation and analysis in order to reach novel and meaningful insights. Analysis of follicular fluids is similarly difficult as that of blood serum due to the ubiquitous presence of several highly abundant proteins and a wide range of protein concentrations. Therefore, the accessibility of this complex body fluid for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC/MS/MS) analysis is a challenging opportunity to gain insights into the physiological status or to identify new diagnostic and prognostic markers for e.g. the treatment of infertility. We compared different sample preparation methods (FASP, eFASP and in-solution digestion) and three different data analysis software packages (Proteome Discoverer with SEQUEST and Mascot, Maxquant with Andromeda) in conjunction with semi- and full-tryptic databank search approaches in order to obtain a maximum coverage of the proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparations: FASP, eFASP, in-solution digestion (ISD), SDS and non-SDS based denaturation, phase-transfer

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.8.3) , Proteome Discoverer (2.1 SP1), SEQUEST HD, Mascot, Androemda, tryptic and semi-tryptic digestion

### Publication Abstract
The proteomic analysis of complex body fluids by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis requires the selection of suitable sample preparation techniques and optimal parameter settings in data analysis software packages to obtain reliable results. Proteomic analysis of follicular fluid, as a representative of a complex body fluid similar to serum or plasma, is difficult as it contains a vast amount of high abundant proteins and a variety of proteins with different concentrations. However, the accessibility of this complex body fluid for LC-MS/MS analysis is an opportunity to gain insights into the status, the composition of fertility-relevant proteins including immunological factors or for the discovery of new diagnostic and prognostic markers for, for example, the treatment of infertility. In this study, we compared different sample preparation methods (FASP, eFASP and in-solution digestion) and three different data analysis software packages (Proteome Discoverer with SEQUEST, Mascot and MaxQuant with Andromeda) combined with semi- and full-tryptic databank search options to obtain a maximum coverage of the follicular fluid proteome. We found that the most comprehensive proteome coverage is achieved by the eFASP sample preparation method using SDS in the initial denaturing step and the SEQUEST-based semi-tryptic data analysis. In conclusion, we have developed a fractionation-free methodical workflow for in depth LC-MS/MS-based analysis for the standardized investigation of human follicle fluid as an important representative of a complex body fluid. Taken together, we were able to identify a total of 1392 proteins in follicular fluid.

### Keywords
Data analysis, Sample preparation, Follicular fluids, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Host Septomics Research Centre Jena University Hospital
University Hospital Jena
Septomics

### Submitter
Roland Lehmann

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Hortense Slevogt
Host Septomics Research Centre Jena University Hospital


