### Accession
PXD011290

### Title
Phosphoproteomic and functional approaches reveal changes in sperm-specific proteins downstream KOR in human spermatozoa

### Description
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) belong to the seven transmembrane receptors superfamily that in response to external stimuli, transduce signals via G proteins to initiate different intracellular signaling pathways which culminate in specific cellular responses. Although in somatic cells the GPCR participate in a broad variety of physiological processes, the expression of diverse GPCRs at the plasma membrane of human spermatozoa suggests their involvement in the regulation of sperm fertility. Mature spermatozoa could present unique features in their molecular mechanisms downstream GPCRs due to the fact that they possess sperm-specific proteins and are transcriptionally and translationally silent. In order to decipher the signaling pathways engaged by this receptor superfamily in human spermatozoa, we selected the kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) as a study model and applied, for first time, phosphoproteomic approach based on TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analyses combined with functional studies using a specific agonist of KOR, U50488H.

### Sample Protocol
Human spermatozoa that had normal parameters were treated with 1 μM U50488H (the specific agonist of the receptor) for 1 and 60 minutes independently for proteomic and functional analyses. For proteomic analyses, we adopted a Tandem Mass-Tag (TMT) 6-plex isotopic labeling strategy followed by phosphopeptide enrichment by consecutive incubations with titanium dioxide beads (TiO2) and generated samples for LC-MS/MS. The experiment was performed in three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine (integrated in MaxQuant, version 1.5.3.30) at a FDR threshold of 1%. Perseus software (v.1.6.0.7) was employed for the calculation of the statistical significance (two-sample student´s T-test) and fold changes between U50488H-treated and Control samples. We considered as U50488H-dependent phosphosites the ones that were consistently regulated presenting a 1.5 fold change (U50488H/Ctr > 1.5 or U50488H/Ctr < 0.67 and p value 0.05) in the three replicas for each timepoint and protein fraction.

### Publication Abstract
G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) belong to the seven transmembrane receptor superfamily that transduce signals via G proteins in response to external stimuli to initiate different intracellular signaling pathways which culminate in specific cellular responses. The expression of diverse GPCRs at the plasma membrane of human spermatozoa suggests their involvement in the regulation of sperm fertility. However, the signaling events downstream of many GPCRs in spermatozoa remain uncharacterized. Here, we selected the kappa-opioid receptor (KOR) as a study model and applied phosphoproteomic approach based on TMT labeling and LC-MS/MS analyses. Quantitative coverage of more than 5000 proteins with over 3500 phosphorylation sites revealed changes in the phosphorylation levels of sperm-specific proteins involved in the regulation of the sperm fertility in response to a specific agonist of KOR, U50488H. Further functional studies indicate that KOR could be involved in the regulation of sperm fertile capacity by modulation of calcium channels. Our findings suggest that human spermatozoa possess unique features in the molecular mechanisms downstream of GPCRs which could be key regulators of sperm fertility and improved knowledge of these specific processes may contribute to the development of useful biochemical tools for diagnosis and treatment of male infertility.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Kor, Human spermatozoa

### Affiliations
University of Basque Country (UPV/EHU)
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Campusvej 55  5230 Odense M  Denmark  ihk@bmb.sdu.dk Phone: +45 65502494

### Submitter
Itziar Urizar Arenaza

### Lab Head
Dr Irina Kratchmarova
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Campusvej 55  5230 Odense M  Denmark  ihk@bmb.sdu.dk Phone: +45 65502494


