### Accession
PXD022101

### Title
Investigation of the host response of naïve Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar) inoculated with Paramoeba perurans prior to the onset of clinical symptoms

### Description
Amoebic Gill Disease (AGD), caused by the ectoparasite Paramoeba perurans (P. perurans) is characterised by hyperplasia of the gill epithelium and lamellar fusion and has become recognised as one of the most significant health threats in salmon farming . In this study, the gill and serum proteomes of Atlantic salmon inoculated with P. perurans, across multiple timepoints post-challenge, were analysed. The expression of proteins with established roles in innate immunity, across various timepoints, was compared with expression in naïve Atlantic salmon to elucidate the host response to gill colonisation.

### Sample Protocol
Gills were weighed, and tissue lysis was performed, on ice, by sonication  in a 50mM Tris, 1% SDS lysis buffer. Protein quantification was carried out and 300µg of protein were incubated with 0.1M DTT at 95°C for 10mins. Serum samples were thawed, and protein quantification was carried out . 300µg of protein were diluted 1 in 10 in a 50mM Tris, 1% SDS lysis buffer and incubated with 0.1M DTT at 95°C for 10mins. For both gill and serum samples, clean up and digestion steps were carried out using the FASP method based on that described by Wiśniewski et al. Briefly, samples were mixed with UA buffer (8M urea, 100mM Tris - HCl pH 8.9) and contaminants and salts were removed by repeated ultrafiltration through 10kDa Vivacon centrifugal concentrators (Sartorius). Samples were incubated for 20 minutes in darkness with 100µl 50mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer, to facilitate blocking of reduced cysteine residues. After further washes with UA and 50mM ABC, trypsin (1µg per 100µg protein; Sigma- Aldrich) in 40µl ABC was added to the samples in the concentrator units. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 4 hours. The resulting peptide fragments were washed with ABC and digestion was halted by the addition of 5µl 50% acetic acid. The eluates were desalted on C18 – Stage tips (Sigma- Aldrich), dried in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf Vacufuge concentrator 5301) and stored at -20°C until mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Q-Exactive was processed using the MaxQuant(version 1.6.4.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against Uniprot Salmo Salar database (2019_04) containing 82,390 entries. All searche were performed using the default setting of MaxQuant, with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. For the generation of label free quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities for protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptides in different nano-HPLC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant in a maximum time window of 1 min.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Serum proteome, Gel-free proteomics, Gill proteome, Atlantic salmon, Amoebic gill disease

### Affiliations
UCD
Department of Biopharmaceutical & Medical Science,School of Science & Computing,Galway Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Rd, Galway, Ireland

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Eugene McCarthy
Department of Biopharmaceutical & Medical Science,School of Science & Computing,Galway Mayo Institute of Technology, Dublin Rd, Galway, Ireland


