### Accession
PXD036344

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of METTL3 phosphorylation in extracellular growth factor signaling

### Description
A fundamental facet of cell signaling is the conversion of extracellular signals into adaptive transcriptional responses. The role of RNA modifications in this process is poorly understood. We found that epidermal growth factor (EGF) promotes ERK-dependent phosphorylation of the m6A writer enzyme METTL3 at serine-43. Serine-43 phosphorylation increased METTL3-mediated methylation of the small nuclear RNA 7SK.  Here we performed of phosphorylation mass spectrometry based on Data independent acquisition (DIA) of Hela cells stimulated with EGF in the absence or presence of the inhibitor U0126. Additionally, we validated known interactions between the 7SK-associated protein LARP7. Our findings establish a novel function for the m6A modification in converting growth-factor signaling events to a transcriptional elongation regulatory response via an RNA-methylation-dependent switch mediated by ERK signaling.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, 2-8 x 108 cells were pelleted and dripped from a syringe directly into liquid nitrogen to generate frozen pellets. Frozen pellets were cryomilled in a Retsch Planetary Ball Mill PM100. We performed three cycles of milling with the following program: 400 rpm with direction reversal for three minutes, with intervals of one minute. Flag IP from 1-2 grams of cryomilled HeLa Flag-LARP7 cells were performed to isolate endogenous 7SK RNA for RNA mass spec and to assess the localization of m6A sites. Lysis, incubation with anti-Flag beads, and washes were performed in IP Buffer A (20 mM Hepes Na, 150 mM NaCl, 0.3% CHAPS, and protease and RNase inhibitors). Beads were resuspended in TE, and RNA was extracted using phenol:chloroform, followed by ethanol precipitation and resuspension in water. For IP performed from crosslinked cells, 6-20 x 107 cells per sample were washed with PBS, UV crosslinked at 254 nm (400 mJoules/cm2), and lysed using Lysis Buffer (50 mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.5, 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1 % Triton x-100, and protease and RNase inhibitors).   The phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using the High-Select™ Fe-NTA kit (Thermo Scientific, A32992) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, the resins of the spin-column were aliquoted, incubated with 200 µg of total peptides for 30 min at room temperature, and transferred into the filter tip (TF-20-L-R-S, Axygen). The supernatant was then removed by centrifugation. Then, the resins adsorbed with phosphopeptides were washed three times with 200 µl washing buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and twice 200 µl water to remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides. The phosphopeptides were then eluted off the resins twice with 100 µl elution buffer (50% ACN, 5% NH3•H2O). The centrifugation steps above were all kept at 500 g, 30 sec. The eluates were dried by speed-vac and stored at −80 °C before MS measurements.  The samples were measured using the DIA mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) method described previously. LC separation was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 systems (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a self-packed analytical PicoFrit column (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) (75 µm × 50 cm length) using C18 material of ReproSil-Pur 120A C18-Q 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A 120-min measurement with buffer B (80% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) from 5% to 37% and corresponding buffer A (0.1% formic acid) during the gradient was used to elute peptides from the LC. The flow rate was kept at 300 nl/min, temperature-controlled at 60 °C using a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation GmbH, Biberach, Germany). The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) instrument coupled to a nanoelectrospray ion source (NanoFlex, Thermo Scientific) was calibrated using Tune (version 3.0) instrument control software. Spray voltage was set to 2,000 V and heating capillary temperature at 275 °C. The DIA-MS methods consisted of one MS1 scan and 33 MS2 scans of variable isolated windows. The MS1 scan range is 350 – 1650 m/z, and the MS1 resolution is 120,000 at m/z 200. The MS1 full scan AGC target value was 2.0E6, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The MS2 resolution was set to 30,000 at m/z 200 with the MS2 scan range 200 – 1800 m/z, and the normalized HCD collision energy was 28%. The MS2 AGC was set to be 1.5E6, and the maximum injection time was 50 ms. The default peptide charge state was set to 2. Both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS data analyses were performed using Spectronaut v15 with a direct DIA search against the Uniprot downloaded human fasta file. The Oxidation at methionine was set as a variable modification, whereas carbamidomethylation at cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Both peptide and protein FDR cutoff (Qvalue) were controlled at 1%, and the data matrix was strictly filtered by Qvalue. Overall, both peptide- and protein- FDR (based on Qvalue) were controlled at 1%, and the data matrix was filtered by Qvalue. For the phosphoproteomics, the serine/threonine/tyrosine (S/T/Y) was enabled as a variable modification, and the PTM score >0.75 for all the samples. All the other settings in Spectronaut are kept as Default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Hela cells, Mettl3, Dia-ms

### Affiliations
Yale University
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Wenxue Li

### Lab Head
Dr Yansheng Liu
Department of Pharmacology, Yale University School of Medicine


