### Accession
PXD007635

### Title
The immunopeptidomic landscape of ovarian carcinoma

### Description
Immunopeptidome analysis of ovarian carcinoma tissues was performed to characterize the HLA class I and class II presented ligandome of this malignancy.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I and II molecules were isolated by standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously (PMID: 23329485). Pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32 was employed for HLA class I isolation and pan-HLA class II mAb Tü39 as well as HLA-DR-specific mAb L243 were used for HLA class II isolation. Between 0.5 g and 3 g of tissue samples were employed for lysis and HLA ligand isolation.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis was carried out using Proteome discoverer. Peak lists were searched against the human proteome as comprised in the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using Mascot search engine. Mass tolerance for processing was 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. No cleavage specificity was selected and the only dynamic modification allowed was oxidized methionine. Peptide confidence was determined using percolator algorithm with a target value of q ≤ 0.05 (5% FDR). Additional post processing filters were search engine rank = 1 and peptide length of 8-12 amino acids for HLA class I ligands and 12-25 amino acids for HLA class II ligands.

### Publication Abstract
Immunotherapies, particularly checkpoint inhibitors, have set off a revolution in cancer therapy by releasing the power of the immune system. However, only little is known about the antigens that are essentially presented on cancer cells, capable of exposing them to immune cells. Large-scale HLA ligandome analysis has enabled us to exhaustively characterize the immunopeptidomic landscape of epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs). Additional comparative profiling with the immunopeptidome of a variety of benign sources has unveiled a multitude of ovarian cancer antigens (MUC16, MSLN, LGALS1, IDO1, KLK10) to be presented by HLA class I and class II molecules exclusively on ovarian cancer cells. Most strikingly, ligands derived from mucin 16 and mesothelin, a molecular axis of prognostic importance in EOC, are prominent in a majority of patients. Differential gene-expression analysis has allowed us to confirm the relevance of these targets for EOC and further provided important insights into the relationship between gene transcript levels and HLA ligand presentation.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Hla, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
University Tuebingen

### Submitter
Heiko Schuster

### Lab Head
Dr Hans-Georg Rammensee
Department of Immunology, Institute of Cell Biology, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.


