### Accession
PXD025009

### Title
Differential effects of environmental and endogenous 24h rhythms within a deep-coverage spatiotemporal proteome

### Description
The cellular landscape of most eukaryotic cells changes dramatically over the course of a 24h day. Whilst the proteome responds directly to daily environmental cycles, it is also regulated by a cellular circadian clock that anticipates the differing demands of day and night. To quantify the relative contribution of diurnal versus circadian regulation, we mapped spatiotemporal proteome dynamics under 12h:12h light:dark cycles compared with constant light. Using Ostreococcus tauri, a prototypical eukaryotic cell, we achieved 85% coverage of the theoretical proteome and provided an unprecedented insight into the identity of proteins that drive and facilitate rhythmic cellular functions. Surprisingly, the overlap between diurnally- and circadian-regulated proteins was quite modest (11%). These proteins exhibited different phases of oscillation between the two conditions, consistent with an interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic regulatory factors. The relative amplitude of rhythmic protein abundance was much lower than would be expected from daily variations in transcript abundance. Transcript rhythmicity was poorly predictive of daily variation in abundance of the encoded protein. We observed coordination between the rhythmic regulation of organelle-encoded proteins with the nuclear-encoded proteins that are targeted to organelles. Rhythmic transmembrane proteins showed a remarkably different phase distribution compared with rhythmic soluble proteins, indicating the existence of a novel circadian regulatory process specific to the biogenesis and/or degradation of membrane proteins. Taken together, our observations argue that the daily spatiotemporal regulation of cellular proteome composition is not dictated solely by clock-regulated gene expression. Instead, it also involves extensive rhythmic post-transcriptional, translational, and post-translational regulation that is further modulated by environmental timing cues.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection and preparation Ostreococcus tauri cells were cultured in artificial sea water (ASW) and entrained under cycles of 12 h light : 12 h dark (LD) as reported previously9 for 6 days. 24h prior to the first sampling point, cultures were either transferred to constant light (LL) or kept in LD cycles (LD, Fig. 1a).  Samples were collected in triplicate every 3.5 hours for 3 full cycles in LL (22 time points) and one full cycle in LD (8 time points). For each time point whole cells were collected at 4000 rpm for 20 min. Media was discarded and each cell pellet was gently resuspended in 0.9 ml ASW. Cells were collected at 4000 rpm for 10 min and the media discarded. After adding two chrome beads (3 mm, REF) to each pellet the samples were snap frozen in LN2. Samples were stored at -80 ºC until all time points were collected. Resuspension buffer (50mM Hepes, pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, protease inhibitors (Roche)) was added to each frozen pellet on ice. Cells were lysed using a Tissue Lyser (Eppendorf) in precooled blocks (1 min at 30/s). Whole lysates were centrifuged at 50,000g for 30 min at 4°C in a Beckman Optima MAX ultracentrifuge. Pellets were kept on ice and were washed once carefully with resuspension buffer. Pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8) by vortexing. Samples were then sonicated in a Bioruptor (Diagenode) for 30s on/ 30s off (x5). All samples were centrifuged at 17,000g for 10 min to remove unsolubilised debris. Triplicate samples per timepoint were pooled, samples were randomised, and 50 µg of each time point was analysed by 3 sets of 11-plex TMT.  TMT peptide labelling Samples were randomised before allocating to TMT runs, and the operator was blinded to the sample IDs. Samples were trypsin-digested as reported previously [wong et al, biorxiv]. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 20 µl of 175 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and labelled with a distinct TMT tag, 12µl, from a stock prepared as per manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific), for 60 minutes at room temperature. The labelling reaction was quenched by incubation with 2.2 µl 5% hydroxylamine for 30 min. Labelled peptides from 10 time point samples and 1 pool were combined into a single sample and partially dried to remove MeCN in a SpeedVac (Savant). Samples were desalted and the eluted peptides were lyophilized.  Basic pH Reverse-Phase HPLC fractionation and LC MS/MS The TMT labelled peptides were subjected to off-line High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) fractionation as described [wong et al, biorxiv]. The fractionated peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS using a fully automated Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano System (Thermo Scientific) fitted with a 100 μm x 2 cm PepMap100 C18 nano trap column and a 75 μm × 25 cm reverse phase NanoEase M/Z HSSC18 T3  column (Waters). Samples were separated using a binary gradient consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid), and eluted at 300 nL/min with an acetonitrile gradient. The outlet of the nano column was directly interfaced via a nanospray ion source to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in standard data-dependent mode, performing a MS full-scan in the m/z range of 380-1600, with a resolution of 70000. This was followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 35000 and Normalised Collision Energy (NCE) of 33%. MS target values of 3e6 and MS2 target values of 1e5 were used. The isolation window of precursor ion was set at 0.7 Da and sequenced peptides were excluded for 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Spectral processing and protein identification Raw files were processed using MaxQuant52 v 1.6.6.0. MS/MS spectra were quantified with reporter ion MS2 and searched against the nuclear-encoded proteome obtained from the Ostta V2.2 database31, 53 plus the mitochondrial and chloroplastic genomes41. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, were set as variable modifications. Protein quantification requirements were set at 1 unique and razor peptide. In the identification tab, second peptides and match between runs were not selected. Other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The MaxQuant output file was processed with Perseus (v1.6.6.0). Identifications from the reverse database were removed, only identified by site, potential contaminants were removed, and we only considered proteins with ≥1 unique and razor peptide. All columns with an intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” and exported as a .txt file.  The MaxQuant output file with phosphor (STY) sites table was also processed with Perseus software (v1.6.6.0). The data was filtered: identifications from the reverse database were removed, potential contaminants were removed and we only considered phosphopeptides with localisation probability ≥ 0.75. Then all columns with intensity “less or equal to zero” were converted to “NAN” and exported as .txt file.  Normalisation Since an equal amount of protein was used for each TMT labelling reaction, sample loading normalisation was performed by taking the sum of all intensities for each time point, and normalising to the mean of these. Internal reference scaling (IRS)54 was then carried out to allow for comparisons between TMT experiments: the mean abundance for each protein in each of the three pools was calculated. The mean of these means was calculated and used to normalise the value for each protein between the three TMT runs. In instances where a protein was missing from a pool sample, the mean of the remaining 2 pool samples was used to normalise. For all except five proteins in the dataset, if a protein was missing from the pool sample it was also missing from every individual time point in that TMT run. Peptides that are not unique to one protein were removed, as were proteins that were detected at too low levels to reliably quantify. Time points were then de-randomised to obtain the final data set.

### Publication Abstract
The cellular landscape changes dramatically over the course of a 24&#x2009;h day. The proteome responds directly to daily environmental cycles and is additionally regulated by the circadian clock. To quantify the relative contribution of diurnal versus circadian regulation, we mapped proteome dynamics under light:dark cycles compared with constant light. Using Ostreococcus tauri, a prototypical eukaryotic cell, we achieved 85% coverage, which allowed an unprecedented insight into the identity of proteins that facilitate rhythmic cellular functions. The overlap between diurnally- and circadian-regulated proteins was modest and these proteins exhibited different phases of oscillation between the two conditions. Transcript oscillations were generally poorly predictive of protein oscillations, in which a far lower relative amplitude was observed. We observed coordination between the rhythmic regulation of organelle-encoded proteins with the nuclear-encoded proteins that are targeted to organelles. Rhythmic transmembrane proteins showed a different phase distribution compared with rhythmic soluble proteins, indicating the existence of a circadian regulatory process specific to the biogenesis and/or degradation of membrane proteins. Our observations argue that the cellular spatiotemporal proteome is shaped by a complex interaction between intrinsic and extrinsic regulatory factors through rhythmic regulation at the transcriptional as well as post-transcriptional, translational, and post-translational levels.

### Keywords
Circadian proteomes, Arrhythmic. rhythmic, Ostreococcus tauri

### Affiliations
MRC-LMB
Reader, School of Biological Science, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Sew Peak-Chew

### Lab Head
Dr Gerben van Ooijen
Reader, School of Biological Science, University of Edinburgh


