### Accession
PXD011597

### Title
Ethane-degrading enrichment culture

### Description
Metaproteome of an Archaeal-Bacterial consortia oxidizing ethane coupled to sulfate reduction to sulfide

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from 30 ml cultures were suspended in 30 ul of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, and lysed by three 60 s freeze-thaw cycles between liquid nitrogen and +37°C (thermal shaker, 1400 rpm). The cell lysate was incubated with 50 mM dithiothreitol at 30°C for 1h, followed by alkylation with 200 mM iodacetamide for 1 h at room temperature, in the dark, and trypsin digestion (0.6 ug trypsin, Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTip columns (Millipore), and analysed by nLC-MS/MS using an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoUPLC system (nanoAquity, Waters).

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was conducted by Proteome Discoverer (v2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Sequest search engine with the annotated metagenomes of Ca. Argoarchaeum (Eth-Arch1), and the sulfate reducing bacteria Eth-SRB1 and Eth-SRB2 as databases. The mass tolerances of precursor- and fragment-ion were set as 3 ppm and 0.1 Da. Peptides were considered to be identified when a probability of 0.05 was achieved. The relative abundance of proteins was estimated based on the precursor-ion intensity of the mapped peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Ethane is the second most abundant component of natural gas in addition to methane, and-similar to methane-is chemically unreactive. The biological consumption of ethane under anoxic conditions was suggested by geochemical profiles at marine hydrocarbon seeps<sup>1-3</sup>, and through ethane-dependent sulfate reduction in slurries<sup>4-7</sup>. Nevertheless, the microorganisms and reactions that catalyse this process have to date remained unknown<sup>8</sup>. Here we describe ethane-oxidizing archaea that were obtained by specific enrichment over ten years, and analyse these archaea using phylogeny-based fluorescence analyses, proteogenomics and metabolite studies. The co-culture, which oxidized ethane completely while reducing sulfate to sulfide, was dominated by an archaeon that we name 'Candidatus Argoarchaeum ethanivorans'; other members were sulfate-reducing Deltaproteobacteria. The genome of Ca. Argoarchaeum contains all of the genes that are necessary for a functional methyl-coenzyme M reductase, and all subunits were detected in protein extracts. Accordingly, ethyl-coenzyme M (ethyl-CoM) was identified as an intermediate by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. This indicated that Ca. Argoarchaeum initiates ethane oxidation by ethyl-CoM formation, analogous to the recently described butane activation by 'Candidatus Syntrophoarchaeum'<sup>9</sup>. Proteogenomics further suggests that oxidation of intermediary acetyl-CoA to CO<sub>2</sub> occurs through the oxidative Wood-Ljungdahl pathway. The identification of an archaeon that uses ethane (C<sub>2</sub>H<sub>6</sub>) fills a gap in our knowledge of microorganisms that specifically oxidize members of the homologous alkane series (C<sub>n</sub>H<sub>2n+2</sub>) without oxygen. Detection of phylogenetic and functional gene markers related to those of Ca. Argoarchaeum at deep-sea gas seeps<sup>10-12</sup> suggests that archaea that are able to oxidize ethane through ethyl-CoM are widespread members of the local communities fostered by venting gaseous alkanes around these seeps.

### Keywords
Archaea, Ethane, Anaerobic

### Affiliations
Dept. Isotope Biogeochemistry Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Florin Musat

### Lab Head
Dr Florin Musat
Dept. Isotope Biogeochemistry Helmholtz Center for Environmental Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany


