### Accession
PXD019755

### Title
Lkb1 suppresses amino acid-driven gluconeogenesis in the liver

### Description
Excessive glucose production in the liver is a key factor in the hyperglycemia observed in diabetes mellitus type 2. It is generally agreed to result from an increase in hepatic gluconeogenesis. Considerable attention has been devoted to the transcriptional regulation of key gluconeogenic enzymes, but much less is known about the regulation of amino-acid catabolism, which generates gluconeogenic substrates. Here, we highlight a novel role of LKB1 in this regulation. We show that mice with a hepatocyte-specific deletion of Lkb1 have higher levels of hepatic amino acid catabolism, driving gluconeogenesis. This effect was observed during both fasting and the postprandial period, identifying Lkb1 as a critical suppressor of postprandial hepatic gluconeogenesis. Hepatic Lkb1 deletion was associated with major changes in whole-body metabolism, leading to a lower lean body mass and, in the longer term, sarcopenia and cachexia, as a consequence of the diversion of amino acids to liver metabolism at the expense of muscle. Using genetic and pharmacological approaches, we identified the aminotransferases and specifically, Agxt as effectors of the suppressor function of Lkb1 in amino acid-driven gluconeogenesis.  The present dataset is from the phosphoproteomic analysis of the refed mice in a study where a global quantitative analysis ( PXD013478 ) is also described in the same publication.

### Sample Protocol
Phosphoproteomemic analysis of "refed mice" Mice breed: Mice with an inducible specific deletion of Lkb1 in hepatocytes (Lkb1KOlivad mice) were obtained by crossing Lkb1fl/fl mice 46 with TTR-CreTam mice expressing an inducible Cre-recombinase under the control of the hepatocyte-specific transthyretin promoter 47. The control mice for this study were their Cre-negative littermates (Lkb1fl/fl; Cre-). AgxtKO mice were a gift from Anja Verhulst (University of Antwerp, Belgium) and Eduardo Salido (Tenerife, Spain) 23. The DKO mice were obtained by crossing LKBKOlivad mice with AgxtKO mice. Liver double knockout of AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 catalytic subunits was achieved by crossing AMPKα1lox/lox mice with AMPKα2lox/lox mice then Alfp-Cre transgenic mice to generate AMPKα1lox/lox,α2lox/lox (control) and AMPKα1lox/lox,α2lox/lox-Alfp-Cre (liver AMPKα1/α2 KO) mice 24.  Mice were housed in colony cages in SPF conditions, under a 12-h light/12-h dark cycle, in a controlled-temperature environment (21°C). They were fed ad libitum with a standard laboratory chow diet (65% carbohydrate, 11% lipids, and 24% proteins; SAFE 03, FRANCE). In most cases, animals were studied either directly after 18 hours of fasting (fasted state) or four hours after the initiation of refeeding with a chow diet (refed state). For long-term experiments, animals were fed with the standard chow diet. We injected two doses of tamoxifen (1.5 mg/mouse of tamoxifen Sigma-Aldrich, T5648) in corn oil IP into eight- to 12-week-old mice. Most studies were performed on male mice 15 days after injection. For the survival analysis, both males and females were monitored for up to 300 days. For all experiments, age-matched animals were used as controls. For protein, RNA and biochemistry studies, livers were removed after each experiment and frozen in liquid nitrogen. For information on the number of animals (n) in each experiment, please refer to the corresponding figure legend. The refed mouse sample numbers are: 914, 918, 919 for lkb1-KO mice  while 911  912 920 921 are WT mice  Sample preparation:  Phosphopeptides were purified according to Humphrey et al 55. Briefly, livers were minced and homogenized in homogenization buffer (100mM Tris/HCl pH8.00 containing 6M guanidinium chloride). Proteins were quantified and 3 mg of proteins were reduced and alkylkated by heating to 95°C for 5 min with 10mM TCEP and 40 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were precipitated with cold acetone, resolubilized in 100mM bicarbonate ammonium solution containing 10% trifluoroethanol and digested overnight with 60µg trypsin. KCl, KH2PO4, ACN and TFA were added to final concentrations of 300mM, 5mM, 50% and 6%, respectively. Samples were centrifuged at 20 000g for 10 min at room temperature and transferred to 30mg TiO2 bead pellets. Samples with TiO2 beads were incubated for 5 min at 40°C with continuous agitation, beads were recovered by centrifugation, washed with 50% ACN containing 1%TFA and transferred to C8 StageTips in 80%ACN containing 0.5% acetic acid. Peptides were eluted with 50% ACN containing 15% NH4OH and immediately acidified by TFA. Peptides were dried and cleaned on SDB-RPS StageTips before analysis by mass spectrometry.  LC MS for refed mice:  Analysis of 10% of the peptides was performed with a nano liquid chromatographer (nLC) hyphenated to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Electron) throughout the elution process according to a data-dependent scheme to analyze the nLC elution content by electrospray ionization as follows: phosphopeptides were separated on a reverse-phase column (Pepmap C18 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length from Thermo) with a two-hour gradient starting with 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O and ending with 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O. The MS scans spanned from 375 to 1500 Th with automated gain control (AGC) target at 3.106, within 100 ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and a resolution of 70,000. Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed on the 10 most abundant ions, with a dynamic exclusion time of 30 s. The precursor selection window was set at 4Th. The HCD normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27% stepped at 32% and MS/MS scan resolution was set at 17,500, with AGC target 1.105 within 100 ms MIIT.

### Data Protocol
Phophopeptide data were analyzed with Maxquant version 1.6.6.0 53. The database used was a concatenation of murine sequences from the reviewed Uniprot-Swissprot database (UniprotKB, release 2019-10) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a constant modification while phosphorylations of STY, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” (MBR) options were allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% for both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was performed with razor peptides, and required at least two such peptides. Statistical analysis and data comparisons were performed with Perseus software 54.  53 Tyanova, S., Mann, M. & Cox, J. MaxQuant for in-depth analysis of large SILAC datasets. Methods in molecular biology 1188, 351-364, doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-1142-4_24 (2014). 54 Tyanova, S. et al. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nature methods 13, 731-740, doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901 (2016). 55 Humphrey, S. J., Azimifar, S. B. & Mann, M. High-throughput phosphoproteomics reveals in vivo insulin signaling dynamics. Nat Biotechnol 33, 990-995, doi:10.1038/nbt.3327 (2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sarcopenia, Refed mice, Q-exactive, Liver, Amino acids, Phosphoproteome, Cachexia, Lkb1, Label-free quantification, Gluconeogenesis, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 PARIS, FRANCE.
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Christine PERRET
Inserm U1016, Institut Cochin, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 PARIS, FRANCE.


