### Accession
PXD003554

### Title
Nuclear nucleolin interactome analysis

### Description
Nucleolin (NCL) is a major component of the cell nucleolus, which has the ability to rapidly shuttle to several other cell’s compartments. NCL has been shown to play important roles in a variety of essential functions among which ribosome biogenesis, gene expression and cell growth. However, the precise mechanisms underlying NCL functions are still unclear. Our study aimed to provide new information on NCL functions via the identification of its nuclear interacting partners. Using an interactomics approach, we identified 140 binding partners of NCL, among which, a 100 of them, were specifically found associated to NCL independently of the presence of RNA.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were transfected for 48 h with the pTCN or the pTC plasmid using the calcium phosphate precipitation procedure. Nuclear protein complexes containing TAP-mCherry-NCL (TCN) or TAP-mCherry (TC) were purified by tandem affinity purification (TAP). Briefly, nuclear protein extracts were prepared from transfected HeLa cells which were re-suspended in a cold hypotonic buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4; 10 mM NaCl; 2 mM MgCl2; and 5 mM DTE) in the presence of a protease inhibitor mixture (Roche Applied Science), then gently lysed by addition of 0.7% Nonidet P-40. The nuclei were pelleted by centrifugation at 4°C, then resuspended in Lysis Buffer (TAP Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) and disrupted by sonication performing 4 rounds of 30 second pulses on ice. When indicated, the extracts were treated with 50 ng/ml RNase A for 30 min at 4°C. Debris was then removed by centrifugation during 10 min centrifugation at 9,000 rpm at 4°C, and supernatants containing the soluble nuclear factors were harvested and used for TAP purifications as indicated by the supplier (TAP Stratagene, La Jolla, CA), first on streptavidin beads then on calmodulin beads. Purified nuclear complexes bound to calmodulin beads were eluted with SDS-PAGE loading buffer for analysis of the protein contents.  Preparation and in-gel digestion of proteins: proteins eluted from calmodulin beads were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen) and stained with R-250 Coomassie blue. Gel bands were manually excised and cut in pieces before being washed by six successive incubations in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 15 min, followed by six incubations in 25mM NH4HCO3 containing 50% (v/v) acetonitrile. Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile and incubated with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 53°C and with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 35 min in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by the addition of 10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 (incubation for 10 min). Gel pieces were then washed again by incubation in 25 mM NH4HCO3 followed by dehydration with 100% acetonitrile. Modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the dehydrated gel pieces for incubation at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted from gel pieces in three sequential extraction steps (each 15 min) in 30 µl of 50% acetonitrile, 30 µl of 5% formic acid, and finally 30 µl of 100% acetonitrile. The pooled supernatants were dried under vacuum.  Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses: the dried extracted peptides were resuspended in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000, Dionex and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Dionex). The nanoLC method consisted of a 120-minutes gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Spray voltage was set at 1.4 kV; heated capillary was adjusted to 200°C. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z = 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 106 ions (maximum filling time 500 ms). The twenty most intense ions from the preview survey scan delivered by the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (collision energy 35%) in the LTQ after accumulation of 104 ions (maximum filling time 100 ms).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8. Spectra were searched against the Uniprot database (Human reference proteome, March 2015 version) and the frequently observed contaminants database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set respectively at 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches. Fragment mass error tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-ter, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates - calculated by employing a reverse database strategy - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels. LFQ values were calculated using MaxQuant from MS intensity of unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleolin (NCL) is a major component of the cell nucleolus, which has the ability to rapidly shuttle to several other cells' compartments. NCL plays important roles in a variety of essential functions, among which are ribosome biogenesis, gene expression, and cell growth. However, the precise mechanisms underlying NCL functions are still unclear. Our study aimed to provide new information on NCL functions via the identification of its nuclear interacting partners. Using an interactomics approach, we identified 140 proteins co-purified with NCL, among which 100 of them were specifically found to be associated with NCL after RNase digestion. The functional classification of these proteins confirmed the prominent role of NCL in ribosome biogenesis and additionally revealed the possible involvement of nuclear NCL in several pre-mRNA processing pathways through its interaction with RNA helicases and proteins participating in pre-mRNA splicing, transport, or stability. NCL knockdown experiments revealed that NCL regulates the localization of EXOSC10 and the amount of ZC3HAV1, two components of the RNA exosome, further suggesting its involvement in the control of mRNA stability. Altogether, this study describes the first nuclear interactome of human NCL and provides the basis for further understanding the mechanisms underlying the essential functions of this nucleolar protein.

### Keywords
Nanolc-ms/ms, Tandem affinity purification, Nucleolin

### Affiliations
EDyP
EDyP lab

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Christophe Bruley
EDyP lab


