### Accession
PXD037655

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis reveals RNA as a source for tumor-agnostic neoantigen identification

### Description
Systemic pan-tumor analyses may reveal the significance of common features implicated in cancer immunogenicity and patient survival. Here, we provide a comprehensive multi-omics data set for 32 patients across 25 tumor types for proteogenomic-based discovery of neoantigens. By using an optimized computational approach, we discover a large number of tumor-specific and tumor-associated antigens. To create a pipeline for the identification of neoantigens in our cohort, we combine DNA and RNA sequencing with MS-based immunopeptidomics of tumor specimens, followed by the assessment of their immunogenicity and an in-depth validation process. We detect a broad variety of non-canonical HLA-binding peptides in the majority of patients demonstrating partially immunogenicity. Our validation process allows for the selection of 32 potential neoantigen candidates. The majority of neoantigen candidates originates from variants identified in the RNA data set, illustrating the relevance of RNA as a still understudied source of cancer antigens. This study underlines the importance of RNA-centered variant detection for the identification of shared biomarkers and potentially relevant neoantigen candidates.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of HLA complexes, consequent elution and purification of peptide ligands was performed as previously described (Bassani-Sternberg et al., 2016). Briefly, snap-frozen human tumor tissue samples were placed in 5-7 ml of PBS with 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 1% octyl-β-D glucopyranoside (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, and 1:200 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich) and mechanically dissociated with an ULTRA-TURRAX Disperser (IKA) for 10 s on ice, followed by 1 h incubation at 4°C. The lysates were then cleared by centrifugation at 40,000g at 4 °C for 20 min and flowed through columns packed with protein-A Sepharose beads (Invitrogen) to deplete the endogenous antibodies. HLA class I complexes were immunoaffinity-purified from the cleared and antibody-depleted lysates on columns containing protein-A Sepharose beads covalently bound to 2 mg of the pan-HLA class I antibody W6/32 (purified from HB95 cells; ATCC) and eluted at room temperature with 0.1 N acetic acid. The eluted HLA-I complexes were then loaded onto Sep-Pak tC18 cartridges (Waters Corporation), and HLA-I peptides were separated from the complexes by elution with 30% acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Peptides were further purified using Silica C-18 column tips (Harvard Apparatus), eluted again with 30% ACN in 0.1% TFA and concentrated by vacuum centrifugation. Finally, HLA-I peptides were resuspended with 2% ACN in 0.1% TFA for LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) on a 50 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter column, in-house packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH), and eluted during a 95 min linear gradient of 5-30% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). Full MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z and AGC target value of 3e6 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The ten most abundant ions with charge 1-4 were accumulated to an AGC target value of 1e5 and for a maximum injection time of 120 ms and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). MS/MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z and 20 s dynamic exclusion to reduce repeated peptide selection.

### Data Protocol
For the identification of all peptide sequences from the MS spectra, pFIND (v.3.1.5) was used to match the reference protein database (Human Ensembl GRCh38, release 92) with general contaminants to the generated spectra files. Parameters were set to search for non-specifically digested peptides ranging from 8-15mers with a maximum mass of 1,500 Da and N-terminal protein acetylation (42.010565 Da), methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463 Da) as possible post-translational modifications. Identified peptides were filtered with an FDR of 0.01 at the peptide spectrum match level.  For the identification of mutated HLA class I peptides, the reference protein database (Human Ensembl GRCh38, release 92) was searched together with a patient-specific customized databases containing mutated amino acid sequences based on each tumor mutational profile. Therefore, mutations called from WES/WGS and RNAseq of the patient tumor samples were introduced into the wildtype transcript DNA sequences downloaded from biomart (v92) and translated into peptide sequences. Genes were included in the analysis without exceptions regarding the transcript biotypes. For non-protein-coding transcripts, ORFs enclosing the mutation site were determined by identifying paired start and stop-codons in all 3 reading frames. The same procedure was performed for protein-coding transcripts in case of start/stop-loss/gain and frameshift mutations. Furthermore, for start/stop mutations, the coding sequence (CDS) was extended into the corresponding UTR. For mutations affecting splice donor or acceptor sites, the affected intron was included into the CDS and again checked for valid ORFs. Only mutations resulting in amino acid changes and within valid ORFs were considered. For every affected transcript, up to three ORFs enclosing the mutation site were translated into the corresponding mutated peptide sequence.  Peptide sequences were then used as a reference data for mutated peptide identification from the MS data using pFIND (v.3.1.5). Parameters were set to search for non-specifically digested peptides ranging from 8-15mers with a maximum mass of 1,500 Da and N-terminal acetylation (42.010565 Da), methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da), cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.021463 Da) as possible post-translational modifications and a set FDR of 0.05 at the peptide spectrum match level.

### Publication Abstract
Systemic pan-tumor analyses may reveal the significance of common features implicated in cancer immunogenicity and patient survival. Here, we provide a comprehensive multi-omics data set for 32 patients across 25 tumor types for proteogenomic-based discovery of neoantigens. By using an optimized computational approach, we discover a large number of tumor-specific and tumor-associated antigens. To create a pipeline for the identification of neoantigens in our cohort, we combine DNA and RNA sequencing with MS-based immunopeptidomics of tumor specimens, followed by the assessment of their immunogenicity and an in-depth validation process. We detect a broad variety of non-canonical HLA-binding peptides in the majority of patients demonstrating partially immunogenicity. Our validation process allows for the selection of 32 potential neoantigen candidates. The majority of neoantigen candidates originates from variants identified in the RNA data set, illustrating the relevance of RNA as a still understudied source of cancer antigens. This study underlines the importance of RNA-centered variant detection for the identification of shared biomarkers and potentially relevant neoantigen candidates.

### Keywords
Neoantigens, Proteogenomics, Human tumor, Hla class i immunopeptidomics

### Affiliations
German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany
3rd Medical Department, School of Medicine, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany
1 German Cancer Consortium of Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 2 IIIrd Medical Department, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 3 Center for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM), School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Celina Tretter

### Lab Head
Dr Angela Krackhardt
1 German Cancer Consortium of Translational Cancer Research (DKTK) and German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 2 IIIrd Medical Department, Klinikum rechts der Isar, School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany 3 Center for Translational Cancer Research (TranslaTUM), School of Medicine, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany


