### Accession
PXD022229

### Title
Early events of the symbiotic interaction between Oryza sativa and Nostoc punctiforme revealed by a quantitative proteomic approach.

### Description
Plant-cyanobacteria symbiosis is considered one of the pivotal events in the history of life. In this symbiosis, the cyanobacterium provides to the plant fixed nitrogen compounds and plant hormones and, in return, the plant provides to the cyanobacterium fixed carbon. Despite the large knowledge in the physiology and ecology of plant-cyanobacteria symbioses, little is known about the molecular mechanisms involved in the crosstalk between partners. It has been shown recently that Nostoc punctiforme is able to stablish an endophytic symbiosis with Oryza sativa. This finding opens a door to explore this symbiotic interaction as a sustainable alternative to nitrogen fertilization of paddy fields. However, molecular mechanisms behind Oryza-Nostoc endosymbiosis are still not clarified. To gain further insights, an LC-MS/MS based label-free quantitative technique was used to evaluate the differential proteomics under N. punctiforme treatment vs. control plants at 1 day and 7 days. Differential expression profiling reveals a significant number of proteins to be down-regulated or missing in both partners, while others were more abundant or only expressed when both partners were in contact. In N. punctiforme, the differential protein expression was primarily connected to primary metabolism, signal transduction and perception, transport of substances and photosynthesis. In O. sativa, the differential protein expression was connected to a wide range of biological functions regulating carbon and nitrogen metabolism and response to biotic and abiotic stresses.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings of rice grown for 7 days were suspended in 50-ml conical tubes with –N BG110 medium. After 4–5 days of acclimation, Nostoc punctiforme inoculants containing hormogonia were added to the solutions at a final concentration of 0.8 µg Chl·mL-1. Cultures of each partners were also grown separately in parallel as controls. Total protein extracts were prepared from biological triplicates at 1 day and 7 days post inoculation from control Nostoc punctiforme samples (5mL of culture at 50µg Chl·mL-1 per replicates), control Oryza sativa root samples (300 mg from 15 plants per replicate) and Nostoc punctiforme treated plant roots (300 mg from 15 plants per replicate). Samples were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and then incubated in lysis buffer (50mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 1mM PMSF (phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride), 1mM EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid), 2% SDS and protease inhibitors cocktail) and centrifuged at 16 000g at 4 °C for 15 min. Protein concentrations were determined by Bradford method (Bio-Rad). Protein samples were precipitated by TCA/acetone. Precipitated samples were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 0.2% Rapigest (Waters) for protein determination. Protein (20 μg) was digested with trypsin as described previously (Vowinckel et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
The SWATH-MS analysis was performed at the Proteomic Facility of the Institute of Plant Biochemistry and Photosynthesis, Seville, Spain. A data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach using nano-LC-MS/MS was initially performed to generate the SWATH-MS spectral libraries.  The peptide and protein identifications were performed using Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) with the Paragon algorithm. The search was conducted against Uniprot Oryza proteome, Uniprot Nostoc proteome or a combined database with Uniprot Oryza+Nostoc proteome. The automatically generated report in ProteinPilot was manually inspected for FDR (false discovery rate) cut-off proteins and only proteins identified at FDR ≤1% were considered for output and subsequent analysis. Only protein-specific peptides were selected for further analysis in Oryza or Nostoc spectral libraries. In addition, the combined Oryza+Nostoc library was used to detect interspecies peptides. These peptides were not used in the downstream analysis carried out with Oryza or Nostoc spectral libraries.    For relative quantification using SWATH analysis, each biological replicate was quantified using three technical replicates and a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Each sample (1 μg) was analyzed using SWATH-MS acquisition method on the LC-MS equipment with the LC gradient. The method consisted of repeated acquisition cycles of TOF MS/MS scans (230 to 1500 m/z, 60 ms acquisition time) of 60 overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of variable width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400-1250 m/z mass range from a previous TOF MS scan (400-1250 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. The total cycle time was 3.7 s. Autocalibration of the equipment and chromatographic conditions were controlled by an injection of a standard of digested β-galactosidase from E coli between the replicates. SWATH MS spectra alignment was performed with the PeakView 2.2 (Sciex) software with the MicroApp SWATH 2.0 using the Oryza or Nostoc spectral libraries generated as described above.  After data processing, the processed mrkvw files containing protein information from PeakView were loaded into MarkerView (Version 1.2.1.1, AB Sciex) for normalization of protein intensity (total area sums) using the built-in total ion intensity sum plug-in.  Statistical analysis for the identification of differentially expressed proteins were performed in R using limma package (folchange > 1.5 and p-value < 0.05).

### Publication Abstract
Symbiosis between cyanobacteria and plants is considered pivotal for biological nitrogen deposition in terrestrial ecosystems. Despite extensive knowledge of the ecology of plant-cyanobacterium symbioses, little is known about the molecular mechanisms involved in recognition between partners. Here, we conducted a quantitative sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry pipeline to analyze protein changes in Oryza sativa and Nostoc punctiforme during early events of symbiosis. We found differentially expressed proteins in both organisms linked to several biological functions, including signal transduction, adhesion, defense-related proteins and cell wall modification. In N. punctiforme we found increased expression of 62 proteins that have been previously described in other Nostoc-plant symbioses, reinforcing the robustness of our study. Our findings reveal new proteins activated in the early stages of the Nostoc-Oryza symbiosis that might be important for the recognition between the plant and the host. Oryza mutants in genes in the common symbiosis signaling pathway (CSSP) show reduced colonization efficiency, providing first insights on the involvement of the CSSP for the accommodation of N. punctiforme inside the plant cells. This information may have long-term implications for a greater understanding of the symbiotic interaction between Nostoc and land plants.

### Keywords
Oryza, Swath-ms., Plant-cyanobacteria symbiosis, Nostoc

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis CSIC Americo Vespucio 49. 41092. Seville (Spain).
CSIC

### Submitter
Alvarez Nunez Consolacion

### Lab Head
Dr Vicente Mariscal
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis CSIC Americo Vespucio 49. 41092. Seville (Spain).


