### Accession
PXD026082

### Title
Human antibodies enhance association of macrophages to Candida albicans and reduce fungal-mediated epithelial damage

### Description
Candida albicans is a common commensal on human mucosal surfaces, but can become pathogenic, e.g. if the host is immunocompromised. While neutrophils, macrophages and T cells-driven activation of neutrophils are regarded as major players in the defence against C. albicans, the role of B cells and the protective function of their antibodies are less well characterized. In this study, we show that human serum antibodies are able to enhance the the association  of human macrophages with C. albicans cells . Human serum antibodies are also capable of reducing the growth of the fungi as well as inhibiting adhesion to epithelial cells. Furthermore, human serum antibodies impair C. albicans’ invasion into human oral epithelial cells by blocking induced endocytosis and consequently host cell damage. While aspartic proteases secreted by C. albicans were able to cleave human IgG, this process does not appear to affect the protective function of human antibodies in adhesion. Thus, humans are equipped with anti­C. albicans antibodies, which can enhance antifungal activities and which can prevent fungal mediated epithelial damage (even in immunocompromised settings).

### Sample Protocol
The 30 kDa heavy chain IgG fragment resulting from SAP2 incubated Privigen was excised from Coomassie (Serva) stained 12% polyacrylamide gels and prepared for in-gel-digestions with chymotrypsin (Promega) using a protocol described from Shevchenko et al. 2006 (DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2006.468) that was adapted for this experiment. Briefly, the Coomassie stain was removed from the gel pieces by multiple steps of dehydration using acetonitrile and rehydration in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Gel pieces were dried and rehydrated in reduction buffer (20 mM TCEP, 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at 56 °C and subsequently in alkylation buffer (25 mM iodoacetamide, 25 mM NH4HCO3) for 30 min at room temperature. For the proteolytic digestion, gel pieces were incubated in 50 µL of a 25 ng/µl chymotrypsin (Promega) solution at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces by three subsequent waterbath sonication steps for 15 min each in 50/50, 70/30 and 90/10 acetonitrile/water (v/v) mixtures with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Supernatants containing the peptides were dried and filtered through a 10 kDa MWCO filter (Merck Millipore). The flowthrough was transferred into HPLC vials. LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano instrument coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Hoffmann et al. 2019). Tryptic peptides were trapped for 4 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow-rate of 5 µL/min. The peptides were then separated on an Acclaim Pep Map column (50 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm) using a binary gradient (A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O; B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90:10 (v/v) ACN/H2O): 0 min at 4% B, 10 min at 6% B, 60 min at 12% B, 100 min at 20% B, 120 min at 25% B, 140 min at 35% B, 160 min at 60% B, 170-175 min at 96% B, 175.1-200 min at 4 % B. Positively charged ions were generated by a Nanospray Flex Ion Source using a stainless steel emitter with 2.2 kV spray voltage. Ions were measured in data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode: Precursor ions were scanned at m/z 300-1500 (R: 120,000 FWHM; AGC target: 1∙106; max. IT: 100 ms). Fragment ions generated in the HCD cell at 30% normalized collision energy using N2 were scanned (R: 15,000 FWHM; AGC target: 2e5; max. IT: 100 ms) using a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against the Uniprot database of Homo sapiens (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640; 2017/06/15) using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1, Sequest HT, and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set as oxidation of Met and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. The static modification was set to carbamidomethylation of Cys. Two unique peptides with a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1% on both peptide and protein level (compared against a reverse decoy database) were required for positive protein hits.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Candida albicans</i> is a common commensal on human mucosal surfaces, but can become pathogenic, e.g. if the host is immunocompromised. While neutrophils, macrophages and T cells are regarded as major players in the defense against pathogenic <i>C. albicans</i>, the role of B cells and the protective function of their antibodies are less well characterized. In this study, we show that human serum antibodies are able to enhance the association of human THP-1 monocyte-like cells with <i>C. albicans</i> cells. Human serum antibodies are also capable of inhibiting the adherence and damage dealt to epithelial cells. Furthermore, human serum antibodies impair <i>C. albicans</i> invasion of human oral epithelial cells by blocking induced endocytosis and consequently host cell damage. While aspartic proteases secreted by <i>C. albicans</i> are able to cleave human IgG, this process does not appear to affect the protective function of human antibodies. Thus, humans are equipped with a robust antibody response to <i>C. albicans</i>, which can enhance antifungal activities and prevent fungal-mediated epithelial damage.

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Secreted aspartyl proteases, Privigen, Igg, Macrophages, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Department of Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Jena, Germany


