### Accession
PXD026213

### Title
A competitive activity-based protein profiling platform yields cell wall synthesis inhibitors active against replicating and non-replicating Mycobacterium tuberculosis

### Description
The identification and validation of a small molecule's targets is a major bottleneck in the discovery process for tuberculosis antibiotics. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is an efficient tool for determining a small molecul's targets within complex proteomes. However, how target inhibition relates to biological activity is often left unexplored. Here we studied the effects of 1,2,3-triazole ureas on Mycobacterium tuberculosis . After screening ~200 compounds, we focused on two inhibitors active against both exponentially replicating and hypoxia-induced drug-tolerant Mtb that form part of a four-compound structure-activity series. The compound with negligible activity revealed potential false positive targets not addressed in other ABPP studies. Biochemistry, computational docking, and morphological analysis confirmed that active compounds preferentially inhibit serine hydrolases with cell wall and lipid metabolism functions and that disruption of the cell wall underlies biological activity. Our findings showed that ABPP identifies the targets most likely relevant to a compound's antibacterial activity.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were treated and processed as described in the methods section.

### Data Protocol
Data were and processed as described in the methods section.

### Publication Abstract
The identification and validation of a small molecule's targets is a major bottleneck in the discovery process for tuberculosis antibiotics. Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) is an efficient tool for determining a small molecule's targets within complex proteomes. However, how target inhibition relates to biological activity is often left unexplored. Here, we study the effects of 1,2,3-triazole ureas on Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). After screening &#x223c;200 compounds, we focus on 4 compounds that form a structure-activity series. The compound with negligible activity reveals targets, the inhibition of which is functionally less relevant for Mtb growth and viability, an aspect not addressed in other ABPP studies. Biochemistry, computational docking, and morphological analysis confirms that active compounds preferentially inhibit serine hydrolases with cell wall and lipid metabolism functions and that disruption of the cell wall underlies biological activity. Our findings show that ABPP identifies the targets most likely relevant to a compound's antibacterial activity.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Drug discovery, Abpp

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute
Scripps Research, Weatherwax Biotechnologies

### Submitter
Armand Cognetta

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin F. Cravatt
Department of Chemistry, Scripps Research Institute


