### Accession
PXD008226

### Title
An inter-subunit protein-protein interface that stabilizes the specific activity and oligomerization of the AAA+ chaperone Reptin

### Description
Reptin forms multiple inter-subunit protein-protein interaction contacts. Rate-limiting motifs in ligand-dependent oligomer assembly are not defined. We set up a Reptin-self peptide scan assay to identify functional protein-protein interfaces that dominate in Reptin self assembly. The most dominant self-peptide binding mapped to the inter-subunit “rim” of the Reptin oligomer that is formed a tyrosine finger binding into an adjacent hydrophobic region in an adjacent subunit.  Reptin binding to the tyrosine finger peptide motif is suppressed by Liddean or ADP suggesting that oligomer formation excludes the self-peptide from binding. HDX-mass spectrometry demonstrated that ATP suppressed deuteration at the dimer interface in both wt and Y340A Reptin. However, the Y340A mutation attenuated deuterium suppression of Reptin within the tyrosine finger in the presence of ligand. The tyrosine finger of Reptin interacts with a more shallow pocket in Pontin. Gel filtration demonstrated that the Y340A Reptin mutant does not form ADP-induced oligomers compared to the D299N mutant or wt- Reptin. The Y340A mutation shows increased AGR2 binding but decreased Pontin or p53 binding. These data indicate that the Y340 tyrosine “finger” plays an important role in stabilizing the Reptin oligomer in the presence of ligand.  We propose that the Reptin interactome is regulated by ligand-dependent conversion between monomeric and oligomeric forms that is regulated by a divergent inter-subunit protein-protein interaction motif.

### Sample Protocol
Reptin, either wt or mutant, was incubated with 1 mM ATP for 1h at 21°C prior to the exchange. The exchange was initiated by a sequential dilution into deuterated buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pD 7.1; 150 mM NaCl, 1mM EDTA, 2 mM MgCl2 and 1 mM DTT) to a final concentration of 2 µM. For sample with ATP the deuterated buffer was enriched with 1 mM ATP.  The exchange was carried out at room temperature and was quenched by the addition of 1 M HCl in 1  M glycine at 5 min followed by rapid freezing in liquid nitrogen.   Digestion and HPLC separation Each sample was thawed and injected onto an immobilized pepsin column (15 µl bed volume, flow rate 20 µl/min, 2% acetonitrile / 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid). Peptides were trapped and desalted on-line on a peptide microtrap (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) for 2 min at flow rate 20 µl/min. Next, the peptides were eluted onto an analytical column (Jupiter C18, 1.0 x 50 mm, 5 µm, 300Å, Phenomenex, CA) and separated using a linear gradient elution of 10 % B in 2 min, followed by 31 min isocratic elution at 40 % B. Solvents were: A – 0.1% formic acid in water, B – 80% acetonitrile / 0.08% formic acid. The immobilized pepsin column, trap cartridge and the analytical column were kept at 1°C.   Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometric analysis was carried out using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with ESI ionization on-line connected with a robotic system based on the HTS-XT platform (CTC Analytics, Zwingen, Switzerland). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode for peptide mapping (HPLC-MS/MS). Each MS scan was followed by MS/MS scans of the top three most intensive ions from both CID and HCD fragmentation spectra. Analysis of deuterated samples was done in HPLC-MS mode with ion detection in the orbital ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide mapping Tandem mass spectra were searched using SequestHT against the cRap protein database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP) containing sequence of the Reptin protein with the following search settings: mass tolerance for precursor ions of 10 ppm, mass tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da, no-enzyme specificity and no-fixed or variable modifications were applied. The false discovery rate at peptide identification level was set to 1%. Sequence coverage was analysed with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  Deuterated samples MS data were processed using HDX Examiner (Sierra Analytics). Graphs showing deuteration kinetics were plotted using Draw-HDX-Plot (MSTools). Molecular structures were rendered using PyMOL

### Publication Abstract
Reptin is a member of the AAA+ superfamily whose members can exist in equilibrium between monomeric apo forms and ligand bound hexamers. Inter-subunit protein-protein interfaces that stabilize Reptin in its oligomeric state are not well-defined. A self-peptide binding assay identified a protein-peptide interface mapping to an inter-subunit "rim" of the hexamer bridged by Tyrosine-340. A Y340A mutation reduced ADP-dependent oligomer formation using a gel filtration assay, suggesting that Y340 forms a dominant oligomer stabilizing side chain. The monomeric Reptin<sup>Y340A</sup> mutant protein exhibited increased activity to its partner protein AGR2 in an ELISA assay, further suggesting that hexamer formation can preclude certain protein interactions. Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) demonstrated that the Y340A mutation attenuated deuterium suppression of Reptin in this motif in the presence of ligand. By contrast, the tyrosine motif of Reptin interacts with a shallower pocket in the hetero-oligomeric structure containing Pontin and HDX-MS revealed no obvious role of the Y340 side chain in stabilizing the Reptin-Pontin oligomer. Molecular dynamic simulations (MDS) rationalized how the Y340A mutation impacts upon a normally stabilizing inter-subunit amino acid contact. MDS also revealed how the D299N mutation can, by contrast, remove oligomer de-stabilizing contacts. These data suggest that the Reptin interactome can be regulated by a ligand dependent equilibrium between monomeric and hexameric forms through a hydrophobic inter-subunit protein-protein interaction motif bridged by Tyrosine-340. SIGNIFICANCE: Discovering dynamic protein-protein interactions is a fundamental aim of research in the life sciences. An emerging view of protein-protein interactions in higher eukaryotes is that they are driven by small linear polypeptide sequences; the linear motif. We report on the use of linear-peptide motif screens to discover a relatively high affinity peptide-protein interaction for the AAA+ and pro-oncogenic protein Reptin. This peptide interaction site was shown to form a 'hot-spot' protein-protein interaction site, and validated to be important for ligand-induced oligomerization of the Reptin protein. These biochemical data provide a foundation to understand how single point mutations in Reptin can impact on its oligomerization and protein-protein interaction landscape.

### Keywords
Hdx mass spectrometry, Protein-protein interaction, Reptin, Oligomer assembly

### Affiliations
d
RECAMO, Masaryk Memorial Cancer Institute
Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Cell Signalling Unit, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Dominika Coufalová

### Lab Head
Dr Ted R. Hupp
Edinburgh Cancer Research Centre, Cell Signalling Unit, University of Edinburgh


