### Accession
PXD004462

### Title
Dynamic protein interactions of the Polycomb Repressive Complex 2

### Description
Polycomb proteins assemble to form complexes with important roles in epigenetic regulation. The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) modulates the di- and tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3, each of which are associated with gene repression. Although three subunits, EZH1/2, SUZ12 and EED, form the catalytic core of PRC2, a wider group of proteins associate with low stoichiometry. This raises the question of whether dynamic variation of the PRC2 interactome results in alternative forms of the complex during differentiation. Here we compared the physical interactions of PRC2 in undifferentiated and differentiated states of NTERA2 pluripotent embryonic carcinoma cells. Label-free quantitative proteomics was used to assess endogenous immunoprecipitation of the EZH2 and SUZ12 subunits of PRC2. A high stringency dataset reflecting the endogenous state of PRC2 was produced that included all previously reported ‘core’ and ‘associated’ PRC2 components, and several novel interacting proteins. Comparison of the interactomes obtained in undifferentiated and differentiated cells revealed candidate proteins that favoured either one or other state. For example, SALL4 and ZNF281 associate with PRC2 in pluripotent cells, while PCL1 and SMAD3 more associate with PRC2 in differentiating cells. Analysis of the mRNA and protein levels of these factors found that their association with PRC2 correlated with their cell state-specific expression. Taken together, we propose that dynamic changes to the PRC2 interactome during differentiation may contribute to directing its activity during cell fate transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples were introduced into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) which was connected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system (Dionex) coupled to a packed C18 fused silica emitter (75 μm I.D.) Parent ion spectra (MS1) were measured at resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6. Tandem mass spectra (MS2; up to 8 scans per duty cycle) were obtained at resolution 17,500, AGC target 5e4, collision energy of 25.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.547 using the human UniProt database (release 2013_12; 67,911 entries). The following search parameters were used: Fixed Mod: carbamidomethylation; Variable Mods: methionine oxidation; Trypsin/P digest enzyme; Precursor mass tolerances 6 ppm; Fragment ion mass tolerances 20 ppm; Peptide FDR 1%; Protein FDR 1%. ‘Label-Free Quantitation; LFQ’, ‘iBAQ’, and ‘Match Between Run’ settings were selected. Reverse hits and contaminants were filtered and the Perseus program (http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=perseus:start) was used to carry out statistics. Briefly, the LFQ values were transformed (log2) and missing values imputed to a normal distribution (width = 0.3; shift = 1.8), and a two-tailed t-test applied with correction for multiple testing.

### Publication Abstract
Polycomb proteins assemble to form complexes with important roles in epigenetic regulation. The Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2) modulates the di- and tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3, each of which are associated with gene repression. Although three subunits, EZH1/2, SUZ12, and EED, form the catalytic core of PRC2, a wider group of proteins associate with low stoichiometry. This raises the question of whether dynamic variation of the PRC2 interactome results in alternative forms of the complex during differentiation. Here we compared the physical interactions of PRC2 in undifferentiated and differentiated states of NTERA2 pluripotent embryonic carcinoma cells. Label-free quantitative proteomics was used to assess endogenous immunoprecipitation of the EZH2 and SUZ12 subunits of PRC2. A high stringency data set reflecting the endogenous state of PRC2 was produced that included all previously reported core and associated PRC2 components, and several novel interacting proteins. Comparison of the interactomes obtained in undifferentiated and differentiated cells revealed candidate proteins that were enriched in complexes isolated from one of the two states. For example, SALL4 and ZNF281 associate with PRC2 in pluripotent cells, whereas PCL1 and SMAD3 preferentially associate with PRC2 in differentiating cells. Analysis of the mRNA and protein levels of these factors revealed that their association with PRC2 correlated with their cell state-specific expression. Taken together, we propose that dynamic changes to the PRC2 interactome during differentiation may contribute to directing its activity during cell fate transitions.

### Keywords
Polycomb reprssor complex 2, Protein interactions

### Affiliations
univ college dublin
University College Dublin

### Submitter
gerard cagney

### Lab Head
Dr Gerard Cagney
University College Dublin


