### Accession
PXD000495

### Title
Pea Seedling Mitochondrial Lysine Acetylome

### Description
Posttranslational lysine acetylation is believed to occur in all taxa and to affect thousands of proteins. In contrast to the hundreds of mitochondrial proteins reported to be lysine-acetylated in non-plant species, only a handful have been reported from the plant taxa previously examined. To investigate whether this reflects a biologically significant difference or merely a peculiarity of the samples thus far examined, we immunoenriched and analyzed acetylated peptides from highly purified pea seedling mitochondria using mass spectrometry. Our results indicate that a multitude of mitochondrial proteins, involved in a variety of processes, are acetylated in pea seedlings.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were purified from pea (Pisum sativum L. cv. Little Marvel) seedlings and delipidated by phase partitioning.  Proteins from each aqueous phase were precipitated with acetone and resuspended in buffered urea/thiourea.  Following sequential digestion with Lys-C and trypsin, peptides were desalted and solvent evaporated.  Antibodies against acetyllysine residues were used to enrich acetylated peptides, and the enriched and flow-through fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  A Thermo Scientific LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with fragmentation by either CID or HCD.  Fragmentation spectra were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant, MSGF+, and Sequest HT with Proteome Discoverer.  Precursor tolerance was set to 6 ppm, while fragment ion tolerances of 0.6 Da and 0.02 Da were used for CID and HCD, respectively.

### Data Protocol
A target database was created using proteins from sequenced legume genomes and in silico translations of Pisum sativum nucleotide sequences.  Decoy database searches were performed with default settings for each search algorithm and peptide-spectrum matches were filtered to an estimated 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational lysine acetylation is believed to occur in all taxa and to affect thousands of proteins. In contrast to the hundreds of mitochondrial proteins reported to be lysine-acetylated in non-plant species, only a handful have been reported from the plant taxa previously examined. To investigate whether this reflects a biologically significant difference or merely a peculiarity of the samples thus far examined, we immunoenriched and analyzed acetylated peptides from highly purified pea seedling mitochondria using mass spectrometry. Our results indicate that a multitude of mitochondrial proteins, involved in a variety of processes, are acetylated in pea seedlings.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Pisum sativum, Garden pea, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
University of Missouri

### Submitter
Colin Smith-Hammond

### Lab Head
Dr Jan A. Miernyk
University of Missouri


