### Accession
PXD000632

### Title
FLAG-affinity pulldown experiments with sll1214 and sll1874 from Synechocystis

### Description
Putative subunits of the Mg-protoporphyrin monomethylester oxidative cyclase from Synechocystis PCC 6803, sll1214 and sll1874 were expressed with N-terminal 3xFLAG-tags in separate transformants.. Solubilised thylakoid membranes from these 2 transformants were incubated with anti-FLAG agarose and after extensive washing, the FLAG-tagged proteins, together with putative interaction partners were desorbed with FLAG peptide. The eluates were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The resulting peptides were cleaned by cation exchange and desalted, then analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS. The FLAG pulldown experiment was also carried out with a thylakoid membrane preparation from wild-type with no FLAG-tagged proteins as a control. Protein identification was by database searching with Mascot.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The cyclase step in chlorophyll (Chl) biosynthesis has not been characterized biochemically, although there are some plausible candidates for cyclase subunits. Two of these, Sll1214 and Sll1874 from the cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803, were FLAG-tagged in vivo and used as bait in separate pulldown experiments. Mass spectrometry identified Ycf54 as an interaction partner in each case, and this interaction was confirmed by a reciprocal pulldown using FLAG-tagged Ycf54 as bait. Inactivation of the ycf54 gene (slr1780) in Synechocystis 6803 resulted in a strain that exhibited significantly reduced Chl levels. A detailed analysis of Chl precursors in the ycf54 mutant revealed accumulation of very high levels of Mg-protoporphyrin IX methyl ester and only traces of protochlorophyllide, the product of the cyclase, were detected. Western blotting demonstrated that levels of the cyclase component Sll1214 and the Chl biosynthesis enzymes Mg-protoporphyrin IX methyltransferase and protochlorophyllide reductase are significantly impaired in the ycf54 mutant. Ycf54 is, therefore, essential for the activity and stability of the oxidative cyclase. We discuss a possible role of Ycf54 as an auxiliary factor essential for the assembly of a cyclase complex or even a large multienzyme catalytic center.

### Keywords
Flag-tag, Mg-protoporphyrin monomethylester oxidative cyclase, Maxis uhr-tof, Synechocystis pcc 6803, Sll1214, Sll1874, Ycf54

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head


