### Accession
PXD029519

### Title
Overlapping binding site for ferredoxin and frataxin on yeast cysteine desulfurase participating in FeS cluster biogenesis

### Description
In mitochondria cysteine desulfurase (Nfs1) plays a central role in the biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (FeS) clusters, cofactors critical for activity of many cellular proteins. Nfs1 functions both as a sulfur donor for cluster assembly and as a binding platform for other proteins functioning in the process. These include, not only the dedicated scaffold protein (Isu1) on which FeS clusters are synthesized, but also frataxin (Yfh1) and ferredoxin (Yah1). Yfh1 activates cysteine desulfurase enzymatic activity, while Yah1 supplies electrons for persulfide reduction. Yfh1 interaction with Nfs1 is well understood; that of Yah1 is not. Here, based on the results of biochemical experiments involving purified wild-type and variant proteins, we report that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae Yah1 and Yfh1 share an evolutionary conserved interaction site on Nfs1. Consistent with this notion each can displace the other from Nfs1, but are inefficient competitors when a variant with an altered interaction site is used. Thus, the binding mode of Yah1 and Yfh1 interacting with Nfs1 in mitochondria of S. cerevisiae resembles the mutually exclusive binding of ferredoxin and frataxin with cysteine desulfurase reported for the bacterial FeS cluster assembly system. Our findings are consistent with the generally accepted scenario that the mitochondrial FeS cluster assembly system was inherited from bacterial ancestors of mitochondria.

### Sample Protocol
We carried out mass spectrometry analysis to confirm presence of ACPEc protein in our preparation of the NIA complex, as well as to identify the degradation products present in the Yah1GST fusion protein preparation. The Yfh1GST-NIA-Isu1 complex and Yah1GSTwere separated on 4-16% gradient SDS-PAGE. Gel pieces were washed with 25 mM ammonium acetate and with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3 to remove Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 staining. Next, the gels were shrunk with acetonitrile and subjected to reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 100mM ammonium acetate for 30 min at 57°C. Free cysteines were alkylated with 0.5 M iodoacetamide in 100 mM ammonium acetate (45 minutes in a dark room at room temperature) and proteins were digested in-gel overnight with 10 ng/μl trypsin (Promega, CAT NO V5280) in 25 mM ammonium acetate. After digestion, the peptides were extracted from the gel by sequential washing with a solution of: 25 mM ammonium acetate (one time), 10% formic acid in water (two times). The gels were finally shrunk with 100% acetonitrile and the resulting solutions were combined, evaporated to dryness on a SpeedVac, then dissolved in 1% acetic acid with water and desalted according to the StageTips C18 procedure.  LC/MS-MS analysis was performed in the Mass Spectrometry Laboratory (Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology University of Gdansk and  Medical University of Gdansk), using a TripleTOF 5600+ hybrid mass spectrometer with a DuoSpray Ion Source (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) connected with an Ekspert MicroLC 200 Plus System (Eksigent, Redwood City, CA, USA). Peptides were separated by a 28 min gradient of 10-90% solvent B in solvent A, with flow rate of 10 μl/min, followed by 2-min regeneration and re-equilibration. Solvents A and B consisted of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and acetonitrile, respectively. Column parameters: Exigent microLC column ChromXP C18CL (3 μm, 120 Å, 150 × 0.3 mm), and an injection volume of 5 μl. The microLC-MS/MS system was controlled by the AB SCIEX Analyst TF 1.6 software. The data-dependent experiments (DDA) were conducted for all the investigated samples. The TOF MS survey scan was performed in the m/z range of 100-2,000 for 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with PEAKS Studio 10.6 software (51) using PEAKS standard protocol (de novo + PEAKS DB + PEAKS PTM + SPIDER) based on UniProtKB SwissProt database (E. coli and S. cerevisiae, retrieval dates: 12.10.2020 and 26.10.2020, number of entries searched: 1759377 and 84397, respectively), with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin with [D|P], digest mode: specific, parent ions mass error tolerance: 0.1 Da, fragment ion mass error tolerance: 0.2 Da, max missed cleavages: 3, fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modifications: Acetylation (N-term), Oxidation (M). Protein identification was validated using a target-decoy search strategy with 1% FDR threshold.

### Publication Abstract
In mitochondria, cysteine desulfurase (Nfs1) plays a central role in the biosynthesis of iron-sulfur (FeS) clusters, cofactors critical for activity of many cellular proteins. Nfs1 functions both as a sulfur donor for cluster assembly and as a binding platform for other proteins functioning in the process. These include not only the dedicated scaffold protein (Isu1) on which FeS clusters are synthesized but also accessory FeS cluster biogenesis proteins frataxin (Yfh1) and ferredoxin (Yah1). Yfh1 has been shown to activate cysteine desulfurase enzymatic activity, whereas Yah1 supplies electrons for the persulfide reduction. While Yfh1 interaction with Nfs1 is well understood, the Yah1-Nfs1 interaction is not. Here, based on the results of biochemical experiments involving purified WT and variant proteins, we report that in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Yah1 and Yfh1 share an evolutionary conserved interaction site on Nfs1. Consistent with this notion, Yah1 and Yfh1 can each displace the other from Nfs1 but are inefficient competitors when a variant with an altered interaction site is used. Thus, the binding mode of Yah1 and Yfh1 interacting with Nfs1 in mitochondria of S.&#xa0;cerevisiae resembles the mutually exclusive binding of ferredoxin and frataxin with cysteine desulfurase reported for the bacterial FeS cluster assembly system. Our findings are consistent with the generally accepted scenario that the mitochondrial FeS cluster assembly system was inherited from bacterial ancestors of mitochondria.

### Keywords
Protein complex, Lc-msms, Iron-sulfur protein

### Affiliations
University of Gdansk
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 58 Abrahama St., 80-307 Gdansk, Poland

### Submitter
Igor Grochowina

### Lab Head
Dr Jaroslaw Marszalek
Intercollegiate Faculty of Biotechnology, University of Gdansk and Medical University of Gdansk, 58 Abrahama St., 80-307 Gdansk, Poland


