### Accession
PXD008464

### Title
An integrated analysis of protein abundance, transcript level and tissue diversity to reveal developmental regulation of maize

### Description
The differentiation and subsequent development of plant tissues or organs are tightly regulated at multiple levels, including the transcriptional, posttranscriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels. Transcriptomes define many of the tissue-specific gene expression patterns in maize, and some key genes and their regulatory networks have been established at the transcriptional level. In this study, the sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry technique was employed as a quantitative proteome assay of four representative maize tissues, and a set of high confidence proteins were identified. Integrated analysis of the proteome and transcriptome revealed that protein abundance was positively correlated with mRNA level with weak to moderate correlation coefficients, but the abundance of key proteins for function or architecture in a given tissue was closely tempo-spatially regulated at the transcription level. A subset of differentially expressed proteins, specifically tissue-specific proteins, were identified, e.g., reproductive structure and flower development-related proteins in tassel and ear, lipid and fatty acid biosynthetic process-related proteins in immature embryo, and inorganic substance and oxidation reduction responsive proteins in root, potentially revealing the physiology, morphology and function of each tissue. Furthermore, we found many new proteins in specific tissues that were highly correlated with their mRNA levels, in addition to known key factors. These proteome data provide new perspective for understanding many aspects of maize developmental biology.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were ground to powder in liquid nitrogen and then incubated in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% SDS, 40 mM Tris-HCl, 40 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.5, 1 mM PMSF (phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride), 2 mM EDTA (ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid)) for 5 min. The suspension was sonicated in an ice water bath for 15 min and then centrifuged at 13,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was mixed with 4 volumes of precooled acetone for overnight protein precipitation. After centrifugation at 13,000 × g for 20 min at 4 °C, the precipitated pellets were collected and air-dried and then resuspended in 8 M urea/100 mM TEAB (tetraethylammonium bromide, pH 8.0).     Protein concentrations were determined by the Bradford method (Bio-Rad). For each sample, 100 μg of protein was dissolved to 500 μL in dissolution buffer TEAB. After reduced with 10 mM DTT (DL-dithiothreitol) at 56 °C for 40 min with gentle shaking and then cooled to room temperature and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the darkness, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) digestion was performed (enzyme/protein 1:50 w/w) at 37 °C overnight. After protein digestion, an equal volume of 0.1% FA (formic acid) was added for acidification. Peptides were loaded on a Strata–X C18 pillar (Phenomenex Inc., CA, USA) three times, washed with 0.1% FA + 3% ACN (acetonitrile) three times, and then eluted with 1 mL of 0.1% FA + 80% ACN. Eluted peptides were dried with a vacuum concentration meter. Peptide samples were stored at −80 °C until required or dissolved in 0.1% FA for LC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-ESI-MS/MS (liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry) analysis was performed on a Triple TOF 5600 plus mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) in two phases: data-dependent acquisition (DDA) was followed by SWATH acquisition on the same sample, with the same gradient conditions and the same amounts of sample used. For DDA, the peptide samples were first loaded on a cHiPLC trap (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 0.5 mm × 200 µm) with buffer (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile) at 2 µL/min for 10 min. Subsequently, the samples were separated on a cHiPLC column (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 20 cm × 75 µm) using an elution gradient of 2–35% acetonitrile at 300 nL/min for 120 min. The trap and column were maintained at 30 °C for retention time stability. The eluent from the column was analyzed using a Triple TOF 5600 plus mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX, USA) in positive ion mode with a nano-ion spray voltage of 2,300 V. Data-dependent acquisition was performed first to obtain the SWATH-MS spectral ion library. Specifically, a survey scan of 250 ms (TOF-MS) in the range 360–1,460 m/z was performed to collect the MS1 spectra, and the top 30 precursor ions with charge states from +2 to +5 and intensity greater than 150 cps were selected for subsequent fragmentation (MS2) with an accumulation time of 100 ms per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 3.25 s. Mass tolerance for precursor ion selection was set as 50 mDα, and MS/MS spectra were collected in the range 100-1,500 m/z. Selected ions and their isotopes were dynamically excluded from further MS/MS fragmentation for 15 s. Ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy based on their m/z and charge state. For SWATH, the same HPLC conditions were used as in the DDA run as described above. Data were acquired with a 250-ms MS1 scan followed by 90-ms MS2 scan with 32 × 25-a.m.u. isolation windows covering the mass range of 400–1,250 Dα (cycle time of 3.25 s). An overlap of 1 Dα between SWATHs was preselected. The collision energy for each window was set independently as defined by CE = 0.06 × m/z + 4, where m/z is the center of each window, with a spread of 15 eV performed linearly across the accumulation time.  ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex) was used to search all the DDA mass spectrometry data thoroughly against the B73 RefGen_V3 5a (https://ftp.maizegdb.org/MaizeGDB/FTP/B73_RefGen_v3/). Raw data for each experimental set were searched in a single batch to create a results file. The outputs of ProteinPilot represent a group of files that were used as the reference spectra library, which contained peptide sequences, charge states, modifications, retention times, confidence scores and the corresponding fragment ions with m/z and intensity. Subsequently, spectral library generation and SWATH data processing were performed using Skyline version 3.5. Any missing values were not used for any calculation and statistical analysis. Before targeted data extraction, a spectra library document was automatically generated that complied with the following rules. i) Peptides that contained modifications and/or were shared between different protein entries/isoforms were excluded from the selection. ii) Peptides identified by ProteinPilot with a confidence less than 85% were excluded. Peptides covered by at least two spectra were used for peptide and protein quantification. iii) Up to 5 fragment ions ranked by their intensity were chosen. iv) Fragment ions within the SWATH isolation window were excluded from the selection. v) To control the false discovery rate (FDR), a random mass shift Q1 and Q3 m/z strategy was used to create a decoy spectra library. To extract the targeted peaks, a mass to charge tolerance was allowed up to 10 ppm for both the peptide precursor and fragment ion. According to the above instructions, the extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) of each ion was automatically extracted with a retention time width of 5 minutes, and the area under the XIC curve (AUC) was calculated for each individual ion. Fragment ion areas belonging to one peptide were summed to determine the peptide abundance, and a summed abundance of peptides for a given protein was conducted to obtain the protein abundance. To eliminate random errors and sample bias, we normalized all data among samples using a median normalization method. To assess the data confidence and control the false discovery rate, the mProphet algorithm  was applied to each extracted peak. For absolute quantification within a single biological sample, the iBAQ algorithm  was applied to the protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
The differentiation and subsequent development of plant tissues or organs are tightly regulated at multiple levels, including the transcriptional, posttranscriptional, translational, and posttranslational levels. Transcriptomes define many of the tissue-specific gene expression patterns in maize, and some key genes and their regulatory networks have been established at the transcriptional level. In this study, the sequential window acquisition of all theoretical spectra-mass spectrometry technique was employed as a quantitative proteome assay of four representative maize tissues, and a set of high-confidence proteins was identified. Integrated analysis of the proteome and transcriptome revealed that protein abundance was positively correlated with mRNA level with weak to moderate correlation coefficients, but the abundance of key proteins for function or architecture in a given tissue was closely tempospatially regulated at the transcription level. A subset of differentially expressed proteins, specifically tissue-specific highly expressed proteins, was identified, for example, reproductive structure and flower development-related proteins in tassel and ear, lipid and fatty acid biosynthetic process-related proteins in immature embryo, and inorganic substance and oxidation reduction responsive proteins in root, potentially revealing the physiology, morphology, and function of each tissue. Furthermore, we found many new proteins in specific tissues that were highly correlated with their mRNA levels, in addition to known key factors. These proteome data provide new perspective for understanding many aspects of maize developmental biology. Raw proteomics data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008464.

### Keywords
Zea mays l., Transcriptome, Proteome, Tissue-specific proteins, Swath-ms, Differentially expressed proteins

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, P.R. China

### Submitter
Jia Haitao

### Lab Head
Dr Zuxin Zhang
National Key Laboratory of Crop Genetic Improvement, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan 430070, P.R. China


