### Accession
PXD042398

### Title
102-Plex Approach for Accurate and Multiplexed Proteome Quantification

### Description
Numerous hyperplexing approaches have been developed to meet the demand for large-scale basic and clinical analysis. Currently, the analysis capacity has expanded to up to 54 samples within a single experiment by utilizing different isotopic and isobaric reagent combinations. In this report, we propose a super multiplexed approach to enable the analysis of up-to 102-plex samples within a single experiment. by the combination of our recently developed TAG-TMTpro and TAG-IBT16 labeling. We systematically investigated the identification and quantification performance of the 102-plex approach using the mixtures of E. coli and HeLa peptides. Our results revealed that all analyses demonstrated accurate and reliable quanti-fication performance. The combination of TAG-TMTpro and TAG-IBT16 approaches expands the multiplexing capacity to 102-plex, providing a more multiplexed quantification method for even larger-scale proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction, Reduction and Alkylation. The harvested cell pellets were re-suspended with lysis buffer (8 M guanidine hydrochloride, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and 10 mM DTT). The slurry solution was boiled at 95 °C for 10 min and then sonicated for 5 min (5 s sonication and 2 s intervals). After sonication, the sample was centrifuged at 20000 g for 20 min, and the supernatant was collected. The protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay. The cell lysates were reduced at 95 °C for 5 min and then alkylated with 100 mM acrylamide at 25 °C for 1 h. Protein Digestion. The FASP method was adopted for protein digestion as previously described with some modifications. The protein samples were transferred to Amicon Ultra-4 filters and centrifuge at 4800 g for three-time buffer displacement, and then dissolved with digestion buffer (10 mM TEAB, pH 8.0). The samples were firstly digested using Lys-C (enzyme/protein as 1:50) at 37 °C for 4 h, and then incubated with trypsin for overnight digestion. After digestion, the solution was collected by centrifugation and the filter was washed twice with 10% ACN. Finally, the filtrates were pooled and vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac. Boc-Ala-OSu and Boc-Gly-OSu Reaction. The vacuum-dried peptides were re-dissolved using 200 mM HEPES (pH 9.0) to reach a final concentration of 5 μg/μL. Then the peptide solution was incubated with 25 mM Boc-Ala-OSu or Boc-Gly-OSu reagents (dissolved using anhydrous ACN) at 25 °C for 2 h. After incubation with 2 M hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 1 h, the Boc group was removed by 2 M HCl at 25 °C for 2 h. The product solutions were vacuum-dried to remove ACN, desalted using homemade C18 microcolumns, and then completely vacuum-dried. TMTpro Labeling Reaction. The peptide samples were labeled with TMTpro reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) as previous described with several modifications. The TMTpro reagents (dissolved in anhydrous ACN) were added to the peptide solutions (dissolved in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) to reach a ratio of peptide/reagent as 1:2 (w/w), and then incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. The excess TMTpro reagents were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 15 min. IBT16 Labeling Reaction. The IBT 16-plex reagents (dissolved in anhydrous ACN) were added to the peptide solutions (dissolved in 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.5) to reach a ratio of peptide/reagent as 1:2.5 (w/w), and then incubated at 25 °C for 1 h. The excess IBT 16-plex reagents were quenched with 0.5% hydroxylamine at 25 °C for 15 min.  Basic pH Reverse-phase Liquid Chromatography (bRPLC) Fractionation. bRPLC fractionation was carried out on a Gemini NX-C18 column (3 μm, 110 Å, 2.0 mm i.d. × 150 mm, Phenomenex, USA) using Dionex UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The bRPLC solvent A was 10 mM NH4HCO3, solvent B was 80% ACN containing 10 mM NH4HCO3. A total of ~400 μg of the dried peptides were dissolved using bRPLC solvent A and then loaded onto the column. The flow rate was set as 150 μL/min. The gradient was set as follows: 0% B for 5 min, 0-40% B in 80 min, 40-100% B in 5 min, 100% B for 3 min, 100-0% B in 2 min, and 0% B for 5 min. Eluates from 7.0 to 95.0 min were mixed into 40 fractions as previously reported,19 and completely vacuum-dried.  Nano-liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectrometry Analysis. Online Nano-liquid Chromatography (nanoLC) was performed using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded and analyzed on an in-house packed C18 columns (75 μm i.d. × 25 cm; 1.9 μm, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The mobile phases consisted of solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN). The peptides were eluted in the following 90-min gradient: 2-5% B in 3 min, 5-35% B in 70 min, 35-44% B in 5 min, 44-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Mass spectrometry data were collected using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) using the lock mass of 445.12003 m/z. MS1 data were collected in the Orbitrap (resolution as 120000, standard AGC target, and auto maximum injection time mode). Ions with intensity above 5000 and charge states between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2 analysis, and a 45 s dynamic exclusion window was used. Cycle time was set as 3 s. MS2 scans were performed in the ion trap with CID fragmentation (isolation window as 0.7 m/z, NCE as 35%, turbo scan rate, standard AGC target, and auto maximum injection time mode). The synchronous precursor selection MS3 (SPS-MS3) methods were adapted for MS3 analysis. The number of SPS was set as 10. MS3 scans were collected in the Orbitrap with HCD fragmentation (resolution as 50000, NCE as 55%, 400% of normalized AGC target, and auto maximum injection time mode).

### Data Protocol
The raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house Mascot Server (version 2.7, Matrix Science). Human Swiss-Prot database (20200321, 20353 sequences) and E. coli database (20200904, 4391 sequences) was downloaded from UniProt. Data were searched using the following parameters: minimum peptide length is 6 and protein can be identified with one high-confidence peptide, trypsin/P as the enzyme; up to two missed cleavage sites were allowed; 10 ppm mass tolerance for MS and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions; propionamidation on cysteine as fixed modification; oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Sample-specific parameters were set as follows: for TMTpro, A-TMTpro and G-TMTpro labeled samples, the TMTpro, A-TMTpro and G-TMTpro modification on N-terminal and lysine were set as fixed modification, respectively; for IBT16, A-IBT16 and G-IBT16 labeled samples, the IBT16, A-IBT16 and G-IBT16 modification on N-terminal and lysine were set as fixed modification, respectively. As for reporter ion quantification, the intensities were extracted using TMTpro/A-TMTpro/G-TMTpro or IBT16/A-IBT16/G-IBT16 quantification method (most confident centroid peak integration with a tolerance of 20 ppm, mass analyze of FTMS, MS order of MS3, activation type of HCD, and collision energy of 0-1000). The incorporated Percolator in Proteome Discoverer was used to validate the search results and only the hits with FDR ≤ 0.01 were accepted for discussion.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperplexing approaches have been aimed to meet the demand for large-scale proteomic analyses. Currently, the analysis capacity has expanded to up to 54 samples within a single experiment by utilizing different isotopic and isobaric reagent combinations. In this report, we propose a super multiplexed approach to enable the analysis of up to 102 samples in a single experiment, by the combination of our recently developed TAG-TMTpro and TAG-IBT16 labeling. We systematically investigated the identification and quantification performance of the 102-plex approach using the mixtures of <i>E. coli</i> and HeLa peptides. Our results revealed that all labeling series demonstrated accurate and reliable quantification performance. The combination of TAG-IBT16 and TAG-TMTpro approaches expands the multiplexing capacity to 102 plexes, providing a more multiplexed quantification method for even larger-scale proteomic analysis. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD042398.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Quantitative proteomic analysis, 102-plex approach

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China

### Submitter
Zhen Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Xumin Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Genetic Engineering, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China


