### Accession
PXD001206

### Title
Impacts of 2-amino-4,6-dinitrotoluene (2-ADNT) Exposure in Northern Bobwhite

### Description
Effects of 2A-DNT on global protein expression were investigated in liver tissue for both sexes and kidney in males, all at a 30 mg/kg-d dose using nLC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolations were carried out using four biological replicates of male kidney, female liver and male liver tissue from birds exposed to either 0 mg/kg-d 2-ADNT (control) or 30 mg/kg-d 2-ADNT (treatment).  100 mg of tissue was used for protein extractiont.  Proteins were extracted from the tissues by differential detergent fractionation (DDF) exactly as described in van den Berg et al (2007) and Vergnon et al (1992).  DDF extraction resulted in four protein fractions for each sample; cytosolic, membrane/organelle, nuclear and least soluble.  Fifty μg of protein from each DDF fraction was precipitated in 50% trichloroacetic acid to remove salts and detergents and then subjected to trypsin digestion exactly as described in van den Berg et al (2007).  After digestion, samples were desalted using a peptide macrotrap (Michrom TR1/25108/52) according to manufacturer’s instructions and cleaned for mass spectrometry using a strong cation exchange trap (Michrom TR1/25108/53, Manufacturer, City, State, Country) following manufacturer’s protocols. The peptides were re-suspended in 20ul of 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry.  Mass spectrometry for protein identification was conducted on each DDF fraction i.e 4 x 4 runs each for the control and treatment tissues. Peptides from each DDF fraction were de-convoluted by mass spectrometry employing the following nano-HPLC method. Samples were loaded on to a BioBasic C18 reversed phase column (Thermo 72105-100266, Manufacturer, City, State, Country) and washed for 20 minutes with 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid to remove salts.  Peptide separation was achieved using a Thermo Surveyor MS pump and a 655 minute nano-HPLC method. This method consists of a gradient of 5% ACN to 50% ACN in 620 minutes, followed by a 20 minute wash with 95% ACN and equilibration with 5% ACN for 15 minutes. Dynamic exclusion parameters included a duration of two minutes and a repeat count of two.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a protein database using the SEQUEST (Yates 3rd et al 1995) algorithm in Bioworks 3.3 (Thermofisher).  The relatively well annotated Gallus gallus non-redundant protein database was downloaded from NCBI, RefSeq for peptide spectral matching and contained 18,768 entries. The protein database was in silico trypsin digested and cysteine carbamidomethylation and methionine oxidations (single and double) were included in the search criteria.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colinus virginianus, Quail, Lcq deca xp plus

### Affiliations
Veterinary Science and Microbiology
Environmental Laboratory US Army Engineer Research and Development Center Vicksburg, MS 39180, USA

### Submitter
Ken Pendarvis

### Lab Head
Dr Kurt A. Gust
Environmental Laboratory US Army Engineer Research and Development Center Vicksburg, MS 39180, USA


