### Accession
PXD043165

### Title
SMYD3: a new regulator of the early steps of adipocyte differentiation

### Description
Abstract Background In obesity, adipose tissue undergoes a remodeling process characterized by increased adipocyte size (hypertrophia) and number (hyperplasia). The individual ability to tip the balance toward the hyperplastic growth, with recruitment of new fat cells through adipogenesis, seems to be critical for a healthy adipose tissue expansion, as opposed to the development of inflammation and detrimental metabolic consequences. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying this fine-tuned regulation are far from being understood.  Methods We analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics visceral white adipose tissue (vWAT) samples collected from C57BL6 mice fed with a HFD for 8 weeks. A subset of these mice, called low responders (LowR HFD), showed a low susceptibility to the onset of adipose tissue inflammation, as opposed to their HFD counterpart. We identified the discriminants between LowR HFD and HFD vWAT samples and explored their function in Adipose Derived human Mesenchymal Stem Cells (AD-hMSCs) differentiated to adipocytes.  Results  We quantified 6051 proteins. Among the candidates that most differentiate LowR HFD from HFD vWAT, we found proteins involved in adipocyte function, including adiponectin and hormone sensitive lipase, suggesting that adipocyte differentiation is enhanced in LowR HFD, as compared to HFD. The chromatin modifier SET and MYND Domain Containing 3 (SMYD3), whose function in adipose tissue was totally unknown, was another top-scored hit. SMYD3 expression was significantly higher in LowR HFD vWAT, as confirmed by western blot analysis. In vitro, we found that SMYD3 mRNA and protein levels decrease rapidly along the differentiation process of AD-hMSCs. Moreover, SMYD3 knock-down at the beginning of adipocyte differentiation resulted in reduced cell proliferation and, at longer term, reduced lipid accumulation in adipocytes. Conclusions Our study describes for the first time the role of SMYD3 as a regulator of adipocyte proliferation during the early steps of adipogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed starting from 30 mg of frozen adipose tissue per mice. After homogenization in PBS protein pellets were generated via trichloroacetic acid (TCA)protein precipitation on ice. Purified protein pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea buffer, and digested overnight.

### Data Protocol
The peptides digests of respective samples were analysed by liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a Acclaim pepmap100, C18, 3μm, 75μm x 20mm nano trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm x 500 mm, C18 ReproSil-Pur (Dr. Maisch GmBH), 1.9 μm, 100 Å, home-made column.  LC-ESI-MS/MS was used for both data-dependent acquisition (DDA) and data-independent acquisition (DIA). Raw data search, generation of peptide and protein data matrices were performed with commercial proteomic software Spectronaut (version:14.8.201029.47784, Biognosys, https://biognosys.com/software/spectronaut/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Adipose tissue, Mice

### Affiliations
University of Lausanne
Faculty Unit of Toxicology, CURML, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Tatjana Sajic

### Lab Head
Dr Federica Gilardi
Faculty Unit of Toxicology, CURML, Faculty of Biology and Medicine, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, Switzerland.


