### Accession
PXD012616

### Title
Combined proteomics and miRNomics of a glioblastoma immunotherapy cohort reveals resistance factor candidates and novel counterstrategy concepts

### Description
Glioblastoma is the most prevalent and aggressive form of brain cancer. With a median overall survival of ~20 months under current standard therapy (surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy), novel treatment approaches are desperately needed. Immunotherapies are being investigated in clinical trials but failed so far. This includes a recent phase II clinical trial with a personalized immunotherapy based on tumor lysate-charged dendritic cells (NCT01213407). Here, we investigated tumor tissue from patients from this trial to explore glioblastoma (immuno)resistance factors and strategies to overcome them. We followed an innovative approach of combining mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics (n=36) with microRNA sequencing plus RT-qPCR (n=38). Protein quantification identified e.g. huntingtin interacting protein 1 (HIP1), retinol binding protein 1 (RBPP1), ferritin heavy chain (FTH1) and focal adhesion kinase 2 (FAK2) as resistance factor candidates. MicroRNA analysis identified miR-216b, miR-216a, miR-708 and let-7i as molecules potentially associated with overcoming resistance as they were enriched in patients with a comparably longer survival. In silico pathway prediction indicated they down-regulate the focal adhesion pathway – among others. FAK2 was enriched in short-term surviving immunotherapy patients. In vitro, FAK inhibitors prevented the formation of glioblastoma cell adhesion in the form of gliomaspheres. Taken together, we here mapped possible drivers of glioblastoma’s immuno)resistance in one of the largest DC vaccination tissue analysis cohorts so far – demonstrating usefulness and feasibility of combined proteomics/miRNomics approaches. Future research should investigate agents that sensitize glioblastoma to (immuno)therapy – e.g. targeting focal adhesion. Small-molecule inhibitors or microRNAs capable of altering multiple pathways at once are candidates to explore.

### Sample Protocol
Glioblastoma lysates were analyzed by quantitative TMT10plex-based proteomics.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was processed using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Glioblastoma is the most prevalent and aggressive brain cancer. With a median overall survival of ~15-20 months under standard therapy, novel treatment approaches are desperately needed. A recent phase II clinical trial with a personalized immunotherapy based on tumor lysate-charged dendritic cell (DC) vaccination, however, failed to prolong survival. Here, we investigated tumor tissue from trial patients to explore glioblastoma survival-related factors. We followed an innovative approach of combining mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;36) with microRNA sequencing plus RT-qPCR (<i>n</i>&#x2009;=&#x2009;38). Protein quantification identified, e.g., huntingtin interacting protein 1 (HIP1), retinol-binding protein 1 (RBP1), ferritin heavy chain (FTH1) and focal adhesion kinase 2 (FAK2) as factor candidates correlated with a dismal prognosis. MicroRNA analysis identified miR-216b, miR-216a, miR-708 and let-7i as molecules potentially associated with favorable tissue characteristics as they were enriched in patients with a comparably longer survival. To illustrate the utility of integrated miRNomics and proteomics findings, focal adhesion was studied further as one example for a pathway of potential general interest. Taken together, we here mapped possible drivers of glioblastoma outcome under immunotherapy in one of the largest DC vaccination tissue analysis cohorts so far-demonstrating usefulness and feasibility of combined proteomics/miRNomics approaches. Future research should investigate agents that sensitize glioblastoma to (immuno)therapy-potentially building on insights generated here.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Glioblastoma, Clinical cohort, Immune oncology

### Affiliations
OmicScouts GmbH
OmicScouts GmbH Lise-Meitner-Str. 30 D-85354 Freising Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Hahne

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes Hahne
OmicScouts GmbH Lise-Meitner-Str. 30 D-85354 Freising Germany


