### Accession
PXD020605

### Title
Desmosomal protein degradation accompanied by desmosomal and adherens junctions protein disarray as underlying causes of PKP2 driven arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy

### Description
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an inherited progressive cardiomyopathy. The pathophysiological events are well understood, yet the underlying molecular mechanisms remain undefined. Here, we created a novel research platform comprising of patient originated hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes bearing a pathological PKP2 mutation (PKP2 c.2013delC/WT), a novel knock-in murine model carrying the equivalent mutation (Pkp2 c.1755delA/WT), and human explanted ACM hearts, to identify disease driving mechanisms. Pkp2 c.1755delA/WT mice displayed reduced desmosomal and adherens junctions protein levels and protein disarray of the intercalated discs in areas of active fibrotic remodeling. These findings were validated in hiPSC-derived cardiomyocytes and human explanted ACM hearts. Led by proteomics data, we demonstrated that the ubiquitin-proteasome system was responsible for the observed desmosomal protein degradation. The research platform presented here provides a strong scientific basis to identify bona fide pathological processes and will aid in the development of potential therapies for the prevention of ACM disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse heart tissue samples from PKP2 c.1755delA/WT male mice and littermates were obtained at 14-16 weeks old and placed in Lysing Matrix D tubes containing Tris/SDS lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.1% SDS and protease inhibitors, at pH8.8) and homogenized using Lysing Matrix D in a FastPrep homogenizer (MP Biomedicals) for 15 seconds, twice. The supernatant was transferred into Eppendorf tubes and sonicated twice for 10 seconds, prior to centrifugation for 20 minutes at 16, 000 g at 4°C. Protein concentration was measured with Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Protein samples were denatured by 6 M urea/ 2 M thiourea, reduced by 10 mM dithiotreitol for 1 hour at 37°C, and alkylated using 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. The samples were precipitated by using 1 mL of pre-chilled acetone and incubated at -20°C overnight. The samples were centrifugation for 30 minutes at 16, 000 g at 4°C, and the supernatant discarded. The protein pellet was dried using a SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH8.5). Proteins were digested by Trypsin/LysC (enzyme: protein = 1:100) overnight at 37°C with 240 rpm shaking. Post digestion, a pooled sample was made by mix same amount of each samples, then all samples were dried using SpeedVac and resuspended in 0.1M TEAB to get 1μg/μL concentration. 20μg of samples along with 2x 20μg of pooled samples were labelled with TMT 10plex Reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. After quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, 1 pooled sample and 8 samples were mixed together (in total 2 mixed TMT-labelled samples), dried using SpeedVac and resuspension in 300 μL of 0.3% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Peptide fractionation was performed using Pierce high pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions and 8 fractions were collected for each mixed TMT-labelled sample. The fractionated samples were dried using SpeedVac and resuspended in 90 μL LC solution (2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid, in LC-MS grade H2O). For LC-MS/MS analysis, 10μL of each fractionated sample was injected and separated by reversed-phase nano-flow HPLC (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a 50cm EASY-SPRAY C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cat No. ES803) over 2-hour gradient at flow rate 0.25μl/min: 0-10min, 4%-10%B; 10-75min, 10%-30%B; 75-80min, 30%-40%B; 80-85min, 40-99%B; 85-90min, 99%B; 90-120min, 4%B; where A = 0.1% formic acid, B = 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. The separated peptides were directly injected into Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analysed using a synchronous precursor selection (SPS) multi-notch MS3 method. Full MS scan range was 375-1500 m/z with resolution 120,000 in Orbitrap. Data-dependent MS2 scan was performed on the most abundant precursors using collision-induced dissociation (CID) and detected in linear ion trap. Top 5 fragment ions in MS2 scan was selected for SPS-MS3 scan using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detected in Orbitrap with scan range 100-500 m/z and resolution 60,000. Cycle time was set at 3 seconds and dynamic exclusion was enabled.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 with Mascot 2.6.0. The database search was performed using UniProt mouse database (version 2019_01, 93387 protein entries), 2 missed cleavage allowed, 5ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.8 Da fragment mass tolerance, TMT 6plex (N-term, K) and carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modifications, oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) as variable modifications. With total peptide normalization and on control scaling. The total scaled abundance was exported into Excel and used for further analysis. Proteins of interest were selected using a significant value of less than or equal to 0.05 and fold change >1.25 or <0.80.

### Publication Abstract
Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy (ACM) is an inherited progressive cardiac disease. Many patients with ACM harbor mutations in desmosomal genes, predominantly in plakophilin-2 (<i>PKP2</i>). Although the genetic basis of ACM is well characterized, the underlying disease-driving mechanisms remain unresolved. Explanted hearts from patients with ACM had less PKP2 compared with healthy hearts, which correlated with reduced expression of desmosomal and adherens junction (AJ) proteins. These proteins were also disorganized in areas of fibrotic remodeling. In vitro data from human-induced pluripotent stem cell-derived cardiomyocytes and microtissues carrying the heterozygous <i>PKP2 c.2013delC</i> pathogenic mutation also displayed impaired contractility. Knockin mice carrying the equivalent heterozygous <i>Pkp2 c.1755delA</i> mutation recapitulated changes in desmosomal and AJ proteins and displayed cardiac dysfunction and fibrosis with age. Global proteomics analysis of 4-month-old heterozygous <i>Pkp2 c.1755delA</i> hearts indicated involvement of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) in ACM pathogenesis. Inhibition of the UPS in mutant mice increased area composita proteins and improved calcium dynamics in isolated cardiomyocytes. Additional proteomics analyses identified lysine ubiquitination sites on the desmosomal proteins, which were more ubiquitinated in mutant mice. In summary, we show that a plakophilin-2 mutation can lead to decreased desmosomal and AJ protein expression through a UPS-dependent mechanism, which preceded cardiac remodeling. These findings suggest that targeting protein degradation and improving desmosomal protein stability may be a potential therapeutic strategy for the treatment of ACM.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Pkp2, Desmosomal protein degradation, Arrhythmogenic cardiomyopahty

### Affiliations
King's British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, London, UK
Cardiovascular Division, King's College London

### Submitter
Xiaoke Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Mayr
King's British Heart Foundation Centre of Research Excellence, King's College London, London, UK


