### Accession
PXD018295

### Title
Improvements on the quantitative analysis of Trypanosoma cruzi histone post translational modifications

### Description
Trypanosome histone N-terminal sequences are very divergent from the other eukaryotes, although they are still decorated by post-translational modifications (PTMs). Here, we used a highly robust workflow to analyze histone PTMs in the parasite Trypanosoma cruzi using mass spectrometry-based data-independent acquisition (DIA). We adapted the workflow for the analysis of the parasite’s histone sequences by modifying the software EpiProfile 2.0, improving peptide and PTM quantification accuracy. This workflow could now be applied to the study of 141 T. cruzi modified histone peptides, which we used to investigate the dynamics of histone PTMs along the metacyclogenesis and the life cycle of T. cruzi.

### Sample Protocol
we extracted T. cruzi histones, which were next chemically derivatizated by propionylation followed by trypsin digestion and mass spectrometry analysis based both on data dependent and independent acquisition (DDA and DIA, respectively). The propionylation (of unmodified and mono-methyl lysines as well as the N-terminus of tryptic peptides) causes the generation of longer tryptic peptides leading to an increase of chromatographic retention, thereby improving the detection of histone peptides.

### Data Protocol
In order to deal efficiently with the high complexity of histone PTMs analysis, we adjusted the EpiProfile 2.0 platform, known to quantify histone PTMs from 13 different organisms, to scrutinize T.cruzi histones. EpiProfile 2.0 identifies and quantifies histone PTMs from DDA and DIA analysis using MS1 and MS2 information as well as previous knowledge of peptide retention time (RT).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ptm, Histone, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
Cell Cycle Laboratory, Butantan Institute, Brazil
LCC

### Submitter
Julia Cunha

### Lab Head
Dr Julia da Cunha
Cell Cycle Laboratory, Butantan Institute, Brazil


