### Accession
PXD018584

### Title
The lncRNA Growth Arrest Specific 5 regulates cell survival via distinct structural modules with independent functions

### Description
There is increasing evidence that the architecture of long non-coding RNAs – just like that of proteins – is hierarchically organized into independently folding sub-modules with distinct functions. Studies characterizing the cellular activities of such modules, however, are rare. The lncRNA growth arrest specific 5 (Gas5) is a key regulator of cell survival in response to stress and nutrient availability. We used SHAPE-MaP to probe the structure of Gas5 in vitro and in cellulo. The results show that Gas5 contains three separate structural modules including the previously predicted steroid receptor binding hairpin motif. Functional assays show that the newly identified modules act independently in leukemic T cells. The 5’ terminal module with low secondary structure content affects basal survival and slows the cell cycle, whereas the highly structured core module mediates the effects of mTOR inhibition on cell growth. Disruption of specific secondary structures within the modules abolish their function in cells. These results highlight the central role of Gas5 in regulating cell survival and reveals how a single lncRNA transcript utilizes a modular structure-function relationship to respond to a variety of cellular stresses under various cellular conditions.

### Sample Protocol
On bead digestion: After removing the supernatant from the IP samples, the bead solutions were resuspended in 200ul of 50 mM NH4HCO3.  The samples were reduced with 1mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at room temperature.  This was followed by alkylation with 5mM iodoacetimide (IAA) for 30 minutes in the dark. The samples were then digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysyl endopeptidase (Wako) for 2 hours at room temperature.  Trypsintrypsin (Promega) was added at 1:50 (w/w) and digestion was allowed to proceed overnight.  The  resulting peptides solutions were desalted with a Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters) and dried under vacuum. LC-MS/MS analysis:  Dried peptides were reconstituted in 10 uL of loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% TFA, 1% acetonitrile).  The sample (2uL) was loaded onto and eluted from a self-packed C18 fused silica column (25 cm x 75 uM internal diameter (ID); New Objective, Woburn, MA) driven by a Easy nLC 1200 coupled to a Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Elution was performed over a 140 minute gradient at a rate of 200nl/min with buffer B ranging from 3% to 99% (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid in water, buffer B: 0.1 % formic in 80% acetonitrile). The mass spectrometer cycle was programmed to collect at the top speed for 3 second cycles with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. The MS scans (350-1500  m/z range, 200,000 AGC, 50 ms maximum ion time) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 200 in profile mode while the HCD MS/MS spectra (1.2 m/z isolation width, 30% collision energy, 10,000 AGC target, 35 maximum ion time) were detected in the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previous sequenced precursor ions for 20 seconds within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with +1, and +7 or higher charge states were excluded from sequencing.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Quantification with MaxQuant RAW data was analyzed using MaxQuant v1.6.01 with Thermo Foundation 2.0 for RAW file reading capability. The search engine Andromeda was used to build and search a concatenated target-decoy UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) containing both Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL human reference protein sequences (90,307target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015), plus 245 contaminant proteins included as a parameter for Andromeda search within MaxQuant [1]. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.0106 Da) were included as variable modifications (up to 5 allowed per peptide); cysteine was assigned a fixed carbamidomethyl modification (+57.0215 Da. Only fully tryptic peptides were considered with up to 2 missed cleavages in the database search. A precursor mass tolerance of ± 20 ppm  and a 0.6 Da product ion tolerance was used. Other search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da, a minimum peptide length of 7 residues and match between runs. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1 percent.  The original raw files, search database and maxquant output has been deposited to ….    MS Quantitative Data Processing and Statistics MaxQuant grouped protein quantification based on the MaxLFQ normalization algorithm [2] was extracted from MaxQuant output for 3,108 non-decoy proteins. Of these, 3,026 proteins were quantified in at least 3 out of 4 technical replicate LC-MS/MS run RAW data for at least one of the 4 different RNA baits. This filtering is important because imputation according to an informative missingness assumption, or missing not at random (MNAR) values remain for these well-quantified proteins with consistent non-missing quantification. LFQ normalized data for all but the outlier sample, determined later, had a Pearson correlation of at least 0.98 to unnormalized summed intensity data. Missing value imputation was performed in R according to the algorithm for LFQ intensity imputation described by Tyanova, et al, with each sample’s missing values imputed with a random distribution within 0.3 SD of the population mean minus 1.8 SD of that sample’s population of nonmissing quantitations [3]. Then outlier detection was performed using a 3SD cutoff for the z-scored connectivity measure calculated by the R WGCNA package fundamentalNetworkConcepts function on an adjacency matrix calculated for the imputed LFQ data iteratively until no outliers could be found; one outlier  was removed. One-way ANOVA with Tukey post-hoc test for significance of differences between pairs of grouped samples was performed in R using base functions aov and TukeyHSD. Then volcano plots using Tukey p values were plotted in R using ggplot2 and plotly packages using an in-house script.   

### Publication Abstract
There is increasing evidence that the architecture of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)-just like that of proteins-is hierarchically organized into independently folding sub-modules with distinct functions. Studies characterizing the cellular activities of such modules, however, are rare. The lncRNA growth arrest specific 5 (GAS5) is a key regulator of cell survival in response to stress and nutrient availability. We use SHAPE-MaP to probe the structure of GAS5 and identify three separate structural modules that act independently in leukemic T&#xa0;cells. The 5' terminal module with low secondary structure content affects basal survival and slows the cell cycle, whereas the highly structured core module mediates the effects of mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) inhibition on cell growth. These results highlight the central role of GAS5 in regulating cell survival and reveal how a single lncRNA transcript utilizes a modular structure-function relationship to respond to a variety of cellular stresses under various cellular conditions.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Growth arrest, Non-coding rna

### Affiliations
Professor Emory Biochemistry
Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases

### Submitter
Duc Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Ortlund
Professor Emory Biochemistry


