### Accession
PXD024872

### Title
Global and diGLY enriched proteomes of RanBPM depleted HeLa cells and RanBPM APMS

### Description
The human CTLH complex is a newly discovered multi-subunit E3 ligase. At present, only a few of its ubiquitination targets are known. Here, we use proteomic techniques in RanBPM-depleted HeLa cells to identify ubiquitination substrates of the CTLH complex. First, global proteomics determined proteins that were significantly increased in cells depleted of RanBPM. This analysis revealed potential degradation-induced ubiquitination substrates of the complex. Ubiquitination differences using diGLY-enriched proteomics in shRanBPM cells compared with the endogenous RanBPM interactome also revealed candidate ubiquitination targets.

### Sample Protocol
Global proteome sample prep: HeLa cells at 75-80% confluency were trypsinized and cells were collected, washed in PBS and frozen at -80 °C. Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), 10 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), 2% SDS and then sonicated. 25 µg of protein lysate was reduced and alkylated followed by methanol precipitation. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50mM ABC and subjected to a sequential LysC-trypsin/LysC-trypsin at 37 ℃ at 600 rpm with interval mixing. After the last digestion, samples were acidified with 10% formic acid (FA) to pH 3-4 and centrifuged at to pellet insoluble material. diGLY enrichment sample prep: HeLa cells at 75-80% confluency were treated with 10 μM MG132 for 4 hours and processed exactly as described for global proteomics but with 1 mg of protein and peptides were dried after no digestion (no acidification). PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif Antibody Bead Conjugate (Cell Signaling Technology) (25 uL per sample) was crosslinked and used as described in Udeshi et al., 2013. Dried peptides were resuspended in 1 mL of IAP buffer, centrifuged, and the supernatant was added to the crosslinked antibody-beads and incubated with rotation for 1 hour at 4℃. After enrichment, beads were washed twice with IAP buffer, three times with PBS, and then peptides were eluted in 0.15% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and reconstituted in 0.1% FA. LC-MS/MS for RanBPM diGLY samples: Approximately 1 µg of peptide was injected onto a Waters M-Class nanoAcquity UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Buffer A consisted of mass spectrometry grade water with 0.1% FA and buffer B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. Samples were trapped for 4 minutes at a flow rate of 5 mL/min using 99% buffer A and 1% buffer B on an ACQUITY UPLC Symmetry BEH C18 Trapping Column (5 mm, 180 mm x 20 mm, Waters). Peptides were separated using an ACQUITY UPLC Peptide BEH C18 Column (130 A˚, 1.7 mm, 75 mm x 250 mm) operating at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 35℃. Samples were separated using a non-linear gradient consisting of 1%–7.5% buffer B over 1 minute, 7.5%–25% buffer B over 179 minutes, 25%–32.5% buffer B over 40 minutes, and 32.5%-40% over 20 minutes, before increasing to 98% buffer B and washing. LC-MS/MS for proteome: Approximately 1 µg of peptide sample (as determined by Pierce BCA assay) was injected onto a Waters M-Class nanoAcquity HPLC system (Waters) coupled to an ESI Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive plus, ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode. Buffer A consisted of mass spectrometry grade water with 0.1% FA and buffer B consisted of acetonitrile with 0.1% FA. All samples were trapped for 5 minutes at a flow rate of 5 mL/min using 99% buffer A and 1% buffer B on a Symmetry BEH C18 Trapping Column (5 mm, 180 mm x 20 mm, Waters). Peptides were separated using a Peptide BEH C18 Column (130 Å, 1.7 mm, 75 mm x 250 mm) operating at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at 35℃ (Waters). Proteome Samples were separated using a non-linear gradient consisting of 1%–7% buffer B over 1 minute, 7%–23% buffer B over 179 minutes and 23%–35% buffer b over 60 minutes, before increasing to 98% buffer B and washing.RanBPM APMS: mouse IgG (sc-2025, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) or RanBPM (F-1, sc-271727, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) antibody was conjugated to Dynabeads Protein G (10004D, Invitrogen) for 1 hour at 4℃ with end-over-end rotation. Afterwards, antibody-bead conjugate was cross-linked and quenched exactly as described above for the diGLY antibody. Meanwhile, HeLa WT cell pellets were lysed in whole-cell extract buffer. A volume corresponding to 1 mg of protein was adjusted to 0.25% NP40. Precleared extract was then added to the cross-linked antibody-beads and incubated overnight at 4℃ with end-over-end rotation. The next day, beads were washed and proteins eluted in 0.5% FA, 30% acetonitrile. Elutions were dried in a SpeedVac then resuspended in 6 M urea and processed exactly as described for global proteomics. Supernatant was filtered by passing through a > 10 kDa cellulose membrane (UFC501096, Sigma-Aldrich) and then was dried in a SpeedVac. Dried peptides were then resuspended in 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 Ziptips (Z720070, Sigma-Aldrich). Eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, resuspended in 20 µL 0.1% FA and 5 µL was injected exactly as described for global proteomes, except gradient times were changes to 1%–7% buffer B over 1 min, 7%–23% buffer B over 59 min and 23%–35% buffer B over 20 min, before increasing to 98% buffer B and washing.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were searched in MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3 using the Human Uniprot database (reviewed only; updated May 2017 with 42,183 entries) (UniProt Consortium, 2015; Cox & Mann, 2008). Missed cleavages were set to 3, cysteine carbamidomethylation (CAM) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), N-terminal acetylation (protein) and deamidation (NQ) (and for Ubiquitin enrichments, diGLY modification of lysine) were set as variable modifications (max. number of modifications per peptide = 5), and peptide length ≥ 6. Protein and peptide FDR was left to 0.01 (1%) and decoy database was set to revert. Match between runs was enabled and all other parameters left at default. Protein groups or GlyGly sites were loaded into Perseus (version 1.6.0.7) and proteins containing peptides only identified by site or matched to reverse and contaminant database were removed. diGLY sites were kept only if there was a localization score >0.9.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitination is an essential post-translational modification that regulates protein stability or function. Its substrate specificity is dictated by various E3 ligases. The human C-terminal to LisH (CTLH) complex is a newly discovered multi-subunit really interesting new gene (RING) E3 ligase with only a few known ubiquitination targets. Here, we used mass spectrometry-based proteomic techniques to gain insight into CTLH complex function and ubiquitination substrates in HeLa cells. First, global proteomics determined proteins that were significantly increased, and thus may be substrates targeted for degradation, in cells depleted of CTLH complex member RanBPM. RanBPM-dependent ubiquitination determined using diGLY-enriched proteomics and the endogenous RanBPM interactome further revealed candidate ubiquitination targets. Three glycolysis enzymes alpha-enolase, L-lactate dehydrogenase A chain (LDHA), and pyruvate kinase M1/2 (PKM) had decreased ubiquitin sites in shRanBPM cells and were found associated with RanBPM in the interactome. Reduced polyubiquitination was validated for PKM2 and LDHA in cells depleted of RanBPM and CTLH complex RING domain subunit RMND5A. PKM2 and LDHA protein levels were unchanged, yet their activity was increased in extracts of cells with downregulated RanBPM. Finally, RanBPM deficient cells displayed enhanced glycolysis and deregulated central carbon metabolism. Overall, this study identifies potential CTLH complex ubiquitination substrates and uncovers that the CTLH complex inhibits glycolysis via non-degradative ubiquitination of PKM2 and LDHA.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Ctlh complex

### Affiliations
University of Western Ontario
Robarts Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry,Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5B7

### Submitter
Matthew Maitland

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline Schild-Poulter
Robarts Research Institute, Department of Biochemistry,Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry, The University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada, N6A 5B7


