### Accession
PXD036260

### Title
Physiological shear stress markedly alters the proteomic response to hypoxia in human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells

### Description
Physiological shear stress, produced by blood flow, homeostatically regulates the phenotype of pulmonary endothelial cells exerting anti-inflammatory and anti-thrombotic actions and maintaining normal barrier function. In the pulmonary circulation hypoxia, due to high altitude or diseases such as COPD, causes vasoconstriction, increased vascular resistance and pulmonary hypertension.  Hypoxia-induced changes in endothelial function play a central role in the development of this pulmonary hypertension.  However, the direct interactive effects of hypoxia and shear stress on the pulmonary endothelial phenotype have not been extensively studied.   We cultured human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMEC) in normoxia or hypoxia while subjected to physiological shear stress or in static conditions.  Unbiased proteomics was used to identify hypoxia-induced changes in protein expression.  Using publicly available single cell RNA-seq datasets, differences in gene expression between the alveolar endothelial cells from COPD and healthy lungs were identified.  60 proteins were identified in HPMEC lysates whose expression changed in response to hypoxia in sheared but not in static conditions. mRNA for five of these (ERG, MCRIP1, EIF4A2, HSP90AA1 and DNAJA1) showed similar changes in the endothelial cells of COPD compared to healthy lungs. These data show that the proteomic responses of the pulmonary microvascular endothelium to hypoxia are significantly altered by shear stress and suggest that these differences are important in the development of hypoxic pulmonary vascular disease.

### Sample Protocol
Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells (HPMEC) from nine different healthy donors (four females and five males, 53-70 years old) were purchased (Promocell, Heidelberg, Germany) and grown in a standard medium MV2 (Promocell, Heidelberg, Germany) with Penicillin-Streptomycin 1% (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). HPMEC (passage 5) were seeded (9000 cells/cm2) onto six well plates, which had been precoated with 0.1% gelatine (Attachment Factor, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA), and grown in a standard tissue incubator (5%CO2, 21%O2) until 80-90% confluent.    For bottom-up proteomics, 25 µl of protein samples, lysed with RIPA, were mixed with 50 µl LYSE buffer (PreOmics, Munich, Germany), digested, and purified using columns (iST Sample Preparation Kit, PreOmics, Munich, Germany). The samples were analyzed by the Mass Spectrometry Resource (MSR) in University College Dublin on a mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA) connected to a chromatography system (Dionex Ultimate 3000, RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were separated on C18 home-made column (100 x 0.075 mm x 3 μm, C18-AQ Dr. Maisch Reprosil-Pur, Tübingen, Germany) over 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min with a linear gradient of increasing ACN from 1% to 27%. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode; a high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed to select the twelve most intense ions and fragmented using high energy C-trap dissociation for MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the mass spectrometer was processed using the MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0) incorporating the Andromeda search engine. To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched against Uniprot homo sapiens database (2021_03) containing 78,120 entries. All searches were performed using the default setting of MaxQuant, with trypsin as specified enzyme allowing two missed cleavages and a false discovery rate of 1% on the peptide and protein level. The database searches were performed with carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modification and acetylation (protein N terminus) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications. For the generation of label free quantitative (LFQ) ion intensities for protein profiles, signals of corresponding peptides in different nano-HPLC MS/MS runs were matched by MaxQuant in a maximum time window of 1 min. Statistical analysis of proteomic data was undertaken in Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3) according to the developer’s protocol.

### Publication Abstract
Blood flow produces shear stress that homeostatically regulates the phenotype of pulmonary endothelial cells, exerting antiinflammatory and antithrombotic actions and maintaining normal barrier function. Hypoxia due to diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), causes vasoconstriction, increased vascular resistance, and pulmonary hypertension. Hypoxia-induced changes in endothelial function play a central role in the development of pulmonary hypertension. However, the interactive effects of hypoxia and shear stress on the pulmonary endothelial phenotype have not been studied. Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells were cultured in normoxia or hypoxia while subjected to physiological shear stress or in static conditions. Unbiased proteomics was used to identify hypoxia-induced changes in protein expression. Using publicly available single-cell RNA sequencing datasets, differences in gene expression between the alveolar endothelial cells from COPD and healthy lungs were identified. Sixty proteins were identified whose expression changed in response to hypoxia in conditions of physiological shear stress but not in static conditions. These included proteins that are crucial for endothelial homeostasis (e.g., JAM-A [junctional adhesion molecule A], ERG [ETS transcription factor ERG]) or implicated in pulmonary hypertension (e.g., thrombospondin-1). Fifty-five of these 60 have not been previously implicated in the development of hypoxic lung diseases. mRNA for 5 of the 60 (ERG, MCRIP1 [MAPK regulated corepressor interacting protein 1], EIF4A2 [eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4A2], HSP90AA1 [heat shock protein 90 alpha family class A member 1], and DNAJA1 [DnaJ Hsp40 (heat shock protein family) member A1]) showed similar changes in the alveolar endothelial cells of COPD compared with healthy lungs in females but not in males. These data show that the proteomic responses of the pulmonary microvascular endothelium to hypoxia are significantly altered by shear stress and suggest that these shear-hypoxia interactions are important in the development of hypoxic pulmonary vascular disease.

### Keywords
Copd, Human pulmonary microvascular endothelial cells, Shear stress, Hypoxia

### Affiliations
School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
UCD

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Paul McLoughlin
School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland


