### Accession
PXD012823

### Title
Acid stress response of Staphylococcus xylosus elicits changes in the proteome and cellular membrane

### Description
Aims: Coagulase negative Staphylococcus xylosus strains are used as starter organisms for sausage fermentation. As those strains have to cope with low pH-values during fermentation, the aim of this study was to identify the acid adaptation mechanisms of S. xylosus TMW 2.1523 previously isolated from salami.  Methods and Results: A comparative proteomic study between two different acid tolerant mutants was performed. Therefore, both S. xylosus mutants were grown pH-static under acid stress (pH 5.1) and reference conditions (pH 7.0). Proteomic data were supported by metabolite and cell membrane lipids analyses. S. xylosus acid stress adaptation is mainly characterized by a metabolic change towards neutral metabolites, enhanced urease activity, reduced ATP consumption, an increase in membrane fluidity and changes of the membrane thickness.  Conclusion: This study corroborates mechanisms as previously described for other Gram-positive bacteria. Additionally, the adjustment of membrane structure and composition in S. xylosus TMW 2.1523 play a prominent role in its acid adaptation.  Significance and Impact of the Study: This study demonstrates for the first time changes of the membrane lipid composition due to acid stress adaptation in staphylococci.

### Sample Protocol
S. xylosus TMW 2.1523 was cultivated at 37°C in media containing 1.5% sodium chloride, 1.5% tryptone/peptone from casein and 0.5% meat extract from Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany). For UV-mutagenesis, S. xylosus TMW 2.1523 OD590= 0.75 were exposed to UVB radiation (312 nm) for 10 minutes. Acid-tolerance selection was done by cultivation of mutagenized bacteria on pH-gradient plates. Most acid tolerant mutants of each mutation round were selected for the next passage. The effect of mutagenesis and acid-selection was controlled by direct comparison of the cell growth of all mutants at different pH-values. Therefore, 5 μl of bacteria (OD 0.3) were dripped on plates ranging from pH 5.6 to pH 5.2. Finally, single colonies of mutants, significantly differing in their acid tolerance, were picked and archived for further experiments. Both mutants were grown under acid stress and non-acid stress (pH 7.0) in Biostat A fermenters form Sartorius (Göttingen, Germany). Fermentation was performed at 37°C, anaerobically at pH-static conditions. As highest cell growth differences of both mutants were determined at pH 5.1 and this pH was also growth limiting (data not shown), it was defined as acid stress condition for this strain. Each fermentation condition was repeated three times per mutant. Inoculation was done with freshly prepared precultures. After 24 hours, samples were taken for metabolomic and proteomic data analysis. Cell metabolism was stopped by adding 6.25% final volume of trichloroacetic acid to each sample. Cell lysis was performed with 8 mol l-1 urea buffer pH 8.0 and glass beads (shaker duration 10 minutes). Proteins were diluted 1:5 with 50 mmol l-1 ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced, alkylated and finally digested with trypsin for 5 hours. Afterwards, the peptide mixture was cleaned up by Sep-Pak Vac tC18 1cc columns. 5 μl of a 0.2 μg μl-1 concentrated peptide mix were used for mass spectrometric analysis by QExactive HF from Thermo Fischer Scientific (Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was done using the software MaxQuant (Tyanova et al. 2016a). The Perseus software was used for statistical data analysis (Tyanova et al. 2016b).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomic, Acid adaptation, Staphylococci, Uv-mutation, Fatty acids, Sausage fermentation

### Affiliations
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY
TU Munich

### Submitter
Christina Ludwig

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Ludwig
Bavarian Center for Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry Technische Universität München Gregor-Mendel-Straße 4 85354 Freising GERMANY


