### Accession
PXD008765

### Title
Localised protein expression changes in different regions of human Alzheimer’s brain correlate with disease severity - Entorhinal Cortex

### Description
Human brain tissue was obtained from the New Zealand Brain Bank from donors with Alzheimer's disease (AD) or age-matched controls (n=9/group). Mean post mortem delays were ~12h. Six distinct brain regions were dissected, Hippocampus, Cingulate Gyrus, Entorhinal Cortex (severely affected), Motor and Sensory Cortex (less affected) and Cerebellum (spared). Protein was extracted from each sample and, each region was analysed independently. For each region, samples were divided into 3 sets of 3 cases and 3 controls and assigned to an iTRAQ 8 plex, alongside two aliquots of a pooled QC sample. Samples were digested, iTRAQ labelled and analysed. For each region, between 3000 and 4200 proteins were compared between AD and control, identifying a series of known and novel protein expression changes associated with the progression of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted, reduced alkylated and digested using standard protocols. Following iTRAQ labelled of peptides (8plex), samples were pooled and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography. Each fraction was subsequently analysed by LC-MS/MS using a AB Sciex QStar Elite MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were extracted, reduced alkylated and digested using standard protocols. Following iTRAQ labelled of peptides (8plex), samples were pooled and fractionated by high-pH reversed phase chromatography. Each fraction was subsequently analysed by LC-MS/MS using a AB Sciex QStar Elite MS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Entorhinal cortex, Itraq, Alzheimer’s, Dementia

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, School of Medical Science, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Richard Unwin

### Lab Head
Dr Richard David Unwin
Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, School of Medical Science, Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, The University of Manchester


