### Accession
PXD021588

### Title
Comparative Host-Coronavirus Protein Interaction Networks Reveal Pan-Viral Disease Mechanisms

### Description
Abstract: The COVID-19 (Coronavirus disease-2019) pandemic, caused by the SARS-CoV-2 coronavirus, has highlighted emergent viruses as significant threats to public health and the global economy. SARS-CoV-2 is closely related to the more lethal but less transmissible coronaviruses SARS-CoV-1 and MERS-CoV. Here, we have carried out comparative viral-human protein-protein interaction and viral protein localization analysis for all three viruses. We find that proteins often do not change localization across viruses but their sequence divergence dictates differences in host interactions. Functional genetic screening identified host factors that functionally impinge on coronavirus proliferation, including Tom70, a mitochondrial chaperone protein that interacts with both SARS-CoV-1 and SARS-CoV-2 Orf9b, an interaction we structurally characterized using cryoEM. Combining genetically validated host factors with both COVID-19 patient genetic data and medical billing records identified important molecular mechanisms (IL-17 regulation) and drug treatments (sigma-1 receptor ligands) that merit further molecular and clinical study.

### Sample Protocol
Anti-Strep-Tag affinity purification Frozen cell pellets were thawed on ice for 15-20 minutes and suspended in 1 ml Lysis Buffer [IP Buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 at 4°C, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P 40 Substitute (NP40; Fluka Analytical) and cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche)]. Samples were then freeze-fractured by refreezing on dry ice for 10-20 minutes, then rethawed and incubated on a tube rotator for 30 minutes at 4°C.  Debris was pelleted by centrifugation at 13,000 xg, 4°C for 15 minutes. Up to 56 samples were arrayed into a 96-well Deepwell plate for affinity purification on the KingFisher Flex Purification System (Thermo Scientific) as follows: MagStrep “type3” beads (30 μl; IBA Lifesciences) were equilibrated twice with 1 ml Wash Buffer (IP Buffer supplemented with 0.05% NP40) and incubated with 0.95 ml lysate for 2 hours. Beads were washed three times with 1 ml Wash Buffer and then once with 1 ml IP Buffer. Beads were released into 75 μl Denaturation-Reduction Buffer (2 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1 mM DTT) in advance of on-bead digestion. All automated protocol steps were performed at  4°C using the slow mix speed and the following mix times: 30 seconds for equilibration/wash steps, 2 hours for binding, and 1 minute for final bead release. Three 10 second bead collection times were used between all steps.  On-bead digestion Bead-bound proteins were denatured and reduced at 37°C for 30 minutes, alkylated in the dark with 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature, and quenched with 3 mM DTT for 10 minutes. To offset evaporation, 22.5 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 were added prior to trypsin digestion. Proteins were then incubated at 37°C, initially for 4 hours with 1.5 μl trypsin (0.5 μg/μl; Promega) and then another 1-2 hours with 0.5 μl additional trypsin. All steps were performed with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm on a ThermoMixer C incubator. Resulting peptides were combined with 50 μl 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 used to rinse beads and acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final, pH < 2.0). Acidified peptides were desalted for MS analysis using a BioPureSPE Mini 96-Well Plate (20mg PROTO 300 C18; The Nest Group, Inc.) according to standard protocols.

### Data Protocol
Mass spec operation, peptide search, and protein interaction scoring Samples were re-suspended in 4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution, and separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow C18 column (Dr. Maisch). Each sample was directly injected via a Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed with a 75 min acquisition, with all MS1 and MS2 spectra collected in the orbitrap; data were acquired using the Thermo software Xcalibur (4.2.47) and Tune (2.11 QF1 Build 3006). For all acquisitions, QCloud was used to control instrument longitudinal performance during the project (26). All proteomic data was searched against the human proteome (uniprot reviewed sequences downloaded February 28th, 2020), EGFP sequence, and the SARS-CoV or MERS protein sequences using the default settings for MaxQuant (version 1.6.12.0) (27). Detected peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant, and identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring with both SAINTexpress (version 3.6.3) and MiST (https://github.com/kroganlab/mist) (6, 7). We applied a two-step filtering strategy to determine the final list of reported interactors which relied on two different scoring stringency cutoffs. In the first step, we chose all protein interactions that possess a MiST score ≥ 0.7, a SAINTexpress BFDR ≤ 0.05 and an average spectral count ≥ 2.

### Publication Abstract
Several highly effective Covid-19 vaccines are in emergency use, although more-infectious coronavirus strains, could delay the end of the pandemic even further. Because of this, it is highly desirable to develop fast antiviral drug treatments to accelerate the lasting immunity against the virus. From a theoretical perspective, computational approaches are useful tools for antiviral drug development based on the data analysis of gene expression, chemical structure, molecular pathway, and protein interaction mapping. This work studies the structural stability of virus-host interactome networks based on the graphical representation of virus-host protein interactions as vertices or nodes connected by commonly shared proteins. These graphical network visualization methods are analogous to those use in the design of artificial neural networks in neuromorphic computing. In standard protein-node-based network representation, virus-host interaction merges with virus-protein and host-protein networks, introducing redundant links associated with the internal virus and host networks. On the contrary, our approach provides a direct geometrical representation of viral infection structure and allows the effective and fast detection of the structural robustness of the virus-host network through proteins removal. This method was validated by applying it to H1N1 and HIV viruses, in which we were able to pinpoint the changes in the Interactome Network produced by known vaccines. The application of this method to the SARS-CoV-2 virus-host protein interactome implies that nonstructural proteins nsp4, nsp12, nsp16, the nuclear pore membrane glycoprotein NUP210, and ubiquitin specific peptidase USP54 play a crucial role in the viral infection, and their removal may provide an efficient therapy. This method may be extended to any new mutations or other viruses for which the Interactome Network is experimentally determined. Since time is of the essence, because of the impact of more-infectious strains on controlling the spread of the virus, this method may be a useful tool for novel antiviral therapies.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Coronavirus

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


