### Accession
PXD020108

### Title
Global proteome and phosphoproteome alterations in 3rd generation EGFR TKI resistance reveal drug targets to circumvent resistance

### Description
Lung cancer continues to be the leading cause of cancer mortality worldwide. The treatment of lung cancer patients harboring mutant EGFR with orally administered EGFR TKIs has been a paradigm shift. Osimertinib and rociletinib are two 3rd generation irreversible EGFR TKIs targeting the EGFR T790M mutation. Osimertinib is the current standard care for patients with EGFR mutations due to increased efficacy, lower side effects, and enhanced brain penetrance. Unfortunately, all patients develop resistance to it. Genomic approaches have primarily been used to interrogate resistance mechanisms. Here, we have characterized the proteome and phosphoproteome of a series of isogenic EGFR mutant lung adenocarcinoma cell lines that are either sensitive or resistant to these drugs. To our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive proteomic dataset resource to date to investigate 3rd generation EGFR TKI resistance in lung adenocarcinoma. We have interrogated this unbiased global quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic dataset to uncover alterations in signaling pathways, and to reveal a proteomic signature of EMT and kinases / phosphatases with altered protein expression and phosphorylation in the TKI resistant cells. We validated the significant role of SHP2 in the activation of RAS/MAPK and PI3K/AKT signaling pathways. Furthermore, we performed anticorrelation analyses of this phosphoproteomic dataset with the published drug-induced P100 phosphoproteomic datasets from the Library of Integrated Network-Based Cellular Signatures (LINCS) program to predict drugs with the potential to overcome EGFR TKI resistance. We identified that dactolisib, a PI3K/mTOR inhibitor, in combination with osimertinib, may overcome osimertinib resistance both in vitro and in vivo.  Introduction Lung cancer continues to be the leading cause of cancer mortality in the world (1). Many lung adenocarcinoma patients with activating epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) mutations initially respond dramaticlly to the first- or second-generation EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). However, they eventually develop resistance. The most common mechanism of acquired resistance is the EGFR T790M gatekeeper site residue mutation (2). Osimertinib, a third generation irreversible EGFR TKI has been approved by the FDA to treat patients harboring the EGFR T790M mutation who have developed resistance to first- and second- generation EGFR TKIs (3). Recently, osimertinib was also approved for the front-line treatment of patients harboring EGFR mutations (4). Rociletinib is another irreversible inhibitor targeting the EGFR T790M mutation, which has minimal activity against wild-type EGFR. Both drugs have therapeutic benefits and have demonstrated activity in tumors with T790M-mediated resistance to other EGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitors (5, 6). Further development of rociletinib was ceased in 2016 due to less than expected efficacy, poor brain penetration leading to tumor progression in brain tissues and off-target effects on IGFR activation leading to hyperglycemia (7, 8).  Although 3rd-generation TKIs provide clinical benefit to most patients with EGFR mutations, some patients, demonstrating primary resistance, still do not respond to these inhibitors. Complete responses are rare, and all patients eventually develop resistance, suggesting primary and acquired resistance mechanisms decrease the efficacy of the drugs (9, 10). Genomic approaches have been used primarily to interrogate osimertinib resistance mechanisms (9, 11-15). Several mechanisms of osimertinib resistance have been identified (16), including novel second site EGFR mutations, activated bypass pathways such as MET amplification, HER2 amplification, RAS mutations, BRAF mutations, PIK3CA mutations, and novel fusion events (17). However, the resistance mechanism is complex and still not fully understood.  Previously, we have used SILAC-based quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify the global dynamic modification which occur upon treatment of TKI-sensitive and -resistant lung adenocarcinoma cells with the 1st and 2nd generation EGFR TKIs, erlotinib and afatinib. Utilizing this strategy, we identified the targets of mutant EGFR signaling pathways responsible for TKI resistance, and possible off-target effects of the drugs (18, 19). In this study, we employed SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize alterations in the proteome and phosphoproteome which occur upon acquired resistance and sought to identify novel mechanisms of resistance to the third generation EGFR TKIs, osimertinib and rociletinib. To our knowledge, this is the most comprehensive 3rd generation EGFR TKI resistant proteome and phosphoproteome analysis resource available to date.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatment H1975 parental cell line was obtained from ATCC. The resistant cell lines AZR3/AZR4 (resistant to osimertinib) and COR1/COR10 (resistant to rociletinib) and were obtained from AstraZeneca and Colvis Oncology, respectively. The cells were cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2 in RPMI medium 1640 with 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin/streptomycin for at least five passages to completely label the proteome with stable isotope labeled heavy Arg and Lys for three-state SILAC experiments. The three state SILAC-labeled cells were TKI-sensitive cell line H1975 (light), the TKI-resistant cell lines AZR3 and COR1 (medium), and the TKI-resistant cell lines AZR4 and COR10 (heavy). The medium state cells were labeled with 13C6-Arg/D4-Lys and the heavy state cells were labeled with 13C615N4-Arg/13C615N2-Lys. Upon complete labeling, the cells were expanded to 15 cm dishes. The resistant cell lines were grown in the presence of TKIs until 3 days before the experiment. Each set of the SILAC labeled cells were treated either with DMSO or the corresponded drugs (50 nM osimertinib or 100 nM rociletinib) for one hour, respectively before harvesting. Protein extraction and sample processing Cells were lysed with urea lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1 mM-glycerophosphate). Protein concentrations were determined by the Modified Lowry method. Equal amounts of protein from lysates of each SILAC state were mixed together. The combined lysate was reduced with 45 mM dithriothreitol, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide, and subsequently digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. The digest was then acidified with 1% TFA and peptides were desalted using C18 solid phase extraction columns, lyophilized and stored at -80° C. Basic reversed phase liquid chromatography fractionation Basic-RPLC separation was performed with an XBridge C18, 100 x 2.1 mm analytical column containing 5 mm particles and equipped with a 10 x 2.1 mm guard column (Waters, Milford, MA) with a flow rate of 0.25 ml/min. The solvent consisted of 10 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) as mobile phase A, and 10 mM TEABC in ACN as mobile phase B. Sample separation was accomplished using the following linear gradient: from 0 to 1% B in 5 min, from 1 to 10% B in 5 min, from 10 to 35% B in 30 min, and from 35 to 100% B in 5 min, and held at 100% B for an additional 3 min. A total of 96 fractions were collected during the LC separation in a 96-well plate containing 12.5 ml of 1% formic acid for immediate acidification. The collected fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. 1/10th of the peptides was injected directly for LC-MS/MS analysis from protein identification. Enrichment of Phosphopeptides  Remaining 9/10th of the dried peptides were dissolved in solution A containing 80% ACN, 1% TFA, and 3% 2, 5-DHB and incubated with TiO2 pretreated (2 h at room temperature) with solution A. After 12 h, TiO2 beads were washed thrice using solution A and twice with 80% ACN containing 1% TFA. TiO2 bound peptides were eluted using 3% NH4OH in 40% ACN and immediately acidified using formic acid. The peptides were vacuum dried, C18 stage-tip cleaned before LC-MS/MS analysis. Phosphotyrosine peptides were enriched using a PhosphoScan Kit (p-Tyr-100 and p-Tyr-1000, Cell Signaling, Danvers, MA). The lyophilized peptide was dissolved in IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and incubated with 40 ml of immobilized anti-phosphotyrosine antibody for 1 h at 4°C. The antibody beads were centrifuged for 1 min at 1500 x g, and the supernatant was separated and saved. The antibody-bound beads were washed 3 times with 1ml of IAP buffer and twice with water by inverting tube 5 times at 4 °C. The phosphotyrosine-containing peptides were eluted from antibody with 55 ml of 0.15% TFA by gently tapping the bottom of the tube and incubating at room temperature for 10 min.  LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF interfaced with an UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano System. The dried peptides and the enriched phosphopeptides were loaded onto a nano-trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 Nano Trap Column) and separated on an Easy-sprayTM C18 LC column (Acclaim PepMap100). Mobile phases A and B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in 90% ACN, respectively. Peptides were eluted from the column at 300 nL/min using the following linear gradient: from 4 to 35% B in 60 min, from 35 to 45% B in 5 min, from 45 to 90% B in 5 min, and held at 90% B for an additional 5 min. The heated capillary temperature and spray voltage were 275 °C and 1.7 kV, respectively. Full spectra were collected from 350 to 1800 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000, followed by data dependent HCD MS/MS scans of the fifteen most abundant ions at a resolution of 30,000, using 40% collision energy and dynamic exclusion time of 30s.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.7.4) with the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human protein database (Feb 2017) and quantification was performed using default parameters for 3 state SILAC in MaxQuant. The parameters used for database search include trypsin as a protease with two missed cleavage sites allowed. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation were specified as variable modifications. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 7 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm. False discovery rate was calculated using a decoy database and a 1% cut-off was applied to both peptide table and phosphosite table. Combined normalized SILAC ratio of the proteins and the phosphopeptides and individual ratios of each experiment were obtained from the MaxQuant search. Perseus (version 1.5.5.3) was used to view and further analyze the data. Hierarchical clustering of proteins and phosphorylation were obtained in Perseus using log2 SILAC ratios. One sample t-test was performed in Perseus and the proteins or phosphopeptides with the p-value less than 0.05 and the SILAC ratio above 1.5-fold changes were considered as significantly changed. Kinase Enrichment Analysis The goal of the enrichment analysis was to identify kinases whose targets were significantly over-represented among the phosphorylation sites that were significantly hyper- or hypo-phosphorylated in drug-resistant vs. sensitive cells when matched with the kinase-target site data in iPTMnet v.4.1.  The enrichment analysis was performed at the level of kinase families rather than individual kinases. Human kinases in iPTMnet were classified into families using a mapping table provided by KinBase (http://kinase.com/web/current/human/). Phosphorylation sites that were significantly hyper- or hypo-phosphorylated in drug resistant vs. sensitive cells were selected using volcano plots (p-value greater than 0.05 and more than 1.5-fold change). Kinases for these sites were retrieved from iPTMnet using the iptmnetr R package (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/iptmnetr/index.html) and mapped to kinase families as above. An enrichment p-value for each family was obtained by performing Fisher’s Exact Test on the two-by-two contingency table. Only families whose kinases phosphorylated three or more significantly changed sites were included in the analysis. Calculations for significantly hyper- or hypophosphorylated sites were done separately. Multiple testing correction was performed with the Benjamin-Hochberg method. All statistical calculations were carried out using R. Drug Signature Comparison Drug signature comparisons were performed using two methods.  First, we used querying Touchstone-P, a library of phosphoproteomic signatures from several cell lines treated with a panel of small molecule drugs (46). The Proteomic Query tool, available through the ConnectivityMap web interface (http://clue.io/proteomics-query), compares an input P100 phosphorylation signature to each signature in the library and reports a connectivity score ranging from -1 (strong negative connection/most “opposite” profile) to 1 (strong positive connection/most similar profile). The tool can calculate scores for data with and without replicates. To analyze our data with replicates, for each replicate of each cell line/drug combination in our dataset, we constructed a list of the log2 abundance ratios (TKI-resistant vs. sensitive) for all sites in the P100 set for which we had data. Replicates in which fewer than 40 of the P100 sites were observed were discarded. Depending on the cell line/drug combination, between two and four replicates had enough P100 data to be included in the analysis. The data was formatted as a gct file using the parse.gctx function in the cmap/cmapR R package (https://rdrr.io/github/cmap/cmapR) and submitted to the Proteomics Query tool to obtain connectivity scores. We also calculated the mean log2 abundance ratio across all replicates for the P100 sites observed in each cell line/drug combination in our data and submitted these profiles to the Proteomics Query tool using the “no replicates” option. Second, we calculated the Pearson correlation coefficient between each cell line/drug combination in our dataset and each experiment in the P100 dataset. We obtained the P100 data for this analysis from the P100 Level 3 data file P100Level3.08_16_2016.gct.txt.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
3rd generation egfr tki, Lung adenocarcinoma, Resistance mechanism

### Affiliations
National Cancer Institute/NIH
Thoracic and GI Malignancies Branch, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD

### Submitter
Yue Andy Qi

### Lab Head
Dr Udayan Guha
Thoracic and GI Malignancies Branch, CCR, NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD


