### Accession
PXD040028

### Title
Quantification of glycated human serum albumin peptides

### Description
Human serum albumin is the most abundant plasma protein with a large number of lysine and arginine residues. Hence, it is highly susceptible to glycation in vivo. In hyperglycemic conditions, such as diabetes, the level of HSA glycation increases. Here we quantified glycated HSA peptides in a subject population of healthy and type 2 diabetes with and without nephropathy to assess its performance for the diagnosis of diabetic nephropathy compared to HbA1c.

### Sample Protocol
50µg of human plasma samples were diluted in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer to get a protein concentration of 1mg/ml and heated at 80°C for 15 min. Disulphide bond reduction was done by adding dithiothreitol and alkylation of sulfhydryl group was done by adding iodoacetamide. Digestion was performed by adding trypsin at 1:25 trypsin to protein ratio. Digestion reaction was stopped by adding 1µl formic acid. The sample was dried by vacuum concentrator.

### Data Protocol
An MRM-HR acquisition method was used to quantify glycated HSA peptides and the corresponding unglycated peptides on Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer. The raw data generated were analyzed using skyline. Proteolytic enzyme was selected as Trypsin (K/R) and the glycation modification mass was specified in the peptide settings. Human serum albumin peptides to be quantified were specified as target peptides and the raw files were imported into Skyline for the quantification of precursors. The areas under curve (AUC) of the precursors were exported as result.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic nephropathy is a leading cause of end-stage renal disease. Hence, early detection of diabetic nephropathy is essential to mitigate the disease burden. Microalbuminuria, the currently used diagnostic marker of diabetic nephropathy, is not efficient in detecting it at an early stage. Therefore, we explored the utility of glycated human serum albumin (HSA) peptides for risk prediction of diabetic nephropathy. Three glycation-sensitive HSA peptides, namely, FKDLGEENFK, KQTALVELVK, and KVPQVSTPTLVEVSR, with deoxyfructosyllysine (DFL) modification were quantified by targeted mass spectrometry (MS) in a study population comprising healthy and type II diabetes subjects with and without nephropathy. Mass spectrometry, receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve, and correlation analysis revealed that the DFL-modified KQTALVELVK peptide was better than other glycated HSA peptides and HbA<sub>1c</sub> for identifying diabetic nephropathy. DFL-modified KQTALVELVK could be a potential marker for risk prediction of diabetic nephropathy.

### Keywords
Human serum albumin, Plasma, Homo sapiens, Mass spectrometry, Hba1c, Glycation, Microalbuminuria, Kidney

### Affiliations
CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory
Proteomics facility, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India

### Submitter
Arvindkumar Chaurasiya

### Lab Head
Dr Mahesh J Kulkarni
Proteomics facility, Biochemical Sciences Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, India


