### Accession
PXD013727

### Title
¬¬Identifying the cellular interactome of Epstein-Barr virus lytic regulator Zta reveals cellular targets contributing to viral replication.

### Description
The human gamma herpesvirus Epstein-Barr virus, infects most adults and is an important contributor to the development of many types of cancer. Essential contributions of viral genes to replication are known but the potential contributions of cell genes to viral replication are less well delineated. A key player is the viral protein Zta (BZLF1, ZEBRA, Z). This sequence-specific DNA-binding protein can disrupt viral latency by driving the transcription of target genes and by interacting with the EBV lytic origin of replication. Here we used an unbiased approach to identify the Zta-interactome in cells derived from a Burkitt’s lymphoma. Isolating Zta and associated proteins from Burkitt’s lymphoma cells undergoing EBV replication, followed by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) mass spectrometry resulted in the identification of forty-four viral and cellular proteins in the Zta interactome. Of these two were known targets of Zta. The association of Zta with Hsc70 and the contribution that Hsc70 plays to EBV replication mirrors a contribution from HSP70 family members to the replication of other herpesviruses. Conversely, the association of Zta with NFATc2 has no known parallels for other herpesviruses. Zta attenuates the activity of an NFAT-dependent promoter, which shows a potential for dampening the expression of genes regulated by calcium-dependent signal transduction. Indeed, Zta has the ability to affect a feed-back loop limiting its own expression, which would aid viral replication by preventing the toxic effects of Zta overexpression.

### Sample Protocol
For each replicate, 1 x 108 Akata cells were concentrated to 1 x 107 cells/ml and were cross-linked following addition of 0.2mM DSP (Thermo Scientific) for 30 minutes at room temperature. The reaction was stopped by the addition of Tris solution to get a final concentration 50mM and incubated for 15 minutes, then cells were washed with D-PBS (Gibco). The cells were re-suspended in CellLytic MT cell lysis reagent (Sigma) for 10 minutes at 4°C. After centrifugation, the nuclear pellets were then re-suspended in lysis reagent (Sigma) with the addition of 250U/ml of Benzonase (Sigma). The nuclear extracts were then diluted in IP dilution buffer (0.01% SDS, 1.1% Triton X-100, 1.2 mM EDTA, 16.7 mM Tris pH 8.0, 167 mM NaCl). 10ug SCZ Zta antibody or control goat IgG were added to 25ul of protein G-dynabeads and cross-linked following the addition of (concentration) bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) (Thermo Scientific). These were then incubated with the nuclear extracts and overnight at 4°C on a rotating wheel.Then beads were washed by low salt, high salt, lithium buffers as described previously for Chromatin precipitation  (Godfrey et al 2017) and finally washed in 10 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA. Then proteins were eluted in 2XLaemmli sample buffer for 10 min at 95 °C. Samples on the beads were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per sample; 37°C, overnight).  The resulting peptides were labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) ten plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the labelled samples pooled. The pooled sample was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto an XBridge BEH C18 Column (130Å, 3.5 µm, 2.1 mm X 150 mm, Waters, UK) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (20 mM Ammonium Hydroxide in acetonitrile, pH 10) from 0-95% over 60 minutes.  The resulting fractions (four in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  High pH RP fractions were further fractionated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid, peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 275°C.   Then samples were further analysed by an Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) the instrument is controlled by Xcalibur 2.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow.  FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic precursor selection. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole mass filter set to a width of 1.2m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms.  Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield.  Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 5 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
FASTA files containing the human proteome alongside the EBV proteome were derived from UniProt/SwissProt database. TMT labelled mass spec analysis were identified and quantified by Proteome discoverer. Data were visualized by Perseus (version 1.5.5.0) (19) and R studio (RStudio Team (2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ebv; bzlf1; lytic replication;nfat;hsc70

### Affiliations
University of Sussex
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex Brighton BN1 9QG UK

### Submitter
Alison Sinclair

### Lab Head
Dr Alison Sinclair
School of Life Sciences University of Sussex Brighton BN1 9QG UK


