### Accession
PXD038629

### Title
Selennoprotein S interacts with the replication and transcription complex of the SARS-CoV-2 by binding nsp7

### Description
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) replicates and evades detection by using endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membranes and their associated protein machineries. Among these hijacked human ER proteins is selenoprotein S, which usually takes part in the ER protein degradation pathway, NFkB signaling, and regulation of cytokines secretion. While the role of selenoprotein S in the viral life cycle is not yet known, it has been reported that it interacts with SARS-CoV-2 non-structural protein 7 (nsp7), a viral protein essential for the reproduction of SARS-CoV-2. However, it was unknown if selenoprotein S and nsp7 interact directly and whether the two proteins can still interact when nsp7 is bound to the virus' replication machinery. Using biochemical assays, we show that selenoprotein S indeed binds directly to nsp7. In addition, we find that selenoprotein S can also bind nsp7 when it is in a complex with the coronavirus's minimal replication complex: nsp7, nsp8 and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase. Using cross-linking experiments, we mapped the interactions of selenoprotein S and nsp7 in the replication complex and show that the hydrophobic segment of selenoprotein S is essential for binding nsp7. This arrangement leaves an extended helix and the intrinsically disordered segment of selenoprotein S exposed and free to potentially recruit additional proteins to the replication complex. Thus, selenoprotein S is shown to directly interact with the viral replication complex, which places this human protein at the heart of viral replication.

### Sample Protocol
10 μM of each protein in cross-linking buffer: 20 mM HEPES, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA (and 0.6 mM DDM for the fragments containing the hydrophobic region) was prepared in a final volume of 100 μL and incubated for one hour at 4 °C. 2 μL of DSSO in DMSO (freshly prepared) was added to final concentration of 20 times molar ratio of the protein mixture and the sample incubated at 25 °C for 45 minutes. For controls, the mixture of the proteins was mixed with 2 μL DMSO. 1 M Tris.Cl, pH 8.0 buffer was added to final concentration of 50 mM to quench the crosslinking for 15 minutes at 25 °C. 10 μL of sample was saved for analysis by SDS-PAGE. 400 μL cold acetone was added to the remaining volume, and incubated on ice for one hour and centrifuged for 10 minutes at 15000 X g. The supernatant was removed, and the samples incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature to dry the precipitates. 12.5 μL of 50 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer, 8 M urea was used to resuspend the precipitate. 187.5 μL of 50 mM sodium bicarbonate was added to lower the urea concentration to 500 mM.  DTT was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the sample incubated at 56 °C for 20 minutes. Afterwards iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration 15 mM and the sample was incubated for 15 minutes in the dark. -lytic protease (NEB) was added to 1:20 molar ratio and incubated at 37 °C for 20 hours. Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the samples to final 1% concentration and the peptides were purified using Pierce C18 zip tip. Peptides were dried using SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until analysis by mass spectrometry. All crosslinking reactions and controls were performed in at least three independent reactions (biological repeats).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 and XlinkX 2.5 node. To identify crosslinked peptides, an MS2_MS3 workflow was set up with MS1 mass tolerance, 10 ppm; MS2 mass tolerance, 20 ppm; MS3 mass tolerance, 0.5 Da. Digestion was set to α-lytic protease (cleavage after T/A/S/V) with four missed cleavages allowed. The minimum peptide length was 4 amino acids. Static modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine and dynamic modification was oxidation of methionine and DSSO for lysines. The XlinkX/PD Validator node was used for cross-linked peptide validation with a 1% false discovery rate (FDR). All crosslinks were examined manually. Only crosslinks verified manually, with XlinkX score of 30 and higher that were reported in at least two of the replicates were considered as true crosslinks and reported in this article.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) replicates and evades detection using ER membranes and their associated protein machinery. Among these hijacked human proteins is selenoprotein S (selenos). This selenoprotein takes part in the protein quality control, signaling, and the regulation of cytokine secretion. While the role of selenos in the viral life cycle is not yet known, it has been reported to interact with SARS-CoV-2 nonstructural protein 7 (nsp7), a viral protein essential for the replication of the virus. We set to study whether selenos and nsp7 interact directly and if they can still bind when nsp7 is bound to the replication and transcription complex of the virus. Using biochemical assays, we show that selenos binds directly to nsp7. In addition, we found that selenos can bind to nsp7 when it is in a complex with the coronavirus's minimal replication and transcription complex, comprised of nsp7, nsp8, and the RNA-dependent RNA polymerase nsp12. In addition, through crosslinking experiments, we mapped the interaction sites of selenos and nsp7 in the replication complex and showed that the hydrophobic segment of selenos is essential for binding to nsp7. This arrangement leaves an extended helix and the intrinsically disordered segment of selenos-including the reactive selenocysteine-exposed and free to potentially recruit additional proteins to the replication and transcription complex.

### Keywords
Covid-19, Selenos, Nsp8, Nsp12, Vimp

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716 USA

### Submitter
Farid Ghelichkhani

### Lab Head
Dr Sharon Rozovsky
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Delaware, Newark, DE, 19716 USA


