### Accession
PXD040858

### Title
A microfluidics-enabled automated workflow of sample preparation for MS-based immunopeptidomics

### Description
Mass spectrometry (MS)-based immunopeptidomics is an attractive antigen discovery method with growing clinical implications, especially for personalized cancer immunotherapies. However, the current experimental approach to extract HLA-I-restricted peptides requires a bulky sample source, which remains a challenge for obtaining clinical tumor samples. We present an innovative streamlined workflow that requires a low sample volume. The workflow integrates the immunoaffinity purification (IP) and C18 peptide cleanup steps on a single microfluidics platform with automated liquid handling and minimal sample transfers, resulting in higher assay sensitivity. We also demonstrate how state-of-the-art data-independent acquisition (DIA) MS method further enhances the depth and reproducibility of tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) spectra-based peptide sequencing. As a result, over 4,000 and 5,000 HLA-I restricted peptides can be reliably identified from as low as 0.2 million human RA957 cells and a melanoma tissue of merely 5 mg, respectively. We also identified multiple known immunogenic tumor-associated antigens and hundreds of peptides derived from non-canonical protein sources. The presented workflow is a powerful tool for identifying the immunopeptidome of sparse samples.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purification of HLA-I complexes in the microfluidics chip or chromatography column The lysis buffer was freshly prepared in PBS containing 1% octyl-beta-d glucopyranoside (Sigma-Alrich), 0.25% sodium deoxycholate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease Inhibitors Mixture (Sigma-Aldrich), and 1 mM Phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (Roche). The needle biopsy-sized tumor tissues were first disrupted in lysis buffer on a Tissue Lyser bead mill (Qiagen) for 1 min at 30 Hz. Then, the lysis of frozen cell pellets or disrupted tumor tissues was done in ice-cold lysis buffer at 4 °C on a tube roller mixer for 1 h. We lysed cell pellets and tumor tissues below 20 mg in 100 μL of lysis buffer and tumor tissues above this weight in 200 μL of lysis buffer. Finally, the lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 21,300 rcf for 30 min at 4 °C, and the supernatant was transferred to lo-bind Eppendorf tubes for the following IP procedure.  For chip-IP, the cleared lysate supernatant was loaded into an antibody-coated microfluidics chip at the lowest flow rate to maximize the immunoaffinity reactions. The following steps are shown in Table S1. The column-IP was performed following the previously established protocols (16, 22, 29). Briefly, each column (Bio-Spin® disposable chromatography columns, Bio-Rad) contained 50 μL of antibody-coated microbeads. The lysate supernatant passed through the microbeads in a gravity-driven flow. Then the beads were extensively washed by high salt, low salt and Tris-HCl buffers before the HLA-peptides were eluted with 0.1 N acetic acid. The acid elution was cleaned in C18 cartridges (Micro SpinColumns, Havard Apparatus). Next, 25% acetonitrile (ACN; Sigma Aldrich) in 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) eluted the HLA-I peptides off the C18 material. Before analyzing the peptides in LC-MS/MS, the excessive ACN was removed by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator plus, Eppendorf) at 60 °C for 3 hours. The dried peptides were stored at -20 °C before MS analysis. Liquid chromatography – Tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses All samples were analyzed with our LC-MS/MS system composed of an Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were ionized by a nano-electrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex™ Ion Sources, Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Germany). The dried HLA-I peptides were resuspended in 8 μL of 2% ACN in 0.1% FA (formic acid), and twice of 3 μL was taken for MS analysis. The analytical columns were fabricated in-house. We first pulled the nanospray tip on a fused silica tubing (360 µm OD × 75µm ID, BGB Analytik, Switzerland) using a laser puller (P-2000, Sutter instrument). Then, a 50 cm-long part was cut and packed with ReproSil-Pur C18 materials (1.9 μm diameter, 120 Å pore size, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). During the sample injection, mounted analytical columns were kept at 50 °C. We used a mixture of 0.1% FA (Solvent A) and 0.1% FA in 95% ACN (Solvent B) to perform the following 60 min-gradient at 250 nL/min: 0–52 min (2 - 25% B); 52–54 min (25–35% B); 54–55 min (35–100% B); 55–60 min (100% B).  For data-independent acquisition (DIA), a full MS1 scan was acquired from 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) and the ion accumulation time of 60 ms, which was followed by 22 DIA MS2 scans with a resolution of 30,000 (m/z = 200) and an automatic gain control (AGC) of 3×106. The fixed first mass was 200 m/z, and the overlap between consecutive MS2 scans was 1 m/z. A stepped normalized collision energy (25.5, 27, and 30) was employed, and the maximum ion accumulation was set to auto.  For data-dependent acquisition (DDA), a full MS1 scan was conducted from 300 to 1650 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 (m/z = 200) and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3×106 ions. A “Top 20” strategy was used to isolate the twenty most abundant precursors within a 1.2 m/z isolation window, which undergo a fragmentation by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalized collision energy of 27. The MS2 scans were performed with a resolution of 30,000 (m/z = 200) and an ion-accumulation time of 120 ms. Peptides with charge state of four and above were exempt from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Database search The Spectronaut® software package (version 16.2, Biognosys, Switzerland) was used for analyzing the MS files. For library-free peptide identification, the raw DIA MS files were directly loaded in the directDIA workflow and searched against the UniProt database (human-reviewed sequences with isoforms, 42,348 entries, June 2020). Some parameters were modified in the default search settings: ‘Digest Type’ was ‘unspecific’; 'Min Peptide Length' was 8, and the 'Max' was 15; 'Variable modifications’ contained ‘Oxidation (M)’ and ‘Acetylation (Protein N-term), no ‘Fixed modifications’; ‘PSM’ and ‘Peptide’ FDR were set to 0.01 with no protein FDR. For library-based peptide identification, we first used the DDA and DIA raw files to generate a hybrid spectral library powered by the built-in tool 'Pulsar' before the targeted peptide search. The default settings were used for Pulsar search and library generation except for the following parameters. The 'Protein FDR' was set to 1, while the FDR for peptide and PSM was 0.01. 'Digestion rule' was left vacant, and the 'Digest Type' was changed to 'Unspecific'. Once the library was established, we also performed a targeted peptide search with a modified default setting. For 'Identification', the DIA raw files were matched to the spectral library with a 'Qvalue Cutoff’ of 0.01 and 1 for precursor and protein, respectively. The ‘Corss-run normalization’ was switched off. Results were exported in a peptide-centric format with the columns of ‘PG.Genes’, ‘PEP.StrippedSequence’, and 'PEP.Quantity’ selected for data analyses. To reveal the retention time of certain peptides, the column of ‘EG.ApexRT’ was included.  Moreover, the same UniProt database was used for a library-based search of canonical immunopeptidomics. To reveal the non-canonical space, we generated the spectral library against a nuORF (novel or unannotated open reading frame) database (47). The identified peptides were labeled with their corresponding protein group information, especially the canonical (PC) and non-canonical (NC) annotations. When one peptide has multiple annotations of protein sources, we consider it derived from nuORFs only when the protein group does not contain the ‘PC’ assignment. To ensure a stringent and precise identification of nuORF-derived peptides, we further aligned the NC-annotated peptides against a non-redundant BLAST database (845,586 protein entries, downloaded on 26/08/2020 via BLAST+, v2.10.1) using an algorithm built in NewAnce tool (16). Leucine and isoleucines were regarded as equal as they are not distinguishable by MS. The peptides mapped to known proteins in this database were thus discarded from the NC peptide pool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Automation, Sample preparation, Mass spectrometry, Data-independent acquisition, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Office B25A/04/94 Rue du Bugnon 25a, CH-1005 Lausanne
UNIL/CHUV

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Office B25A/04/94 Rue du Bugnon 25a, CH-1005 Lausanne


