### Accession
PXD029783

### Title
Spirocyclic dimer (SpiD7) activates unfolded protein response (UPR) to selectively inhibit growth and induce apoptosis of cancer cells

### Description
Protein homeostasis is maintained by a combination of tightly controlled processes which include synthesis, folding, trafficking and degradation. Transient accumulation of unfolded / misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) due to cell intrinsic and / or extrinsic signals results in the activation of unfolded protein response (UPR), an adaptation mechanism. Failure to resolve the transient accumulation results in UPR mediated programmed cell death. Loss of tumor suppressor gene or oncogene addiction in cancer cells result in a sustained higher basal UPR levels. This higher basal UPR levels in cancer cells when compared to normal cells provides a therapeutic window that can be exploited by UPR activators. Here we explored covalent modification of surface exposed cysteine (SEC) residues to simulate unfolded / misfolded proteins and induce UPR activation. A proteome-wide click-pulldown-MS study using an alkyne tagged isatin-derived spirocyclic -methylene--butyrolactone analog identified > 330 protein targets that were covalently modified. Evaluation for UPR activation with a set of analogs that can covalently modify SECs identified a spirocyclic -methylene--butyrolactone dimer (SpiD7) as a UPR activator. SpiD7 induced XBP1 splicing protected normal cells from caspase-mediated apoptosis, no such induction was observed in cancer cells, which resulted in caspase-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells. SpiD7 inhibits growth of high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSC) cell lines ~3-15 fold more potently than immortalized fallopian tube epithelial (normal) cells and reduced clonogenic growth of HGSC cell lines. Our results suggest that induction of UPR by covalent modification of SEC residues is a cancer cell vulnerability and can be exploited to discover novel therapeutics.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digests of whole cell lysates were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an RSLCnano system (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The samples were first injected onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 300 µm x 0.5 cm, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 3.0 min at a flow rate of 5 µL/min before switching in line with the main column. Separation was performed on a C18 nano column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 2µm 75µm x 250mm, ThermoFisher Scientific) at 260 nL/min with a linear gradient from 5-32% over 36 min. The LC aqueous mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and the organic mobile phase contained 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 80% (v/v) acetonitrile. Mass spectra for the eluted peptides were acquired on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer in data-dependent mode using a mass range of m/z 250–1500, resolution 120,000, AGC target 3 x 10^6, maximum injection time 60 ms for the MS1 peptide measurements. Data-dependent MS2 spectra were acquired by HCD as a Top12 experiment with a normalized collision energy (NCE) set at 28%, AGC target set to 1 x 10^5, 15,000 resolution, intensity threshold 2 x 10^4 and a maximum injection time of 250 ms.  Dynamic exclusion was set at 12 sec and the isolation window set to 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the cRAP_20150130 database (selected for Homo sapiens, unknown version, 20295 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.060 Da and a parent ion tolerance of up to 15.0 PPM. O+14 of pyrrolysine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidated of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The unfolded protein response (UPR) is an adaptation mechanism activated to resolve transient accumulation of unfolded/misfolded proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum. Failure to resolve the transient accumulation of such proteins results in UPR-mediated programmed cell death. Loss of tumor suppressor gene or oncogene addiction in cancer cells can result in sustained higher basal UPR levels; however, it is not clear if these higher basal UPR levels in cancer cells can be exploited as a therapeutic strategy. We hypothesized that covalent modification of surface-exposed cysteine (SEC) residues could simulate unfolded/misfolded proteins to activate the UPR, and that higher basal UPR levels in cancer cells would provide the necessary therapeutic window. To test this hypothesis, here we synthesized analogs that can covalently modify multiple SEC residues and evaluated them as UPR activators. We identified a spirocyclic dimer, SpiD7, and evaluated its effects on UPR activation signals, that is, XBP1 splicing, phosphorylation of eIF2&#x3b1;, and a decrease in ATF 6 levels, in normal and cancer cells, which were further confirmed by RNA-Seq analyses. We found that SpiD7 selectively induced caspase-mediated apoptosis in cancer cells, whereas normal cells exhibited robust XBP1 splicing, indicating adaptation to stress. Furthermore, SpiD7 inhibited the growth of high-grade serous carcinoma cell lines ~3-15-fold more potently than immortalized fallopian tube epithelial (paired normal control) cells and reduced clonogenic growth of high-grade serous carcinoma cell lines. Our results suggest that induction of the UPR by covalent modification of SEC residues represents a cancer cell vulnerability and can be exploited to discover novel therapeutics.

### Keywords
Unfolded protein response (upr)

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Nicholas Woods

### Lab Head
Dr Amar Natarajan
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer and Allied Diseases, Fred & Pamela Buffett Cancer Center, University of Nebraska Medical Center


