### Accession
PXD018549

### Title
Topoisomerase I Poisoning by Electrophiles Derived from Oxidative Stress

### Description
The cancer target enyzme topoisomerase 1 transiently cleaves one strand of chromosomal DNA to relax accumulated strain that can prevent transcription, replication or chromatin assembly. The topoisomerase 1 poison camptothecin and its synthetic analogs are widely used chemotherapeutics that act by trapping the enzyme on DNA in a ‘covalent complex’, resulting in persistent DNA damage and cell death. The prevailing model, interfacial inhibition, contends that the covalent complex is trapped by drug binding alone. In contrast, here we show that camptothecins produce extensive oxidative stress and that topoisomerase 1 is reactive with electrophilic second messengers of oxidative damage. We show that blocking oxidative stress in cells inhibits covalent complex formation by camptothecin, while electrophiles such as 4-hydroxynonenal are able to induce covalent complex formation in cells on their own. Towards mechanism of action, we show that 4-hydroxynonenal electrophilically modifies a cysteine within the DNA-binding active site of human topoisomerase 1. Taken together, our results suggest a mechanism in which oxidative stress mediates the effects of many topoisomerase 1 poisons, and suggest that this critical DNA-regulating enzyme may have a dual role as a sensor of cellular redox stress, linking oxidative stress to DNA damage response in cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics analyses.   For proteomics analysis of systems biology effects of TOP1 poisons on cells, A549 cells plated at 10 X 103 cells/cm2 were treated with CPT 1 µM, TPT 1 µM, or DMSO 0.1% (vehicle) for 72 hours in complete culture medium in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37 ºC. Cell monolayers were then harvested by cell scraper, centrifuged for 5 min at 1000 x g to collect cell pellets, and lysed in 100 µL of mPER buffer (Thermo) on ice for 20 min. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation for 15 min at 14,500 x g. The insoluble fraction was separated and discarded.   In experiments to identify putative HNE reactive amino acid residues, hTOP1 (1 µg, Topogen) was incubated with HNE (200 µM, Cayman Chemical) in 100 µL of PBS at 37 ºC for 30 min to HNE modify the protein.   Two technical replicates from all protein samples were then boiled at 95 ºC in Laemmli sample buffer for 5 min and then subjected to electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using 10 µg of protein per lane as determined by BCA protein assay (Thermo). Proteins in gel were visualized with a gel stain (Imperial, Thermo) and gel regions of interest were excised by sterile razor blade. Gel sections were then chopped into ~ 1 mm3 pieces, washed in dH2O and incubated in 100 mM NH4HCO3 pH 7.5 in 50% acetonitrile. A reduction step was performed by addition of 100 μL NH4HCO3 (50 mM, pH 7.5) and 10 μL of tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP HCl, 200 mM) at 37 °C for 30 min. Gel sections were washed in purified water, then acetonitrile, and vacuum dried. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at 37 °C with 1:100 enzyme–protein ratio of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) in NH4HCO3 (50 mM, pH 7.5) and CaCl2 (200 mM). Peptides were extracted with 5% formic acid and vacuum dried.  For HPLC, all samples were resuspended in HPLC-grade water (Burdick and Jackson) containing 0.2% formic acid (Fluka), 0.1% TFA (Thermo), and 0.002% Zwittergent 3 – 16 (EMD Calbiochem). The peptide samples were loaded to a 0.25 μl C8 OptiPak trapping cartridge custom-packed with Michrom Magic C8 (Optimize Technologies), washed, then switched in-line with a 20 cm X 75 μm C18 packed spray tip nano column packed with Michrom Magic C18AQ, for a two-step gradient. Mobile phase A was water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98/2/0.2) and mobile phase B was acetonitrile/isopropanol/water/formic acid (80/10/10/0.2). Using a flow rate of 350 nl/min, a 90 min, two-step LC gradient was run from 5% B to 50% B in 60 min, followed by 50% – 95% B over the next 10 min, hold 10 min at 95% B, back to starting conditions and re-equilibrated.  Electrospray tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) was performed with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo), using a 70,000 RP survey scan in profile mode, m/z 340–2000 Da, with lockmasses, followed by 20 MS/MS HCD fragmentation scans at 17,500 resolution on doubly and triply charged precursors. Single charged ions were excluded, and ions selected for MS/MS were placed on an exclusion list for 60 sec. For TOP1-HNE experiments, an inclusion list was generated with in-house software (Mayo Clinic Proteomics Core), and used with expected tryptic hTop1 peptide ions, either unmodified or with potential 4-HNE amino acid modifications (C,H,K) during the LC-MS/MS runs.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.5.2.8) and X! Tandem (The GPM, version CYCLONE) and post-search processed with Perseus (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, version 1.6.5). MaxQuant and X! Tandem were set up to search the 181010_TOP1_Human.fasta database with contaminants assuming the digestion enzyme strict trypsin with max miss cleavage set to 2. MaxQuant and X! Tandem were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 PPM and a parent ion tolerance of 20 PPM.   For TOP1 poisons systems biology data analysis, Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc.) was used to visualize MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 5 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Ratios were reported based on the LFQ Intensities of protein peak areas determined by MaxQuant and reported in a proteinGroups.txt file. The proteingroups.txt file was processed in Perseus. Proteins were removed from this results file if they were flagged by MaxQuant as “Contaminants”, “Reverse” or “Only identified by site”. LFQ peak intensities were log2 transformed, median normalized in CPT or TPT samples vs vehicle-only control, and missing values were imputed via default settings in Perseus. Gene Ontology analysis was performed with a significance cutoff of ± 1.5-fold via the DAVID bioinformatics resource (NIH; https://david.ncifcrf.gov/).   For TOP1-HNE data analysis, HNE-Delta:H(2)O (C,H,K), HNE of (C,H,K), and HNE+Delta:H(2) (C,H,K) were specified in MaxQuant and X!Tandem as variable modifications, along with deamidation (NQ), oxidation (M), formylation (N-term), acetylation (N-term), carbamidomethylation (C), Glu->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, ammonia-loss of the N-terminus, and gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus. LFQ quantification was conducted with a minimum of 1 high-confidence peptide. 1% false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was selected for peptide, protein, and site identifications. Scaffold PTM (Proteome Software) was used to annotate PTM sites derived from MS/MS sequencing results obtained using Scaffold, and all HNE modification sites were confirmed by manual validation.

### Publication Abstract
Topoisomerase 1 (Top1) reversibly nicks chromosomal DNA to relax strain accumulated during transcription, replication, chromatin assembly, and chromosome condensation. The Top1 poison camptothecin targets cancer cells by trapping the enzyme in the covalent complex Top1<sub>cc</sub>, tethered to cleaved DNA by a tyrosine-3'-phosphate bond. In&#xa0;vitro mechanistic studies point to interfacial inhibition, where camptothecin binding to the Top1-DNA interface stabilizes Top1<sub>cc</sub>. Here we present a complementary covalent mechanism that is critical in&#xa0;vivo. We observed that camptothecins induce oxidative stress, leading to lipid peroxidation, lipid-derived electrophile accumulation, and Top1 poisoning via covalent modification. The electrophile 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal can induce Top1<sub>cc</sub> on its own and forms a Michael adduct to a cysteine thiol in the Top1 active site, potentially blocking tyrosine dephosphorylation and 3' DNA phosphate release. Thereby, camptothecins may leverage a physiological cysteine-based redox switch in Top1 to mediate their selective toxicity to rapidly proliferating cancer cells.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Chemotherapy, Q-exactive, Topoisomerases, Proteomics, Enzymology

### Affiliations
University of Chicago
University of Chicago, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Chicago IL 60637, USA

### Submitter
Donald Wolfgeher

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Stephen Kron
University of Chicago, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, Chicago IL 60637, USA


