### Accession
PXD001907

### Title
SuperQuant: a Data Processing Approach to Increase Quantitative Proteome Coverage

### Description
SuperQuant is a quantitative proteomics data processing workflow that utilizes fragment ion complementarity to identify multiple co-isolated peptides in tandem mass spectra. Parent ion and label-free quantification method are supported. The performance of the developed approach was tested using dimethyl labeled HeLa lysate sample having artificially created ratio between channels (10(heavy):4(medium):1(light)). Developed software is implemented as a processing node to Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.x and freely available for the community at https://github.com/caetera/SuperQuantNode.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were lysed and proteins were digested on-filter. Next, 25 ug of peptide mixture were labeled with dimethyl reagent (modification: C2H4, C2D4 and 13C2D6) and mixed with ratio 10:4:1 (light: medium: heavy). Peptides were separated using Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoUPLC system, coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptides were focused on the precolumn (PepMap C18 10 cm x 150 µm i.d., 5 µm; Thermo, USA) and eluted from the analytical column (PepMap C18 50 cm x 75 µm i.d., 3 µm; Thermo, USA) with 245 min long gradient. The mass spectrometer was operating in top speed mode with 3 seconds cycle. MS1 spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap mass analyzer from 400 to 1200 Th, with 120,000 resolution at 200 Th, AGC target value - 5e5, maximum accumulation time - 60 ms. Ions were isolated using quadrupole mass filter with 1, 2, and 4 Th wide isolation windows and fragmented using CID in the linear ion trap. MS/MS spectra were acquired with Orbitrap detection with 15,000 resolution at 200 Th, AGC target - 1e4, maximum accumulation time - 40 ms. For comparison reasons MS/MS spectra were recorded in the linear ion trap as well using "Rapid" settings, AGC target value - 5e3, maximum accumulation time - 35 ms and 2 Th isolation window. Each analysis was performed in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
An algorithm was implemented in C# (Visual C# 2013) and compiled as a node for Proteome Discoverer 2.x, core principle is published in Kryuchkov et al. J. Proteome Res., 2013, 12(7), 3362-3371; DOI: 10.1021/pr400210m. Data analysis was performed using Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.0.0.673. Mascot 2.3 was used as the database search engine. SwissProt database (2014.04) restricted to Homo sapiens (20340 protein sequences) combined with common contaminants database (231 protein sequences) was used. Search parameters for high resolution MS/MS method were: parent ion mass tolerance - 5 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance - 0.02 Th; fixed modifications - carbamidomethylated cysteine; variable modifications - oxidized methionine and labeled N-terminal and lysine (dimethyl). For the low resolution MS/MS method fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Th, while other parameters were the same. Reversed decoy database was searched separately. In case of SuperQuant analysis all MS2 spectra were processed using home-built deconvolution node to produce fragmentation spectra consisting only of singly charged fragments, all peaks that could not be assigned to any charge state according to the isotopic pattern were transferred to the deconvoluted spectra with charge state 1+. Next, deconvoluted spectra were processed with ComplementaryFinder node before database search. ComplementaryFinder node was applied with the following parameters: co-isolation window was set 0.6 Th wider on the lower border than the isolation window; expected charge states for co-isolated peptides were 2+, 3+ and 4+; reconstructed peptide masses were grouped with 5 ppm window and weighted average (weights = intensity) of all masses in the group was used as the final estimation of the peptide mass; at least 6 ions were necessry to consider valid co-isolated peptide; ions within 10 ppm distance from the masses of immonium ions formed from 20 common amino acids were excluded from the list of possible complementary pair members; peaks corresponding to complementary pairs were intensified. Database search results were evaluated using Percolator 2.0527 with standard parameters. All PSMs with q-value < 0.01 were grouped together by the same sequence and theoretical mass and the highest Percolator SVM score was used as the score for the group. Qvality 2.0528 was used for the estimation of q-value on the PSM group level, PSM groups were filtered by q-value < 0.01. Each PSM group gives rise to one peptide. Proteins related to the filtered peptides were grouped using maximum parsimony principle. Quantification of peptides and proteins was performed using standard settings provided by Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
SuperQuant is a quantitative proteomics data processing approach that uses complementary fragment ions to identify multiple coisolated peptides in tandem mass spectra allowing for their quantification. This approach can be applied to any shotgun proteomics data set acquired with high mass accuracy for quantification at the MS(1) level. The SuperQuant approach was developed and implemented as a processing node within the Thermo Proteome Discoverer 2.x. The performance of the developed approach was tested using dimethyl-labeled HeLa lysate samples having a ratio between channels of 10(heavy):4(medium):1(light). Peptides were fragmented with collision-induced dissociation using isolation windows of 1, 2, and 4 Th while recording data both with high-resolution and low-resolution. The results obtained using SuperQuant were compared to those using the conventional ion trap-based approach (low mass accuracy MS(2) spectra), which is known to achieve high identification performance. Compared to the common high-resolution approach, the SuperQuant approach identifies up to 70% more peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs), 40% more peptides, and 20% more proteins at the 0.01 FDR level. It identifies more PSMs and peptides than the ion trap-based approach. Improvements in identifications resulted in up to 10% more PSMs, 15% more peptides, and 10% more proteins quantified on the same raw data. The developed approach does not affect the accuracy of the quantification and observed coefficients of variation between replicates of the same proteins were close to the values typical for other precursor ion-based quantification methods. The raw data is deposited to ProteomeXchange (PXD001907). The developed node is available for testing at https://github.com/caetera/SuperQuantNode.

### Keywords
Hela, Lc-msms, Data processing, Post-aquisition, Complementary ions

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Associate professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Vladimir Gorshkov

### Lab Head
Dr Frank Kjeldsen
Associate professor, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


