### Accession
PXD026934

### Title
Mitochondria regulate dietary lipid processing in enterocytes

### Description
Digested dietary fats are taken up, processed and transported by enterocytes to supply the body with lipids. Most absorbed lipids are assembled into pre-chylomicrons in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) of enterocytes, which are then transported to the Golgi for maturation and subsequent secretion to the circulation. The role of mitochondria in regulating intestinal lipid transport remains unknown. Here we show that mitochondrial dysfunction in enterocytes inhibits chylomicron production and the transport of dietary lipids to peripheral organs. Mice with intestinal epithelial cell (IEC)-specific ablation of the mitochondrial-specific aspartyl - tRNA synthetase DARS2, as well as of the respiratory chain subunit SDHA or the assembly factor COX10 failed to thrive and showed massive accumulation of lipids within large lipid droplets (LDs) in enterocytes of the proximal small intestine (SI). Feeding a fat-free diet inhibited the formation of LDs in DARS2-deficient enterocytes, showing that accumulating lipids derive mostly from digested fat. Furthermore, metabolic tracing studies revealed impaired transport of dietary lipids to peripheral organs in mice lacking DARS2 in IECs. Moreover, DARS2-deficient enterocytes showed a distinct lack of mature chylomicrons concomitant with a disorganisation of the Golgi apparatus, suggesting that impaired ER to Golgi trafficking underlies impaired chylomicron production and secretion. Taken together, these results revealed a vital role of mitochondria in regulating dietary lipid transport in enterocytes, which is relevant for understanding the intestinal and nutritional defects observed in patients with mitochondrial defects.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digestion for MS Samples for MS analysis were prepared by in-solution digestion. 20 µg of protein were precipitated for at least one hour in four volumes (v:v) of ice-cold acetone and protein pellets were extracted by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 10 min and dissolved in Urea buffer (6 M Urea,  2 M Thiourea in 10 mM HEPES, pH 8.0). Urea-containing samples were reduced by applying tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at a final concentration of 10 mM, alkylated with chloroacetamide (CAA) at a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated for 1 h RT. Samples were then digested with 1 µL LysC for 2 h at RT, diluted with 50 mM ABC to a Urea concentration of 2 M, incubated with 1 µL  0.5 mg/mL trypsin overnight at RT, acidified to 1% FA and purified using Stop and Go extraction tips (StageTips).  MS-based proteome analysis Proteome samples were analyzed using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) with FAIMS Pro device using a combination of two compensation voltages of -50 V and -70 V. Chromatographic peptide separation was achieved on a 50 cm reversed phase nanoHPLC-columns (ID 75 µm, PoroShell C18 120, 2.4 µm) coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 HPLC system and a binary buffer system A (0.1% FA) and B (80% ACN/0.1% FA). Samples derived from in-solution digestion were measured over a 120 min gradient, raising the content of buffer ACN from 3.2 to 22% over 102 min, from 22 to 45% over 8 min and from 45 to 76% over 2 min. The column was washed with 76% ACN for 8 min. Full MS spectra (300–1,750 m/z) were recorded at a resolution (R) of 60,000, maximum injection time (max. IT) of 20 ms and AGC target of 6e5. The 20 most abundant ion peptides in each full MS scan were selected for HCD fragmentation at nominal collisional energy (NCE) of 30. MS2 spectra were recorded at R = 15,000, a maximum IT of 22 ms, and an AGC target of 1e5. This MS acquisition program was alternatively run for both FAIMS compensation voltages to cover different peptide fractions.

### Data Protocol
MS data processing and analysis The generated MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant analysis software and the implemented Andromeda software (1.6.14). Peptides and proteins were identified using the canonical mouse UniProt database (downloaded 08/2019) with common contaminants. All parameters in MaxQuant were set to the default values. Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed.  Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was chosen as a fixed modification. The label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to quantify the measured peptides and the “match between runs” option was enabled to quantify peptides with a missing MS2 spectrum.  Subsequent statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (1.5.8.5) software. Potential contaminants and reverse peptides were excluded, and values were log2 transformed. Raw files were assigned to two groups (TG and WT) and proteinGroups were filtered for 4 valid values in at least one group before missing values were replaced from normal distribution (width: 0.3; down shift: 1.3). Welch’s Student t-test with S0=0.1 and a permutation-based FDR of 0.01 with 500 randomizations was performed to obtain differentially regulated proteins between the two groups. Identified proteins were annotated with the following Gene Ontology terms: Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Compartment, and the Reactome Pathway database. Finally, graphical visualization was achieved using Instant Clue software.

### Publication Abstract
Digested dietary fats are taken up by enterocytes where they are assembled into pre-chylomicrons in the endoplasmic reticulum followed by transport to the Golgi for maturation and subsequent secretion to the circulation<sup>1</sup>. The role of mitochondria in dietary lipid processing is unclear. Here we show that mitochondrial dysfunction in enterocytes inhibits chylomicron production and the transport of dietary lipids to peripheral organs. Mice with specific ablation of the mitochondrial aspartyl-tRNA synthetase DARS2 (ref. <sup>2</sup>), the respiratory chain subunit SDHA<sup>3</sup> or the assembly factor COX10 (ref. <sup>4</sup>) in intestinal epithelial cells showed accumulation of large lipid droplets (LDs) in enterocytes of the proximal small intestine&#xa0;and failed to thrive. Feeding a fat-free diet suppressed the build-up of LDs in DARS2-deficient enterocytes, which shows that the accumulating&#xa0;lipids derive mostly from digested fat. Furthermore, metabolic tracing studies revealed an impaired transport of dietary lipids to peripheral organs in mice lacking DARS2 in intestinal epithelial cells. DARS2 deficiency caused a distinct lack of mature chylomicrons concomitant with a progressive dispersal of the Golgi apparatus in proximal enterocytes. This finding&#xa0;suggests that mitochondrial dysfunction results in impaired trafficking of chylomicrons from the endoplasmic reticulum to the Golgi, which in turn leads to storage of dietary lipids in large cytoplasmic LDs. Taken together, these results reveal a role for mitochondria in dietary lipid transport in enterocytes, which might be relevant for understanding the intestinal defects observed in patients with mitochondrial disorders<sup>5</sup>.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Enterocyctes, Dars2, Golgi, Lipid metabolism, Small intestine, Er

### Affiliations
1Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 2Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 3Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
CECAD Research Center, University of Cologne

### Submitter
Theresa Bock

### Lab Head
Dr Manolis Pasparakis
1Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 2Cologne Excellence Cluster on Cellular Stress Responses in Aging-Associated Diseases (CECAD), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. 3Center for Molecular Medicine (CMMC), University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.


