### Accession
PXD028328

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Arabidopsis fsd1 mutants in response to methyl viologen

### Description
Within this project, two Arabidopsis tDNA mutants deficient in iron superoxide dismutase FSD1 were exposed to 8h long treatment with methyl viologen. Differential, LC MSMS base proteomics was performed in order to elucidate the mechanisms of the role of FSD1 in oxidative stress tolerance

### Sample Protocol
Plants (WT, fsd1-1 and fsd1-2 mutants) treated as described above for 8 h were homogenized in liquid nitrogen and the proteins were extracted by phenol extraction.  Mock and MV treated samples were analysed in biological triplicates. Proteins were digested by in solution digestion using a sequencing grade modified trypsin [44]. Digested peptides were re-suspended in 15 μl of formic acid and 5 μl of this was analyzed. The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). Peptides were eluted with linear 110 min gradient from 5% to 21% of solvent B in 62 minutes and to 36% of solvent B in 110 minutes, followed by wash stage with 100% of solvent B. MS data was acquired automatically by using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1. software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300–1750 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation for most intense peptide ions.

### Data Protocol
Data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an in-house server running the Mascot 2.7.0 software (Matrix Science). Data was searched against a SwissProt (version 2019_11) databases by using Arabidopsis thaliana taxonomy filter. The following parameters were used: static modifications: carbamidomethyl (C)*, variable modifications: oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), peptide mass tolerance: ± 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: ± 0.02 Da, maximum missed cleavages: 2. Methionine oxidation is a common modification which occurs during the sample processing and is therefore normally included in the search parameters. For quantitation a minimum of 2 files had to contain the same feature. Unique peptides were chosen for quantification. Precursor abundance was based on intensity. All peptides were used for normalization. The ANOVA (adjusted p≦0.05) was used to filter statistically significant results, applied to proteins exhibiting the fold change≧1.5. Proteins identified by 1 peptide were excluded from results. Proteins present in all three replicates corresponding to the control proteome and absent in all three replicates of the test proteome were considered as unique for the control proteome, and vice versa.

### Publication Abstract
Iron superoxide dismutase 1 (FSD1) was recently characterized as a plastidial, cytoplasmic, and nuclear enzyme with osmoprotective and antioxidant functions. However, the current knowledge on its role in oxidative stress tolerance is ambiguous. Here, we characterized the role of FSD1 in response to methyl viologen (MV)-induced oxidative stress in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>. In accordance with the known regulation of <i>FSD1</i> expression, abundance, and activity, the findings demonstrated that the antioxidant function of FSD1 depends on the availability of Cu<sup>2+</sup> in growth media. <i>Arabidopsis fsd1</i> mutants showed lower capacity to decompose superoxide at low Cu<sup>2+</sup> concentrations in the medium. Prolonged exposure to MV led to reduced ascorbate levels and higher protein carbonylation in <i>fsd1</i> mutants and transgenic plants lacking a plastid FSD1 pool as compared to the wild type. MV induced a rapid increase in FSD1 activity, followed by a decrease after 4 h long exposure. Genetic disruption of <i>FSD1</i> negatively affected the hydrogen peroxide-decomposing ascorbate peroxidase in <i>fsd1</i> mutants. Chloroplastic localization of FSD1 is crucial to maintain redox homeostasis. Proteomic analysis showed that the sensitivity of <i>fsd1</i> mutants to MV coincided with decreased abundances of ferredoxin and photosystem II light-harvesting complex proteins. These mutants have higher levels of chloroplastic proteases indicating an altered protein turnover in chloroplasts. Moreover, <i>FSD1</i> disruption affects the abundance of proteins involved in the defense response. Collectively, the study provides evidence for the conditional antioxidative function of FSD1 and its possible role in signaling.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Methyl viologen, Iron superoxide dismutase, Lc msms, Fsd1

### Affiliations
Palacký University Olomouc
1Department of Cell Biology, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czechia

### Submitter
Tomáš Takáč

### Lab Head
Dr Tomas Takac
1Department of Cell Biology, Centre of the Region Haná for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, Faculty of Science, Palacký University Olomouc, Olomouc, Czechia


