### Accession
PXD040900

### Title
Initiation of fibronectin fibrillogenesis is an enzyme-dependent process

### Description
Fibronectin fibrillogenesis and mechanosensing both depend on integrin-mediated force transmission to the extracellular-matrix. However, force transmission is in itself dependent on fibrillogenesis, and fibronectin fibrils are found in soft embryos where high forces cannot be applied, suggesting that force cannot be the sole initiator of fibrillogenesis. Here we identify a novel nucleation step prior to force transmission, driven by fibronectin oxidation mediated by lysyl-oxidase enzyme family members. This oxidation induces fibronectin clustering that promotes early adhesion, alters cellular response to soft matrices, and enhances force transmission to the matrix. In contrast, absence of fibronectin oxidation abrogates fibrillogenesis, perturbs cell-matrix adhesion, and compromises mechanosensation. Moreover, fibronectin oxidation promotes cancer cells colony formation in soft agar as well as collective and single-cell migration. These results reveal a yet unidentified, force-independent enzyme-dependent mechanism that initiates fibronectin fibrillogenesis, establishing a critical step in cell adhesion and mechanosensing.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry proteolysis: The proteins in the samples were suspended in 8M Urea, 100mM Ammonium bicarbonate and were reduced with 3mM DTT (60ºC for 30 min), modified with 10mM iodoacetamide in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate (in the dark, room temperature for 30 min) and digested in 2M Urea, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate with modified trypsin (Promega) at a 1:50 enzyme-to-substrate ratio, overnight at 37oC.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis: The eluted peptides were desalted using C18 tips (Top-tip, Glygen) dried and re-suspended in 0.1% Formic acid. The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 X 180-mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed phase material (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with linear 30 minutes gradient of 5% to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water ,15 minutes gradient of 28% to 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water and 15 minutes at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min. Mass spectrometry was performed by Q-Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) in a positive mode using repetitively full MS scan followed by collision induces dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan. The mass spectrometry data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software 1.5.2.851 for peak picking and identification using the Andromeda search engine, searching against the human proteome from the Uniprot database with mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 20 ppm for the fragment ions. Oxidation on Lys and Met and protein N-terminus acetylation were accepted as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl on cysteine was accepted as static modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to six amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed.  The data was quantified by label free analysis using the same software. Peptide- and protein-level false discovery rates (FDRs) were filtered to 1% using the target-decoy strategy.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysyl oxidases, Oxidation, Fibronectin

### Affiliations
Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Haguy Wolfenson

### Lab Head
Dr Haguy Wolfenson
Department of Genetics and Developmental Biology, The Rappaport Faculty of Medicine and Research Institute, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology


