### Accession
PXD030678

### Title
A druggable signaling hub of choroid plexus immune-secretory function

### Description
The choroid plexus (ChP) secretes a half-liter of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) per day into the cerebral ventricular system and gates immune cell entry into the brain as the blood-CSF barrier. Acquired hydrocephalus, characterized by ventriculomegaly from CSF accumulation, is caused by both brain infection or hemorrhage and is treated by neurosurgical CSF diversion with attendant morbidity and long-term disability. We interrogated novel rat models of post-infectious (PIH) and post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus (PHH) using a multi-omics, systems biology platform to elucidate mechanisms of disease. Integrated analysis of new genome-level transcriptomic and proteomic ChP datasets demonstrated that lipopolysaccharide in PIH, and blood breakdown products in PHH, trigger highly similar toll-like receptor-4 (TLR4)-dependent immune responses at the ChP-CSF interface. This includes the production of a CSF “cytokine storm” elicited from activated peripherally-derived and border-associated macrophages that accumulate at the ChP. Pro-inflammatory CSF signals stimulate their cognate receptors on ChP epithelial cells in paracrine manner to acutely increase CSF secretion rate via the TNF receptor associated SPAK kinase, which binds and activates a multi-ion transporter and channel complex at the ChP apical membrane. Genetic and pharmacological immunosuppression with repurposed drugs antagonizes SPAK-dependent CSF hypersecretion and prevents acute PIH and PHH. These data expand our understanding of ChP immune-epithelial cell crosstalk, reframe PIH and PHH as related inflammatory disorders vulnerable to systemic immunomodulation, and identify a druggable hub of ChP immune-secretory function that holds promise for other neurological disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen pellets of ChP cells were lysed by sonication in RIPA buffer plus 1× PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor (Roche) and 1× cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). Protein (200 μg) for each sample underwent reduction, alkylation, and chloroform-methanol precipitation.  Samples were resuspended in 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) and digested with trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w) overnight at 37°C. Digested samples were acidified and desalted on a C18 Macro Spin Column (The Nest Group). Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), then dried by a SpeedVac. The dried peptide pellet from each sample was then TMT labeled according to manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a TMT10Plex Isobaric Labeling Reagent Kit (Cat#:90110). A label efficiency test was performed on 1/50th of each sample prior to equally mixing the 10 channels, then samples were dried prior to fractionation. Pooled TMT labeled peptides were then dissolved in buffer A and injected onto a Waters ACQUITY UPLC (BEH) C18 column (Waters XBridge BEH130 C18 3.5 μm 4.6 × 250 mm) at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. An orthogonal high pH reverse phase separation was carried out using a Waters H-class UPLC system with Buffers (A:95% water/5% acetonitrile (ACN) with 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10; B: 5% water/95% acetonitrile (ACN) with 10 mM ammonium acetate, pH 10) were used to separate the peptides with a 60 min gradient 15% – 55% with buffer B. Total 60 fractions were collected.  The fractions were then pooled into 8 fractions, dried and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid.  Mass spectrometry data were obtained on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) in the Keck MS & Proteomics Resource at Yale University as described in Lee et. al (Lee et al., 2021). Briefly, individual pooled fractions were loaded into a trapping column (nanoACQUITY UPLC Symmetry C18 Trap column, 180 µm × 20 mm and separated with a C18 column (nanoACQUITY column Peptide BEH C18, 75 µm × 250 mm) at a flow rate of 5 µL/min.  Peptides were eluted with a gradient from 6% to 20% mobile phase B over 120 min and then to 40% mobile phase B for another 45 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min at a flowrate of 300 nL/min with buffers (A: 0.1% formic acid in water and B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The data were acquired with data-dependent mode with multinotch synchronous precursor selection (SPS)-MS3 scanning for TMT tags as described previously (McAlister et al., 2014). The ions above with an intensity threshold of 5000 was selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID)-MS fragmentation. The top 10 fragment ions for each peptide MS2 were notched out and co-fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) to produce MS3 scans and were analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics raw data files were processed and quantified by MaxQuant (https://maxquant.net/maxquant/) version 1.6.1.0 with Andromeda search engine using the Rat UniProt FASTA database (http://coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:andromeda:start). Default value of parameters were used in Maxquant unless explicitly stated. Briefly, false-discovery rate (FDR) was set 1% for proteins and peptides respectively and match between runs was enabled with a default time window of 0.7 min. Search results (TMT reporter ion intensities) were exported as text files. The differentially expressed proteins were identified using the Perseus framework (https://maxquant.net/perseus/). Proteins with a log2-fold change expression greater than 1 and a q-value less than 0.05 were considered significant. The R ComplexHeatmap package was used to visualize the heatmap expression of highly variable genes (Gu et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
The choroid plexus (ChP) is the blood-cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) barrier and the primary source of CSF. Acquired hydrocephalus, caused by brain infection or hemorrhage, lacks drug treatments due to obscure pathobiology. Our integrated, multi-omic investigation of post-infectious hydrocephalus (PIH) and post-hemorrhagic hydrocephalus (PHH) models revealed that lipopolysaccharide and blood breakdown products trigger highly&#xa0;similar TLR4-dependent immune responses at the ChP-CSF interface. The resulting CSF "cytokine storm", elicited from peripherally derived and border-associated ChP macrophages, causes increased CSF&#xa0;production from ChP epithelial cells via phospho-activation of the TNF-receptor-associated kinase&#xa0;SPAK, which serves as a regulatory scaffold of a multi-ion transporter protein complex. Genetic or pharmacological immunomodulation prevents PIH and PHH by antagonizing SPAK-dependent CSF hypersecretion. These results reveal the ChP as a dynamic, cellularly heterogeneous tissue with highly regulated immune-secretory capacity, expand our understanding of ChP immune-epithelial cell cross talk, and reframe PIH and PHH as related neuroimmune disorders vulnerable to small molecule pharmacotherapy.

### Keywords
Hydrocephalus, Csf, Multi-omics, Choroide plexus

### Affiliations
1Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA
Associate Research scientist

### Submitter
Mohammad Shahid Mansuri

### Lab Head
Dr Kristopher T. Kahle
1Department of Neurosurgery, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. Department of Neurosurgery, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA


