### Accession
PXD029715

### Title
Targeting mitochondrial reactive oxygen species alleviates allergic airway disease in a mouse model of obese allergic asthma

### Description
Obesity is associated with severe, difficult to control asthma, and increased airway oxidative stress. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS) are an important source of oxidative stress leading us to hypothesize that targeting mROS in obese allergic asthma might be an effective treatment strategy. Using a mouse model of house dust mite (HDM) induced allergic airway disease in mice fed a low- (LFD) or high-fat diet (HFD), and the mitochondrial antioxidant MitoQuinone (MitoQ); we investigated the effects of obesity and mROS on airway inflammation, remodelling and airway hyperreactivity (AHR). HDM induces airway inflammation, remodelling and hyperreactivity in both lean and obese mice. Obese allergic mice showed increased lung tissue eotaxin levels, airway tissue eosinophilia and AHR when compared to lean allergic mice. MitoQ reduced markers of airway inflammation, remodelling and hyperreactivity in both lean and obese allergic mice, and tissue eosinophilia in obeseHDM mice. mROS regulates cell signalling by protein oxidation of multiple downstream targets: MitoQ reduced HDM-induced cysteine-sulfenylation of several proteins including those involved in the unfolded protein response (UPR). In summary, mROS mediates the development of allergic airway disease and hence MitoQ might be effective for the treatment for asthma, and specific features of obese asthma.

### Sample Protocol
Pulldown of cysteine-sulfenylated proteins and trypsin digestion: 1 mg of total lung protein lysate was extracted using a RIPA based lysis buffer containing 5 mM catalase, 10 mM NEM and 10 mM DCP Bio-1 was used for binding to Neutravidin agarose beads overnight at 4°C. Following 3 washes with RIPA buffer to remove non-specific interactions the bound proteins were eluted by boiling, Equal volumes of the samples (Obese PBS (n=5), Obese HDM (n=5), Obese MitoQ (n=5), Lean PBS (n=4), Lean HDM (n=4), Lean MitoQ (n=4)) were run briefly onto the SDS-PAGE gels (1/3 of the whole length of the gel), which was then stained with silver. The gel pieces were minced to 1 mm3 cubes, combined, destained, and subjected to disulfide reduction and alkylation, and trypsin digestion protocols, as described previously (Hristova et al., Redox biology, 2014).  Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-based protein identification:  The tryptic peptides resuspended in 2.5% acetonitrile (ACN) and 2.5% formic acid (FA) in water and analyzed on the Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a 100 μm x 320 mm capillary column packed with UChrom C18 (1.8 μm particle size, 120A, Cat. No: PN-80001; Nanolcms, CA) at a flow rate of 300 nl min-1.  The column end was laser pulled to a ~3 μm orifice and packed with minimal amounts of 5um Magic C18AQ before packing with the 1.8 um particle size chromatographic materials.  Peptides derived from proteins in DCP Bio-1 pull-downs were separated by a solvent system composed of solvent A: 100% water/0.1% FA and solvent B: 80% ACN /0.1% FA with a gradient of 0-44% ACN /0.1% FA over 150 min, 44-100% ACN /0.1% FA in 1 min and then 100% ACN /0.1% FA for 8 min, followed by an immediate return to 0% ACN /0.1% FA and a hold at 0% ACN /0.1% FA.  Mass spectrometry data was acquired in a data-dependent “Top 10” acquisition mode with lock mass function activated (m/z 371.1012; use lock masses: best; lock mass injection: full MS), in which a survey scan from m/z 350-1600 at 70, 000 resolution (AGC target 1e6; max IT 100 ms; profile mode) was followed by 10 higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) scans on the most abundant ions at 17,500 resolution (loop count = 10; AGC target 5e4; max IT 100 ms;  centroid mode).  MS/MS scans were acquired with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z and a normalized collisional energy of 26%.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled (peptide match: preferred; exclude isotopes: on; underfill ratio: 1%; exclusion duration: 15 sec). Minimum AGC target = 5 e2

### Data Protocol
Database searches: Raw files (.raw) were analyzed by using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Product ion spectra were searched using the SEQUEST with the “Basic” Processing and Consensus workflows against a Uniprot Mus musculus protein database (UP000000589; downloaded March 3rd, 2020).  Search Parameters were as follows: Full trypsin enzymatic activity; max. allowed missed cleavages = 2, mass tolerance at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively; dynamic modification on methionine (oxidation: +15.995 Da), and static modification on cysteines (carbamidomethylation: +57.021 Da).  Percolator was included in the workflow to limit the false discovery rate to less than or equal to 1%.  The resulting msf result files were incorporated into Q+S 4.11 (Proteome Software, OR) with “prefiltered mode” and Protein Cluster Analysis for spectral counting analysis.  Data analysis: The total spectral counts were statistically evaluated between “PBS”, “HDM” and “MitoQ” treatments groups in both the lean and obese sample sets. Statistical tools in Scaffold Quantitative Analysis Mode were used for pairwise comparisons (two-tailed t-test for PBS vs. HDM and HDM vs. MitoQ), with the following settings: No normalization was used; Min. Value = 0.5 (All spectral counts of 0 were replaced with a value of 0.5); and total spectra as quantitative method.  Spectral counting reports were exported from Scaffold with “Show lower scoring peptides and <5% Probabilities” deactivated and Hide “Decoy”.  The total spectral counts of all proteins (including protein cluster members) and the corresponding statistical analyses exported from Scaffold as “total spectrum counting reports” are uploaded to PRIDE.  One of the cluster members was selected to represent the cluster and the associated spectral counts were derived from the peptides of all the members.  For simplicity, only spectral counts of protein clusters were used to construct the volcano plots and heatmaps depicting differential sulfenylation of proteins between treatment groups in obese and lean sample sets. Volcano plots were created using fold change values (log2 of the difference between the number of peptides of the two groups (PBS vs HDM)) and -log10 of p values (PBS vs HDM).  Heat maps detailing significant increases in protein sulfenylation between HDM, and PBS groups were created by first scaling the total spectral counts in individual samples of the three treatment groups so that individual counts in all samples summed up to 100 (this allows fold changes of proteins of varying abundances be represented on the same scale.)  All volcano plots and heat maps were created using Graph Pad Prism 8 (GraphPad Software Inc., CA).  The PEAK file (MGF) and RESULTS (mzIdenML) files were generated using Scaffold “Export” function (PRIDE/Scaffold re-analysis).     PRIDE Upload:  Raw files uploaded also include bovine serum albumin peptide standards that were run between samples to monitor system performance. Quant File:  SpectralCount.xlsx contains spectral count data analyzed and exported by Scaffold. BSA_standards_XCalibur.pdf: Base peak chromatograms of the between-sample standards visualized in XCalibur.

### Publication Abstract
Obesity is associated with severe, difficult-to-control asthma, and increased airway oxidative stress. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mROS) are an important source of oxidative stress in asthma, leading us to hypothesize that targeting mROS in obese allergic asthma might be an effective treatment. Using a mouse model of house dust mite (HDM)-induced allergic airway disease in mice fed a low- (LFD) or high-fat diet (HFD), and the mitochondrial antioxidant MitoQuinone (MitoQ), we investigated the effects of obesity and ROS on HDM-induced airway inflammation, remodeling, and airway hyperresponsiveness (AHR). Obese allergic mice showed increased lung tissue eotaxin, airway tissue eosinophilia, and AHR compared with lean allergic mice. MitoQ reduced airway inflammation, remodeling, and hyperreactivity in both lean and obese allergic mice, and tissue eosinophilia in obese-allergic mice. Similar effects were observed with decyl triphosphonium (dTPP<sup>+</sup>), the hydrophobic cationic moiety of MitoQ lacking ubiquinone. HDM-induced oxidative sulfenylation of proteins was increased particularly in HFD mice. Although only MitoQ reduced sulfenylation of proteins involved in protein folding in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), ER stress was attenuated by both MitoQ and dTPP<sup>+</sup> suggesting the anti-allergic effects of MitoQ are mediated in part by effects of its hydrophobic dTPP<sup>+</sup> moiety reducing ER stress. In summary, oxidative signaling is an important mediator of allergic airway disease. MitoQ, likely through reducing protein oxidation and affecting the UPR pathway, might be effective for the treatment of asthma and specific features of obese asthma.

### Keywords
Obesity, Allergic asthma, Airway oxidome, Mitoquinone, Tissue eosinophilia, Unfolded protein response (upr)., Mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mros)

### Affiliations
Vermont Genetics Network Proteomics Facility
Department of Biology
University of Vermont

Associate Professor Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine HSRF 218, University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA

### Submitter
Ying Wai Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Vikas Anathy
Associate Professor Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine HSRF 218, University of Vermont  Larner College of Medicine Burlington, Vermont, 05405, USA


