### Accession
PXD035332

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum Chr3C7 and Chr3C16 DiQ-BioID data

### Description
As part of a larger study characterizing all unknown &#39;nonsecretory&#39; proteins encoded on chromosome 3 of P. falciparum parasites, we selected two candidate proteins (Chr3C7 and Chr3C16) to obtain interactomes using dimerisation-induced quantitative BioID (DiQ-BioID). This set of experiments resulted in a list of significantly enriched proteins which identified interactors and compartment neighbours of the selected proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Knock-in parasite culture episomally expressing the biotinyliser constructs were split into two identical cultures (150 ml each) and dimerisation was induced in one culture by adding rapalog (final concentration 250 nM). Cultures were harvested after a total of 24 h culturing with 50 μM biotin. Parasites were purified from the host cells using 0.03% saponin and lysed in 2 ml lysis buffer (50mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 500 mM NaCl, 1% Triton-X-100) containing 1 mM DTT, 1x protein inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1 mM PMSF. Lysates were cleared and biotinylated proteins were purified on 50 μL Streptavidin Sepharose (GE Healthcare) overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed twice in lysis buffer, once in dH2O, twice in Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) and three times in 100 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.5 (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich) before on bead digestion. In short, proteins are denatured and disulfide bonds reduced for 1 hour shaking at 37 ˚C in digestion buffer (100 mM TEAB, 5 mM Tris(2-carboethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma), after which cysteines were blocked by the addition of 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Thermo Scientific) and incubation for 10 minutes. Proteins are then digested using 0.4μg Trypsin/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour at 37˚C. The supernatants, containing most of the peptides are collected, and beads are washed once with 50μl of 100mM TEAB, to collect as many peptides as possible. The digestion is completed by overnight incubation at 37 ˚C. Peptides are then dimethyl-labeled by addition of 4 μl of a 4% light or heavy formaldehyde (“light”: CH2O, 37% formaldehyde solution, Sigma-Aldrich; “heavy”: 13CD2O, 20% formaldehyde-13C, d2 solution, Sigma-Aldrich) and 4μl 0.6M “light” NaBH3CN (Merck) or “heavy” NaBD3CN (Sigma) and incubation for 1 hour shaking at room temperature. After stopping the reaction using 16μl 1% ammonia, samples are pooled and acidified using 10% Trifluoric Acid (TFA). The samples are then concentrated and desalted using Stagetips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and stored at 4 °C until analysed via mass spectrometry. On the day of measuring the samples, each C18 stage tip was rehydrated with 30 μL of buffer A and peptides were eluted in 30 μL of buffer B. The acetonitrile was evaporated in a SpeedVac and the concentrated sample was then reconstituted to a final volume of 12 μL with buffer A. To analyse the sample by mass spectrometry, 5 μL of sample was analyzed during a 140 minute gradient of increasing buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) on an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 30 cm C18-reverse phase column coupled on-line to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was acquired in data-dependent top speed mode in a 3 sec cycle with dynamic exclusion set at 60 sec. Resolution for MS was set at 120.000.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30; Cox & Mann, 2008). Parameters were set to default except for the following: Multiplicity was set at 2 and the labels were added to lysine residues and peptide N-termini (light: dimethLys0 and dimethNter0; heavy: dimethLys8 and dimethNter8). Deamidation (NQ) was added as a variable modification together with oxidation (M) and acetyl (N-term). Match-between-runs and re-quantify options were enabled with default parameters and iBAQ values were calculated. Mass spectra were compared to peptide masses from the Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 annotated proteome (PlasmoDB release 33). The “proteinGroups” file generated by MaxQuant was analysed using the Perseus software package (version 1.4.0.20; Tyanova et al., 2016). The data were filtered against peptides assigned as “only identified by site”, “reverse” and/or “potential contaminant” hits in the datasets. H/L normalized ratios were transformed to log2 values.

### Publication Abstract
Taxon-specific proteins are key determinants defining the biology of all organisms and represent prime drug targets in pathogens. However, lacking comparability with proteins in other lineages makes them particularly difficult to study. In malaria parasites, this is exacerbated by technical limitations. Here, we analyzed the cellular location, essentiality, function, and, in selected cases, interactome of all unknown non-secretory proteins encoded on an entire P.&#xa0;falciparum chromosome. The nucleus was the most common localization, indicating that it is a hotspot of parasite-specific biology. More in-depth functional studies with four proteins revealed essential roles in DNA replication and mitosis. The mitosis proteins defined a possible orphan complex and a highly diverged complex needed for spindle-kinetochore connection. Structure-function comparisons indicated that the taxon-specific proteins evolved by different mechanisms. This work demonstrates the feasibility of gene-by-gene screens to elucidate the biology of malaria parasites and reveal critical parasite-specific processes of interest as drug targets.

### Keywords
Subcellular localisation, Plasmodium falciparum, Malaria, Mitosis, Chromosome-wide screen

### Affiliations
Bernhard-Nocht-Institut für Tropenmedizin
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.

### Submitter
Gala Ramon-Zamorano

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Spielmann
Bernhard Nocht Institute for Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany.


