### Accession
PXD010570

### Title
293FT Cell Endogenous FANCA Protein-Protein Interactions

### Description
Hyperinsulinemia affects 72% of Fanconi anemia (FA) patients and an additional 25% experience lowered glucose tolerance or frank diabetes. The underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to the dysfunction of FA pancreas β cells is unknown. These experiments were performed in 293FT HEK cells as a part of the optimization and validation of the endogenous IP and to establish the FANCA interactome in a non-pancreas cell line to delineate beta cell-specific FANCA interactions.

### Sample Protocol
Identification and analysis of FANCA interacting proteins in 293FT was done using Dynabeads Antibody Coupling Kit (ThermoFisher). Anti-FANCA antibodies (60 µg) (Bethyl Laboratories) were coupled onto magnetic beads (3 mg) at 37 ºC overnight, with rotation. The same amount of rabbit polyclonal IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) was coupled to beads and used as a negative control. Beads were thoroughly washed with buffers provided within a kit and incubated with 3 mg of proteins from the cell lysates for 2 h at 4 ºC, with rotation. To remove the non-specific binders, beads were washed 4 time with NETN buffer containing NaCl (50 mM) and MgCl2 (1mM). Then, they were washed once with NETN containing Tween (0.02%), for 5 min with rotation. To elute the bound protein fraction, beads were incubated with 500 µl NH4OH (0.5 M)/EDTA (0.5 mM), pH 11.0, for 10 min with rotation. The elution fraction was neutralized with acetic acid and concentrated using a speedvac. Samples were then run on a 10% CriterionTM XT Bis-Tris Protein Gels (Bio-Rad) were used for the protein electrophoretic separation with a compatible XT MOPS running buffer (Bio-Rad). Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 dye (ThermoFisher) for 2 h and left to destain overnight in water/methanol/acetic acid (70/20/10%) destain solution. Coomassie-stained gel pieces were manually cut using a sterile scalpel and kept in sterile microcentrifuge tubes. Gel pieces were washed with HPLC water and shrunk with acetonitrile (ACN) (100%). Proteins were reduced with Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (2mM)/ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) (50 mM), for 1 h at 37 °C. After incubation, ACN was added to TCEP to destain gel pieces. After gel pieces were dried by adding additional portion of ACN, thiol groups of proteins were alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) (50 mM)/AmBic (50mM), for 20 min in dark with rotation. Samples were dried with ACN and MS-grade trypsin (10 nM) (Promega) was added for protein digestion. Samples were incubated with trypsin for 30 min on ice. After the excess of trypsin was removed from tubes, AmBic (25mM) was added to the gel pieces. Tryptic digestion continued overnight at 37 °C. Digested peptides were then extracted from gel with ACN (50%)/trifluoroacetic acid (0.1%) solution. Samples were dried in a Speedvac, dissolved in 15 µL formic acid (FA) (0.1%) and submitted for LC-MS/MS analysis. In-gel digested peptide samples were analyzed using high-resolution mass spectrometry on either a Orbitrap Velos, Orbitrap Q-Exactive, or Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ coupled with UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). 500 ng of each sample was loaded onto the rapid separation liquid chromatography (RSCL) column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSCL, 75 µm × 15 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific), using FA (0.1%). The nano-LC peptide separation system is supported with an additional peptide trap column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75µm × 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific). The samples were eluted using a 2-h linear gradient of ACN (4-99 %) in 0.1% FA. The parameters for the method created for all experiments was as follows: nanospray needle voltage in a positive mode: 2000 V; NC pump flow: 0.3 µl/min and loading pump flow: 4  µl/min; Inject mode: µl PickUp;  Orbitrap scan mode was used for MS/MS, with the resolution 120000 m/z and the scan range 375-1500 m/z (Normal); Dynamic exclusion was set after n times:1 and duration: 60s;  Detector type for MS/MS was set to: Orbitrap, with the resolution: 30000, isolation mode: quadrupole, activation type: HCD, HCD collision energy: 40%, first mass: 110 m/z. The MS/MS spectra from the peptides were analyzed by assigning the fragments to the candidate sequence using MASCOT search engine (Matrix Science, v2.5.1) with a Swissprot database (Taxonomy: Mammalia). Parameters on MASCOT were set as follows: Enzyme: trypsin, Max missed cleavage: 2, Peptide charge: 2+, 3+ and 4+, Peptide tolerance: ± 0.1 Da, Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications: oxidation (M), phospho (ST) and phospho (Y), MS/MS tolerance: ± 0.5 Da, Instrument: ESI-FTICR. MASCOT results for different gel cuts of the same sample were combined in the Mascot analysis. Mascot results were further evaluated using Scaffold (Proteome Software Inc., v4.5.1) and data was searched again using X! Tandem. Peptide identifications were accepted if they were established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller et al, 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they were established at greater than 99.0% Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Data Protocol
MS data statistical analysis was performed using the Significance Analysis of INTeractome (SAINT), a framework that can compute interaction probabilities in a variety of large data sets (Choi et al, 2011). All experimental replicates were included in the proteomic analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperinsulinemia affects 72% of Fanconi anemia (FA) patients and an additional 25% experience lowered glucose tolerance or frank diabetes. The underlying molecular mechanisms contributing to the dysfunction of FA pancreas &#x3b2; cells is unknown. Therefore, we sought to evaluate the functional role of FANCA, the most commonly mutated gene in FA, in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS). This study reveals that FANCA or FANCB knockdown impairs GSIS in human pancreas &#x3b2; cell line EndoC-&#x3b2;H3. To identify potential pathways by which FANCA might regulate GSIS, we employed a proteomics approach to identify FANCA protein interactions in EndoC-&#x3b2;H3 differentially regulated in response to elevated glucose levels. Glucose-dependent changes in the FANCA interaction network were observed, including increased association with other FA family proteins, suggesting an activation of the DNA damage response in response to elevated glucose levels. Reactive oxygen species increase in response to glucose stimulation and are necessary for GSIS in EndoC-&#x3b2;H3 cells. Glucose-induced activation of the DNA damage response was also observed as an increase in the DNA damage foci marker &#x3b3;-H2AX and dependent upon the presence of reactive oxygen species. These results illuminate the role of FANCA in GSIS and its protein interactions regulated by glucose stimulation that may explain the prevalence of &#x3b2; cell-specific endocrinopathies in FA patients.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Fanca, Fanconi anemia complementation group a

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center - Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, NE 68198, USA

### Submitter
Nicholas Woods

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Woods, Ph.D.
Eppley Institute for Research in Cancer University of Nebraska Medical Center Omaha, NE 68198, USA


