### Accession
PXD002500

### Title
The spider clot proteome -  The spider hemolymph clot proteome reveals high concentrations of hemocyanin and von Willebrand factor-like proteins

### Description
Arthropods include chelicerates, crustaceans, and insects that all have open circulation systems and thus require different properties of their coagulation system than vertebrates. Although the clotting reaction in the chelicerate horseshoe crab has been described in details, the overall protein composition of the resulting clot has not been analysed for any of the chelicerates. The largest class among the chelicerates is the arachnids, which includes spiders, ticks, mites, and scorpions. Here, we use a mass spectrometry-based approach to characterize the spider hemolymph clot proteome from the Brazilian whiteknee tarantula, Acanthoscurria geniculate. We focused on the insoluble part of the clot and demonstrated high concentrations of proteins homologous to the hemostasis-related and multimerization-prone von Willebrand factor. These proteins, which include hemolectins and vitellogenin homologous, were previously identified as essential components of the hemolymph clot in crustaceans and insects. Their presence in the spider hemolymph clot suggests that the origin of these proteins’ function in coagulation predates the split between chelicerates and mandibulata. The clot proteome reveals that the major proteinaceous component is the oxygen-transporting and phenoloxidase-displaying abundant hemolymph protein hemocyanin, suggesting that this protein also plays a role in clot biology. In general, many of the identified clot-proteins are related to the innate immune system, and our results support the previously suggested crosstalk between immunity and coagulation in arthropods.

### Sample Protocol
Hemolymph collection and clot formation The hemolymph was collected from four male individuals of the wandering Brazilian Whiteknee Tarantulas (Acanthoscurria geniculata) classified as Theraposidae, Mygalomorphae, Araneae, Arachnid, Chelicerata. The Acanthoscurria geniculata used in this study originated from a captive bred stock and were obtained from commercial dealers. Upon purchase they were kept in individual terraria. The daily light:dark cycle was 14:10 hours, temperature was 27-29°C, and air humidity around 80%. The tarantulas were fed on cockroaches on a weekly basis and increased body mass during captivity.  In order to obtain hemolymph samples, the spiders were removed from their cages and sedated using CO2. Afterwards hemolymph was sampled from the book lungs with a sterile syringe. Hemolymph (150-200 μl) was added LPS to a final concentration of 65 μg/ml. Coagulation was also obtained without the addition of LPS, probably due to bacterial contaminations from the spider exoskeleton. However, for consistency, LPS was added to all analyzed samples. Then the samples were incubated at room temperature to allow clot formation. Subsequently, the samples were centrifuged for 2 minutes at 1.000 x g, the supernatants removed, and the remaining pellets containing the clot were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C.    Clot purification and sample preparation for mass spectrometry analyses The clots were washed with 1 ml of phosphate buffered saline (PBS) that was incubated with the clots for 3 minutes at 4 °C before centrifugation and gently removal of supernatant without touching the pellet. It was repeated three times, and then approximately half of each of the four pellets was transferred to new tubes where reducing SDS-gel electrophoresis sample buffer was added and the samples boiled for 5 minutes and then centrifuged. The supernatants were removed and SDS-sample buffer was added again to the in-soluble pellets. Subsequently, both the supernatant samples, as well as the pellet samples, were subjected to SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on 5-15% gradient gels followed by Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining of the resolved proteins. The insoluble clots were visible and retained in the stacking gels, and after the electrophoresis they were manually collected and the SDS was removed by washing the clots on 3 kDa molecular weight cut-off centrifugal filters, as described before for purification of human clots. The clots were removed from the filters and the clot-proteins denatured and reduced by incubation at room temperature for 1 hour in the following buffer: 15 mM dithiothreitol, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 8 M urea. Subsequently the reduced cysteines were blocked by alkylation with iodoacetamide added to a final concentration of 30 mM. The samples were incubated for an additional hour and then diluted 5 times in 100 mM ammnonium bicarbonate. Afterwards, 2.5 μg sequence-grade modified trypsin was added and the samples digested for app. 16 hours at 37°C. The resulting tryptic peptides were micro-purified on self-packed columns containing POROS R2 media (Applied Biosystems), eluted, and lyophilized.  Mass spectrometry analyses LC–MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (EASY-nLC II, Thermo Scientific) connected to a mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+, AB Sciex) equipped with an electrospray ionization source (NanoSpray III, AB Sciex) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6 control. The samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid, injected, trapped and desalted isocratically on a precolumn whereupon the peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d.), which was pulled (P2000 laser puller, Sutter Instrument Co.) and packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Marisch GmbH) in-house. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient from 5 % to 35 % phase B (0.1 % formic acid and 90 % acetonitrile). An information dependent acquisition method was employed allowing up to 25 MS/MS spectra per cycle of 1.6 s. Four technical replica were performed of each of the four biological samples resulting in 16 LC-MS/MS analyses in total.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  The collected MS files were processed by Mascot Distiller 2.5.0 (Matrix Science) and subsequently these processed files were used to interrogate the previously generated transcriptomics-based Acanthoscurria geniculate-sequence database containing 36.071 annotated protein sequences. The following search parameters were selected: i) trypsin as enzyme and up to one missed cleavage allowed, ii) carbamidomethyl as fixed modification, iii) oxidation of methionine as variable modification, iv) peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm, v) fragment mass tolerance of 0.2 Da, vi) instrument setting ESI-QUAD-TOF, and vii) significance threshold (p) of 0.01. The quantification of proteins in the clot is based on XIC and for this purpose the average quantitation protocol was selected in Mascot Distiller using significant threshold at 0.01 and the number of peptides required for quantification was set to 3, matched rho was 0.7, XIC threshold was 0.1, and isolated precursor threshold was set at 0.5. The result obtained by the Mascot Distiller searches were subsequently parsed using MS Data Miner v. 1.3.0. Protein identifications were only accepted if they were based on at least two unique peptides with one of the peptides having a minimum score of 30, and if the protein was identified in at least 5 of the 16 LC-MS/MS analyses. Quantification, with the criteria described above, in three out of the four technical replicas was required in order to accept quantification of a protein in one of the biological replica. Proteins were only included on the final list of quantified proteins, if they were quantified in three or in all, of the four biological replica. The relative abundance of the quantified proteins was calculated as the average MS intensity for the three most intense peptides for each protein divided by the total sum of the average signal for all quantified proteins in the sample.

### Publication Abstract
Arthropods include chelicerates, crustaceans, and insects that all have open circulation systems and thus require different properties of their coagulation system than vertebrates. Although the clotting reaction in the chelicerate horseshoe crab (Family: Limulidae) has been described in details, the overall protein composition of the resulting clot has not been analyzed for any of the chelicerates. The largest class among the chelicerates is the arachnids, which includes spiders, ticks, mites, and scorpions. Here, we use a mass spectrometry-based approach to characterize the spider hemolymph clot proteome from the Brazilian whiteknee tarantula, Acanthoscurria geniculata. We focused on the insoluble part of the clot and demonstrated high concentrations of proteins homologous to the hemostasis-related and multimerization-prone von Willebrand factor. These proteins, which include hemolectins and vitellogenin homologous, were previously identified as essential components of the hemolymph clot in crustaceans and insects. Their presence in the spider hemolymph clot suggests that the origin of these proteins' function in coagulation predates the split between chelicerates and mandibulata. The clot proteome reveals that the major proteinaceous component is the oxygen-transporting and phenoloxidase-displaying abundant hemolymph protein hemocyanin, suggesting that this protein also plays a role in clot biology. Furthermore, quantification of the peptidome after coagulation revealed the simultaneous activation of both the innate immune system and the coagulation system. In general, many of the identified clot-proteins are related to the innate immune system, and our results support the previously suggested crosstalk between immunity and coagulation in arthropods.

### Keywords
Spiders, Chelicerates, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Coagulation, Lc-ms/ms, Arthropods, Innate immunity

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics
Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,  Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Kristian Wejse Sanggaard

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Center and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics,  Aarhus University, Denmark


