### Accession
PXD030476

### Title
Human Plasma from non-Hispanic White and African American Sepsis Survivors and Non-Survivors with Primary Intra-Abdominal Infection LC-MS/MS

### Description
This study examined global proteomic changes in blood plasma from non-Hispanic White and African American sepsis patients with primary intra-abdominal infection using LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive HF. Proteins were quantified in the LC-MS/MS experiments using Tandem Mass Tags 16-plex (TMTpro).

### Sample Protocol
Crude plasma was immunodepleted using a Multiple Affinity Removal System (MARS) 14 column and concentrated with spin filters. After protein concentration for each sample was determined using BCA assay, a pool with equal protein amounts from all samples was prepared for QC and normalization purposes. The samples were randomly divided into 8 batches of 15, with each batch including one pooled sample. 60 ug of protein from each sample was digested using trypsin/Lys-C. 25 ug of the resulting peptides were tagged using TMTpro 16plex. After pooling the tagged samples, each batch was fractionated offline using high pH reversed phase fractionation into 24 concatenated fractions. Each fraction was injected in duplicate for LC-MS/MS analysis. Online reversed phase LC separation took place over 185 minutes for all analyses. Note that some TMT channels in Batch 8 were assigned samples from Batch 12 of a second cohort of ProCESS samples due to having extra channels available; hence, those files are named Batches 8 & 12.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.3 using SEQUEST HT and Percolator. Some key parameters included dynamic modifications of Methionine oxidation, TMTpro 16plex at the peptide N-terminus and Lysine residues, acetylation and methylation on protein N-termini, and methionine loss with acetylation. Carbamidomethylation on Cysteine residues was a fixed modification. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da. The cleavage enzyme was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Peptide confidence was set to high with one peptide minimum needed for identification and peptides were only counted for the top scored protein. Quantification was performed based on reporter ion intensity and underwent a two-step normalization using the pooled samples. Quantifiable proteins had to be identified with high confidence peptides, at least 2 PSMs, and have intensity values in the pool channel of all batches in which they were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Intra-abdominal infection is a common cause of sepsis, and intra-abdominal sepsis leads to &#x223c;156&#x2009;000 U.S. deaths annually. African American/Black adults have higher incidence and mortality rates from sepsis compared to Non-Hispanic White adults. A limited number of studies have traced survival outcomes to molecular changes; however, these studies primarily only included Non-Hispanic White adults. Our goal is to better understand molecular changes that may contribute to differences in sepsis survival in African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White adults with primary intra-abdominal infection. We employed discovery-based plasma proteomics of patient samples from the Protocolized Care for Early Septic Shock (ProCESS) cohort (<i>N</i> = 107). We identified 49 proteins involved in the acute phase response and complement system whose expression levels are associated with both survival outcome and racial background. Additionally, 82 proteins differentially-expressed in survivors were specific to African American/Black or Non-Hispanic White patients, suggesting molecular-level heterogeneity in sepsis patients in key inflammatory pathways. A smaller, robust set of 19 proteins were in common in African American/Black and Non-Hispanic White survivors and may represent potential universal molecular changes in sepsis. Overall, this study identifies molecular factors that may contribute to differences in survival outcomes in African American/Black patients that are not fully explained by socioeconomic or other non-biological factors.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Sepsis, Tmt

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry Nashville, TN, USA
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Kathryn Kapp

### Lab Head
Dr Renã A. S. Robinson
Vanderbilt University Department of Chemistry Nashville, TN, USA


