### Accession
PXD024456

### Title
THEM6-mediated lipid remodelling sustains stress resistance in cancer (Part2 : THEM6 KO in 22rv1)

### Description
Despite the clinical benefit of androgen-deprivation therapy (ADT), the majority of patients with advanced prostate cancer (PCa) ultimately develop lethal castration-resistant prostate cancer (CRPC). In this study, we identified thioesterase superfamily member 6 (THEM6) as a marker of ADT resistance in PCa. In patients, THEM6 expression correlates with progressive disease and is associated with poor survival. THEM6 deletion reduces in vivo tumour growth and restores castration sensitivity in orthograft models of CRPC. Mechanistically, THEM6 is located at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane and controls lipid homeostasis by regulating intracellular levels of ether lipids. As a consequence, THEM6 loss in CRPC cells significantly alters ER function, preventing lipid-mediated induction of ATF4 and reducing de novo sterol biosynthesis. Finally, we show that THEM6 is required for the establishment of the MYC-induced stress response. Thus, similar to PCa, THEM6 loss significantly impairs tumorigenesis in the MYC-dependent subtype of triple negative breast cancer. Altogether our results highlight THEM6 as a novel component of the treatment-induced stress response and a promising target for the treatment of CRPC and MYC-driven cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described (van der Reest J, Lilla S, Zheng L, Zanivan S, Gottlieb E. Nature Communications 9: 1581, 2018) with some modifications. Samples were lysate in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate pH 8.5 and 55 mM iodoacetamide to alkylate free cysteine thiols. Cells were scraped in lysis buffer and lysates were collected in Eppendorf tubes and briefly sonicated. Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was transferred to clean tubes and incubated at room temperature in the dark to allow complete labelling of reduced cysteine with IAA. Protein concentration was determined, and samples were stored at −80 °C until further processing.  For each experiment (3 replicates 3 conditions), 30 µg of protein extracts were reduced with 10 mM DTT, followed by dilution 1:2 using 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 7.0. Newly generated thiols were subsequently alkylated with N-Ethylmaleimide. Alkylated proteins were precipitated using trichloroacetic acid (TCA).  Washed pellets were reconstituted in 50 µl of HEPES 200 mM and digested first with Endoproteinase Lys-C (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate) for one hour, followed by a trypsin, overnight (ratio 1:33 enzyme:lysate).  The digested peptides from each experiment, and a pool sample, were differentially labelled using TMT10-plex reagent (Thermo Scientific). Each sample was labelled with 0.1 mg of TMT reagent dissolved in 50 μl of 100% anhydrous acetonitrile. The reaction was carried out at room temperature for 2 hours. Fully labelled samples were mixed in equal amount and desalted using a Sep Pak C18 reverse phase solid-phase extraction cartridges (Waters). After clean-up, the TMT-labelled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase chromatography on a C18 column (150 × 2.1 mm i.d. - Kinetex EVO (5 μm, 100 Å)) using an HPLC system (Agilent, LC 1260 Infinity II, Agilent). A two-step gradient was applied, from 1–28% B in 42 min, then from 28–46% B in 13 min to obtain a total of 21 fractions for MS analysis.  UHPLC-MS/MS analysis Peptides from all experiments were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC II 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA), using a binary gradient with buffer A (2% acetonitrile) and B (80% acetonitrile), both containing 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded into fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). Packed emitters were heated by means of a column oven (Sonation, Biberach, Germany) integrated into the nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Scientific). An Active Background Ion Reduction Device (ABIRD, ESI Source Solutions, Woburn, MA, USA) was used to decrease air contaminants signal level. The Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used for data acquisition.  An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA was used for the TMT labelled proteome analysis. Peptides were loaded into a packed 50 cm fused silica emitter kept at 50°C, and eluted at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using different gradients optimised for three sets of fractions: 1–7, 8–15, and 16–21 as previously described [The mammalian cytosolic thioredoxin reductase pathway acts via a membrane protein to reduce ER-localised proteins. Cao X, Lilla S, Cao Z, Pringle MA, Oka OBV, Robinson PJ, Szmaja T, van Lith M, Zanivan S, Bulleid NJ. J Cell Sci. 2020 Apr 30;133(8):jcs241976. doi: 10.1242/jcs.241976. PMID: 32184267]. A full scan over mass range of 350–1400 m/z was acquired at 60,000 resolution at 200 m/z, with a target value of 500,000 ions for a maximum injection time of 20 ms. Higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation was performed on the 15 most intense ions, for a maximum injection time of 100 ms, or a target value of 100,000 ions. Peptide fragments were analysed in the Orbitrap at 50,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The MS Raw data were processed with MaxQuant software [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372] version 1.6.3.3 (TMT proteome experiments) or 1.5.5.1 (AP-MS experiment) and searched with Andromeda search engine [Cox, J., et al., Andromeda: A Peptide Search Engine Integrated into the MaxQuant Environment. J Proteome Res, 2011. 10(4): p. 1794-1805.], querying SwissProt [The UniProt Consortium, The Universal Protein Resource (UniProt) in 2010. Nucleic Acids Res, 2010. 38(Database issue): p. D142-D148] Homo sapiens (30/04/2019; 42,438 entries). First and main searches were performed with precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, and MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. Database was searched requiring specificity for trypsin cleavage and allowing maximum two missed cleavages. Modification by iodoacetamide and N-Ethylmaleimide on cysteine residues were specified as variable, as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation modifications, no fixed modifications were specified. The peptide, protein, and site false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 %.  For the TMT-proteome analysis MaxQuant was set to quantify on “Reporter ion MS2”, and TMT10plex was chose as Isobaric label. Interference between TMT channels were corrected by MaxQuant using the correction factors provided by the manufacturer. The “Filter by PIF” option was activated and a “Reporter ion tolerance” of 0.003 Da was used.  MaxQuant outputs were analysed with Perseus software version 1.6.2.3 [Cox, J. and M. Mann, MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotech, 2008. 26(12): p. 1367-1372]. From the ProteinGroups.txt file, Reverse and Potential Contaminant flagged proteins were removed, as well as protein groups identified with no unique peptides. Only proteins quantified in three out of three replicate experiments, were included in the analysis. To determine significant change in protein abundance, a Student t-test with a 5% FDR (permutation-based) was applied using the corrected reporter ions Intensities.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Castration-resistant prostate cancer, Cancer metabolism, Endoplasmic reticulum, Cancer proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom

### Submitter
Sergio Lilla

### Lab Head
Dr Sara Rossana Zanivan
CRUK - Beatson Institute for Cancer Research - Switchback Rd, Bearsden, Glasgow G61 1BD - United Kingdom


