### Accession
PXD023689

### Title
Proteomics reveals the function reverse of MPSSS treated prostate cancer-associated fibroblasts to suppress PC-3 cell viability via the FoxO pathway

### Description
Prostate cancer (PCa) remains the malignancy with the highest morbidity in men (1). Although early-stage PCa usually causes no symptoms, cancer cells in prostate glands readily metastasize to bones, lymph nodes, lungs, and liver during PCa progression (2). Common strategies, including surgery, radiation therapy, and androgen-deprivation therapy, are promising treatments for early-stage PCa. However, advanced PCa still lacks effective therapeutic strategies (3-5). Thus, researchers are currently focused on inhibiting tumor progression to explore effective therapeutic strategies for PCa treatment (6, 7). Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), stromal cells derived from normal fibroblasts or epithelia, are one of the major cellular components in the tumor microenvironment (8, 9). Compared with normal fibroblasts, CAFs are activated with increased expression of key protein markers, such as α-SMA, FAP, vimentin and S100A4 protein (10, 11). In the tumor microenvironment, CAFs secrete various growth effectors or cytokines to the extracellular matrix and thereby promote tumor progression by directly enhancing cancer cell growth, angiogenic induction, the extracellular matrix modification, and tumor-promoting inflammatory mediation (11-14). Notably, CAFs could act as an immunosuppressive mediator for the formation of an immunosuppressive tumor environment by recruiting and activating multiple immune cells (15). As such, CAFs might be a potential target in anti-tumor immunotherapy (16, 17). Currently, increased research has focused on inhibiting the immunosuppressive function of prostate cancer-associated fibroblasts (prostate CAFs), which may suggest therapeutic strategies for PCa (18, 19). Polysaccharides from Lentinus edodes are known to exhibit potent anti-tumor and immunomodulatory functions. The anti-tumor mechanisms of L. edodes polysaccharides include regulating the innate immune system by mediating CAF function, preventing tumorigenesis, or directly killing tumor cells via cell cycle regulation or apoptotic induction (20-22). Our previous studies isolated a novel polysaccharide component (MPSSS) from L. edodes. We found the secretome of prostate CAFs treated with MPSSS could inhibit the proliferation of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells, which suggested that MPSSS could prevent the immunosuppressive function of prostate CAFs (22). However, although the secretome of MPSSS-treated prostate CAFs inhibit the proliferation of T cells, how the secretome of MPSSS-treated prostate CAFs affect PCa progression is still unclear. The secretome defines as all proteins secreted by the organism or living cells into the extracellular space, which consists of soluble proteins and extracellular vesicles (EVs) (23). The secretome of prostate CAFs pays vital roles in PCa tumor origination, progression (24, 25). Since EVs contains various molecules (proteins, RNA, DNA and lipid) (26), we speculate that soluble proteins and EVs of prostate CAFs might have the different influence on PCa cells. In this study, the secretome of prostate CAFs untreated/treated with MPSSS were separated into the high molecular weight secretome (>100 kD) and the low molecular weight secretome (3-100 kD) using 100 kD and 3kD MWCO memberane filtration to narrow down the range of active components. The high molecular weight secretome contained extracellular vesicles (EVs) and large soluble proteins, while the low molecular weight secretome contained the small soluble proteins. The secretome of prostate CAFs untreated/treated with MPSSS were used to explore the underlying function and molecular mechanism using quantitative proteomics and multiple biochemical approaches.

### Sample Protocol
1.Collection of high molecular weight and low molecular weight secretome of prostate CAFs untreated/treated with MPSSS Our previous study showed that MPSSS reduced prostate CAFs activity by decreasing α-SMA expression, and 0.5 mg/mL MPSSS obviously decreased the expression. Therefore, 0.5 mg/mL MPSSS was chosen to treat prostate CAFs in this study. Prostate CAFs were untreated/treated with MPSSS for 24 h and then cultured in FBS-free DMEM for another 24 h. Conditioned medium was harvested, centrifuged at 1000 g for 3 min followed by 2000 g for 20 min and filtered using a 0.2 μm filter (PALL) to remove dead cells and cell debris. To explore the functional molecules on PC-3 cells, the supernatants of prostate CAFs untreated/treated with MPSSS separated into two parts, the high molecular weight secretome (>100 kD) (hmwCAFS/MT-hmwCAFS) and the low molecular weight secretome (<100 kD) with Amicon Ultra-15 tubes (100 kD MWCO; Millipore). The low molecular weight secretome (<100 kD) was then concentrated with Amicon Ultra-4 tubes (3 kD MWCO; Millipore) to produce the low molecular weight secretome (3-100 kD) samples (lmwCAFS/MT-lmwCAFS) (Figure 1A). The protein concentrations of all fractions were determined using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher, USA).   2. TMT 6-plex labeling Proteins in lmwCAFS/MT-lmwCAFS were solubilized in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). PC-3 cells treated with lmwCAFS/MT-lmwCAFS were lysed in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM HEPES, pH 8.5). The protein mixture was digested using mass spectrometry grade Lys-C (Wako) and modified trypsin (Promega) as previously described . Equal amounts of peptides were labeled with TMT 6-plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocols. Then, the labeled peptides were pooled, dried and resolved with 100 mM HEPES buffer, followed by desalting with an Oasis HLB column (Waters) and drying for high pH fractionation. 3.High pH reversed-phase fractionation The peptides were dissolved in buffer A (2% ACN/98% H2O, pH=10) and fractioned on a RIGO 3000 equipped with an XBridge peptide BEH C18 column (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm, Waters) as described in a previous study. Thirteen fractions were collected for LC-MS/MS analysis. 4.LC-MS/MS analysis Peptide samples (900 ng for each) were reconstituted in 0.5% FA/H2O and analyzed by LC-MS/MS with an Easy n-LC 1000 HPLC and a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). The peptides were separated with a C18 column (75 µm  20 cm) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18 AQ particles (3.0m, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH) with solvent A (0.1% FA) and solvent B (ACN/0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 280 nL/min with a  gradient: 4% B (0 min)-8% B (5 min)- 22% (58 min)-32% B (70 min)-90% B (71 min)-90% B (78 min). A Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used for MS analysis in data-dependent acquisition mode. Each MS1 spectrum was obtained at 70,000 high-resolution (m/z 200) at 300-1600 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3E6 for a maximum filling time of 60 ms. The top 20 most abundant precursor ions were selected with a 2.0 m/z isolation window and fragmented with a normalized collision energy of 27. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 17,500 resolution (m/z 200) with a 5E4 target value over a maximum injection time of 80 ms by setting up an isolation window of 2.0 m/z and dynamic exclusion time of 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer software with Sequest HT and Mascot search engine using a human database (including 20385 proteins downloaded in August, 2018) appended with known contaminants. Trypsin was selected as the enzyme, and only two missed cleavages were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm, and the product ion tolerance was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl cysteine and TMT 6-plex labeled lysine(K) and N-terminus of peptides were selected as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. The percolator algorithm was used for FDR analysis. Peptides with FDR < 1% were set as high confidence peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Prostate cancer-associated fibroblasts (prostate CAFs) are essential components of the tumor microenvironment and can promote tumor progression through their immunosuppressive functions. MPSSS, a novel polysaccharide purified from Lentinus edodes, has been reported to have anti-tumor activity. MPSSS could also inhibit the immunosuppressive function of prostate CAFs, which has been demonstrated through that the secretome of MPSSS-treated prostate CAFs could inhibit the proliferation of T cells. However, how the secretome of MPSSS-treated prostate CAFs influence prostate cancer progression is still unclear. Interestingly, we found that the low molecular weight (3-100kD) secretome of prostate CAFs (lmwCAFS) could promote the growth of PC-3 cells, while that of MPSSS-treated prostate CAFs (MT-lmwCAFS) could inhibit their growth. We carried out comparative secretomic analysis of lmwCAFS and MT-lmwCAFS to identify functional molecules that inhibit the growth of PC-3 cells, and proteomic analysis of lmwCAFS-treated PC-3 cells and MT-lmwCAFS-treated PC-3 cells to investigate the underlying molecular mechanism. These analyses suggest that TGF-&#x3b2;3 from MT-lmwCAFS may inhibit the growth of PC-3 cells. The validated experiments revealed that TGF-&#x3b2;3 from MT-lmwCAFS activated p21 expression in PC-3 cells by regulating the FoxO pathway thereby inducing G0/G1 cell cycle arrest of PC-3 cells. Overall, our data demonstrated that MPSSS reversed the ability of prostate CAFs to suppress the cell viability of PC-3 cells, which might provide a potential therapeutic strategy to prevent prostate cancer progression.

### Keywords
Human, Prostate cafs, Prostate cancer cells, Proteomics, Secretomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Tingting Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Tingting Zhang
Key Laboratory of Protein and Peptide Pharmaceuticals & Laboratory of Proteomics, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


