### Accession
PXD022670

### Title
β-Adrenergic regulation of metabolism in macrophages

### Description
Macrophages have important roles in the immune system including clearing pathogens and wound healing. Metabolic phenotypes have been associated with functional phenotypes, where pro-inflammatory macrophages have an increased rate of glycolysis and anti-inflammatory macrophages primarily use oxidative phosphorylation. β-adrenoceptor (βAR) signalling in macrophages has been implicated in disease states such as cancer, atherosclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. The impact of β-adrenoceptor signalling on macrophage metabolism has not been defined. Here we expand on defining the phenotype of macrophages treated with isoprenaline and describe the impact that βAR signalling has on the metabolome and proteome. We found that βAR signalling alters proteins involved in cytoskeletal rearrangement and redox control of the cell. We showed that βAR signalling in macrophages shifts glucose metabolism from glycolysis towards the tricarboxylic acid cycle and pentose phosphate pathways. We also show that βAR signalling perturbs purine metabolism by accumulating adenylate pools. Taken together these results indicate that βAR signalling shifts metabolism to support redox perturbations and upregulate proteins involved in cytoskeletal changes that may impact migration and phagocytosis processes.

### Sample Protocol
3x107 cells were pelleted (400 x g for 5 min) and washed three times with 1xDPBS containing protease and phosphatase inhibitors (Complete mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 20 mM sodium fluoride, 0.1 mM sodium orthovanadate and 10 mM β-glycerolphosphate). Cell pellets were solubilised with 4% SDC in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and heated at 95°C for 10 min before probe sonication. Following sonication, the samples were allowed to reach room temperature. Proteins were reduced and alkylated using TCEP (final concentration 10 mM) and iodoacetamide (final concentration 40 mM) and incubated at 95°C for 10 min. Following centrifugation at maximum speed for 3 min, the protein concentration of the sample was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) protein assay (Pierce) as per manufacturer’s protocol. Each replicate was adjusted to 500 μg of protein. Protein samples were incubated overnight with trypsin (20 μg/ mg of protein) at 37°C with shaking at 1500 rpm. On the following day, trypsin activity was quenched with 5% (v/v) formic acid and residual detergent was removed by phase separation after the addition of an equal volume of ethyl. Samples were then dried to complete dryness. Desalting was performed using in-house generated C18 stage tips according to standard methods. Samples were dried, and resuspended in 20 μL of 2% ACN and 0.1% formic acid containing indexed retention time (iRT) peptides (Biognosys) to facilitate retention time alignment among samples in downstream processing. Samples LC-MS/MS was performed using data independent acquisition (DIA), samples were loaded at a flow rate of 15 μL/min onto a reversed-phase trap column (100 μm x 2 cm), Acclaim PepMap media (Dionex), which was maintained at a temperature of 40 °C. Peptides were then eluted from the trap column at a flow rate of 0.25 μL/min through a reversed-phase capillary column (75 μm x 15 cm) (LC Packings, Dionex). the HPLC was set to 158 min using a gradient that reached 30% ACN after 123 min, then 34% ACN after 126 min, 79.2% ACN after 131 min and 2% after 138 min for a further 20 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data independent mode with a 33-fixed-window setup of 18 m/z effective precursor isolation over the m/z range of 375-975 Da.

### Data Protocol
Comparative proteomics analysis was performed by analysing DIA data with SpectronautTM 13.0 against an in-house generated U937 macrophage library. The library contained 3,745 peptides corresponding to 1,969 protein groups. For processing, raw files were loaded and Spectronaut calculated the ideal mass tolerances for data extraction and scoring based on extensive mass calibration using a correction factor of one.   Both at the precursor and fragment levels, the highest datapoint within the selected m/z tolerance was chosen for DIA targeted data extraction. Identification of peptides against the library was based on the default Spectronaut settings (Manual for Spectronaut 13.0, available on Biognosis website). Briefly, the Q-value cut-off at the precursor and protein levels were set at 1%, therefore only those that passed this threshold were considered as identified and used for other subsequent processes. Retention time (RT) prediction type was set to dynamic indexed RT. Interference correction was on MS2 level. For quantification, the interference correction was activated and a global cross run normalisation was performed using the total peak area as the normalisation base. A significance filter of 0.01 was used for Q-value filtering. Fold-changes for the isoprenaline-treated samples compared to the vehicle control samples were calculated in Microsoft Excel. The reliability of the quantification measurements between biological replicates were based on p-values generated using Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages have important roles in the immune system including clearing pathogens and wound healing. Metabolic phenotypes in macrophages have been associated with functional phenotypes, where pro-inflammatory macrophages have an increased rate of glycolysis and anti-inflammatory macrophages primarily use oxidative phosphorylation. &#x3b2;-adrenoceptor (&#x3b2;AR) signalling in macrophages has been implicated in disease states such as cancer, atherosclerosis and rheumatoid arthritis. The impact of &#x3b2;AR signalling on macrophage metabolism has not been defined. Using metabolomics and proteomics, we describe the impact of &#x3b2;AR signalling on macrophages treated with isoprenaline. We found that &#x3b2;AR signalling alters proteins involved in cytoskeletal rearrangement and redox homeostasis of the cell. We showed that &#x3b2;AR signalling in macrophages shifts glucose metabolism from glycolysis towards the tricarboxylic acid cycle and pentose phosphate pathways. We also show that &#x3b2;AR signalling perturbs purine metabolism by accumulating adenylate and guanylate pools. Taken together, these results indicate that &#x3b2;AR signalling shifts metabolism to support redox processes and upregulates proteins involved in cytoskeletal changes, which may contribute to &#x3b2;AR effects on macrophage function.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Monash University
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics Theme, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Amanda Peterson

### Lab Head
Dr Darren John Creek
Drug Delivery, Disposition and Dynamics Theme, Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Monash University, Parkville, Victoria, Australia


