### Accession
PXD011441

### Title
Effect of sourdough bread diet supplementation on the rat gut microbiota

### Description
Investigation of the effect of chow diet integration with standard baker's yeast leavened carasau bread (SB) or with functional sourdough-leavened carasau bread (FB) on the gut microbiota of young rats.

### Sample Protocol
Eleven fecal samples and 12 liver samples were subjected to bead-beating and heating/freezing steps after resuspension in an SDS-based, reducing extraction buffer. Protein extracts were cleaned up, alkylated and trypsin digested according to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure. LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The single-run 1D LC peptide separation was performed applying a 247 min separation gradient and loading 4 μg of peptide mixture per sample. The mass spectrometer was set up in a data-dependent MS/MS mode, with Higher Energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) as the fragmentation method.

### Data Protocol
Microbial peptide identification was carried out using the Proteome Discoverer informatic platform (version 2.0; Thermo Fisher Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%). Search parameters were set as follows: precursor mass threshold 350-5000 Da; minimum peak count 6; signal-to-noise threshold 2; enzyme trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites 2; peptide length range 5-50 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da; dynamic modification methionine oxidation; static modification cysteine carbamidomethylation. Two parallel processing nodes were used. The first processing node was built on a combination of three microbial sequence databases: i) a collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from rat fecal samples (DB1_rat.fasta: 11,510,359 sequences in total); ii) a publicly available mouse metagenomic dataset (ftp://penguin.genomics.cn/pub/10.5524/100001_101000/100114/Genecatalog/184sample_2.6M.GeneSet.pep.gz) (Xiao et al., 2015) merged with a collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from mouse fecal samples (DB2_mouse.fasta: 9,825,357 sequences in total); iii) a pseudometagenome comprising all UniProtKB (release 2017_11) sequences belonging to the 54 microbial genera detected in the 16S rDNA analysis described in this study with an abundance > 0.1% in at least one sample (DB3_pseudometagenome.fasta: 17,389,183 sequences in total).

### Publication Abstract
Sourdough-leavened bread (SB) is acknowledged for its great variety of valuable effects on consumer's metabolism and health, including a low glycemic index and a reduced content of the possible carcinogen acrylamide. Here, we aimed to investigate how these effects influence the gut microbiota composition and functions. Therefore, we subjected rats to a diet supplemented with SB, baker's yeast leavened bread (BB), or unsupplemented diet (chow), and, after 4 weeks of treatment, their gut microbiota was analyzed using a metaproteogenomic approach. As a result, diet supplementation with SB led to a reduction of specific members of the intestinal microbiota previously associated to low protein diets, namely <i>Alistipes</i> and <i>Mucispirillum</i>, or known as intestinal pathobionts, i.e., <i>Mycoplasma</i>. Concerning functions, asparaginases expressed by <i>Bacteroides</i> were observed as more abundant in SB-fed rats, leading to hypothesize that in their colonic microbiota the enzyme substrate, asparagine, was available in higher amounts than in BB- and chow-fed rats. Another group of protein families, expressed by <i>Clostridium</i>, was detected as more abundant in animal fed SB-supplemented diet. Of these, manganese catalase, small acid-soluble proteins (SASP), Ser/Thr kinase PrkA, and V-ATPase proteolipid subunit have been all reported to take part in <i>Clostridium</i> sporulation, strongly suggesting that the diet supplementation with SB might promote environmental conditions inducing metabolic dormancy of <i>Clostridium</i> spp. within the gut microbiota. In conclusion, our data describe the effects of SB consumption on the intestinal microbiota taxonomy and functions in rats. Moreover, our results suggest that a metaproteogenomic approach can provide evidence of the interplay between metabolites deriving from bread digestion and microbial metabolism.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Rat, Diet, Fecal, Liver, Ltq-orbitrap velos, Bread

### Affiliations
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy
Porto Conte Ricerche

### Submitter
Antonio Palomba

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Porto Conte Ricerche, Science and Technology Park of Sardinia, Tramariglio, Alghero, Italy


