### Accession
PXD003095

### Title
Identification of the novel function of adipocyte plasma membrane associated protein (APMAP) in gestational diabetes mellitus by proteomic analysis of omental adipose tissues

### Description
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is considered as the early stage of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In this study, we compared the demographic and clinical data between six GDM and six NGT (healthy controls) and found the HOMA-IR was increased in GDM. Previously, many researches had proved that omental adipose tissues dysfunction could induce insulin resistance. Thus, in order to investigate the cause of the insulin resistance in GDM, label-free proteomics was used to discover differentially expressed proteins in omental adipose tissues between GDM and NGT. A total of 3529 proteins identified, including 66 significantly changed proteins. Adipocyte plasma membrane associated protein (APMAP also called C20orf3) was one of changed proteins and down regulated in GDM omental adipose tissues. Further, mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes were used to simulate omental adipocytes and we found that inhibited the expression of APMAP by RNAi would impaired the insulin signaling and activated the NFkB signaling in adipocytes. These results indicated that the decreased of APMAP in mental adipose tissues may be important in process of the insulin resistance in GDM.

### Sample Protocol
Subjects 6 GDM and 6 NGT subjects were enrolled in the study . Diagnosis of GDM was based on IADPSG criteria. Omental adipose tissue was taken during caesarean. Omental adipose tissue were collected from each pregnant woman immediately after delivery during surgery and the volume of each being 1-2 cm 3. Tissue was washed triple by normal saline and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen then stored at -80 °C in 5 min for proteomics analysis and western blotting and this sample process was considered suitable for proteomics analysis Materials Ammonium bicarbonate, dithiothreitol (DTT), Iodoacetamide (IAA), sodium carbonate were purchased was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO). Acetonitrile and water for nano-LC-MS/MS were purchased from J.T. Baker (Phillipsburg, NJ). Trypsin was purchased from Promega (Madison, WI).  methanol were purchased from BioRad (Hercules, CA, USA). Medium and reagents used for cell culture studies were obtained from Invitrogen (Burlington, ON). Protein Trypsin Digestion Using FASP Method 50 μg of sample was digested by the FASP procedure, aspreviously described. Each sample was transferred to a 30 K filter (Millipore) and centrifuged at 12 000 g for 30 min at 20 °C. Then, 200 μL of urea buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris- HCl, pH 8.5) was added to the sample and centrifuged at 12 000 g for another 30 min. This step was repeated one more time. The concentrate was then mixed with 100 μL of 50 mM IAA in urea buffer and incubated for an additional 30 min at room temperature in darkness. After that, IAA was removed by centrifugation at 12 000 g for 30 min. Next, the sample was diluted with 200 μL of urea buffer and centrifuged two more times. Then, 200 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added and the sample was centrifuged at 12 000 g for 30 min. This step was repeated twice. Finally, 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and trypsin (1:50, enzyme to protein) was added to the sample, which was then incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. The tryptic peptide mixtures were collected for further analysis. LC-MS/MS The reverse phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) separation was achieved on the Easy nano-LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a self-packed column (75μm × 150mm; 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18 beads, 120 Å , Dr.Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mobile phase A of RP-HPLC was 0.1% formic acid in water, and B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The peptides were eluted using a gradient (2-90% mobile phase B) over a 4 h period into a nano-ESI Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with each full MS scan followed by MS/MS for the 20 most intense ions with the parameters: ≥ +2 precursor ion charges, 2 Da precursor ion isolation window and 30 normalized collision energy of HCD. Dynamic Exclusion™ was set for 25s. The full mass and the subsequent MS/MS analyses were scanned in the Orbitrap analyzer with R = 70,000 and R= 17,500 (defined at m/z 200), respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis The MS data were analyzed using the software MaxQuant (32) (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.3.0.5). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation (M, +15.99492 Da) was set as a variable modification. Proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data of peptides against a decoy version of the International Protein Index (IPI) human database (version 3.87, European Bioinformatics Institute). Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. Label-free quantification was carried out in MaxQuant as previously described. Protein abundance was calculated on the basis of the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity).

### Publication Abstract
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) is considered as an early stage of type 2 diabetes mellitus. In this study, we compared demographic and clinical data between six GDM subjects and six normal glucose tolerance (NGT; healthy controls) subjects and found that homeostasis model of assessment for insulin resistance index (HOMA-IR) increased in GDM. Many previous studies demonstrated that omental adipose tissue dysfunction could induce insulin resistance. Thus, to investigate the cause of insulin resistance in GDM, we used label-free proteomics to identify differentially expressed proteins in omental adipose tissues from GDM and NGT subjects (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD003095). A total of 3528 proteins were identified, including 66 significantly changed proteins. Adipocyte plasma membrane-associated protein (APMAP, a.k.a. C20orf3), one of the differentially expressed proteins, was down-regulated in GDM omental adipose tissues. Furthermore, mature 3T3-L1 adipocytes were used to simulate omental adipocytes. The inhibition of APMAP expression by RNAi impaired insulin signaling and activated NF&#x3ba;B signaling in these adipocytes. Our study revealed that the down-regulation of APMAP in omental adipose tissue may play an important role in insulin resistance in the pathophysiology of GDM.

### Keywords
Omental adipose tissues, Gestational diabetes mellitus, Label-free proteomics

### Affiliations
None
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, 201203

### Submitter
Xing Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, China, 201203


