### Accession
PXD030059

### Title
Cell-Lineage Guided Mass Spectrometry Proteomics in the Developing (Frog) Embryo

### Description
We provide a protocol to enable the mass spectrometry-based characterization of proteins in identified cell lineages in Xenopus laevis (frog) embryos. The experimental workflow leverages reproducible cell-fate maps and established technologies from developmental biology to identify, fluorescently label, track, and analyze cells and their progenies from this important biological model of vertebrate development. Proteins are identified and quantified via bottom-up proteomics. Microanalytical capillary electrophoresis or nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoLC) are used to separate peptides, and electrospray ionization (ESI) high-resolution mass spectrometry (HRMS) are employed for detection.

### Sample Protocol
Orthogonal approaches are used to provide scalable sampling of proteomes from cells and tissues. Single cells are identified in the frog embryo based on reproducible cell-fate maps, followed by whole-cell dissection or capillary microaspiration of subcellular contents. Cell lineages are traced by injecting the precursor cells with fluorescent markers. Tissues arising from these clones are manually dissected under a research-grade stereomicroscope. Optionally, the cells are isolated by fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). After depletion of abundant yolk proteins in these specimens, the proteome is analyzed via a bottom-up workflow based on CE or nanoLC ESI-HRMS. Representative data are provided from a study that was conducted on a custom-built microanalytical CE platform and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC chromatograph with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS-MS/MS data were processed in ProteomeDiscoverer (Thermo) using the SEQUEST search engine against the X. laevis proteome. This proteome was built in house by concatenating the genome-based X. laevis proteome (Xenbase, http://www.xenbase.org) and the mRNA-based PHROG proteomic database (M. Wuehr et al., Curr. Biol. 2014, 24, 1467). Peptide and protein matches were filtered to <1% false discovery rate, calculated against a reversed-sequence decoy database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroscience, Neuron, Frog, Capillary electrophoresis, Xenopus laevis, Proteomics, Liquid chromatography, Cell and developmental biology, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
University of Maryland, College Park
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland–College Park, MD

### Submitter
Peter Nemes

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Nemes
Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of Maryland–College Park, MD


