### Accession
PXD047650

### Title
Evaluation of secretomes derived from human dermal and adipose tissue mesenchymal stem/stromal cells for skin wound healing: Not as effective as cells

### Description
Although the paracrine effects of mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) have been recognized as crucial mediators of their regenerative effects on tissue repair, the potential of MSC secretomes as effective substitutes for cellular therapies remains underexplored. In this study, we compared MSCs from the human dermis (DSCs) and adipose tissue (ASCs) with their secretomes regarding their efficacy for skin wound healing using a translationally-relevant murine model. Proteomic analysis revealed that while there was a substantial overlap in protein composition between DSC and ASC secretomes, specific proteins associated with wound healing and angiogenesis were differentially expressed. Despite a similar angiogenic potential in vivo, DSC- and ASC-secretomes were found to be less effective than cells in accelerating wound closure and promoting tissue remodeling. Overall, secretome-treated groups showed intermediary results between cells and control (empty scaffold) treated groups. These findings highlight that although secretomes possess therapeutic potential, their efficacy might be limited compared to cellular therapies. This study contributes to the growing understanding of MSC secretomes, emphasizes the need for further protocol optimization, and offers insights into their potential applications in regenerative medicine.

### Sample Protocol
The secretomes were obtained from DSCs or ASCs monolayers at 90% confluence that were subjected to a triple wash with PBS and maintained in DMEM without FBS for 48 hours. Cell supernatants were collected and processed by centrifugation (5 min, 300 g) to pellet and exclude eventual floating dead cells, and then filtered through a 0.22 µm filter to remove debris. The resulting secretome was concentrated tenfold using Ultra-15-Centrifugal Filter Ultracel 3K prior to mass spectrometry assays.

### Data Protocol
Liquid Chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) method was employed for this study. In summary, 5 µg of peptides from each sample were analyzed in triplicate using the Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer. Protein identification, quantification, and validation were conducted using the MaxQuant Platform.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Integra matrix, Conditioned medium, Proteomics, Dermis, Exosomes, Msc

### Affiliations
Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida
Fiocruz

### Submitter
Marco Augusto Stimamiglio

### Lab Head
Dr Helena Zomer
Department of Physiological Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, University of Florida


