### Accession
PXD020520

### Title
The non-canonical PARP1 inhibitor target, PARP16, contributes to talazoparib polypharmacology and synergy with WEE1 inhibitors: Chemical Proteomics Cal51

### Description
PARP1 inhibitors (PARP1is) display single-agent anticancer activity in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and other neuroendocrine tumors independent of BRCA1/2 mutations. Here, we determined the differential efficacy of multiple clinical PARP1is in SCLC cells. Compared to the other PARP1is (rucaparib, olaparib and niraparib), talazoparib displayed the highest potency across SCLC, also  in SLFN11-negative cells. Chemical proteomics identified PARP16 as a unique talazoparib target in addition to PARP1. Silencing PARP16 significantly reduced cell survival, particularly in combination with PARP1 inhibition. Drug combination screening revealed talazoparib synergy with the WEE1/PLK1 inhibitor, adavosertib. Global phosphoproteomics identified disparate effects on cell cycle and DNA damage response signaling, illustrating underlying mechanisms. Synergy with adavosertib was more pronounced for talazoparib than olaparib and silencing PARP16 further reduced cell survival in combination with olaparib and adavosertib. Together, these data suggest that PARP16 contributes to talazoparib’s overall mechanism of action and constitutes a new actionable target in SCLC.

### Sample Protocol
The drug pulldown experiments were performed essentially as described before (Knezevic et al., 2016). Briefly, the i-olaparib and i-talazoparib were immobilized on NHS-activated sepharose beads with triethylamine overnight. Successful coupling was confirmed using HPLC-MS and beads were blocked overnight with ethanolamine. Lysates (5 mg per sample) were pre-incubated with competition compound (20 M, except for the dose-dependent competition experiment) or DMSO for 30 min at 4°C. The drug beads were washed with DMSO followed by lysis buffer and affinity pulldown experiments were performed by incubating lysates for 2 hrs at 4°C. Beads were further washed on Bio-spin disposable chromatography columns (BioRad) with lysis buffer, bound proteins were eluted by heating to 95-100°C in 30 L of Laemmli buffer for 5 min. A portion of each eluate was set aside for analysis by western blotting. The eluates were run on SDS-PAGE, followed by in-gel trypsin digestion, and cleared with C18 ZipTip clean up (Millipore). Briefly, the ZipTips were activated by pipetting methanol a few times followed by 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The samples were then pipetted a few times and tips were washed with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and eluted in 50% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. The eluate was concentrated using vacuum centrifugation. The peptides were re-dissolved in HPLC buffer spiked with Scientific Pierce Retention Time Calibration Mixture (PRTC). LC-MS/MS analysis using a Dionex RSLCnano coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) was performed as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the SwissProt 2018 human protein database using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science). Up to two missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 20ppm and fragment ion tolerance was 0.05.. Results were visualized in Scaffold 4.3.4, (www.proteomesoftware.com), using a protein threshold of 50%, a minimum of 1 peptide, and a peptide threshold of 95%, and peptide counts were analyzed as Exclusive Unique Spectrum Count. In the dose dependent talazoparib pull down pulldown in 86M1 lysates, the relative intensities of unique peptides were selected from MaxQuant for each protein and were used to calculate the IC50 using doses in Graphpad Prism. Depletion factors and Ki values were calculated using the unique peptide intensities and IC50 values as described before (Medard 2015).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parp inhibitor, Off-target, Adavosertib, Parp16, Parp1, Proteomics, Breast cancer, Talazoparib, Polypharmacology

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


