### Accession
PXD002205

### Title
Ubiquitin S65 proteomics:  Protein turnover analysis

### Description
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation.  Ubiquitin itself can be post-translationally modified by phosphorylation, with nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue having the potential to be phosphorylated.  However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we performed in vivo and in vitro characterization of the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at position serine 65.  We find ubiquitin S65 phosphorylation to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring in tandem with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state.  Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates.  Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, and substrate targeting.  These results demonstrate that phosphorylation represents an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic analysis of yeast turnover.  The approach used here was based on a previously described experimental design{Boisvert:2012iv}. Each strain (DS147, DS181, and DS182) was individually cultured in lysine-free synthetic complete media supplemented with K0 or K4 lysine (4,4,5,5-D4) at 436 μM concentration{Ong:2002}.  After a minimum of six doublings, cells were pelleted and the supernatant removed.  Cultures grown in K0 media were resuspended in 20 mL of K0 media again, and cultures previously grown in K4 media were resuspended in media containing K8 lysine (13C6, 15N2) at an OD of ~0.3.  After 4 hours of culture, cells had reached a density of ~1.0, and 1.5 mL of culture was harvested by centrifugation.  Cells from the same strain were resuspended at 4°C in proteomics lysis buffer.  Cell suspensions were lysed, reduced, alkylated, and digested with LysC.  After digestion, all samples were acidified to pH 2 the addition of TFA and desalted on 100 mg styrene divinylbenzene cartridges (Phenomenex).  Peptides were fractionated by stepwise elution from the cartridge basic pH reversed-phase conditions.  Four fractions were collected after the addition of 500 μL volumes of 20 mM ammonia with increasing acetonitrile concentration (6%, 12%, 18%, and 80% acetonitrile, respectively).  Fractions were lyophilized, resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile, and directly analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptides were resuspended in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile and loaded onto a 100 μm ID x 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm, 120Å particles (Dr. Maisch).  Peptides were eluted over a 100 μm ID x 30 cm analytical column packed with the same material.  Peptides were eluted into either a Velos Orbitrap or a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an EasyII nLC or Easy1000 nLC system (Thermo Fisher).  The exact gradient conditions were tailored to the complexity and chemical properties of each sample.  Generally, the gradient was 8-30% acetonitrile in 0.15% formic acid over the course of 90-120min.  All MS spectra were collected with orbitrap detection, while MS/MS spectra of the 20 most abundant ions were collected either with ion trap detection and resonant excitation collision-activated dissociation (CAD), or with orbitrap detection and beam-type CAD.   Identification and quantification of peptides, protein, and modifications.  All data was searched against the Saccharomyces cerevisiae database supplemented as appropriate with either the His-tagged ubiquitin sequence, or with the S65A and S65E mutated ubiquitin sequence.  Searches and peptide quantifications were performed with the MaxQuant data analysis software{Cox:2008}.  All peptide, protein, and PTM site identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate{Elias:2007}.  To account for any errors in mixing of cells, all quantitative values were normalized such the intensity of the light signal (K0) was equal to sum of the medium (K4) and the heavy (K8) signal. Statistical analysis of differences between different yeast strain rates of protein degradation, synthesis, and turnover was performed using a two-sided t-test assuming unequal variance.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitylation is an essential post-translational modification that regulates numerous cellular processes, most notably protein degradation. Ubiquitin can itself be phosphorylated at nearly every serine, threonine, and tyrosine residue. However, the effect of this modification on ubiquitin function is largely unknown. Here, we characterized the effects of phosphorylation of yeast ubiquitin at serine 65 in vivo and in vitro. We find this post-translational modification to be regulated under oxidative stress, occurring concomitantly with the restructuring of the ubiquitin landscape into a highly polymeric state. Phosphomimetic mutation of S65 recapitulates the oxidative stress phenotype, causing a dramatic accumulation of ubiquitylated proteins and a proteome-wide reduction of protein turnover rates. Importantly, this mutation impacts ubiquitin chain disassembly, chain linkage distribution, ubiquitin interactions, and substrate targeting. These results demonstrate that phosphorylation is an additional mode of ubiquitin regulation with broad implications in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Phosphorylation, Yeast, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of Washington

### Submitter
Danielle Swaney

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
University of Washington


