### Accession
PXD007782

### Title
The surface proteome of extracellular vesicles from Fasciola hepatica

### Description
Helminth parasites secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) as a means of exporting effector molecules into the host microenvironment. Once released, the parasite-derived EVs are internalised by host immune cells and trigger a range of biological effects including modulation of host immunity. While the molecular cargo of EVs have been characterised in many parasites, little is known about the surface-exposed molecules that may effect ligand-receptor interactions with the target host cell surface that initiate vesicle docking and subsequent internalisation. Here we used a membrane-impermeable biotin reagent to capture proteins displayed on the outer membrane surface of adult F. hepatica EVs and mass spectrometry to identified the surface proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Freshly collected F. hepatica 15K and 120k EVs were labelled with the membrane impermeable sulfo-NHS-LC-biotin (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Biotinylated EV surface proteins were sequentially extracted in detergent and recovered using streptavidin–sepharose beads (GE Healthcare). Protein bound to the beads were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides analysed in a nanoESI QqTOF mass spectrometer (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX).

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analysed using Mascot v2.4.1 (Matrix Science). Mascot was set up to search a database comprised of the gene models identified within the F. hepatica genome (version 1.0, 101,780 entries); Cwiklinski et al. (2015) assuming trypsin digestion with 1 missed cleavage permitted. The F. hepatica gene model sequences can be accessed through WormBase ParaSite (http://parasite.wormbase.org/) under accession PRJEB6687 (genomic read data and gene model transcripts).  Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 ppm. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Gln->pyro-Glu of the N-terminus, oxidation of methionine, dioxidation of methionine, acetyl of the N-terminus, BHAc of lysine and NHS-LC-Biotin of the N-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Helminth parasites secrete extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can be internalised by host immune cells resulting in modulation of host immunity. While the molecular cargo of EVs have been characterised in many parasites, little is known about the surface-exposed molecules that participate in ligand-receptor interactions with the host cell surface to initiate vesicle docking and subsequent internalisation. Using a membrane-impermeable biotin reagent to capture proteins displayed on the outer membrane surface of two EV sub-populations (termed 15k and 120k EVs) released by adult F. hepatica, we describe 380 surface proteins including an array of virulence factors, membrane transport proteins and molecules involved in EV biogenesis/trafficking. Proteomics and immunohistochemical analysis show that the 120k EVs have an endosomal origin and may be released from the parasite via the protonephridial (excretory) system whilst the larger 15k EVs are released from the gastrodermal epithelial cells that line the fluke gut. A parallel lectin microarray strategy was used to profile the topology of major surface oligosaccharides of intact fluorogenically-labelled EVs as they would be displayed to the host. Lectin profiles corresponding to glycoconjugates exposed on the surface of the 15 K and 120K EV sub-populations are practically identical but are distinct from those of the parasite surface tegument, although all are predominated by high mannose sugars. We found that while the F. hepatica EVs were resistant to exo- and endo-glycosidases, the glyco-amidase PNGase F drastically remodelled the surface oligosaccharides and blocked the uptake of EVs by host macrophages. In contrast, pre-treatment with antibodies obtained from infected hosts, or purified antibodies raised against the extracellular domains of specific EV surface proteins (DM9-containing protein, CD63 receptor and myoferlin), significantly enhanced their cellular internalisation. This work highlights the diversity of EV biogenesis and trafficking pathways used by F. hepatica and sheds light on the molecular interaction between parasite EVs and host cells.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica, Exosome, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Queens University Belfast
School of Biological Sciences Medical Biology Centre Queen's University Belfast Belfast, N. Ireland

### Submitter
Mark Robinson

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Robinson
School of Biological Sciences Medical Biology Centre Queen's University Belfast Belfast, N. Ireland


