### Accession
PXD039004

### Title
Short Gradient Multi-CV FAIMSpro BoxCar DIA Facilitates Quantitative Time-Course Analysis of Osmotic and Salt Stress in Arabidopsis thaliana - Abiotic Stress Dataset

### Description
A major limitation in quantitative time-course proteomics is the tradeoff between depth-of-analysis and speed-of-analysis. In high complexity, high dynamic samples such as plant extracts, this is tradeoff is especially apparent. To address this, we evaluate multiple composition voltage (CV) High Field Asymetric Waveform Ion Mobility Spectrometry (FAIMSpro) settings using the latest label-free, single-shot Orbitrap-based DIA acquisition workflows for their ability to deeply-quantify the Arabidopsis thaliana seedling proteome at microliter per minute flow rates. Using a micro-flow BoxCar DIA acquisition workflow with -30, -50, -70 CV FAIMSpro settings we are able to consistently quantify >5000 Arabidopsis seedling proteins over a 21-minute gradient, facilitating the analysis of ~48 samples per day. Utilizing this acquisition approach, we next performed an abiotic stress time-course experiment, whereby we quantified proteome-level changes occurring in Arabidopsis seedling shoots and roots over 24 h of salt and osmotic stress. Here, we successfully quantify over >6400 shoot and >8500 root protein groups, respectively, quantifying nearly 9700 unique protein groups total across the study. Collectively, we pioneer a fast-flow, multi-CV FAIMSpro BoxCar DIA acquisition workflow that represents an exciting new analysis approach for quantitative time-course proteomics experimentation in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth & Abiotic stress treatment - Sterilized Arabidopsis thaliana wild-type Col-0 (Arabidopsis) seeds were plated on 0.5 x MS (Caisson Laboratories Inc. Murashige & Skoog MSP01-50LT) 0.8 % plant agar (Caisson laboratories Inc. Phytoblend™ PTP01-2KG) and stratified for 3 days at 4 oC in the dark. Seeds were germinated under 16 h : 8 h photoperiod with LED light with 100 µmol/m2/s at constant 22 oC.  Seedlings were grown vertically in custom 3D printed blacked-out vertical plate holders to minimize root exposure to light. At ZT3, seedlings were transferred to either 150 mM NaCl, 300 mM mannitol, or 0.5 X MS control plates. Plants were harvested at 0 h, 1 h, 3 h, 6 h, 12 h, and 24 h post stress exposure.   Tissue processing, protein extraction and protein digest - Frozen plant material was ground using Geno/Grinder (SPEX SamplePrep) for 30s at 1200 rpm and aliqoted into 100 mg (shoot) and 50 mg (root) fractions under liquid N2 prior to extraction. Ground tissue was then dissolved in protein extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 100 mM NaCl, and 4 % (w/v) SDS at a 1:2 (w/v) ratio and extracted by shaking 1000 RPM 95oC for using a tabletop shaker (Eppenforf ThermoMixer F2.0).  Samples were then centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 10 minutes at room temperature. and the supernatant retained in new tubes. Protein extracts were then reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (D9779, Sigma), followed by alkylation with 30 mM Iodoacetamide (I1149, Sigma) for 30 minutes at room temperature. Total proteome peptide fractions were then generated using a KingFisher APEX (Thermo Scientific) automated sample processing system as outlined by Leutert et al. (2019) without deviation (10.15252/msb.20199021). Peptides were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (V5113; Promega) diluted in 50 mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer  pH 8.5 (T7408; Sigma). Following digestion, samples were acidified with formic acid (A117, Fisher) to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v).  Peptides were desalted as previously described (DOI: 10.1111/tpj.14315) using an OT-2 liquid handling robot (Opentrons Labworks Inc.) mounted with Omix C18 pipette tips (A5700310K; Agilent). Desalted peptides were dried and stored at -80oC prior to re-suspension in 3.0 % (v/v) ACN / 0.1 % (v/v) FA prior to MS injection.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis - Peptides were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode. A total of 2 µg of re-suspended peptide was injected per replicate using Easy-nLC 1200 system (LC140; Thermo Scientific) using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column (Cat# 164750; Thermo Scientific) followed by a 15 cm Easy-Spray PepMap C18 analytical column (ES906; Thermo Scientific) warmed to 50oC. Peptides were eluted at 1.2 µL/min using a segmented solvent B gradient of 0.1% (v/v) FA in 80% (v/v) ACN (A998, Fisher) from 4 to 41% solvent B (0 – 21 min). The FAIMSpro was used with a fixed gas flow of 3.5 L/min with voltages applied as described in the manuscript. A positive ion spray voltage of 2.3 kV was used with an ion transfer tube temperature of 300oC and an RF lens setting of 40%.  Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) – Direct DIA acquisition was performed as previously described (10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03338). Full scan MS1 spectra (350–1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z with a normalized AGC target of 100% and IT set to automatic. Fragment spectra were acquired a resolution of 30 000 across twenty-eight 38.5 m/z windows overlapping of 1 m/z using a dynamic maximum injection time and an AGC target value of 2000%, with a minimum number of desired points across each peak set to 6. HCD fragmented was performed using a fixed 27% fragmentation energy. BoxCar DIA acquisition was also performed as described (10.1021/acs.analchem.1c03338) using the DIA acquisition outlined above. MS1 spectra were acquired using two multiplexed targeted SIM scans of 10 BoxCar windows each. Full scan MS1 spectra (350–1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 120 000 at 200 m/z and normalized AGC targets of 100% per BoxCar isolation window. Isolation windows used were determined as previously described (Mehta et al 2022). Fragment spectra were acquired according to the settings described above for directDIA acquisition. Data analysis - Downstream data analysis of all DirectDIA and BoxCarDIA acquisitions was performed on Spectronaut ver. 17 (Biognosys AG). Final numbers of PSMs, peptides, and protein groups from the result summary in Spectronaut. Significantly changing differentially abundant proteins were determined and corrected for multiple comparisons (Bonferroni-corrected p-value <0.05; q-value).

### Publication Abstract
A major limitation when undertaking quantitative proteomic time-course experimentation is the tradeoff between depth-of-analysis and speed-of-analysis. In high complexity and high dynamic range sample types, such as plant extracts, balance between resolution and time is especially apparent. To address this, we evaluate multiple compensation voltage (CV) high field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMSpro) settings using the latest label-free single-shot Orbitrap-based DIA acquisition workflows for their ability to deeply quantify the Arabidopsis thaliana seedling proteome. Using a BoxCarDIA acquisition workflow with a -30 -50 -70 CV FAIMSpro setting, we were able to consistently quantify &gt;5000 Arabidopsis seedling proteins over a 21-min gradient, facilitating the analysis of &#x223c;42 samples per day. Utilizing this acquisition approach, we then quantified proteome-level changes occurring in Arabidopsis seedling shoots and roots over 24&#xa0;h of salt and osmotic stress, to identify early and late stress response proteins and reveal stress response overlaps. Here, we successfully quantify &gt;6400 shoot and &gt;8500 root protein groups, respectively, quantifying nearly &#x223c;9700 unique protein groups in total across the study. Collectively, we pioneer a short gradient, multi-CV FAIMSpro BoxCarDIA acquisition workflow that represents an exciting new analysis approach for undertaking quantitative proteomic time-course experimentation in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Directdia, Faimspro, Boxcardia

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Depamrtment of Biological Sciences - University of Alberta

### Submitter
Richard Uhrig

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Glen Uhrig
Depamrtment of Biological Sciences - University of Alberta


