### Accession
PXD021417

### Title
Reanalysis of a synthetic cross-linked peptide library with OpenPepXL for benchmarking purposes

### Description
Reanalysis of a synthetic crosslinked peptide library dataset. The three replicates of the XL-MS experiment with the non-cleavable cross-linker DSS from the dataset published in Beveridge et al., Nature Commun., 2020 (PRIDE project PXD014337) were searched with the XL-MS identification tool OpenPepXL for benchmarking purposes.

### Sample Protocol
The synthetic peptide library was crosslinked using DSS as described in Beveridge et al., Nature Commun., 2020 (PRIDE project PXD014337).

### Data Protocol
The .RAW files of all datasets were converted into mzML and MGF files using MSConvertGUI from the ProteoWizard toolkit version 3.0.10577. Reversed sequence decoy protein databases were generated from the target protein databases using the TOPP tool DecoyDatabase from OpenMS 2.5. OpenPepXL 1.2 with the TOPP tool XFDR for False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimation were used to identify cross-links. The search parameters were: precursor tolerance = 5 ppm, fragment tolerance = 20ppm, max. number of missed cleavages = 3, enzyme = Trypsin, min. peptide length = 5, fixed modification = Carbamidomethyl (C), variable modification = Oxidation (M), max. variable modifications per peptide = 2, charges = +2 to +8 , cross-linker = DSS, cross-link mass = 138.0680796, mono-link masses = 156.07864431, linked residues = K. Additional filtering and post-processing was partly done with the TOPP tool IDFilter and TextExporter. The MzIdentML files (*.mzid) contain the complete, unfiltered search results. The tables (*.tsv) contain the final filtered results at 5% (*_fdr5.tsv) and 1% (*_fdr1.tsv) FDR, with removed decoys and mono-links, and cross-links made unique by only keeping the highest scoring CSM for each.

### Publication Abstract
Cross-linking MS (XL-MS) has been recognized as an effective source of information about protein structures and interactions. In contrast to regular peptide identification, XL-MS has to deal with a quadratic search space, where peptides from every protein could potentially be cross-linked to any other protein. To cope with this search space, most tools apply different heuristics for search space reduction. We introduce a new open-source XL-MS database search algorithm, OpenPepXL, which offers increased sensitivity compared with other tools. OpenPepXL searches the full search space of an XL-MS experiment without using heuristics to reduce it. Because of efficient data structures and built-in parallelization OpenPepXL achieves excellent runtimes and can also be deployed on large compute clusters and cloud services while maintaining a slim memory footprint. We compared OpenPepXL to several other commonly used tools for identification of noncleavable labeled and label-free cross-linkers on a diverse set of XL-MS experiments. In our first comparison, we used a data set from a fraction of a cell lysate with a protein database of 128 targets and 128 decoys. At 5% FDR, OpenPepXL finds from 7% to over 50% more unique residue pairs (URPs) than other tools. On data sets with available high-resolution structures for cross-link validation OpenPepXL reports from 7% to over 40% more structurally validated URPs than other tools. Additionally, we used a synthetic peptide data set that allows objective validation of cross-links without relying on structural information and found that OpenPepXL reports at least 12% more validated URPs than other tools. It has been built as part of the OpenMS suite of tools and supports Windows, macOS, and Linux operating systems. OpenPepXL also supports the MzIdentML 1.2 format for XL-MS identification results. It is freely available under a three-clause BSD license at https://openms.org/openpepxl.

### Keywords
Technical dataset

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology
1. Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany;  2. Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany;  3. Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany;  4. Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany;

### Submitter
Eugen Netz

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Kohlbacher
1. Biomolecular Interactions, Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Tübingen, Germany;  2. Applied Bioinformatics, Dept. of Computer Science, University of Tübingen, Germany;  3. Institute for Translational Bioinformatics, University Hospital Tübingen, Germany;  4. Institute for Bioinformatics and Medical Informatics, University of Tübingen, Germany;


