### Accession
PXD013978

### Title
Temporal multi-omics identifies LRG1 as vascular instructor of early metastatic colonization.

### Description
Metastasis is the primary cause of cancer-related mortality and the mechanistically least well understood step of the tumor progression cascade. Employing surgical preclinical metastasis models, we show here that small primary tumors reprogram the body’s vascular endothelium to alter systemic homeostasis and to condition the premetastatic niche for metastatic colonization. Endothelial cells thereby serve as an amplifier of tumor-induced instructive signals. The combined endothelial transcriptomic and serum proteomic screen identified the TGFß pathway signaling specifier LRG1 as an early vascular niche instructor of metastatic colonization. Adjuvant LRG1 inhibition to primary tumor-resected mice delayed metastatic growth and increased overall survival. The study has thereby established the premetastatic systems map of primary tumor-induced vascular changes and identified LRG1 as a therapeutic target for metastasis

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis and Digestion  Total plasma protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA) following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were prepared according to Kramer et. al. Briefly, for each samples 50 µg of protein were diluted in a total volume of 100 µL of 0.1% (w/v) RapiGest-SF (Waters) dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) (pH 8) and heated for 15 min at 95°C. Prior to protein digestion disulfide bonds were reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT, 5 mM final concentration) for 30 min at 60°C and subsequently alkylated with 2-Chloroacetamide (CAA, 15 mM final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Promega) in a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37°C, shaking at 700 rpm. Following digestion, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added (pH <2) to a final concentration of 1% and incubated for 20 min at 37°C to stop digestion and break down RapiGest, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 min. The peptide containing supernatants were collected in new tubes. MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C. For relative quantification samples were subjected to LC-MS analysis in single shots. Additionally, a library of protein identification was generated by deep fractionating a pool of all samples, using high pH reverse phase liquid chromatography.  Library fractionation The pooled library-sample was adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium formate at a final concentration of 20 mM. Peptide fractionation was performed on a 1200 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent) with a Gemini C18 column (3 µm, 110 Å, 100 × 1.0 mm; Phenomenex) using a linear 60 min gradient from 0% to 35% (v/v) ACN in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/min. Sixty 1-min fractions were collected and pooled into twelve fractions, dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA). MS injection-ready samples were stored at -20°C.  LC-MS Analysis The single shot samples and 12 library fractions were injected using an Easy-nLC 1200 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto a trap column (Pepmap, 100 μm x 2cm, C18, 5 μm 100Å pores) at a constant flow of solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at a maximum pressure of 800 bar and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC 75 μm × 50 cm, C18, 2 µM, 100Å) at a constant flow of 0.3 μl/minute, at 55°C by applying a multistep gradient. During the elution, the percentage of solvent B (0.1% FA, 80% ACN 19.9% water) was increased linearly from 3% to 8% in 4 minutes, then from 8% to 10% in 2 minutes, then from 10% to 32% in a further 17 minutes, and then to 50% B in 3 minutes. Finally, the gradient was finished with 8 minutes at 100% solvent B, followed by 11 minutes 97% solvent A.  Eluting peptides were electro-sprayed by applying 2 kV on a 360 μm OD x 20μm ID; 10 μm Picotip coated emitter (New Objective) into a Q Exactive HF quadropole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The capillary temperature was set to 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode of acquisition. Briefly, for each cycle, one Full MS spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap with a mass range of 350-1500 m/z and a resolution of 60,000 FWHM at 200 m/z. The automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 3 x 106 with a maximum injection time of 32 ms. Precursor ions were filtered according to charge state (required 2-7 z) and monoisotopic peak assignment. The top 20 most abundant ions per full scan were selected for an MS2 acquisition. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic exclusion window (40 s ± 10 ppm tolerance). For MS2 scans the resolution was set to 15,000 FWHM with an AGC of 1 x 105 ions and maximum fill time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol The mass spectra were processed with MaxQuant (V1.5.1.2) using the Andromeda search engine against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot databases of Mus musculus (13.09.2017), with the following search settings: digestion enzyme was set to trypsin/P, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. Precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modification. The match between run function was enabled to match from the “library” to the “single shot samples” with a time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. A minimum of one unique peptide and a false discovery rate below 0.01 was set for peptide and protein identification. The protein quantification was performed using the label-free quantification algorithm of MaxQuant. As a decoy database reversed sequences of the target database were used. If not stated otherwise, MaxQuant settings were left as default. For identification of differentially expressed proteins the LFQ values extracted from the protein groups table were used and Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma, Version 3.36.2; Rstudio, Version 1.1.456), with a p-value below 0.05 was performed.

### Publication Abstract
Metastasis is the primary cause of cancer-related mortality. Tumor cell interactions with cells of the vessel wall are decisive and potentially rate-limiting for metastasis. The molecular nature of this cross-talk is, beyond candidate gene approaches, hitherto poorly understood. Using endothelial cell (EC) bulk and single-cell transcriptomics in combination with serum proteomics, we traced the evolution of the metastatic vascular niche in surgical models of lung metastasis. Temporal multiomics revealed that primary tumors systemically reprogram the body&#x2019;s vascular endothelium to perturb homeostasis and to precondition the vascular niche for metastatic growth. The vasculature with its enormous surface thereby serves as amplifier of tumor-induced instructive signals. Comparative analysis of lung EC gene expression and secretome identified the transforming growth factor&#x2013;&#x3b2; (TGF&#x3b2;) pathway specifier LRG1, leucine-rich alpha-2-glycoprotein 1, as an early instructor of metastasis. In the presence of a primary tumor, ECs systemically up-regulated LRG1 in a signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3)&#x2013;dependent manner. A meta-analysis of retrospective clinical studies revealed a corresponding up-regulation of LRG1 concentrations in the serum of patients with cancer. Functionally, systemic up-regulation of LRG1 promoted metastasis in mice by increasing the number of prometastatic neural/glial antigen 2 (NG2)<sup>+</sup> perivascular cells. In turn, genetic deletion of <i>Lrg1</i> hampered growth of lung metastasis. Postsurgical adjuvant administration of an LRG1-neutralizing antibody delayed metastatic growth and increased overall survival. This study has established a systems map of early primary tumor-induced vascular changes and identified LRG1 as a therapeutic target for metastasis.

### Keywords
And vascular niche, Lrg1, Metastasis, Endothelial cells, Cancer

### Affiliations
Prof. Dr. Hellmut Augustin  Vascular Oncology and Metastasis  Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) Heidelberg
DKFZ Heidelbeg

### Submitter
Bianca Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Hellmut Augustin
Prof. Dr. Hellmut Augustin  Vascular Oncology and Metastasis  Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) Heidelberg


