### Accession
PXD026333

### Title
Urine proteome in patients with metabolic associated fatty liver disease

### Description
Background  Metabolic associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD) was recently proposed to replace non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD), which is defined as ectopic fat deposition in the liver. Hepatic steatosis is an independent predictor for insulin resistance and cardiovascular risk and hence mortality. The aim of present study was to investigate the urine molecular pattern and potential urine biomarker to distinguish healthy control, mild and severe hepatic steatosis in MAFLD patients using proteomic data. Method Hepatic steatosis was measured by Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that measure the proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF). Proteomic measurements of urine samples were done by mass spectrometry. Linear regression analyses were used to detect significant associations between the biomarkers and clinical parameters. Western blot and Elisa were performed for validation. Results Multiple pathways have been compromised in MAFLD, including the carbohydrate derivative catabolic process, glycosaminoglycan process, aminoglycan metabolic process, inflammatory response, insulin-like growth factor receptor and GTPase complex. Alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1 (ORM1) and ceruloplasmin were finally identified to be potential urine biomarkers to detect mild/severe hepatic steatosis.

### Sample Protocol
Human urine proteomics samples of 2 mL were collected and centrifuged at 2000 g for 4 min to remove cell debris before reduced with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 ℃ for 30 min, which could also inactivate the virus. The treated samples were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in dark at room temperature for 30 min. The supernatant was loaded into a 10 kDa ultrafiltration tube and the larger molecular weight proteins (proteome) were separated from the endogenous peptides (peptidome) by centrifugation. The solution was removed by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min and 200 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4CO3) was added. Proteome samples were digested with 2 μg of trypsin at 37 ℃ for 14 h, then the digestion reaction was terminated by 1% formic acid (FA). The digested peptides were desalted through a StageTip and dried before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Hepatic steatosis was measured by Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that measure the proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF). Proteomic measurements of urine samples were done by mass spectrometry. Linear regression analyses were used to detect significant associations between the biomarkers and clinical parameters. Western blot and Elisa were performed for validation.

### Publication Abstract
Background: In patients with metabolic-associated fatty liver disease (MAFLD), hepatic steatosis is the first step of diagnosis, and it is a risk predictor that independently predicts insulin resistance, cardiovascular risk, and mortality. Urine biomarkers have the advantage of being less complex, with a lower dynamic range and fewer technical challenges, in comparison to blood biomarkers. Methods: Hepatic steatosis was measured by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), which measured the proton density fat fraction (MRI-PDFF). Mild hepatic steatosis was defined as MRI-PDFF 5&#x2212;10% and severe hepatic steatosis was defined as MRI-PDFF &gt; 10%. Results: MAFLD patients with any kidney diseases were excluded. There were 53 proteins identified by mass spectrometry with significantly different expressions among the healthy control, mild steatosis, and severe steatosis patients. Gene Ontology (GO) and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analyses of these significantly changed urinary molecular features correlated with the liver, resulting in the dysregulation of carbohydrate derivative/catabolic/glycosaminoglycan/metabolic processes, insulin-like growth factor receptor levels, inflammatory responses, the PI3K&#x2212;Akt signaling pathway, and cholesterol metabolism. Urine alpha-1-acid glycoprotein 1 (ORM1) and ceruloplasmin showed the most significant correlation with the clinical parameters of MAFLD status, including liver fat content, fibrosis, ALT, triglycerides, glucose, HOMA-IR, and C-reactive protein. According to ELISA and western blot (30 urine samples, normalized to urine creatinine), ceruloplasmin (ROC 0.78, p = 0.034) and ORM1 (ROC 0.87, p = 0.005) showed moderate diagnostic accuracy in distinguishing mild steatosis from healthy controls. Ceruloplasmin (ROC 0.79, p = 0.028) and ORM1 (ROC 0.81, p = 0.019) also showed moderate diagnostic accuracy in distinguishing severe steatosis from mild steatosis. Conclusions: Ceruloplasmin and ORM1 are potential biomarkers in distinguishing mild and severe steatosis in MAFLD patients.

### Keywords
Metabolic associated fatty liver disease, Proteomics, Hepatic steatosis

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


