### Accession
PXD002591

### Title
A novel quantitative mass spectrometry platform for determining site-specific protein O-GlcNAcylation dynamics

### Description
Over the past decades, protein O-GlcNAcylation has been found to play a fundamental role in cell cycle control, metabolism, transcriptional regulation, and cellular signaling. Nevertheless, quantitative approaches to determine in vivo GlcNAc dynamics at a large-scale are still not readily available. Here, we have developed an approach to isotopically label O-GlcNAc modifications on proteins by producing 13C-labeled UDP-GlcNAc from 13C6-glucose via the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway. This metabolic labeling was combined with quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to determine site-specific protein O-GlcNAcylation turnover rates. First, an efficient enrichment method for O-GlcNAc peptides was developed with the use of phenylboronic acid solid-phase extraction and anhydrous DMSO. The near stoichiometry reaction between the diol of GlcNAc and boronic acid dramatically improved the enrichment efficiency. Additionally, our kinetic model for turnover rates integrates both metabolomic and proteomic data, which increase the accuracy of the turnover rate estimation. Other advantages of this metabolic labeling method include in vivo application, direct labeling of the O-GlcNAc sites and higher confidence for site identification. Concentrating only on nuclear localized GlcNAc modified proteins, we are able to identify 159 O-GlcNAc sites on 74 proteins and determine turnover rates of 24 O-GlcNAc peptides from 21 proteins extracted from HeLa nuclei. In general, we found O-GlcNAcylation turnover rates are slower than those published for phosphorylation or acetylation. Nevertheless, the rates widely varied depending on both the protein and the residue modified. We believe this methodology can be broadly applied to reveal turnovers/dynamics of protein O-GlcNAcylation from different biological states and will provide more information on the significance of site-specific O-GlcNAcylation, enabling us to study the temporal dynamics of this critical modification in a site-specific manner for the first time.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM media in which normal glucose was replaced with 25 mM 13C6-glucose and supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and penicillin-streptomycin antibiotics. For protein turnover measurement, HeLa cells were cultured in DMEM media in which normal lysine and arginine were replaced with same amount of lysine(13C6, 15N2) and arginine(13C6, 15N4) and supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS and penicillin-streptomycin antibotics. Cells were incubated at 37oC, 5% CO2 and harvested after 6, 12 and 24 hours after switching and incubating in heavy media. For pulse-labeling experiment, cells were harvest after 0.5, 2, 5, 9, 24, 32 and 48 hour incubation. HeLa cells which were grown in 25 mM normal glucose DMEM media were used as zero start time point. Frozen cell pellets were kept on ice to bring up to 4oC. Cells pellets were re-suspended in 10X volume of nuclear isolation buffer (15mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 60mM KCl, 15mM NaCl, 5mM MgCl2, 1mM CaCl2, 250mM Sucrose, 1 mM DTT 1mM, 1X HALT phosphase inhibitor, 20 µM Thiamet G, 10 mM sodium butyrate and 0.3% NP-40), then gently pipetted up and down and incubated on ice for 5 min to break the cell membranes. Trypan blue showed more than 95% staining, indicating that most cells were lysed to nuclei. Fractioned cells were centrifuged 228 g for 5 min at 4 oC to pellet nuclei. Whole nuclei were isolated and washed with NP40 free nuclear isolation buffer several times and re-suspended in 9 M urea buffer and then sonicated for 10 s, three times. After DTT reduction and akylation with iodoacetamide, nuclear proteins were digested overnight with endoproteinase Lys-C (1:50 ratio) in 4M urea 25 mM Tris pH 8 buffer at room temperature overnight. Proteins for turnover measurement were digested overnight with trypsin (1:50 ratio) instead. Digested peptides were desalted with Oasis HLB cartridges.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to MS1 and MS2 files by xtract 1.0.0.8 in pFind Studio 2.8 (pfind.ict.ac.cn) and converted to MGF files by pParse to calibrate the precursor isotopic mass to the monoisotopic mass and export co-eluted precursors, which could increase the identification rate.(41) The MS1 and MS2 files were used for quantification and the MGF files were used for database searching and site localization. The Uniprot human database was used for database searching (the version of May 2014 with 88,949 entries). Search parameters were set with the database search engine pFind 2.8 (42), including precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da for HCD and ETD, Lys-C cleavage and up to 2 mis-cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, serine, threonine and asparagine (Asn) N-acetylhexosamine (HexNAc) were set as variable modifications. Asn(N) was used considering the low activity of PNGNase F in de-N-glycosylation(43). For the protein turnover experiment, the following parameters were used: precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, trypsin cleavage and up to 2 mis-cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification while methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. The target-decoy approach was used to filter the search results, in which the false discovery rate was less than 1% at the spectral level.(44) Before the site localization, the MGF files were preprocessed, including removing the entire precursor isotopic clusters, removing the isotopic peaks of fragment ions, keeping the monoisotopic peaks and keeping top-6 peaks in every 100 m/z window of each MS/MS spectrum. After the preprocessing, Ascore for HCD spectra and their corresponding ETD spectra were calculated, respectively.(45) Meanwhile, HCD and ETD spectral pairs were combined to calculate Cscore.(33) Annotated MS2 for all identified HexNAc modified peptides are reported in Table S1.

### Publication Abstract
Over the past decades, protein O-GlcNAcylation has been found to play a fundamental role in cell cycle control, metabolism, transcriptional regulation, and cellular signaling. Nevertheless, quantitative approaches to determine in vivo GlcNAc dynamics at a large-scale are still not readily available. Here, we have developed an approach to isotopically label O-GlcNAc modifications on proteins by producing (13)C-labeled UDP-GlcNAc from (13)C6-glucose via the hexosamine biosynthetic pathway. This metabolic labeling was combined with quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to determine protein O-GlcNAcylation turnover rates. First, an efficient enrichment method for O-GlcNAc peptides was developed with the use of phenylboronic acid solid-phase extraction and anhydrous DMSO. The near stoichiometry reaction between the diol of GlcNAc and boronic acid dramatically improved the enrichment efficiency. Additionally, our kinetic model for turnover rates integrates both metabolomic and proteomic data, which increase the accuracy of the turnover rate estimation. Other advantages of this metabolic labeling method include in vivo application, direct labeling of the O-GlcNAc sites and higher confidence for site identification. Concentrating only on nuclear localized GlcNAc modified proteins, we are able to identify 105 O-GlcNAc peptides on 42 proteins and determine turnover rates of 20 O-GlcNAc peptides from 14 proteins extracted from HeLa nuclei. In general, we found O-GlcNAcylation turnover rates are slower than those published for phosphorylation or acetylation. Nevertheless, the rates widely varied depending on both the protein and the residue modified. We believe this methodology can be broadly applied to reveal turnovers/dynamics of protein O-GlcNAcylation from different biological states and will provide more information on the significance of O-GlcNAcylation, enabling us to study the temporal dynamics of this critical modification for the first time.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry method determines protein o-glcnacylation rates

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Xiaoshi Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of Pennsylvania


