### Accession
PXD030042

### Title
BCAS0292 is involved in the adaptation of Burkholderia cenocepacia and shows characteristics of a DNA mimic protein WHOLE PROTEOME

### Description
Adaptation of opportunistic pathogens to their host environment requires reprogramming of a vast array of genes to facilitate host survival in the host. Burkholderia cenocepacia, a Gram-negative bacterium with a large genome of ~ 8Mb in size that colonizes environmental niches, is exquisitely adaptable to the hypoxic environment of the cystic fibrosis lung and survives in macrophages. We previously identified an immunoreactive acidic protein encoded on replicon 3, BCAS0292. Deletion of the BCAS0292 gene resulted in altered abundance of >1000 proteins; 46 proteins became undetectable while 556 proteins showed >1.5-fold reduced abundance, suggesting BCAS0292 is a global regulator. Moreover, the ∆BCAS0292 mutant showed a range of pleiotropic effects: virulence and host-cell attachment were reduced, antibiotic susceptibility was altered and biofilm formation enhanced. Its growth and survival were impaired in 6% oxygen. Structural analysis revealed BCAS0292 presents a dimeric β-structure with a negative surface charge. The ΔBCAS0292 mutant displayed altered DNA supercoiling, implicated in global regulation of gene expression. Five proteins were identified in pull-downs with FLAG-tagged BCAS0292, including the Histone H1-like protein, HctB, recognised as a global transcriptional regulator.  Taken together, we propose that BCAS0292 which is increased in abundance in response to stress, acts as a DNA-mimic and binds to DNA-binding proteins, altering DNA topology and regulating the expression of multiple genes, thereby enabling the adaptation of B. cenocepacia to highly diverse environments.

### Sample Protocol
Whole proteome analysis. Bacterial cells were pelleted with centrifugation of 6,000 g for ten min. Ice-cold lysis buffer containing 8 M Urea, 25 mM Tris-HCL, 10 mM DTT and 1 X EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (pH=8.6) was added to pellets, using a volume of 8 ml/g bacterial pellet. Pellets were resuspended and cells lysed using a cell-disruptor probe set with an output power of 16, using four 30-sec bursts on ice. Lysates were then centrifuged at 14,000 xg for 15 min, supernatants transferred to fresh tubes and a Bradford assay used to determine the protein concentration of each sample. DTT was added to each supernatant and incubated at 56 °C for 30 min followed by 1M iodoacetamide which was incubated in darkness at RT for 20 min. Lysates were then dialysed in dialysis tubing with a cut-off of 3.5 kDa against 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate overnight with stirring at 4 °C then the ammonium bicarbonate was replaced with fresh solution and incubated for a further six hours. Trypsin was added to dialysed protein and tubes incubated overnight at 37 °C. Aliquots (20 μl) from each sample were placed in fresh tubes and samples were dried in a speedy vac using medium heat and resuspended in 20 μl resuspension buffer containing 0.5 % TFA in MilliQ water. Tubes were sonicated for two min and centrifuged briefly. Peptides were cleaned up using Ziptips (Millipore, Germany). All biological replicate and technical replicate samples were analysed on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Each sample was loaded onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 Column (50 cm x 75 μm, Thermo Scientific), and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 120 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 ₒC, and with a potential of 2500 V applied to the frit. All data was acquired with the MS operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (140,000) MS scan (300-2000 Dalton) was performed using the Q-Exactive to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using HCD (higher-energy collisional dissociation).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label free quantitative (LFQ) analysis was conducted using MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5: http://maxquant.org/) supported by the Andromeda database search engine to correlate MS/MS data against the B. cenocepacia strain J2315 Uniprot database and Perseus to organise the data (Version 1.4.1.3)(Tyanova et al., 2016a, Tyanova et al., 2016b, Cox and Mann, 2008, Cox et al., 2011). For protein identification the following search parameters were used: precursor-ion mass tolerance of 1.5 Da, fragment ion mass tolerance of 6 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and a maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 0.01 for both peptides and proteins and only peptides with minimum length of six amino acid length were considered for identification. Proteins were considered identified when a minimum of two peptides for each parent protein was observed. LFQ intensities measured for individual runs were grouped based on their experimental treatment. The data was log2 transformed and an ANOVA (p < 0.05) was performed between the control and individual treatment samples to identify differentially abundant proteins. A log2 fold change  ≥ 1.5 and log2 fold change ≤ −1.5 with adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered. Proteins with statistically significant differential expression were extracted and these were used to generate maps of expression.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dna-protein interactions, Burkholderia, Host-pathogen interactions; respiratory infections; bacterial adaptation;

### Affiliations
UCD
Siobhán McClean, PhD, PDip  Associate Professor,  Head of Biochemistry,  School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science,  Associate Dean for Widening Participation,  College of Science  Conway Institute room F059  University College Dublin  +353 1 716 6723

### Submitter
Eugene Dillon

### Lab Head
Dr Siobhán McClean
Siobhán McClean, PhD, PDip  Associate Professor,  Head of Biochemistry,  School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Science,  Associate Dean for Widening Participation,  College of Science  Conway Institute room F059  University College Dublin  +353 1 716 6723


