### Accession
PXD026908

### Title
A novel blood brain barrier-permeable IRE1 inhibitor prevents Glioblastoma relapse in mice

### Description
Inositol Requiring Enzyme 1 (IRE1) is a bifunctional serine/threonine kinase and endoribonuclease that is a major mediator of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR) during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Tumor cells experience ER stress due to adverse environmental cues such as hypoxia or nutrient shortage and high metabolic/protein folding demand. To cope with those stresses, cancer cells utilize IRE1 signaling as an adaptive mechanism. Here we report the discovery of novel family of compounds as IRE1 inhibitors identified through a structural exploration of the IRE1 kinase domain. All the inhibitors were tested for their ability to sensitize glioblastoma (GBM) cells to chemotherapy. We show that all molecules identified inhibit IRE1 signaling and sensitize glioblastoma cells to the standard of care chemotherapy temozolomide (TMZ). From these inhibitors we selected one that was able to cross the Brain Blood Barrier (BBB) and evaluated its capacity to inhibit tumor growth and avoid relapse in vivo. These results support the attractiveness of IRE1 as an adjuvant therapeutic target in GBM; a common and wholly fatal diagnosis. In addition, they provide scope for quickly testing IRE1 inhibitor suitability in GBM as adjuvant therapy due to their current status for clinical use.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatments – U87MG (ATCC) cells were authenticated as recommended by AACR (http://aacrjournals.org/content/cell-line-authentication-information) and tested for the absence of mycoplasma using MycoAlert® (Lonza, Basel, Switzerland) or MycoFluor (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA). U87MG were grown in DMEM Glutamax (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) supplemented with 10% FBS. GBM immortalized U251 and primary RADH8 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS in a 5% CO2 humidified atmosphere at 37°C. GBM cell lines were modified for IRE1 activity by overexpressing a dominant negative (DN) form of IRE1 that lacks the RNAse domain (IRE1.NCK or IRE1 Q780stop) were generated as previously described. For XBP1s induction experiments, tunicamycin was used at 1 μg/ml for the indicated periods of time. For inhibitor cell toxicity assays cells were plated in 96 well plates at 5000 cells per well and treated with 0, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 and 2500 μM concentrations of each inhibitor. After 6 days of incubation, WST1 reagent (Roche) was added to each well and post 2-hour incubation the plate was read using a Tecan 200 colorimeter. For TMZ sensitivity assays cells were plated in a 96 well plate at 5000 cells per well and co-treated with 0, 5, 10, 25, 50, 100, 250, 500, 1000 and 2500 μM of TMZ plus a non-toxic dose of inhibitor. After 6 days of incubation, WST1 reagent (Roche) was added to each well and post 2-hour incubation the plate was read using a Tecan 200 colorimeter. Proteomic analyses - Untreated and MKC8866 and Z4-treated (during 48 hours) parental U251 and RADH87 GBM cells as well as DN IRE1 U251 and RADH87 cells were lysed with lysis buffer composed of 20 mM Tris pH 8, 1.5 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, supplemented with proteases and phosphatases inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Total proteins were precipitated with 80% ice-cold acetone. Washed pellet were then denatured with 8 M urea in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 minutes, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark. Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Ref 125-05061, Wako) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 4h, followed by an overnight modified trypsin digestion (Ref V511A, Promega) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 2 M urea. Both Lys-C and Trypsin digestions were performed at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against HomoSapiens reviewed SwissProt database. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% and their quantification was based on XIC (Extracted Ion Chromatogram).

### Publication Abstract
Inositol-requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1) is a major mediator of the unfolded protein response (UPR), which is activated upon endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. Tumor cells experience ER stress due to adverse microenvironmental cues, a stress overcome by relying on IRE1 signaling as an adaptive mechanism. Herein, we report the discovery of structurally new IRE1 inhibitors identified through the structural exploration of its kinase domain. Characterization in <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> and in cellular models showed that they inhibit IRE1 signaling and sensitize glioblastoma (GB) cells to the standard chemotherapeutic, temozolomide (TMZ). Finally, we demonstrate that one of these inhibitors, Z4P, permeates the blood-brain barrier (BBB), inhibits GB growth, and prevents relapse <i>in&#xa0;vivo</i> when administered together with TMZ. The hit compound disclosed herein satisfies an unmet need for targeted, non-toxic IRE1 inhibitors and our results support the attractiveness of IRE1 as an adjuvant therapeutic target in GB.

### Keywords
Inhibitors, Ire1, Glioblastoma, Endoplasmic reticulum, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
CNRS
INSERM U1242, Université de Rennes, Centre de Lutte contre le Cancer Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France.

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Chevet
INSERM U1242, Université de Rennes, Centre de Lutte contre le Cancer Eugène Marquis, Rennes, France.


