### Accession
PXD034999

### Title
The UAS domain of UBXN7 interacts with RNF111 RING domain

### Description
In this study we performed 2 interactomes. To identify interactants of RNF111 that are dependent of the RING domain, we performed qualitative interactome comparison of HEK-293 cells transfected with GFP, GFP-RNF111-wt or GFP-RNF11-C933A mutated in its RING domain. This led to the identification of UBXN7 as a RING-dependent partner for RNF111. To identify UBXN7 UAS dependant partners, we performed quantitative interactome comparison of HEK-293 cells transfected with GFP, GFP-UBXN7-UAS.

### Sample Protocol
For the 2 interactomes, GFP-Trap coupled mass spectrometry was performed as followed. HEK 293 cells, seeded in 10 cm dishes, were individually transfected with the appropriate plasmids using X-tremGENE HP (Roche) according to the manufacterer’s instructions and lysed in IP150 buffer (150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH7.5, 5mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 10% glycerol) 24h post-transfection. 3mg of proteins were incubated on 25 µl GFP-Trap Chromotek slurry for 1h30 at 4°C, followed by 3 washes with buffer IP150 and 3 additional washes with buffer Ammonium Bicarbonate (ABC) 50 mM. Beads were resuspended in 100 µl ABC buffer and proteins digested by adding 0.2 µg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded onto homemade C18 StageTips packed by stacking one AttractSPE® disk (#SPE-Disks-Bio-C18-100.47.20 Affinisep) and 2 mg beads (#186004521 SepPak C18 Cartridge Waters) into a 200 µL micropipette tip for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 MeCN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Peptides were reconstituted in injection buffer (2:98 MeCN:H2O + 0.3% TFA) before liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
For GFP-RNF111-WT, qualitative interactome experiment was performed with one replicate for each condition (GFP, GFP-RNF111-WT and GFP-RNF111-C933A) by LC-MS/MS using an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins that displayed no peptides in the GFP and GFP-RNF111-C933A conditions and at least 3 distinct peptides identified in the GFP-RNF111-WT condition were selected as potential RNF111-RING specific interactants. For GFP-UAS, quantitative interactome experiment was performed with five replicates for each condition (GFP and GFP-UAS-UBXN7) by coupling an RSLCnano system to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific). For identification, the data were searched against the Home Sapiens UP000005640 database using Sequest HT through proteome discoverer (PD version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.02 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS [Poullet et al, 2007] 3.9.3 (https://github.com/bioinfo-pf-curie/myproms). False-discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator (PMID 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed using peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs), reextracted across all conditions and computed with MassChroQ (PMID21751374), version 2.2.21. XICs from all proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) were used and two-missed cleavages were allowed.  Quantification and statistical analysis of the GFP-UAS-UBXN7/GFP protein ratio based on peptide intensity was performed inside myProMS-Quant v3.6. Median and scale normalization at peptide level was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N = 5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was used and p-values were adjusted with the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293 cells, Ubxn7, Rnf111

### Affiliations
Institut Curie - Centre de Recherche
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Vanessa Masson

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


