### Accession
PXD045366

### Title
Insulin deficiency distorts human pancreatic endocrine cell composition during development

### Description
Objective: The developmental effects of mutations in genes associated with monogenic diabetes on human pancreas development is not well understood. More specifically, if insulin gene recessive mutations influence the human endocrine lineage segregation still needs to be investigated.      Methods: We generated a novel knock-in H2B-Cherry reporter human induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSCs) line expressing no insulin upon differentiation to stem cell-derived (SC-) β cells in vitro. This cell line enabled us to have a model mimicking the extremely reduced insulin levels in patients with recessive insulin mutations. We combined immunostaining, Western blotting and proteomics analysis to characterize the SC-islets from this iPSC line. Furthermore, we leveraged FACS analysis and imaging to explore the impact of insulin shortage on human endocrine cell induction, composition and proliferation.      Results: We found that lack of insulin hampers insulin receptor (IR) signaling in SC-islets but increases the IR sensitivity. Furthermore, insulin deficiency showed no effects on human endocrine lineage induction. However, lack of insulin skewed the SC-islet cell composition. We found an increased in SC-β cell number at the expense of SC-α cell differentiation in the absence of insulin. Finally, insulin shortage reduced the rate of SC-β cell proliferation but had no impact of the expansion of SC-α cells.     Conclusions: We provided evidence of the developmental impacts of reduced insulin levels on human β cell characteristics and endocrine lineage formation. These findings help to better understand the pathomechanisms of recessive insulin mutations during embryonic development and also shed some lights on the possible physiological function of this hormone coordinating human islet cell composition and architecture during endocrinogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Differentiated human stem cells/islets were washed two times in PBS, and prepared for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). In brief, samples were lysed in SDC lysis buffer (2% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5) at 95 °C for 10 min at 1000 rpm, sonicated in high mode (30 sec OFF, 30 sec ON) for 10 cycles (Bioruptor® Plus; Diagenode). Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay was used to determine the protein concentration and 25 µg of protein were used for further analysis. Samples were incubated with TCEP and CAA (final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM, respectively) at 45°C for 10 min with 1000-rpm shake, in dark. Protein digestion was done with trypsin and LysC (1:40, protease:protein ratio) overnight at 37 °C, 1,000 rpm shake. Later, peptides were acidified with isopropanol including 2% TFA with 1:1 volume-to-volume ratio. Desalting and purification of the acidified samples were done in custom-made StageTips, which were prepared with three layers of styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate (SDB-RPS; 3 M Empore) membranes. Peptides were loaded on the activated (100% ACN, 1% TFA in 30% Methanol, 0.2% TFA, respectively) StageTips, run through the SDB-RPS membranes, and washed with EtOAc including 1% TFA, isopropanol including 1% TFA, and 0.2% TFA, respectively. Peptides eluted from the membranes with 60 µl elution buffer (80% ACN, 1.25% NH4OH) were dried by vacuum centrifuge (40 min at 45 °C) and reconstituted in 6 µl of loading buffer (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Peptide concentration was estimated via optical measurement at 280 nm (Nanodrop 2000; Thermo Scientific). 

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis: 0.5 µg of peptides were analyzed using the EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). FAIMS Pro™ with Orbitrap Fusion ™ module was used with two different compensation voltages (CV) (-50V and -70V). Peptides were loaded at 60 °C onto a 50 cm, 75 µm inner diameter, in-house packed HPLC column with 1.9 µm with C18 Reprosil particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH). A binary buffer system [0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% ACNcan, in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B)] at a flow rate of 300 nl/min was used over a 60 min gradient: 5-20% buffer B over 30 min, 20-29% buffer B over 9 min, 29-45% buffer B over 6 min, 45-95% buffer B over 5 min, wash with 95% buffer B for 5 min and 95-5% buffer B over 5 min. MS data were acquired in DIA (data-independent acquisition) mode using a 2 second cycle time scan method. Full scan MS targets were in a 300–1650 m/z scan range with 3x106 charges and data was acquired in 120,000 at m/z 200 resolution with 45 ms maximum injection time. Precursor ions for MS/MS scans were fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 30. MS/MS scan sets were 15,000 at m/z 200 resolution with an ion target value of %1000 and a maximum injection time of 22 ms.   Proteome data processing and analysis: The raw data were searched with Spectronaut version 15.7 in directDIA mode (library-free approach) and all searches were performed against the human Uniprot FASTA database (2020). MaxLFQ settings enabled protein level label-free quantification. MaxQuant contaminant fasta file was included in the search. Default settings were kept if not stated otherwise. Perseus (version 1.6.14.0) was used for bioinformatics analysis. UniProtKB, Gene Ontology (GO), and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotations were included in the analysis.    In Perseus, the raw data were filtered for “Maxquant contaminants”. Quantified proteins were filtered for at least two valid values among biological replicates in at least one condition. Missing values were imputed (Gaussian normal distribution with a width of 0.3 and a downshift of 1.8) in order to obtain PCA, hierarchical clusters, volcano plots and to apply the t-test. Two-sample test with student t-test statistics (permutation-based FDR = 0.1; s0 = 0) was performed in Perseus and significant proteins were hierarchical clustered by applying Euclidean as a distance measure for row clustering after normalization of median protein abundances of biological replicates by z-score. Fisher’s Exact GOBP, GOCC, GOMF and KEGG Term enrichment of significant proteins was performed against human database (gene list with 21846 entries) in Perseus (Benjamini Hochberg FDR truncation with 0.05 threshold value). 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Islet composition, Ipsc differentiation, Monogenic diabetes, Lc-ms/ms, Endocrinogenesis, Dia, Insulin, Β cell

### Affiliations
Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany
Helmholtz Center Munich

### Submitter
Natalie Krahmer

### Lab Head
Dr Natalie Krahmer
Institute of Diabetes and Obesity, Helmholtz Munich, Neuherberg, Germany


