### Accession
PXD040915

### Title
Cytochrome c Lysine Acetylation Regulates Cellular Respiration and Cell Death in Ischemic Skeletal Muscle

### Description
Cytochrome c (Cytc) is essential for mitochondrial respiration and apoptosis. Tissue specific post-translational modifications of Cytc play an important regulatory role in these processes. Here, we describe a new acetylation site, lysine 39, which was mapped in ischemic porcine skeletal muscle. Recombinant acetylmimetic K39Q protein demonstrated increased cytochrome c oxidase (COX) activity and decreased caspase-3 and cardiolipin peroxidase activities. Cytc double knockout cells expressing acetylmimetic K39Q Cytc showed an increase in mitochondrial respiration, mitochondrial membrane potential, and mitochondrial ROS production and a decrease in cell death. These results are discussed in the context of X-ray crystallography structures of K39 acetylated (1.50 Å) and acetylmimetic K39Q Cytc (1.36 Å) and NMR dynamics. We propose that lysine 39 acetylation is an adaptive response allowing skeletal muscle to meet heightened energy demand while simultaneously providing the tissue with robust resilience to ischemia-reperfusion injury.

### Sample Protocol
Purified Cytc (40 µg) was analyzed by mass spectrometry at the Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics (Berlin, Germany). 200 µl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8, was added to each sample and boiled at 95°C for 10 minutes on a rocking platform. 20 µg were further processed by reduction of cysteines by adding 2.84 µl of 0.2 M tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) at 37°C for 30 minutes at 800 rpm (final TCEP concentration of 5.5 mM) and alkylation by adding 5.2 µl of 0.5 M 2-chloroacetamide, at RT for 30 minutes at 800 rpm. (final CAA concentration was 24 mM). Each sample (pH 8.0) was split in two equal amounts and either digested by 200 ng trypsin or 200 ng chymotrypsin (both: Roche, Basel, Switzerland; enzyme to protein ratio 1:50, MS-grade), shaking at 700 rpm at 37°C for tryptic samples and 25°C for chymotryptic samples overnight. 4.5 µl of 100% ACN was added to tryptic samples to enhance enzyme activity. Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile and 2% formic acid in water, briefly vortexed, and sonicated in a water bath for 5 minutes before injection to nano-LC-MS. 5 µg digest were used per run.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously 56. Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a gradient from 3.8 to 38% solvent B in solvent A over 120 min at 266 nL per minute flow rate. Solvent A was 0.1 % formic acid and solvent B was 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, and 0.1% formic acid. Nanoelectrospray was generated by applying 3.5 kV. A cycle of one full Fourier transformation scan mass spectrum (300−1750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, automatic gain control (AGC) target 1 × 106) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5 × 105) with a normalized collision energy of 25 eV. To avoid repeated sequencing of the same peptides, a dynamic exclusion window of 30 sec was used. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were sequenced. Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v2.2.0.0) (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry; Martinsried, Germany) and searched against the Sus domesticus proteome database UniProtKB (December 2016). Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, a first search mass tolerance for peptides of 20 ppm and a main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Post-translational modifications of interest were acetylation of lysine, mono-, di-, and tri-methylation of lysine as well as phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. All acetylated lysins of CytC were manually verified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytochrome c, Ischimic muscle, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Maik Hüttemann
Center for Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48201, USA


