### Accession
PXD019074

### Title
Jurkat extracellular vesicle fractionation profiling

### Description
Extracellular vesicles are a mixture of particles of variable size and subcellular origin. To characterize the different vesicle species further, we applied differential centrifugation and profiling to Jurkat cell conditioned medium. The three step centriguation gradient yielded sufficient partial separation of EVs to distinguish subcellular origins and to detect cofractionating groups of proteins likely to share localization to the same type of EVs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell conditioned medium from SILAC light labeled cells was cleared of cellular debris by a 2K g spin and the supernatant was further fractioanted by consecutive spins at 10K, 30K and 100K g. In parallel the cleared medium of SILAC medium labeleld cells was directly spun at 100K g to be used as a spike in reference to improve quantification accuracy. The three sets of SILAC mixed subfractions , as well as 30 μg SILAC medium labelled full proteome sample from each batch of uninfected Jurkat cells, were precipitated in parallel in 5x volume ice-cold acetone at -20°C over night, and each was resuspended in 30 μl 50 mM Tris pH 8.1 containing 8 M Urea and 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature. The proteins were then alkylated with 5 mM idodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark. In solution digestion was performed first with LysC overnight at room temperature, and for a further three hours with additional trypsin upon dilution to 2M Urea. The enzyme to protein ratio was 1:50 (w/w), but at least 500 ng of each enzyme were used. Peptides were then acidified to 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and up to 20 μg peptides were loaded onto SDB-RPS stage tips for peptide cleanup and triple fractionation as previously described (Kulak et al, 2014). Peptides were vacuum concentrated to dryness, reconstituted in buffer A* (0.1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile (ACN)) and adjusted to 100-250 ng/μL. 500 ng of peptides was loaded on a 50-cm column with 75-μm inner diameter, packed in-house with 1.8-μm C18 particles (Dr Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptide separation by reverse phase chromatography was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), running a linear gradient from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) containing 5% buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) to 30% buffer B over 95 minutes at 300 nl/min flow-rate and 55°C. Runs were separated by 5 minute wash-outs with 95% buffer B and re-equilibration. The LC was coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top-15 method, dynamically excluding precursors picked during the last 30 seconds. MS1 survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in a 300-1650 Th range, with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and 3e6 target ions, as determined with predictive automatic gain control. Sequencing was performed via higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation of ions isolated from a 1.4 Th window, with a maximum injection time of 28 ms and 1e5 target ions. MS2 fragment scans were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in a 200-200,000 Th range. The minimum predicted ion count to be reached per injection was 2.9e3.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant Version 1.6.10.43 (Cox & Mann, 2008) with default settings, except for the following. SILAC mixed samples and full proteome samples were separated into two parameter groups for relative SILAC quantification and label-free quantification using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al, 2014), respectively. For SILAC samples the multiplicity was set to 2, with Arg6 and Lys4 as light labels, and Arg10 and Lys8 as heavy labels; re-quantification was enabled. For full proteomes only the light SILAC labels were specified. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for both SILAC and LFQ and matching between runs was enabled. In the experimental design each set of SDB-RPS fractions was labelled with consecutive numbers, while the three reference CCM fractions and the full proteomes were kept separate by 10 digits. Hence, only identifications from the same biological fraction and adjacent peptide fractions were matched across replicates. The human SwissProt protein reference database was downloaded from UniProt (2019_11_29, canonical and isoform data). Further downstream analysis of data was done in Perseus version 1.6.2.3, spreadsheet applications and python.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fractionation, Profiling, Extracellular vesicles, Silac, Jurkat, Differential centrifugation

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Research Group "Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking" Munich, Germany
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Julia Schessner

### Lab Head
Dr Georg H.H. Borner
Max-Planck-Institute of Biochemistry Research Group "Systems Biology of Membrane Trafficking" Munich, Germany


