### Accession
PXD007077

### Title
Soil metaproteomics using DNA RNA protein co-extraction method

### Description
Soil is an inherently complex matrix and as such, we believe when performing culture-independent microbial community analyses using the 'omics' suite of tools, all biomolecules investigated should be co-extracted from the same biological sample. To this end, we developed a robust, cost-effective DNA, RNA and protein co-extraction method for soil. The samples deposited here represent 3 biological replicates from one of eight soil types tested in this work.

### Sample Protocol
DNA, RNA and protein were co-extracted from 2 g (fw) of soil, from 3 different soil types with three replicates per soil type. Protein was isolated using phenol and washed using acetone/ethanol precipitation steps. Protein was eluted in urea buffer and run on a 12 % acrylamide SDS page gel. Two chunks per lane (1 replicate per lane) were digested and underwent LC-MSMS as described in detail by Abram et al., 2011.

### Data Protocol
Peak files (mgf) were uploaded on to the MetaProteome Analyser (Muth et al., 2015) where all searches and identifications were performed.

### Publication Abstract
The soil microbiome is inherently complex with high biological diversity, and spatial heterogeneity typically occurring on the submillimetre scale. To study the microbial ecology of soils, and other microbiomes, biomolecules, that is, nucleic acids and proteins, must be efficiently and reliably co-recovered from the same biological samples. Commercial kits are currently available for the co-extraction of DNA, RNA and proteins but none has been developed for soil samples. We present a new protocol drawing on existing phenol-chloroform-based methods for nucleic acids co-extraction but incorporating targeted precipitation of proteins from the phenol phase. The protocol is cost-effective and robust, and easily implemented using reagents commonly available in laboratories. The method is estimated to be eight times cheaper than using disparate commercial kits for the isolation of DNA and/or RNA, and proteins, from soil. The method is effective, providing good quality biomolecules from a diverse range of soil types, with clay contents varying from 9.5% to 35.1%, which we successfully used for downstream, high-throughput gene sequencing and metaproteomics. Additionally, we demonstrate that the protocol can also be easily implemented for biomolecule co-extraction from other complex microbiome samples, including cattle slurry and microbial communities recovered from anaerobic bioreactors, as well as from Gram-positive and Gram-negative pure cultures.

### Keywords
Soil metaproteomics lc ms/ms

### Affiliations
National University of Ireland Galway
Functional Environmental Microbiology, College of Science, NUI Galway, Ireland

### Submitter
Camilla Thorn

### Lab Head
Dr Florence Abram
Functional Environmental Microbiology, College of Science, NUI Galway, Ireland


