### Accession
PXD035808

### Title
Oxidative Azidylation of Proteins

### Description
We describe a method for directly attaching azide to protein to enable downstream click chemistry. Further, we show that azide binds protein noncovalently in hydrophobic patches, which we can capture and identify using MS. Full details are in the associated paper.

### Sample Protocol
Full details given in associated publication, but briefly: protein is treated attach azide groups as described in paper, then TCA precipitated, clicked to a cleavable biotin alkyne, precipitated again, reduced, alkylated, and digested, enriched usig streptavidin resin, eluted/cleaved, cleaned up with C18, then analyzed with MS.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 Data was searched using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 Full details are in associated publication.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrophobic microdomains, also known as hydrophobic patches, are essential for many important biological functions of water-soluble proteins. These include ligand or substrate binding, protein-protein interactions, proper folding after translation, and aggregation during denaturation. Unlike transmembrane domains, which are easily recognized from stretches of contiguous hydrophobic sidechains in amino acids via primary protein sequence, these three-dimensional hydrophobic patches cannot be easily predicted. The lack of experimental strategies for directly determining their locations hinders further understanding of their structure and function. Here, we posit that the small triatomic anion N<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> (azide) is attracted to these patches and, in the presence of an oxidant, forms a radical that covalently modifies C-H bonds of nearby amino acids. Using two model proteins (BSA and lysozyme) and a cell-free lysate from the model higher plant <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>, we find that radical-mediated covalent azidylation occurs within buried catalytic active sites and ligand binding sites and exhibits similar behavior to established hydrophobic probes. The results herein suggest a model in which the azido radical is acting as an "affinity reagent" for nonaqueous three-dimensional protein microenvironments and is consistent with both the nonlocalized electron density of the azide moiety and the known high reactivity of azido radicals widely used in organic chemistry syntheses. We propose that the azido radical is a facile means of identifying hydrophobic microenvironments in soluble proteins and, in addition, provides a simple new method for attaching chemical handles to proteins without the need for genetic manipulation or specialized reagents.

### Keywords
Click chemistry, Azide, Protein structure, Protein modification

### Affiliations
Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Benjamin Minkoff

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Sussman
Center for Genomic Science Innovation, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, WI, USA


