### Accession
PXD006316

### Title
Navel Leaf Early Detection -  Longitudinal transcriptomic, proteomic, and metabolomic analyses of Citrus sinensis (L

### Description
Navel orange trees were grafted with budwood infected with the citrus greening bacterium, 'Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus', or control budwood, and leaf samples were collected every two weeks post graft for LC/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Navel Leaf samples were homogenized and sonicated and proteins extracted via TCA/Acetone.  Pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea, proteins were reduced with TCEP, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with 1:40 ratio of trypsin, followed by C18 solid phase extraction.  Samples were seperated by reversed phase chromatography using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC system equipped with a 5mm x 300um trapping column packed with PepMap 100 5 um C18 particles and a 15 cm x 75 um PepMap analytical column packed with C18 2 um particles.  Loading pump flow was 50 uL/min solvent A (98/2 water/acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid), followed by seperation on the analytical column by application of a linear gradient from 95% solvent A, and 5% solvent B (95/5 acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% formic acid) to 33% solvent A and 67% solvent B over 90 mins with a 300 nL/min flow rate.  2.5 kV was applied to a metal emitter tip in a Nanospray Flex ion source and MS was then performed using a Q-Exactive MS system using a data dependent analysis with dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data files were searched against a citrus protein database using Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA). MS/MS search parameters included fixed modifications (cysteine: carbamidomethyl), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), and maximum one missed cleavage.  Thermo *.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format using MSConvert in Protewizard. Files with the *.dat extension were exported from Mascot and loaded into Scaffold Q+ 4.4.1.1 (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and used to calculate normalized spectral count for each protein from each sample.  Scaffold protein and peptide thresholds were set at 95%, with a minimum peptide number of two per protein – this resulted in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.3% and a peptide FDR of less than 0.0%

### Publication Abstract
"<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus" (<i>C</i>Las) is the bacterium associated with the citrus disease Huanglongbing (HLB). Current <i>C</i>Las detection methods are unreliable during presymptomatic infection, and understanding <i>C</i>Las pathogenicity to help develop new detection techniques is challenging because <i>C</i>Las has yet to be isolated in pure culture. To understand how <i>C</i>Las affects citrus metabolism and whether infected plants produce systemic signals that can be used to develop improved detection techniques, leaves from Washington Navel orange (<i>Citrus sinensis</i> (L.) Osbeck) plants were graft-inoculated with <i>C</i>Las and longitudinally studied using transcriptomics (RNA sequencing), proteomics (liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry), and metabolomics (proton nuclear magnetic resonance). Photosynthesis gene expression and protein levels were lower in infected plants compared to controls during late infection, and lower levels of photosynthesis proteins were identified as early as 8 weeks post-grafting. These changes coordinated with higher sugar concentrations, which have been shown to accumulate during HLB. Cell wall modification and degradation gene expression and proteins were higher in infected plants during late infection. Changes in gene expression and proteins related to plant defense were observed in infected plants as early as 8 weeks post-grafting. These results reveal coordinated changes in greenhouse navel leaves during <i>C</i>Las infection at the transcript, protein, and metabolite levels, which can inform of biomarkers of early infection.

### Keywords
Citrus, Citrus greening, Huanglongbing, 'candidatus liberibacter asiaticus'

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Cilia
USDA-ARS, Cornell University, Boyce Thompson Institute


