### Accession
PXD014174

### Title
Beta-glucan is a major growth substrate for human gut bacteria related to Coprococcus eutactus

### Description
A clone encoding carboxymethylcellulase activity was isolated during functional screening of a human gut metagenomic library using Lactococcus lactis MG1363 as heterologous host. The insert sequence revealed a glycoside hydrolase family 9 (GH9) catalytic domain with sequence similarity to a gene from Coprococcus sp. ART55/1, which is closely related to Coprocococcus eutactus. Surveys of available genomes indicated a limited distribution of GH9 domains among dominant human colonic anaerobes. Genomes of two Coprococcus-related strains showed the presence of two GH9-encoding and four GH5-encoding genes, however, the strains did not appear to be able to degrade cellulose. Instead, they grew well on beta-glucans and one of the strains also showed growth on galactomannan, galactan and glucomannan. Gene expression and proteomic analysis of Coprococcus sp. ART55/1 grown on cellobiose, beta-glucan and lichenan led to a similar change in expression in comparison to glucose. On beta-glucan and lichenan only, one of the four GH5 genes was strongly upregulated. Growth on glucomannan lead to a transcriptional response of many genes, in particular a strong upregulation of glycoside hydrolases involved in mannan degradation. Thus, beta-glucans are a major growth substrate for species related to Coprococcus eutactus, with glucomannan and galactans alternative substrates for some strains.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate cultures of Coprococcus sp. ART55/1 grown on either glucose, cellobiose, beta-glucan, lichenan or glucomannan were harvested during exponential phase (optical density 0.45-0.84) by centrifugation (2,630 x g, 4°C, 10 min) and the pellet washed once with 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 6.5. The supernatant was removed, the cell pellet was resuspended in 0.5 ml reswell 3-10 buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.3% DTT) and 0.125 ml of 106 µm glass beads suspended in water were added. Bead-beating was performed with a FastPrep machine (Fastprep-24 machine, MP Biomedicals, Cambridge, UK) six times for 10 s on setting 6.5 with a minimum of 30 s on ice in between. The samples were centrifuged (14,000 x g, 12°C, 10 min) and the supernatant stored at -70°C. TCA precipitation was carried out as detailed in Ze et al., (2015). Protein pellets from TCA acetone precipitations were re-dissolved in 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with the aid of an ultrasonic bath (10 min). Protein digestion was carried out in solution with 10 µl porcine trypsin (20 µg/ml, sequencing grade; Promega UK, Southampton, UK) by using the NPC protocol published by PRIME-XS (http://www.primexs.eu/protocols/Public-Documents/04---Protocols/PRIME-XS-Protocol-NPC-In-Solution-Digestion.pdf/). Peptides were desalted on ZipTip micro-C18 stage tips (Merck Millipore, Watford, UK) and analysed by LC-MS as previously described by Herrero-de-Dios et al., 2018 using a Q Exactive Plus/Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoLC-MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Hemel Hempstead, UK) to which a 25 cm long PepMap RSLC C18 nano column (internal diameter 75 µm) was fitted.

### Data Protocol
Peak identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4) with comparisons made to Coprococcus sp. ART55/1 reference protein sequences downloaded from NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/13745?genome_assembly_id=175605). Parameters were set to calculate LFQ (label-free quantification), as well as to identify potential contaminant proteins from media.

### Publication Abstract
A clone encoding carboxymethyl cellulase activity was isolated during functional screening of a human gut metagenomic library using Lactococcus lactis MG1363 as heterologous host. The insert carried a glycoside hydrolase family 9 (GH9) catalytic domain with sequence similarity to a gene from Coprococcus eutactus ART55/1. Genome surveys indicated a limited distribution of GH9 domains among dominant human colonic anaerobes. Genomes of C. eutactus-related strains harboured two GH9-encoding and four GH5-encoding genes, but the strains did not appear to degrade cellulose. Instead, they grew well on &#x3b2;-glucans and one of the strains also grew on galactomannan, galactan, glucomannan and starch. Coprococcus comes and Coprococcus catus strains did not harbour GH9 genes and were not able to grow on &#x3b2;-glucans. Gene expression and proteomic analysis of C. eutactus ART55/1 grown on cellobiose, &#x3b2;-glucan and lichenan revealed similar changes in expression in comparison to glucose. On &#x3b2;-glucan and lichenan only, one of the four GH5 genes was strongly upregulated. Growth on glucomannan led to a transcriptional response of many genes, in particular a strong upregulation of glycoside hydrolases involved in mannan degradation. Thus, &#x3b2;-glucans are a major growth substrate for species related to C. eutactus, with glucomannan and galactans alternative substrates for some strains.

### Keywords
Coprococcus eutactus; beta-glucan;

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
Rowett Institute Gut Health Theme University of Aberdeen Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD

### Submitter
Sophie Shaw

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Louis
Rowett Institute Gut Health Theme University of Aberdeen Foresterhill Aberdeen AB25 2ZD


