### Accession
PXD044749

### Title
A stop-and-go mechanism controls mitochondrial respiration

### Description
Oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) is essential for the synthesis of the vast majority of ATP in eukaryotic cells. It is carried out by multi-protein assemblies that form the electron transport chain (ETC), which are coupled to the mitochondrial ATP synthase, which uses the proton gradient generated by the ETC to drive ATP synthesis. The assembly of the OXPHOS protein machinery requires the coordinated integration of proteins encoded in the nuclear and the mitochondrial genomes, imposing an additional layer of complexity. While the biogenesis of the individual OXPHOS complexes is well understood, it remains unknown how the assembly of the ETC and ATP synthase is coordinated to achieve the correct stoichiometry of the OXPHOS machinery. Here, we identify the mitochondrial regulatory hub for respiratory assembly (MiRA), which serves as a platform on which complex IV and complex V biogenesis are synchronised to ensure balanced assembly of the ETC and complex V. At the molecular level, this is achieved by a stop-and-go safeguarding mechanism: The novel mitochondrial protein Mra1 binds to and slows down complex IV assembly. Two Go signals are then required for assembly to proceed: Binding of the complex IV assembly factor Rcf2 and interaction with the mitoribosome, which translates the complex V subunit Atp9. Both Go signals induce the clipping and subsequent degradation of Mra1, relieving the molecular brake and allowing parallel maturation of complexes IV and V. The absence of the stop-and-go safety mechanism results in the formation of immature complexes, decreased ATP levels and reduced cell viability. The antagonistic activities at MiRA provide a regulated orchestration of complex IV and V assembly which is essential to avoid the predominance of either complex and an unbalanced ratio of OXPHOS complexes, thus ensuring the correct stoichiometry of protein machineries encoded by two different genomes.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel tryptic digestion Upon SDS-PAGE, coomassie stained bands were manually excised from the gel. The gel pieces were washed once with 60 µL of 1:1 (v/v) 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB; Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and acetonitrile (ACN; Roth, Germany), pH 8.5 for 10 min and shrunk three times for 10 min each in 60 µL ACN and washed in 60 µL 50 mM TEAB, pH 8.5. Following a reduction of proteins with 10 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) in 100 mM TEAB at 57°C for 30 min and dehydration of gel pieces, proteins were alkylated with 10 mM IAA (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) in 100 mM TEAB at 25°C for 20 min in the dark. Prior to protein digestion, gel pieces were washed with 60 µl 100 mM TEAB and shrunk twice for 10 min in 60 µl ACN. A total of 30 µL of 8 ng/µL in 50 mM TEAB trypsin solution (sequencing grade, Thermo-Fisher, USA) was added to the dry gel pieces and incubated 4 h at 37°C. The reaction was quenched by addition of 20 µL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA; Biosolve, The Netherlands). The resulting peptides were extracted once for 30 min with 30 µl 1:1 (v/v) 0.1%TFA and ACN, followed by gel dehydration with 20 µl ACN for 20 min, and wash with 30 µl of 100 mM TEAB for another 20 min. Finally, gel was shrunk twice with 20 µl of ACN for 20 min. The supernatant from each extraction step was collected, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% TFA. LC-MS/MS analysis Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system coupled to an Orbitrap QE HF (Thermo Fisher). An in-house packed analytical column (75 µm x 200 mm, 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Germany) was used. Mobile phase solutions were prepared as follows, solvent A: 0.1% formic acid / 1% acetonitrile, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid, 89.9% acetonitrile. Peptides were separated in a 60 min linear gradient started from 3% B and increased to 23% B over 50 min and to 38% B over 10 min, followed by washout with 95% B. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution and MS2 spectra were generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 27 and isolation width of 1.4 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database search The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot Saccharomyces cerevisiae (UP000002311, November 2019) protein database and a customized contaminant database (part of MaxQuant, MPI Martinsried) using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 with Sequest HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da and a parent ion mass tolerance to 5 ppm. Trypsin was specified as enzyme. Carbamidomethyl was set as fixed modification of cysteine and oxidation (methionine), and deamidation (asparagine, glutamine) as variable modifications of peptides. Acetylation, methionine-loss and combination of acetylation and methionine-loss were set as variable modifications of protein terminus. For feature linking and mapping, RT tolerance [min] and mass tolerance [ppm] were set to 0.001 and 0.0005, respectively. Peptide quantification was done using precursor ion quantifier node with Summed Abundances method set for protein abundance calculation. Data analysis Contaminating proteins, proteins identified with less than two peptides, and proteins not identified as a "Master Protein" in a protein group were excluded from the analysis. Next, abundances were log2 transformed, and missing values were replaced using Perseus (ver. 1.6.13.0) feature "replace missing values from normal distribution" [citation: https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901]. Protein abundance ratios (WT-Δmra1) were calculated to determine putative protein interaction partners. Uniprot accession number mapping to ORF was performed using R package "org.Sc.sgd.db". Information about mitochondrial localization was acquired from previous study [citation: doi: 10.1038/s41467-017-00359-0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Respiratory chain, Protein complex assembly, Complex stoichiometry, Mitoribosome

### Affiliations
University of Heidelberg
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Marcin Luzarowski

### Lab Head
Dr Nora Voegtle
Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University (ZMBH), 69120 Heidelberg, Germany


