### Accession
PXD020575

### Title
An FGF-2 signaling pathway that is activated in aged skeletal muscle promotes intramuscular adipogenesis

### Description
Aged skeletal muscle is markedly affected by fatty muscle infiltration and strategies to reduce the occurrence of adipocytes within skeletal muscle, the intramuscular adipose tissue (IMAT), are urgently needed. Fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2) is a critical growth factor for muscle tissue. Here, we show that FGF-2 not only stimulates muscle growth, but also promotes intramuscular adipogenesis. Using multiple screening assays for upstream and downstream signaling of microRNA (miR)-29a we located the secreted protein and adipogenic inhibitor SPARC to an FGF-2 signaling pathway that is conserved between skeletal muscle cells from mice and humans and that is activated in skeletal muscle from aged mice. FGF-2 induces the miR-29a/SPARC axis through transcriptional activation of FRA-1 which binds and activates an evolutionary conserved AP-1 site element proximal in the miR-29a promoter. Genetic deletions in muscle cells and AAV-mediated overexpression of FGF-2 or SPARC in mouse skeletal muscle revealed that this axis regulates differentiation of fibro/adipogenic progenitors in vitro and intramuscular fat formation in vivo. Thus, our data highlight an ambivalent role of FGF-2 for adult skeletal muscle and reveal a novel pathway to combat fat accumulation in aged skeletal muscle.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS, serum free cell culture supernatants from C2C12 myotubes (n = 4 per group) were collected 72 h post-transfection with antagomir-29a or mimic-29a and respective control antagomirs or control mimics. Label free quantification of secreted proteins was performed at the Functional Genomics Center Zurich. Briefly, proteins were precipitated using cold TCA/acetone, digested with trypsin and analyzed via LC-MS/MS using an Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific)

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were searched against MaxQuant database (09/02/16) using MaxQuant software v1.4.1.2. Variable modifications included oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and deamidation (NQ). Protein FDR was set to 0.05. MaxQuant output was subjected to differential expression analysis using the Bioconductor package Limma.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microrna, Lc-msms, Imat, Muscle

### Affiliations
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Clinical Nutrition, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Sebastian Mathes

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Krützfeldt
Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Clinical Nutrition, University Hospital Zurich, Switzerland


