### Accession
PXD040982

### Title
Mass-spectrometry phosphoproteomics of Calu-3 cell lines infected with SARS-CoV-2, in comparison to non-infected and UV mock-treated cell lines

### Description
To identify the proteome alterations in human epithelial cells upon SARS-CoV-2 infection, we performed an in vitro experiment, where we infected lung-adenocarcinoma cultured human airway epithelial cells (Calu-3) with an isolate of the ancestral variant and alpha variant of SARS-CoV-2 in two separate experiments. Samples were then collected 3 hours, 1 day, 3 days, and 7 days post infection. In parallel, for comparison, we collected samples on the same days from non-infected cells and cells treated with SARS-CoV-2 virus (of the corresponding variant) inactivated by ultraviolet radiation. All conditions were performed in biological triplicates and we performed phosphoproteomics analysis with high-pH fractionation and LC-MS/MS.   Cell culture specifics   Human lung adenocarcinoma Calu3 cells (ATCC, HTB-55) were grown in minimum essential medium (MEM) supplemented with 20% FBS, HEPES, L-glutamin, 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 mg/ml streptomycin at 37°C and 5% CO2. The SARS-CoV-2 variants were propagated on Vero E6 cells and titrated via end point dilution assay. For UV-inactivation, the virus stock was incubated under UV-light for 3 x 1.5 min. Complete inactivation was confirmed via infection attempt and no live virus could be detected after the treatment.  Cells were infected with active or UV-inactivated SARS-CoV-2 in complete MEM at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 1. After two  hours of incubation the virus solution was removed, the cells were washed, and fresh growth medium was added. Before the infection, the active and inactivated virus were treated with Trypsin at 1:100 dilution for one hour at 37°C.  Before sample collection at the indicated time points, the cells were washed thoroughly. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 1mM DTT and boiled at 95°C for five minutes.

### Sample Protocol
Sample isolation for proteomics The cell pellets were dissolved in 300 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM HEPES pH 7,6, 1 mM DTT), heated to 95°C and sonicated. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Samples were then prepared for MS analysis using a modified version of the SP3 protein clean-up and a digestion protocol (Hughes et al., 2014; Moggridge et al., 2018), where proteins were digested by LycC and trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce). In brief, 200 µg protein from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 bead mix (20 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 30 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LysC buffer (1 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LysC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. The peptides were eluted from the mixture after placing the mixture on a magnetic rack, followed by peptide concentration measurement (Bio-Rad DC Assay). The samples were then pH adjusted using TEAB pH 8.5 (100 mM final conc.), 100 µg of peptides from each sample were labelled with isobaric TMT-tags (TMT16plex reagent) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific), the pooled peptide mix was further fractionated by basic reverse phase chromatography. In particular, the separation was performed using a 25 cm column (Waters corporation, XBRIDGE, Peptide BEH C18 column, 300Å, 3.5 μm, 2.1 mm X 250 mm) in a 90 min gradient from 3% solvent A (20 mM NH3) to 50 % solvent B (80% Acetonitrile, 20 mM NH3) at a constant flow of 200 μl/ min. Finally, 96 fractions were collected, concatenated in 12 fractions as previously described (Mertins et al 2018), followed by TiIMAC chromatography for phosphopeptide enrichment. The LC/MSMS analysis was performed using a Dionex UltiMate™ 3000 RSLCnano System coupled to a Q-Exactive-HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Each of the 24 fractions was dissolved in 20ul solvent A and 10ul were injected. Samples were trapped on a C18 guard-desalting column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 75μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 µm, 100Å), and separated on a 50 cm long C18 column (Easy spray PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 μm, 100Å, 75 μm x 50 cm). The nano capillary solvent A was 95% water, 5% DMSO, 0.1% formic acid; and solvent B was 5% water, 5% DMSO, 95% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. At a constant flow of 0.25 μl min−1, the curved gradient went from 6-8% B up to 40% B in each fraction in a two-hour gradient length, followed by a steep increase to 100% B in 5 min. FTMS master scans with 60,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (30 000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 16 for MS1 and 15 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100 ms for MS1 and 400 ms for MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~2.5 s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30 s duration. Precursors with unassigned charge state or charge state 1 were excluded. An underfill ratio of 1% was used.  Of note, the labelling efficiency was determined by LC-MS/MS before pooling of the samples. For the sample clean-up step, a solid phase extraction (SPE strata-X-C, Phenomenex) was performed, and purified samples were dried in a SpeedVac. An aliquot of approximately 10 µg was suspended in LC mobile phase A and 1 µg was injected on the LC-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap raw MS/MS files were converted to mzML format using msConvert from the ProteoWizard tool suite (Chambers et al., 2012).  Spectra were searched using MSGF+ search engine (v2020.03.14) (Kim and Pevzner, 2014) and Percolator (v3.04.0) (Granholm et al., 2014) for Percolator target-decoy scoring.   All searches were done against the Human protein coding subset of Ensembl version 105 using our proteomics workflow (https://github.com/lehtiolab/ddamsproteomics, vs.2.7), which was run with Nextflow (v20.01.0). MSGF+ settings included precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fully tryptic peptides, maximum peptide length of 50 amino acids and a maximum charge of 6. Fixed modifications were TMTpro-16-plex on lysine and peptide N-termini, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues, a variable modification was used for oxidation on methionine residues and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, and tyrosine.   Quantification of TMTpro-16-plex reporter ions was done using OpenMS project’s IsobaricAnalyzer (v2.5) (Röst et al., 2016). MS1 feature detection and quantification was performed using Dinosaur (https://github.com/fickludd/dinosaur) (Teleman et al., 2016). PSMs found at 1% FDR were used to infer gene identities.  Protein quantification by TMTpro-16-plex reporter ions was calculated using medians of log2-transformed PSM channel intensities from which were subtracted the average value of three and two internal channels, for set 1 and 2 respectively. Protein and gene quantification values were then normalized by subtracting their channel medians. Protein false discovery rates were calculated using the picked-FDR method using gene symbols as protein groups and limited to 1% FDR (Savitski et al., 2015).   References  Hughes, C.S., Foehr, S., Garfield, D.A., Furlong, E.E., Steinmetz, L.M., and Krijgsveld, J. (2014). Ultrasensitive proteome analysis using paramagnetic bead technology. Mol. Syst. Biol. 10, 1–10.  Moggridge, S., Sorensen, P.H., Morin, G.B., and Hughes, C.S. (2018). Extending the Compatibility of the SP3 Paramagnetic Bead Processing Approach for Proteomics. J. Proteome Res. 17, 1730–1740.  Mertins, P., Tang, L.C., Krug, K., Clark, D.J., Gritsenko, M.A., Chen, L., Clauser, K.R., Clauss, T.R., Shah, P., Gillette, M.A., et al. (2018). Reproducible workflow for multiplexed deep-scale proteome and phosphoproteome analysis of tumor tissues by liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry. Nat. Protoc. 2018 137 13, 1632–1661.  Chambers, M.C., MacLean, B., Burke, R., Amodei, D., Ruderman, D.L., Neumann, S., Gatto, L., Fischer, B., Pratt, B., Egertson, J., et al. (2012). A cross-platform toolkit for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Nat. Biotechnol. 2012 3010 30, 918–920.  Kim, S., and Pevzner, P.A. (2014). MS-GF+ makes progress towards a universal database search tool for proteomics. Nat. Commun. 5, 5277.  Granholm, V., Kim, S., Navarro, J.C.F., Sjölund, E., Smith, R.D., and Käll, L. (2014). Fast and accurate database searches with MS-GF+percolator. J. Proteome Res. 13, 890–897.  Röst, H.L., Sachsenberg, T., Aiche, S., Bielow, C., Weisser, H., Aicheler, F., Andreotti, S., Ehrlich, H.-C., Gutenbrunner, P., Kenar, E., et al. (2016). OpenMS: a flexible open-source software platform for mass spectrometry data  analysis. Nat. Methods 13, 741–748.  Teleman, J., Chawade, A., Sandin, M., Levander, F., and Malmström, J. (2016). Dinosaur: A Refined Open-Source Peptide MS Feature Detector. J. Proteome Res. 15, 2143–2151.  Savitski, M.M., Wilhelm, M., Hahne, H., Kuster, B., and Bantscheff, M. (2015). A Scalable Approach for Protein False Discovery Rate Estimation in Large Proteomic Data Sets. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 14, 2394–2404.

### Publication Abstract
COVID-19 is characterised by systemic immunological perturbations in the human body, which can lead to multi-organ damage. Many of these processes are considered to be mediated by the blood. Therefore, to better understand the systemic host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, we performed systematic analyses of the circulating, soluble proteins in the blood through global proteomics by mass-spectrometry (MS) proteomics. Here, we show that a large part of the soluble&#xa0;blood proteome is altered in COVID-19, among them elevated levels of interferon-induced and proteasomal proteins. Some proteins that have alternating levels in human cells after a SARS-CoV-2 infection in vitro and in different organs of COVID-19 patients are deregulated in the blood, suggesting shared infection-related changes.The availability of different public proteomic resources on soluble blood proteome alterations leaves uncertainty about the change of a given protein during COVID-19. Hence, we performed a systematic review and meta-analysis of MS global proteomics studies of soluble blood proteomes, including up to 1706 individuals (1039 COVID-19 patients), to provide concluding estimates for the alteration of 1517 soluble blood proteins in COVID-19. Finally, based on the meta-analysis we developed CoViMAPP, an open-access resource for effect sizes of alterations and diagnostic potential of soluble blood proteins in COVID-19, which is publicly available for the research, clinical, and academic community.

### Keywords
Human, Sars-cov-2, Infection, Covid-19, Phosphoproteomics, Calu-3 cell line, Lc-ms/ms, Phosphosites, Ph fractionation

### Affiliations
1. Department of Oncology-Pathology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm;
2. Proteogenomics Facility, Science for Life Laboratory
Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institute and Science for Life Laboratory

### Submitter
Haris Babačić

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Department of Oncology and Pathology, Karolinska Institute and Science for Life Laboratory


