### Accession
PXD048024

### Title
Molecular-Level Architecture of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii’s Glycoprotein-Rich Cell Wall

### Description
Microalgae are a renewable and promising biomass for large-20 scale biofuel, food and nutrient production. However, their efficient exploitation depends on our knowledge of the cell wall composition and organization as it can limit access to high-value molecules. Here we provide an atomic-level model of the non-crystalline and water-insoluble glycoprotein-rich cell wall of Chlamydomonas reinhardtii. Using in situ solid-state and sensitivity-enhanced nuclear magnetic 25 resonance, we reveal unprecedented details on the protein and carbohydrate composition and their nanoscale heterogeneity, as well as the presence of spatially segregated protein- and glycan-rich regions with different dynamics and hydration levels. We show that mannose-rich lower molecular-weight proteins likely contribute to the cell wall cohesion by binding to high-molecular weight protein components, and that water provides plasticity to the cell-wall architecture. The 30 structural insight exemplifies strategies used by nature to form cell walls devoid of cellulose or other glycan polymers.

### Sample Protocol
This study is in part based on shotgun glycoproteomics. Chlamydomonas reinhardtii proteins are extracted from cell wall preparations, reduced, alkylated (Iodoacetamide) and digested with trypsin protease before Concanavalin A lectin weak affinity chromatography for enrichment of O-Man glycopeptides. Enriched O-Man glycopeptides were desalted and subjected to nLC-MS/MS on Orbitrap Tribrid Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files are analysed using Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 (Thermo). All peptide spectral matches (PSMs) are based on probability-based scoring (Sequest-HT, p<0.01) and manual inspection of glycopeptide MS/MS identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-man, Lc-msms, Glycoprotein, Ptm, Cell wall

### Affiliations
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Adnan Halim
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics (CCG) Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine University of Copenhagen


