### Accession
PXD030916

### Title
An animal-free medium enhances Lactobacillus johnsonii LJO02 supernatant selective efficacy against the methicillin (oxacillin)-resistant Staphylococcus aureus virulence through key-metabolites

### Description
The spread of multidrug-resistant (MDR) bacteria, such as the skin commensal Staphylococcus aureus, is a worldwide heath challenge; therefore, new methods to counteract the over-colonization and virulence of opportunistic pathogenic biotypes are highly urgent.  We characterized and compared the activity of Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus LR06 (DSM 21981) and Lactobacillus johnsonii LJO02 (DSM 33828) cell-free supernatants (CFSs), produced in a conventional animal-based MRS medium and in an innovative vegetal TIL, versus the MDR Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 43300).  CFSs were analysed via high-resolution mass spectrometry and gas-chromatography for short chain fatty acids (SCFAs), lactic acid and protein composition, while their activity was assessed towards i) the viability and metabolic activity of the MRSA strain through optical density and alamarBlue assay, and ii) the capability to inhibit/disaggregate the pathogenic biofilm, via crystal violet staining.  All the CFSs reduce viable and metabolically active S. aureus, with the TIL medium more efficient, respect to MRS, in stimulating lactic acid bacteria metabolism and reducing the virulent biofilm. CFSs from LJO02 produced in TIL are the best, thanks to specific SCFAs and proteic metabolites.  In conclusion, antagonistic non-pathogenic CFSs represent a promising and strategic approach, with potential applications as bacteriotherapy, and bioremediation of hospital equipments surfaces.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins in the media were precipitated overnight at −20 °C with 4 volumes of ice-cold acetone. The pellets were then collected by centrifugation at 17,000× g for 20 min. at 4 °C and then resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). Protein concentrations were determined using BCA protein assay (Sigma). Proteins were then subjected to reduction with DTT 200 mM, to alkylation with IAM 200mM and to complete protein digestion with 2 μg of Trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA). The peptide digests were desalted on the Discovery® DSC-18 solid phase extraction (SPE) 96-well plate (25 mg/well) (Sigma-Aldrich Inc., St. Louis, MO, USA).The digested peptides were analyzed with a UHPLC Vanquish system (Thermo Scientific, Rodano, Italy) coupled with an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific, Rodano, Italy). Peptides were separated by a reverse phase column (Accucore™ RP-MS 100 x 2.1 mm, particle size 2.6 µm). The column was maintained at a constant temperature of 40 °C at a flow rate of 0.200 mL/min. Mobile phase A and B were water and acetonitrile respectively, both acidified with 0.1% formic acid. The analysis was performed using the following gradient: 0-5 min from 2% to 5% B; 5-55 min from 5% to 30% B; 55-61 from 30% to 90% B and hold for one minute, at 62.1 min the percentage of B was set to the initial condition of the run at 2% and hold for about 8 minutes. The Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in positive ion mode. The ESI source was used with a voltage of 2.8 kV. The capillary temperature, sheath gas flow, auxiliary gas and spare gas flow were set at 325 °C, 45 arb, 10 arb and 2 respectively. S-lens was set at 70 rf. For the acquisition of spectra a data-dependent (ddMS2) top 10 scan mode was used. Survey full-scan MS spectra (mass range m/z 381 to 1581) were acquired with resolution R = 70,000 and AGC target 3x106. MS/MS fragmentation was performed using high-energy c-trap dissociation (HCD) with resolution R = 35,000 and AGC target 1x106. The normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 30. The injection volume was 3 ul.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra analysis was carried out using Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science Inc., Boston, USA), the digestion enzyme selected was trypsin, with 2 missed cleavages and a search tolerance of 10 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteines as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification.Mass spectra were searched against the NCBI Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus and Lactobacillus johnsonii sequence databases (2021).  Bioinformatic analysis was performed using the web-based DAVID tool (https://david.ncifcrf.gov).

### Publication Abstract
The spread of multidrug-resistant bacteria, such as the skin commensal Staphylococcus aureus, is a worldwide health challenge; new methods to counteract opportunistic pathogen growth and virulence are urgent. We compared the activity of Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus LR06 (DSM 21981) and Lactobacillus johnsonii LJO02 (DSM 33828) cell-free supernatants (CFSs) produced in the conventional animal derivative-based MRS medium and an innovative animal derivative-free broth (TIL) versus the MDR S. aureus (ATCC 43300). CFS influence was assessed towards the viability, metabolic activity, and ability to form biofilm of the MDR strain through optical density, alamarBlue assay, and crystal violet staining; their content in short-chain fatty acids, lactic acid, and proteins was analysed via high-resolution mass spectrometry and gas chromatography. All CFSs reduce viable and metabolically active S. aureus, being TIL more efficient compared to MRS in stimulating lactic acid bacteria metabolism and decreasing S. aureus biofilm formation. Particularly, the CFS from LJO02 grown in TIL has the best efficacy, revealing a high amount of lactic acid and 59 peculiar proteins; its effectiveness is partially maintained upon trypsin and proteinase K treatments, but not by pepsin and pH basification. Therefore, antagonistic CFSs may represent a strategic prevention approach, with bacteriotherapeutic and bio-repair potential.

### Keywords
Proteimics, Lacticaseibacillus rhamnosus, Cell-free supernatants, Scfas, Lactobacillus johnsonii, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD,University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab,Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT),Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD,University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy


