### Accession
PXD039297

### Title
Systematic comparative analysis of extracellular vesicles following apoptosis, necroptosis and ferroptosis

### Description
The formation of extracellular vesicles (EVs) has emerged as a novel paradigm in cell-to-cell communication during health and disease. According to the type of cell death modalities, the intercellular functions of EVs may be influenced by their biogenesis and composition. To identify a possible EV cargo signature, we performed a comparative analysis of steady-state (ssEVs) and cell death-associated EVs (cdEVs) following apoptosis (apoEVs), necroptosis (necEVs) and ferroptosis (ferEVs) in the same cell type. We determined the physical and biochemical characteristics, the protein cargo by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
APols-Aided Protein Precipitation A total of 16 samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis (4 independent experiments each time 4 conditions: untreated, necroptosis, apoptosis, ferroptosis – UNAF). First, EV preparations were lysed to a final concentration of 1 mg/ml in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), vortexed and incubated for 30 min on ice. Next, samples were homogenized by sonication. Then, proteins were reduced by adding 15 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubation for 30 minutes at 55˚C and then alkylated. Next, samples were acidified with 10 % formic acid to pH 3 and centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000  g and RT. The resulting protein-containing pellets were washed and re-dissolved. Then, proteins were digested with 0.1 µg lysyl endopeptidase for 4 hours at 37 °C, followed by overnight digestion with 0.1 µg trypsin at 37 °C. Next, samples were acidified with TFA to a final concentration of 1 % (pH < 3), incubated for 15 min on ice, centrifuged for 10 min at 20,000 g, and RT to pellet the precipitated Amphipol A8-35. The peptide-containing supernatant was transferred to new tubes, dried under vacuum, and stored at −20 °C. TMT labeling TMTproTM 16-plex labels were equilibrated to RT immediately before use and dissolved in 25 µl anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN). The dried peptides were re-suspended in 20 µl 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5) and labeled for 1 hour at RT using 0.1 mg (5 µl) of TMTProTM label. The reaction was quenched for 15 min at RT with the addition of 1 µl 5% hydroxylamine. The 16 labeled samples were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation, re-dissolved in 100 µl 0.1% TFA and desalted. The tip was first washed three times with 100 µl pre-wash buffer and pre-equilibrated five times with 100 µl of wash buffer before the sample was loaded on the tip. After peptide binding, the tip was washed three times with 100 µl of wash buffer, and peptides were eluted twice with 100 µl elution buffer. The combined elutions were dried in a vacuum concentrator. HPLC fractionation Vacuum-dried peptides were re-dissolved in 100 µl solvent A (0.1 % TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)), and 95 µl was injected for fractionation by RP-HPLC connected to a Probot fractionator. Peptides were first loaded in solvent A on a 4 cm pre-column for 10 min at 25 µl/min and then separated on a 15 cm analytical column. Elution was done using a linear gradient from 100% RP-HPLC solvent A (10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5) in water/ACN (98:2, v/v)) to 100% RP-HPLC solvent B (70% ACN, 10 mM ammonium acetate (pH 5.5)) in 100 min at a constant flow rate of 3 µl/min. Fractions were collected every minute between 20 and 92 minutes and pooled every 12 minutes to generate 12 samples for LC-MS/MS analysis. All 12 fractions were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at −20 °C until further use. LC-MS/MS analysis  The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 1.5 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for a maximum of 80 ms. MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer. The fractionated peptides were re-dissolved in 20 µl solvent A, and 12.5 µl of each fraction was injected LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μl/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column. Peptides were separated on a 250 mm Waters nanoEase M/Z HSS T3 Column, 100Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm inner diameter (Waters Corporation), kept at a constant temperature of 45°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient starting at 5% MS solvent B reaching 33% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 80 min, 55% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 104 min, 99% MS solvent B in 107 minutes followed by a 10-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 15,000 were isolated with a width of 0.7 m/z for fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 32% after filling the trap at a target value of 20,000 for a maximum of 120 ms. MS/MS spectra (with a fixed first mass of 110 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS runs of all 16 samples were searched together using the MaxQuant algorithm (version 1.6.2.6) with mainly default search settings, including a false discovery rate set at 1% on peptide and protein level (PSM). MS2-based quantification using TMTPro16plex labels was chosen as the quantification method. Spectra were searched against the mouse protein sequences in the Swiss-Prot database (database release version of 2021_01), containing 21,989 sequences (www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set to the C-terminal of arginine and lysine, allowing cleavage at Arg/Lys-Pro bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini, whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification. In order to reduce the number of spectra that suffer from co-fragmentation, the precursor ion fraction (PIF) option was set to 75 %. Only proteins with at least one unique or razor peptide were retained, leading to identifying 5,261 proteins. MS2-based quantification using TMTpro labels was chosen as the quantification method, and a minimum ratio count of 2 unique peptides was required for quantification. Further data analysis of the shotgun results was performed with an in-house R script, using the protein groups output table from MaxQuant. Reverse database hits were removed, LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, and replicate samples were grouped. Proteins with less than three valid values in at least one group were removed, and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution centered around the detection limit (package DEP), leading to a list of 4,984 quantified proteins in the experiment, used for further data analysis. Among these 4,984 quantified proteins, 89 were determined as contaminants, and two were not linked to a known gene. Among the remaining 4,893 quantified proteins, 4,367 were identified as individual proteins and 526 as a protein group.  Pairwise analysis To compare protein abundance between pairs of sample groups (Nec vs. Unt, Apo vs. Unt, Fer vs. Unt), statistical testing for differences between two group means was performed using the package limma. The complete list of quantified proteins is presented in Table S1. Statistical significance for differential regulation was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 (-log10 > 1.301) and a variable fold change of FC ≥ 1.5 (|log2FC| ≥ 0.585) for the ‘relaxed’ threshold, and FC ≥ 4 (|log2FC| ≥ 2) for the ‘stringent’ threshold.  Multigroup analysis To compare protein abundance between sample groups (Unt vs. Nec vs. Apo vs. Fer), statistical testing for differences between group means was performed using the package limma49. Statistical significance for differential regulation was set to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.05. In addition, Z-scored LFQ intensities from significantly regulated proteins were plotted in a heatmap after non-supervised hierarchical clustering.  Gene ontology Two sets of differentially abundant proteins were used for functional characterization. The first set was obtained using the parameter thresholds of adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 and |Log2FC| ≥ 2 (4x) (stringent analysis). For the second set, parameter thresholds of adjusted p-value ≤ 0.05 and |Log2FC| ≥ 0.585 (1.5x) were used (low stringency analysis). To characterize the significantly up and downregulated proteins in cell death conditions versus the untreated condition, gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis was performed using the enrichGO function of the R package clusterProfiler (v4.0.5). The p and q value cutoffs were set to 0.01 and 0.05, respectively. Beforehand, proteins were grouped in upregulated and downregulated sets. Then, analysis was done separately for each GO type (Biological Process, Molecular Function, and Cellular Component). We only considered the Biological Process for interpretation, as this was the most informative for our experimental dataset. Finally, summarization of the enriched GO-terms was performed using the web-based GO-terms classification counter CateGOrizer and the generic GO Slims classification (GO_Slim2, with root classes removed, from generic GO-subset: http://geneontology.org/docs/download-ontology/). The cateGOrizer tool is available here: https://www.animalgenome.org/tools/catego/.

### Publication Abstract
Formation of extracellular vesicles (EVs) has emerged as a novel paradigm in cell-to-cell communication in health and disease. EVs are notably produced during cell death but it had remained unclear whether different modalities of regulated cell death (RCD) influence the biogenesis and composition of EVs. To this end, we performed a comparative analysis of steady-state (ssEVs) and cell death-associated EVs (cdEVs) following TNF-induced necroptosis (necEVs), anti-Fas-induced apoptosis (apoEVs), and ML162-induced ferroptosis (ferEVs) using the same cell line. For each RCD condition, we determined the biophysical and biochemical characteristics of the cell death-associated EVs (cdEVs), the protein cargo, and the presence of methylated ribosomal RNA. We found that the global protein content of all cdEVs was increased compared to steady-state EVs. Qualitatively, the isolated exosomal ssEVs and cdEVs, contained a largely overlapping protein cargo including some quantitative differences in particular proteins. All cdEVs were enriched for proteins involved in RNA splicing and nuclear export, and showed distinctive rRNA methylation patterns compared to ssEVs. Interestingly, necEVs and apoEVs, but strikingly not ferEVs, showed enrichment of proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis. Altogether, our work documents quantitative and qualitative differences between ssEVs and cdEVs.

### Keywords
Necroptosis, Cell death, Extracellular vesicles, Ferroptosis, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
Molecular Signaling and Cell Death Unit, VIB Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.

### Submitter
Sara Dufour

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Vandenabeele
Molecular Signaling and Cell Death Unit, VIB Center for Inflammation Research, Ghent, Belgium. Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium.


