### Accession
PXD018275

### Title
Proteome-wide modulation of S-nitrosylation in Trypanosoma cruzi trypomastigotes upon interaction with the host extracellular matrix

### Description
Trypomastigotes from Trypanosoma cruzi adhere to the extracellular matrix (ECM) in order to invade mammalian host cells. Incubation of trypomastigotes with ECM leads to a decrease of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) activity and associated post-translational modifications (PTMs). Herein, resin-assisted enrichment of thiols combined with mass spectrometry were employed to map site-specific S-nitrosylated (SNO) proteins from T. cruzi trypomastigotes incubated (MTy) or not (Ty) with ECM. We confirmed the reduction of S-nitrosylation upon incubation with ECM, associated to a rewiring of the subcellular distribution and intracellular signaling pathways of the SNO proteins between MTy and Ty conditions.  Forty (~10.7%) and 248 (~66.4%) SNO-peptides were uniquely identified in MTy and Ty, respectively, in addition to 85 peptides (~22.7%) quantified in both conditions. S-nitrosylated proteins were enriched in a wide range of cellular components, including surface membranes and vesicles, and are involved in ribosome, transport, carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms. Of note, we described for the first time nytrosylation of histones H2B and H3 on Cys64 and Cys126, respectively, which is was more abundant in MTy. Additionally, sequence alignment shows that H3 (Cys126) histone is also present in T.b.brucei, but not in L. major, while H2B (Cys64) is absent in both parasites and other higher eukaryotes. Protein-protein interaction networks analyzed by STRING revealed ribosomal proteins, proteins involved in carbon and fatty acid metabolism to be among the enriched protein complexes. Among the SNO ribosomal proteins, 90% were identified and quantified uniquely or upregulated in the Ty fraction. Enzymes involved in oxidoreductase, kinases and phosphatases were identified as nitrosylated and phosphorylated in the same conditions suggesting a crosstalk between these modifications linked to regulation of energy metabolism of T. cruzi in the presence of ECM. Although enzymatic activity of NOS was described in T. cruzi, its identification is elusive. In silico mapping of putative nitric oxide synthase (NOS) gene(s) based on domain architecture identified four putative T. cruzi proteins expressing a putative C-terminal NOS domain: two putative P450 reductases, a putative FMN/FAD containing oxidoreductase and a putative oxidoreductase-protein. Our results provide the first site-specific characterization of S-nitrosylated proteins in T. cruzi linked to the roles of NO in reprogramming parasite cells to invade mammalian hosts.

### Sample Protocol
T. cruzi trypomastigotes, Y strain released into the culture medium 4-5 days after the infection of LLCMK2 cell line, were collected, spun down, resuspended in cold PSG buffer (5 mM NaH2PO4/Na2HPO4, pH 8.0, 7.3 mM NaCl, 1% dextrose) and purified in a DEAE-cellulose column. Purified trypomastigotes (5 x 108 parasites in 5ml of Modified Eagle’s Medium supplemented with 2% FBS) were mixed with 150 µL of commercial ECM (Geltrex™ LDEV-Free Reduced Growth Factor Basement Membrane Matrix, Invitrogen) and incubated for 2 h at 37oC and 5% CO2. Enrichment of S-nitrosylated peptides was performed using resin-assisted protocol. T. cruzi trypomastigote cells (450 µg proteins) were lysed in 1 ml of HENS Buffer (100 mM HEPES, pH 7.8, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM Neocuproine and 1% SDS), containing 40 mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM), protease inhibitor cocktail; 0.1 mM PMSF) and DNase at 55 °C for 30 min in the dark, with frequent vortexing, and centrifuged for 10 min at 10,000 x g. The supernatant was treated with 3 volumes of cold acetone and incubated at -20 °C overnight. The mixture was centrifuged (10000 g x 10 min), washed three times with 70% acetone and re-suspended in HENS buffer (200 µl per mg protein). This material was added to 50 µl of activated resin slurry (Thiopropyl/Sepharose 6B resin (GE Healthcare) in the presence of 5 mM sodium ascorbate (Fluka) and incubated in the dark, under rotation. After 2-4 h of incubation, the material was digested overnight with 8 μg trypsin (Promega), and incubated overnight (16hrs) at 37 °C), followed by washing the resin with HENS buffer (4 x 1 ml) then with HENS diluted 1:10 (2 x 1 ml). The bound S-nitrosylated peptides were eluted by incubation with 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 800 RPM at room temperature, centrifuged at 1500xg for 1 minute, and the filtrates collected. This step was repeated two more times with a 10-minute incubation period. The eluted peptides were alkylated with 30mM iodoacetamide and desalted on C18 column, dried down and analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry. Tryptic peptides were separated by nLC-MS/MS on an EASY-Spray PepMap® 50 cm × 75 μm C18 column using an Easy nLC1000 nanoflow system (Thermo Fisher). A gradient of 5-25% solvent B (A 0.1% formic acid; B 95% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid) was applied for separation of the peptides using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for 95 minutes at a flow of 300 nL/min. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific); the maximum total cycle time was confined to 3 s. The 20 most intense precursors selected from the IT MS1 full scan (resolution 120,000 full width at half-maximum (FWHM) @ m/z 200) were quadrupole-isolated and fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (CID) and detected in the dual-pressure linear ion trap with 35 as normalized collision energy. The MS1 scan range was between 350–1500 m/z, the ion count target was set to 2 × 105, the MS2 ion count target was set to 1 × 104. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10-ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes.

### Data Protocol
Identification and quantification of peptides and proteins were performed in MaxQuant using label free quantification (LFQ) feature. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the combined Uniprot T. cruzi database (downloaded March, 2016; with 54,996 entries) and a common contaminant protein database with a mass tolerance level of 4.5 ppm for MS and 0.5 Da for MS/MS. Search parameters were: 1) trypsin with full specificity as enzyme with two missed cleavages, 2) oxidation of methionine, N-ethyl maleimide and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as variable modifications and 3) PSMs, peptide and protein false discover rate (FDR) less than 1%. Peptides modified with carbamidomethylation were considered as formerly S-nitrosylated and considered for further analyses. Contaminant proteins and proteins identified in the reverse database were excluded for further analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Trypanosoma cruzi trypomastigotes adhere to extracellular matrix (ECM) to invade mammalian host cells regulating intracellular signaling pathways. Herein, resin-assisted enrichment of thiols combined with mass spectrometry were employed to map site-specific S-nitrosylated (SNO) proteins from T. cruzi trypomastigotes incubated (MTy) or not (Ty) with ECM. We confirmed the reduction of S-nitrosylation upon incubation with ECM, associated with a rewiring of the subcellular distribution and intracellular signaling pathways. Forty, 248 and 85 SNO-peptides were identified only in MTy, Ty or in both conditions, respectively. SNO proteins were enriched in ribosome, transport, carbohydrate and lipid metabolisms. Nitrosylation of histones H2B and H3 on Cys64 and Cys126, respectively, is described. Protein-protein interaction networks revealed ribosomal proteins, proteins involved in carbon and fatty acid metabolism to be among the enriched protein complexes. Kinases, phosphatases and enzymes involved in the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids and amino acids were identified as nitrosylated and phosphorylated, suggesting a post-translational modifications crosstalk. In silico mapping of nitric oxide synthase (NOS) genes, previously uncharacterized, matched to four putative T. cruzi proteins expressing C-terminal NOS domain. Our results provide the first site-specific characterization of S-nitrosylated proteins in T. cruzi and their modulation upon ECM incubation before infection of the mammalian hosts. SIGNIFICANCE: Protein S-nitrosylation represents a major molecular mechanism for signal transduction by nitric oxide. We present for the first time a proteomic profile of S-nitrosylated proteins from infective forms of T. cruzi, showing a decrease in SNO proteins after incubation of the parasite with the extracellular matrix, a necessary step for the parasite invasion of the host mammalian cells. We also show for the first time nitrosylation of H2B (Cys64) and H3 (Cys126) histones, sites not conserved in higher eukaryotic cells, and suggest that some specific histone isoforms are sensitive to NO signaling. S-nitrosylation in H2B and H3 histones are more abundant in MTy. Moreover, proteins involved in translation, glycolytic pathway and fatty acid metabolism are enriched in the present dataset. Comparison of the SNO proteome and the phosphoproteome, obtained previously under the same experimental conditions, show that most of the proteins sharing both modifications are involved in metabolic pathways, transport and ribosome function. The data suggest that both PTMs are involved in reprogramming the metabolism of T. cruzi in response to environmental changes. Although NO synthesis was detected in T. cruzi, the identification of NOS remains elusive. Analysis in silico showed two genes similar in domains to NADPH-dependent cytochrome-P450 reductase and two putative oxidoreductases, but no oxygenase domain of NOS was mapped in the T. cruzi genome. It is tempting to speculate that NO synthase-like from T. cruzi and its early NO-mediated pathways triggered in response to host interaction constitute potential diagnostic and therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, S-nitrosylation, Proteomic, Histones, Nitric oxide synthase, Trypanosoma cruzi

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, Room 9, Butanta, Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Giuseppe Palmisano
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sao Paulo, Avenida Lineu Prestes 1374, Room 9, Butanta, Sao Paulo


