### Accession
PXD038675

### Title
Asparagine uptake: a cellular strategy of Methylocystis to combat severe salt stress

### Description
Sodium chloride is an important ionic-osmotic stressor in bulk and rhizosphere soils. Members of the alphaproteobacterial genus Methylocystis are known to have a low salt tolerance (≤ 1.0% NaCl),despite the fact that these methane oxidizers are soil inhabitants. We therefore tested various amino acids and other well-known osmolytes for their potential to act as a compatible solute or osmoprotectant under otherwise growth-inhibitory NaCl conditions. Besides ornithine, the addition of 10 mM asparagine to the medium had the greatest stress relief effect under severe salinity (1.50% NaCl), leading to a partial growth recovery of strain SC2. The analysis of its exo-metabolome revealed that asparagine was taken up quantitatively. This resulted in an intracellularconcentration of 264 ± 57 mM asparagine, with a certain portion hydrolyzed to aspartate (4.20 ± 1.41 mM). In addition to general and oxidative stress responses, the uptake of asparagine induced 34 major proteome rearrangements related to the KEGG level 2 categories energy metabolism, amino acid metabolism, and cell growth and death. In particular, various proteins involved in cell division (e.g., ChpT, CtrA, PleC, FtsA, FtsH1) and peptidoglycan synthesis showed a positive expression response. Asparagine-derived 13C-carbon was incorporated into nearly all amino acids. Both the exo-metabolome and the 13C-labeling degree suggests that in addition to aspartate, the amino acids glutamate, glycine, serine, and alanine, but also pyruvate and malate, were most crucially involved in the osmoprotective effect of asparagine, with glutamate being a major hub between the central carbon and amino acid pathways. In summary, asparagine induced significant proteome rearrangements, leading to major changes in the flux of central metabolites and free amino acids. In consequence, asparagine acted, in part, as a carbon and nitrogen source for the growth recovery of strain SC2 under severe salinity (1.50% NaCl).

### Sample Protocol
LC–MS/MS analysis of protein digests was performed on Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with in-house packed C18 resin column (Magic C18 AQ 2.4 μm, Dr. Maisch). The peptides were first loaded onto a C18 precolumn (preconcentration setup) and then eluted in backflush mode with a gradient from 98% solvent A (0.15% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (99.85% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 25% solvent B over 105 min, continued from 25% to 35% of solvent B up to 135 min. The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. The data acquisition mode for the initial LFQ study was set to obtain one high-resolution MS scan at a resolution of 60 000 (m/z 200) with scanning range from 375 to 1500 m/z followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most intense ions. To increase the efficiency of MS/MS shots, the charged state screening modus was adjusted to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s. The ion accumulation time was set to 50 ms (both MS and MS/MS). The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 × 106 for MS survey scans and 1 × 105 for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Using MASCOT (v.2.5, Matrix Science), the MS raw data of all identification (ID)-based experiments was searched against the UniProt Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 protein database (downloaded 12/02/2016, 4428 proteins) or E. coli strain K-12 protein database (downloaded 03/09/2016, 4306 proteins) containing 386 common contaminant/background proteins that were manually added. Searches were subjected to MASCOT using Proteome Discoverer (v.1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the following parameters: full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); two missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) set as a fixed modification; and oxidation (M) set as a variable modification. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions generated by high energy-collision dissociation (HCD). ID-based data were tested for Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment using the open source software LAGO (see below). With this approach, we obtained first evidence which categories of proteins were particularly enriched in crude lysates relative to clear lysates. Discovery-LFQ was done using Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics, version 2.0). MS raw files were imported into Progenesis and the output data (MS/MS spectra) were exported in mgf format. MS/MS spectra were then searched using MASCOT against a decoy database of the predicted proteomes from Methylocystis sp. strain SC2 and E. coli strain K-12. The search criteria were set as for ID-based evaluation of the data. Results from the database search were imported back to Progenesis to map peptide identifications to MS1 features. The peak heights of all MS1 features annotated with the same peptide sequence were summed, and protein abundance was calculated per LC–MS run. Next, the data obtained from Progenesis were evaluated using SafeQuant R-package version 2.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Methylocystis</i> spp. are known to have a low salt tolerance (&#x2264;1.0% NaCl). Therefore, we tested various amino acids and other well-known osmolytes for their potential to act as an osmoprotectant under otherwise growth-inhibiting NaCl conditions. Adjustment of the medium to 10&#x2009;mM asparagine had the greatest osmoprotective effect under severe salinity (1.50% NaCl), leading to partial growth recovery of strain SC2. The intracellular concentration of asparagine increased to 264&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;57&#x2009;mM, with a certain portion hydrolyzed to aspartate (4.20&#x2009;&#xb1;&#x2009;1.41&#x2009;mM). In addition to general and oxidative stress responses, the uptake of asparagine specifically induced major proteome rearrangements related to the KEGG level 3 categories of "methane metabolism," "pyruvate metabolism," "amino acid turnover," and "cell division." In particular, various proteins involved in cell division (e.g., ChpT, CtrA, PleC, FtsA, FtsH1) and peptidoglycan synthesis showed a positive expression response. Asparagine-derived <sup>13</sup>C-carbon was incorporated into nearly all amino acids. Both the exometabolome and the <sup>13</sup>C-labeling pattern suggest that in addition to aspartate, the amino acids glutamate, glycine, serine, and alanine, but also pyruvate and malate, were most crucially involved in the osmoprotective effect of asparagine, with glutamate being a major hub between the central carbon and amino acid pathways. In summary, asparagine induced significant proteome rearrangements, leading to major changes in central metabolic pathway activity and the sizes of free amino acid pools. In consequence, asparagine acted, in part, as a carbon source for the growth recovery of strain SC2 under severe salinity. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. play a major role in reducing methane emissions into the atmosphere from methanogenic wetlands. In addition, they contribute to atmospheric methane oxidation in upland soils. Although these bacteria are typical soil inhabitants, <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. are thought to have limited capacity to acclimate to salt stress. This called for a thorough study into potential osmoprotectants, which revealed asparagine as the most promising candidate. Intriguingly, asparagine was taken up quantitatively and acted, at least in part, as an intracellular carbon source under severe salt stress. The effect of asparagine as an osmoprotectant for <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. is an unexpected finding. It may provide <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. with an ecological advantage in wetlands, where these methanotrophs colonize the roots of submerged vascular plants. Collectively, our study offers a new avenue into research on compounds that may increase the resilience of <i>Methylocystis</i> spp. to environmental change.

### Keywords
Methylocystis, Salt stress, Lfq

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany
MPI Marburg

### Submitter
Timo Glatter

### Lab Head
Dr Timo Glatter
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology Karl von Frisch Str. 10 35043 Marburg Germany


