### Accession
PXD006348

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of Brucella abortus and Brucella melitensis

### Description
Brucella type strains (B. abortus 544 and B. melitensis 16 M), field-isolates (B. abortus T and B. melitensis C) were independently cultivated six times on Tryptic Soy Broth at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2 until mid-logarithmic phase. The cells were harvested by brief centrifugation and the bacteria was inactivated using recommended ethanol precipitation procedure.  Following which the cells were lysed, proteins quantified and the differentially expressed proteins among B. abortus and B. melitensis were identified using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC/MS) based label free quantitative proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were processed as follows 1. Each strains were cultured times independently at 37°C on Tryptic Soy Broth at 37 °C in the presence of 5% CO2. 2. The cells were harvested by brief centrifugation when the OD600 measurement reached 0.6 to 0.9. 3. The cell pellet was then inactivated by addition of 300 µl of distilled water and 900 µl of ethanol.  4. Following which centrifuged briefly, supernatant discarded and the resulting pellet was air-dried to remove traces of ethanol. 5. The pellet was mixed with 250 µl of 20 mM HEPES buffer (pH 7.4) and sonicated on ice  (1 min, 100% amplitude and 1 duty cycle, Hielscher Ultrasonics, Teltow, Germany). 6. The volume of extract containing 10 µg of proteins was acetone precipitation and subjected to in-solution digested with lys-C and trypsin. 7. The resultant peptides were desalted by solid phase extraction, using the stage-tip procedure and separated by reversed phase chromatography.  8. The peptides were then ionized by electrospray ionization and transferred into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) which was operated in the positive mode. Measurements were carried out for full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300–1700 in the Orbitrap analyzer at resolution R = 60,000) followed by isolation and fragmentation of the twenty most intense ions by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
The raw spectra was processed and searched using MaxQuant-Andromeda software (version 1.3.0.5) suit (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany) against combined database of Brucella abortus 2308 (update: 23.06.2015) and Brucella melitensis M28 (update: 06.07.2015), downloaded from the UniProt Knowledgebase. Search parameters were: Initial maximum precursor-7 ppm, fragment mass -0.5 Da, variable modification-methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation, fixed modification-cysteine carbamidomethylation, digestion with trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages, the false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01. The frequently observed laboratory contaminants were removed.  The protein identification was valid only when atleast one unique or ‘‘razor’’ peptide was present and with a minimum peptide length - 7 amino acids.  The original “ProteinGroups.txt” file of MaxQuant output files was imported in Perseus software (Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Munich, Germany), LFQ intensities were transformed in to logarithmic scale with base two and all the missing values were replaced (imputed) with the value of the lowest intensity. Welch's t-test was applied to identify statistically significant differentially expressed proteins between the bacterial strain groups and an error correction (p value < 0.05) using the method of Benjamini–Hochberg.

### Publication Abstract
Brucellosis is a zoonotic infection caused by bacteria of the genus <i>Brucella</i>. The species, <i>B. abortus</i> and <i>B. melitensis</i>, major causative agents of human brucellosis, share remarkably similar genomes, but they differ in their natural hosts, phenotype, antigenic, immunogenic, proteomic and metabolomic properties. In the present study, label-free quantitative proteomic analysis was applied to investigate protein expression level differences. Type strains and field strains were each cultured six times, cells were harvested at a midlogarithmic growth phase and proteins were extracted. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted, separated by reverse-phase nanoLC, ionized using electrospray ionization and transferred into an linear trap quadrapole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer to record full scan MS spectra (<i>m/z</i> 300-1700) and tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) spectra of the 20 most intense ions. Database matching with the reference proteomes resulted in the identification of 826 proteins. The Cluster of Gene Ontologies of the identified proteins revealed differences in bimolecular transport and protein synthesis mechanisms between these two strains. Among several other proteins, antifreeze proteins, Omp10, superoxide dismutase and 30S ribosomal protein S14 were predicted as potential virulence factors among the proteins differentially expressed. All mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD006348.

### Keywords
Comparative proteomic analysis, Maxquant software, Maxquant-andromeda, Perseus software, Brucella abortus, Label free quantitative analysis, Brucella melitensis, Ltq orbitrap velos mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Freie Universitaet-Berlin,Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.

### Submitter
Jayaseelan Murugaiyan

### Lab Head
Dr Jayaseelan Murugaiyan
Institute of Animal Hygiene and Environmental Health,  Centre for Infectious Medicine,  Freie Universität Berlin,  Robert-von-Ostertag-Str. 7-13,  14163 Berlin,  Germany.


