### Accession
PXD012289

### Title
Dynamic Bovine Milk Proteome Alterations during Staphylococcus aureus Infection in Subclinical and Clinical Mastitis

### Description
Bovine mastitis, predominantly caused by pathogenic Staphylococcus aureus, is a major impediment to milk production. Although its prevalence varies from cows to buffaloes, it lacks relevant markers that mark the phases and progression of the disease. Thus, the focus of this study was to identify key proteins that mark the transition from subclinical to clinical states in a species specific manner. Whey proteins isolated from healthy and S. aureus infected milk from both Holstein Friesian cow and Murrah buffalo were characterized by label free quantification using mass spectrometry. Collectively, 662 proteins were identified with atleast two peptides, of which 51 and 80 proteins were found significant by ANOVA (p value < 0.05) with increasing or decreasing trends in the disease progression in HF and Mu, respectively. Linear change in expression of proteins like haptoglobin and fibronectin in HF and spermadhesin and osteopontin in Mu correlated with the stage of the disease and progression in a species specific manner. Similarly, high mobility group proteins, angiogenin, cofilin-1 that were previously reported in oxidative stress were overexpressed whilemembers of ubiquitin family which remove aggregated proteins were downregulated during the progression of infection. Subsequently, selected differentially expressed proteins (e.g. osteopontin, CAP-1 and fibrinogen α) were validated by Western blot analysis. Results of this study provide deeper insights on whey proteome dynamics and a signature pattern indicative of disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were first reduced with 5 mMtris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine(TCEP) and cysteines were alkylated by adding 20mM final concentration of iodoacetamide (IAA). Subsequently, the samples were digested overnight at 37°C in a final concentration of 2M urea with 100 mMTris-HCl, pH 8.5, containing trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped by addition of 90% formic acid to a final concentration of 4%. Digested samples were desalted using c18 silica cartridge (The NestGroup Inc., Southborough, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS data were searchedusing the SEQUEST algorithm within Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (ThermoFisher Scientific) against the Uniprot Bovine proteome database to obtain peptide and protein identifications. For all searches, trypsin was specified as the enzyme for protein cleavage allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation (M) and carbamidomethylation(C) were set as dynamic and fixed modificationsrespectively. For Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0 search, the precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. Both peptide spectrum match and protein false discovery rate were set to 0.01 FDR and determined using percolator node. Relative protein quantification of the proteins was performed using Minora feature detector node of Proteome Discoverer2.2 with default settings using peptide spectrum matches (PSM) with confidence.

### Publication Abstract
Dairy cows can suffer from a negative energy balance (NEB) during their transition from the dry period to early lactation, which can increase the risk of postpartum diseases such as clinical ketosis, mastitis, and fatty liver. Zeolite clinoptilolite (CPL), due to its ion-exchange property, has often been used to treat NEB in animals. However, limited information is available on the dynamics of global metabolomics and proteomic profiles in serum that could provide a better understanding of the associated altered biological pathways in response to CPL. Thus, in the present study, a total 64 serum samples were collected from 8 control and 8 CPL-treated cows at different time points in the prepartum and postpartum stages. Labelled proteomics and untargeted metabolomics resulted in identification of 64 and 21 differentially expressed proteins and metabolites, respectively, which appear to play key roles in restoring energy balance (EB) after CPL supplementation. Joint pathway and interaction analysis revealed cross-talks among valproic acid, leucic acid, glycerol, fibronectin, and kinninogen-1, which could be responsible for restoring NEB. By using a global proteomics and metabolomics strategy, the present study concluded that CPL supplementation could lower NEB in just a few weeks, and explained the possible underlying pathways employed by CPL.

### Keywords
Bovine whey/ subclinical mastitis/ clinical mastitis/ label free quantification

### Affiliations
Tulane University
#*Assistant Professor Department of Biotechnology Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee

### Submitter
Sudipa Maity

### Lab Head
Dr Kiran Ambatipudi
#*Assistant Professor Department of Biotechnology Indian Institute of Technology Roorkee


