### Accession
PXD005842

### Title
The comparison of mitochondrial proteomics of fungal ETC Complex I mutant

### Description
Candidiasis is the most common invasive fungal infection in clinical sets.  The causative agent C. albicans has a complex metabolism for energy production in which mitochondria play important roles for its virulence to the host.  Three fungal- specific mitochondrial ETC complex CI subunits - Goa1p, Nuo1p (Nuxm) and Nuo2p (NUZM) have been associated with assembly of CI and mitochondrial function in this organism. They also carry on a number of cellular bioprocess including cell wall mannan. To better understand the biological functions of each subunit,  we profile the proteomics of three gene knockout mutants, by comparison with one from wild type  (SN250). We hypothesize the common and CI subunit- specific cellular activities which are bound to mitochondrial CI in this organism.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria are isolated from three biological samples after each strain was grown in Mid-log phase in rich medium containing 2% glucose using the Yeast Mitochondrial Isolation Kit. The proteins of each sample are then isolated using the Yeast Protein Extraction Regent, and supernatant proteins were precipitated by adding ice cold 25 % TCA solution at -20°C for 2 hrs. After washing with 80% acetone , protein samples are dissolved in 8 M urea and then alkylated by 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temp for 15 min in the dark.  The protein digest is carried out with trypsin (25,000:1) and (protein:protease = 100:1) in 2 M urea with 1 mM CaCl2 at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides are acidified with 5% formic acid and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 5 min. The supernatant peptides are then desalted with C18 Spin columns. The final peptide concentration is adjusted to 0.2 μg /μL in 0.1% formic acid solution, which are analyzed using an Oribtrap Fusion MS coupled on-line to an nanoscaled liquid chromatography system in a total of 12 runs .  The peptides in 4-μL of 0.1% formic acid are loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 (75 μM x 500 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for peptide fractionation.  The peptides were initially injected at 500 nL/ min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Rapid Separation Autosampler. The mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid, and phase B consisted of 100% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The peptides were then eluted with a 2 ~ 45% gradient of increasing acetonitrile for 180 min, which was followed by 95% acetonitrile to clean the column, before re-equilibration to 2% acetonitrile.    The instrument is operated in a data-dependent mode with spray voltage of 2.0 kv, and data are collected from an alternative switch from Mass Scan (MS) and tandem MS (MS/MS).  In MS scan, the ions with 350-1600 m/z with a charge state of >3 are selected for further fragmentation in an Oribitrap mass analyzer.  The maximum ion injection times are 50 ms for the full MS scan and 150 ms for MS/MS. The resolution is targeted as 120,000 (m/z, 200) for MS with automatic gain control (AGC) of 5 x 105 and as 15,000 (m/z, 200) for MS/MS with AGC of 2 x 105. Monoisotopic mass (A0) selection is turned off during the analysis. Other isotopic masses with a minimal threshold of 20,000 in +2, +3, +4 or +5 charge state otherwise are accumulated and fragmented within the higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell (HCD normalized energy 30). The product ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter with an isolation window of 2 Da.  Every ion selected for fragmentation is excluded for 30 sec by dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data are transformed to MaxQuant by using the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.3.30) andThermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) with a target- decoy search strategy for qualitative and quantitative analyses.  The peptides assignment is completed by running raw data against the protein sequence database UniProt (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and CGD database (http://www.candidagenome.org/download/sequence/C_albicans_SC5314/Assembly22/current/C_albicans_SC5314_A22_default_proteins.fasta.gz).Mass error is set to MS1 (A0) ≤ 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions.  Other search parameters include trypsin cleavage, fixed protein modification of protein such as cysteine carbamidomethylation and a number of variable modifications such as O-GlcNAc protein modification, protein N-terminal or lysine carbamidomethylation, and methionine oxidation.  False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification sites are specified at 1%.  For protein identification, minimum peptide length is set up as 7 with at least one match of unique peptide that has been achieved. To determine and compare the relative amount of proteins between WT and mutant strains, we also used LFQ (Label Free Quantification) and the iBAQ algorithm that is implemented into MaxQuant to quantitate the content of peptides following a Perseus software (35-37).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Oribtrap fusion ms- nano-scaled liquid chromatography, Proteomics, And candida albicans

### Affiliations
suzhou bionovogene
Institute of dermatology, Chinese academy of medical sciences

### Submitter
jing wang

### Lab Head
Dr xiaodongshe  
Institute of dermatology, Chinese academy of medical sciences


