### Accession
PXD026335

### Title
Mouse Heart SS-31 Proteome and Phosphoproteome

### Description
The heart proteome and phosphoproteome were analyzed in young (5-6-month old), old (24-month old at the start of the study), and elamipretide-treated (for 8 weeks) old mice using shotgun proteomics methods in order to assess the effects of aging on signaling and the ability of mitochondrion-targeted drug elamipretide (SS-31) to reverse age-related changes. Enhancement and suppression of phosphorylation at sites along a variety of proteins was found to occur with age. Elamipretide treatment partially restored the phosphorylation state of proteins that had increased phosphorylation with age, but did not have a large effect those that had decreased phosphorylation with age.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis Frozen hearts were grinded in liquid nitrogen. About 50mg of ground tissue were resuspended in 1600μL of lysis buffer composed of 8M urea, 75mM NaCl, 50mM Tris pH 8.2, protease inhibitors (Roche Complete EDTA-free), and phosphatase inhibitors (50mM beta-glycerophosphate, 10mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1mM sodium orthovanadate and 50mM sodium fluoride). Samples were subjected to 2 cycles of bead beating (1min beating, 1.5min rest) with 0.5mm diameter zirconia beads and sonicated for 5min in ice. Samples were centrifuged at 4ºC to remove debris and lysate protein concentration was measured by BCA assay (Pierce). Protein was reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 55ºC and alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30min at RT. The alkylation reaction was quenched with additional 5mM DTT for 15min at RT. Samples were diluted five-fold with 50mM Tris pH 8.2 and proteins digested with trypsin at 1:200 enzyme to protein ratio at 37ºC overnight. The digestion was quenched by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to pH 2. Samples were centrifuged to remove insoluble material and peptides were desalted over a 50mg tC18 SepPak cartridge (Waters). Cartridges were conditioned with 1mL of methanol, 3mL of 100% acetonitrile (ACN), 1mL of 70% ACN, 0.25% acetic acid (AA) and 1mL of 40% ACN, 0.5% AA; and equilibrated with 3mL of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Then peptide samples were loaded into the cartridges, washed with 3mL of 0.1% TFA and 1mL of 0.5% AA, and then sequentially eluted first with 0.5mL of 40% ACN, 0.5% AA and then with 0.5mL of 70% ACN, 0.25% AA. 20μg and 500μg aliquots of eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -80ºC for proteomic analysis and phosphopeptide enrichment, respectively.  Phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptide enrichment was done by immobilized metal affinity chromatography (IMAC). 500μg of peptides were resuspended in 150μl 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. To prepare IMAC slurry, Ni-NTA magnetic agarose (Qiagen) was stripped with 40mM EDTA for 30 min, reloaded with 10mM FeCl3 for 30 min, washed 3 times and resuspended in 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using a KingFisher Flex robot (Thermo Scientific) programmed to incubate peptides with 150μl 5% bead slurry for 30 min, wash 3 times with 150μl 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, and elute with 60 μl 50% ACN, 0.5% ammonium hydroxide. The eluates were acidified with 30μl 10% formic acid (FA), 75% ACN, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and stored at -80ᵒC until mass spectrometry analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis Peptide and phosphopeptide samples were dissolved in 4% formic acid, 3% acetonitrile, loaded onto a 100μm ID x 3cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse phase chromatography on a 100μm ID x 30cm analytical column packed with 1.9μm beads of the same material and housed into a column heater set at 50ºC. Eluted peptides were online analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides for proteome analysis were eluted into a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an EasyII nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher). The gradient was 9-30% ACN in 0.125% FA over the course of 90min. The total duration of the method, including column wash and equilibration was 120min. All MS spectra were acquired on the orbitrap mass analyzer and stored in centroid mode. Full MS scans were acquired from 300 to 1500 m/z at 70,000 FWHM resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and maximum injection time of 100ms. The 20 most abundant ions on the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 2 m/z precursor isolation window and beam-type collisional-activation dissociation (HCD) with 26% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were collected at 17,500 FWHM resolution with a fill target of 5E4 ions and maximum injection time of 50ms. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 30s. Phosphopeptides for phosphoproteome analysis were eluted into a Velos Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer by gradient elution delivered by an Easy1000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher). The gradient was 9-23% ACN in 0.125% FA over the course of 90 min. The total duration of the method, including column wash and equilibration was 120 min. Full MS scans were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyzer and recorded in centroid mode. Mass range was 300 to 1500, resolution 60,000 FWHM, fill target 3E6 ions, and maximum injection time 100ms. Each MS scan was followed by up to 20 data-dependent MS/MS scans on the top 20 most intense precursor ions with 2 m/z isolation window, collision-induced dissociation (CID) with 35% normalized collision energy, and acquired on the ion trap. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Acquired mass spectra raw files were converted to mzXML format and MS/MS spectra were searched against the mouse SwissProt database including isoforms (downloaded May 10, 2015, 24,750 protein sequences) using the Comet search algorithm (version 2015.02 rev.2) (PMID: 23148064). Search parameters included full tryptic enzyme specificity with up to two missed cleavages permitted, mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor and 1 Da for fragments ions, fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation on cysteines, and as variable modifications methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. Phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was also included as variable modification in phosphoproteome analysis. Peptide matches were filtered to <1% false-discovery rate, using the target-decoy database strategy and Percolator (version 3.1.2) (PMID: 17952086). Protein inference was carried out using Protein Prophet (PMID: 14632076) and protein groups were filtered at ≥90 % probability score. Peptides were quantified using in-house software by peak-area integration of MS1 spectra, peptide intensities were added for every protein group for protein intensity measurements whereas phosphopeptide intensities were treated individually. Phosphorylation site localization was performed using an in-house implementation of Ascore (PMID: 16964243) and sites with an Ascore > 13 were considered localized, which corresponds to a >95% probability of correct assignment (p < 0.05). If Ascore<13 the most likely position is indicated including into brackets the range of residues towards the N and C termini of the phosphopeptide where other phosphorylatable sites reside. Perseus software (PMID: 27348712) was used for bioinformatic and statistical analysis using log2 transformed data from total intensity normalized protein intensities and median normalized phosphopeptide intensities from each run.

### Publication Abstract
It has been demonstrated that elamipretide (SS-31) rescues age-related functional deficits in the heart but the full set of mechanisms behind this have yet to be determined. We investigated the hypothesis that elamipretide influences post-translational modifications to heart proteins. The S-glutathionylation and phosphorylation proteomes of mouse hearts were analyzed using shotgun proteomics to assess the effects of aging on these post-translational modifications and the ability of the mitochondria-targeted drug elamipretide to reverse age-related changes. Aging led to an increase in oxidation of protein thiols demonstrated by increased S-glutathionylation of cysteine residues on proteins from Old (24&#xa0;months old at the start of the study) mouse hearts compared to Young (5-6&#xa0;months old). This shift in the oxidation state of the proteome was almost completely reversed by 8&#xa0;weeks of treatment with elamipretide. Many of the significant changes that occurred were in proteins involved in mitochondrial or cardiac function. We also found changes in the mouse heart phosphoproteome that were associated with age, some of which were partially restored with elamipretide treatment. Parallel reaction monitoring of a subset of phosphorylation sites revealed that the unmodified peptide reporting for Myot S231 increased with age, but not its phosphorylated form and that both phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms of the peptide covering cMyBP-C S307 increased, but that elamipretide treatment did not affect these changes. These results suggest that changes to thiol redox state and phosphorylation status are two ways in which age may affect mouse heart function, which can be restored by treatment with elamipretide.

### Keywords
Heart tissue, Mouse, Elamipretide, Aging, Lc-ms/ms, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Ss-31

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seatte, WA, USA
University of Washington

### Submitter
Judit Villen

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seatte, WA, USA


