### Accession
PXD023591

### Title
Orthogonal degron system for controlled protein degradation in cyanobacteria

### Description
We installed and optimized a genetic tool that allows control over protein stability in a model cyanobacterium. This tool has potential uses for the fundamental study of cyanobacterial genes, and may be useful for the design of more sophisticated, bioindustrial cyanobacterial strains.

### Sample Protocol
Last Updated November 4th 2019  Proteolytic Digestion An aliquot equivalent to 120ug was taken from each sample and precipitated using acetone.  Protein pellets were then re-suspended in 270uL of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 10% trifluoroethanol.  Samples were reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP and Iodoacetamide at 10mM and 40mM, respectively and incubating for 5min at 45C with shaking at 1400 rpm in an Eppendorf ThermoMixer.  Trypsin/LysC enzyme mixture (V5071, www.promega.com) in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, was added at a 1:100 ratio (wt/wt) and the mixture was incubated at 37C overnight.  Final volume of each digest was ~300uL. After digestion, the samples were acidified to 2% TFA and subjected to C18 solid phase clean up using StageTips1 to remove salts.  Eluates were dried using a vacuum centrifuge.  TMT Labeling Peptide samples were then re-suspended in 100uL of 100mM TEAB and labeled with TMT reagents from Thermo Scientific (www.thermo.com) according to manufacturers’ instructions.  A 2uL aliquot of each labeled peptide sample was taken for label incorporation testing.  The remainder of each labeled sample was combined in equal amounts by volume and purified by solid phase extraction using c18 SepPak cartridges (www.waters.com).  Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation to ~2uL and stored at -20C.  Purified peptides were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA to 20uL.  Labeling assignments were are follows:  Sample  Label   2Hr Induced 1  126 2Hr Induced 2  128C 2Hr Induced 3  129C 4Hr Induced 1  127N 4Hr Induced 2  128N 4Hr Induced 3  130C Uninduced 1  127C Uninduced 2  129N Uninduced 3  130N  LC/MS/MS Analysis An injection of 5uL was automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5min with buffer A.  Bound peptides were then eluted onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.75mm x 500mm C18 analytical column over 125min with a gradient of 5%B to 8%B in 5min, 8%B – 40%B in 109min, ramping to 90%B in 1min and held at 90%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B =80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% water) at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min.  Column temperature was maintained at 50C using an integrated column heater (PRSO, v2, www.sonation.com).  Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120,000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 15 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 45,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra are converted to peak lists using ProteomeDiscoverer, v2.2.0 (www.thermo.com) and searched against a protein database containing all S. elongatus PC7942 entries found in UniProt (www.uniprot.org, downloaded 2019-10-11), customer provided sequences and appended with common laboratory contaminants (downloaded from www.thegpm.org) using the Mascot searching algorithm, v 2.6, within ProteomeDiscoverer.  The Mascot output was then analyzed using Scaffold Q+S, v4.10.0 (www.proteomesoftware.com) to probabilistically validate protein identifications with the X!Tandem validation search option selected.  Assignments validated using the Scaffold 1%FDR confidence filter are considered true.    Mascot parameters for all databases were as follows: -  allow up to 2 missed tryptic sites -  Fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl Cysteine, TMT10 of Lysine and peptide N-term - variable modification of Oxidation of Methionine - peptide tolerance of +/- 10ppm - MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da 1. Rappsilber,J., Mann,M., Ishihama,Y., Nat.Protoc., 2007, 2: 1896-1906

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synechococcus elongatus pcc 7942, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University
MSU

### Submitter
Jonathan Sakkos

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Ducat
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State University


