### Accession
PXD019827

### Title
Synthetic fluoro peptides in neat solvent and complex proteome background

### Description
This dataset was generated to model discovery of uncommon and non-canonical PTM by agnostic analysis. Synthetic DFSAFILVEFCR peptides were obtained in three chemoforms, all with carbamidomethylated C12: 1) with unmodified phenylalanines, 2) with fluoro-F2, and 3) with fluoro-F11. Peptide composition and chemical modifications were confirmed using mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed in neat solvent for sequence and modification confirmation, and in the context of AML cell tryptic proteome.

### Sample Protocol
OCIAML2 cell proteomes was extracted, and cysteine residues were reduced and derivatized with iodoacetamide. Syntetic peptides were spiked in 200ng background at 100 fmol (F11) or 10 fmol (F2). Samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS with MS2 recorded in the orbitrap detector

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using Byonic to confirm identity of the syntetic peptides and recording of fragmentation spectra for all chemoforms.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have revealed diverse amino acid, post-translational, and noncanonical modifications of proteins in diverse organisms and tissues. However, their unbiased detection and analysis remain hindered by technical limitations. Here, we present a spectral alignment method for the identification of protein modifications using high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics. Termed SAMPEI for spectral alignment-based modified peptide identification, this open-source algorithm is designed for the discovery of functional protein and peptide signaling modifications, without prior knowledge of their identities. Using synthetic standards and controlled chemical labeling experiments, we demonstrate its high specificity and sensitivity for the discovery of substoichiometric protein modifications in complex cellular extracts. SAMPEI mapping of mouse macrophage differentiation revealed diverse post-translational protein modifications, including distinct forms of cysteine itaconatylation. SAMPEI's robust parametrization and versatility are expected to facilitate the discovery of biological modifications of diverse macromolecules. SAMPEI is implemented as a Python package and is available open-source from BioConda and GitHub (https://github.com/FenyoLab/SAMPEI).

### Keywords
Lc-msms fluorination modifications ptm orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


