### Accession
PXD002067

### Title
Wheat Allergens MALDI-TOF/TOF -  Using 7 cm immobilized pH gradient strips to determine levels of clinically relevant proteins in wheat grain extracts

### Description
The aim of the work was to test relatively simple proteomics approach based on phenol extraction and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) with 7cm immobilized pH gradient strips for the determination of clinically relevant proteins in wheat grain.  Using this approach, 157 2-DE spots were quantified in biological triplicate, out of which 55 were identified by MALDI-TOF/TOF mass spectrometry. Clinically relevant proteins associated with celiac disease, wheat dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis, baker´s asthma, and food allergy, were detected in 24 2-DE spots.  However, alcohol-soluble gliadins were not detected with this approach.  The comparison with recent quantitative study suggested that gel-based and gel-free proteomics approaches are complementary for the detection and quantification of clinically relevant proteins in wheat grain.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds were grinded in liquid nitrogen and proteins were extracted with phenol-based extraction media. Sample (50 µg protein) was diluted in isoelectric focusing (IEF) buffer, and loaded onto 7 cm immobilized pH gradient (IPG) strips of pH 3-10. The equilibrated strips were loaded on the top of 10% polyacrylamide gel and the electrophoresis was run at 80V. Gels were stained for 16 hour with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250. Mass spectrometry analysis was done with tandem Time of Flight (TOF/TOF) mass spectrometer in combination with matrix assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) using ultrafleXtreme instrument.

### Data Protocol
Acquired spectra were processed by flexAnalysis 3.3 software (Bruker). The MS/MS peak lists were imported into the ProteinScape 2.1 proteomic data management software (Bruker).  Peptide identification was performed by in-house Mascot 2.3 server (Matrix Science), querying against the non-redundant Triticeae plant protein UniProt database downloaded on April, 2014 (100 981 entries). For allergenicity assessment, identified proteins were queried against Allergome database containing 2994 allergen entries, using Allergome Aligner module with embeded NCBI blastp v.2.2.18 algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of the work was to test a relatively simple proteomics approach based on phenol extraction and two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) with 7 cm immobilized pH gradient strips for the determination of clinically relevant proteins in wheat grain. Using this approach, 157 2-DE spots were quantified in biological triplicate, out of which 55 were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization - time of flight tandem mass spectrometry. Clinically relevant proteins associated with celiac disease, wheat dependent exercise induced anaphylaxis, baker's asthma, and food allergy, were detected in 24 2-DE spots. However, alcohol-soluble gliadins were not detected with this approach. The comparison with a recent quantitative study suggested that gel-based and gel-free proteomics approaches are complementary for the detection and quantification of clinically relevant proteins in wheat grain.

### Keywords
Grain, Gel-based quantification, Maldi-tof/tof, Triticum aestivum, Allergen

### Affiliations
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovakia
Plant Science and Biodiversity Center SAS

### Submitter
Maksym Danchenko

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hajduch
Institute of Plant Genetics and Biotechnology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Slovakia


