### Accession
PXD009284

### Title
DNA repair proximity landscape analysis reveals shieldin as a key regulator of NHEJ-dependent processes

### Description
By combining proximity labeling with quantitative mass spectrometry, we generated high-resolution interaction neighborhood maps of the endogenously expressed DNA repair factors 53BP1, BRCA1, and MDC1.

### Sample Protocol
Apex lableing was done as described previously. Nuclear fractionation was done to enrich nuclei and subsequently, nuclei were lysed in RIPA buffer. Clarified lysate was collected and proteins were quantified by Bradford’s reagent. Nuclear lysates from control and bait-expressing cells were mixed 1:1 and incubated with Strep-Tactin sepharose beads slurry at 4 C on a rotating wheel for overnight. The bound proteins were eluted by boiling the beads at 95 C for 15 min with 50µl 4x NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen). Eluates were alkylated with 5.5mM chloroacetamide. The proteins were resolved on a NuPAGE Novex® Bis-Tris 4-12% gel (Invitrogen), the gel was stained with Novex® colloidal blue stain (Invitrogen), and subsequently destained with water. Gel lanes for each sample were sliced, destained further with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer containing 50% ethanol. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100% ethanol and proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin (Sigma) at 37 C for 16h. Trypsin digestion was stopped by incubating the gel pieces with trifluoroacetic acid and the resulting peptides were eluted with increasing concentration of acetonitrile and desalted on reversed-phase C18 StageTips. The peptides were eluted from StageTips by adding 40µl of elution buffer containing 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Acetonitrile concentration in the eluates was reduced to less than 5% by vacuum centrifugation and peptides were diluted with a buffer containing 0.5% acetic acid and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid before injecting into a mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data files were analyzed using MaxQuant. A UniProt database against human proteome obtained from the UniProtKB  was used to search for parent ion and MS/MS spectra using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Tandem mass spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing max. 2 missed cleavage sites. N-terminal protein acetylation, and methionine oxidation were searched as variable modifications, whereas cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 0.01 estimated using a target-decoy approach.

### Publication Abstract
Repair of damaged DNA is essential for maintaining genome integrity and for preventing genome-instability-associated diseases, such as cancer. By combining proximity labeling with quantitative mass spectrometry, we generated high-resolution interaction neighborhood maps of the endogenously expressed DNA repair factors 53BP1, BRCA1, and MDC1. Our spatially resolved interaction maps reveal rich network intricacies, identify shared and bait-specific interaction modules, and implicate previously concealed regulators in this process. We identified a novel vertebrate-specific protein complex, shieldin, comprising REV7 plus three previously uncharacterized proteins, RINN1 (CTC-534A2.2), RINN2 (FAM35A), and RINN3 (C20ORF196). Recruitment of&#xa0;shieldin to DSBs, via the ATM-RNF8-RNF168-53BP1-RIF1 axis, promotes NHEJ-dependent repair of intrachromosomal breaks, immunoglobulin class-switch recombination (CSR), and fusion of unprotected telomeres. Shieldin functions as a downstream effector of 53BP1-RIF1 in restraining DNA end resection and in sensitizing BRCA1-deficient cells to PARP inhibitors. These findings have implications for understanding cancer-associated PARPi resistance and the evolution of antibody CSR in higher vertebrates.

### Keywords
Shieldin, Dna damage repair, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
The Novo Nordisk Foundation center for Protein Research
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Rajat Gupta

### Lab Head
Dr Chunaram Choudhary
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


