### Accession
PXD013187

### Title
S-acylproteomic analysis of human prostate cancer LNCaP cells by LB-ABE

### Description
Deep S-acylproteomic analysis of LNCaP cells by coupling LB-ABE with label-free quantitative proteomics

### Sample Protocol
After LB-ABE enrichment of proteins from three biological replicates of LNCaP cells, enriched proteins were digested by an endoproteinase (i.e., Trypsin, Asp-N, or Arg-C) using FASP. Briefly, in Microcon-YM30 spin filters, protein samples were washed by 200 μL Urea Solution (100 mM Tris-HCl, 8 M Urea, pH8.5) for two times, alkylated by 200 μL 55 mM iodoacetamide in Urea solution for 30 min in the dark at RT, washed by 200 μL Urea solution once, and washed by 200 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer for four times. After each wash, samples were centrifuged at 14,000×g for 15 to 25 min at 20°C. Subsequently, the collection tubes were replaced with clean ones, and 50 μL 2 ng/μL endoproteinase (trypsin, Asp-N, or Arg-C) was added. After 16-h protein digestion in a water-bath at 37°C, samples were centrifuged at 14,000×g for 10 min at 20°C, followed by the addition of 40 μL 50 mM NH4HCO3 buffer to the upper chamber and centrifugation at 14,000×g for 10 min at 20°C. The collected digestion products were concentrated in a SpeedVac and stored at -80°C until LC-MS/MS analysis.  Label-free LC-MS/MS was performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer essentially as we previously described.10,11 Peptides were redissolved with 40 μL 0.2% formic acid. Ten microliters of peptide solution were loaded onto a 2-cm trap column and separated on a 50-cm EASY-Spray analytical column heated to 55°C, using a gradient of 2-34% B in 174 min, 34-60% B in 10 min, 60-100% B in 2 min, and 100% B in 14 min at the flow rate of 150 nL/min. Separated peptides were ionized by an EASY-Spray ion source. Mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner, with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans. In MS scans, the lock mass at m/z 445.120025 was applied to provide internal mass calibration. The full scan was performed in 240,000 resolution at m/z 400 Th, with an ion packet setting of 1×106 for automatic gain control and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. Up to 20 most intense peptide ions with charge state of ≥2 were automatically selected for MS/MS fragmentation by rapid collision-induced dissociation (rCID), using 7,500 resolution, 1×104 automatic gain control, 50 ms maximum injection time, 10 ms activation time and 35% normalized collision energy. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 1, an exclusion duration of 30 s, and a repeat duration of 90 s.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS data (36 RAW files) were searched against the Uniprot_Human database (released on 01/22/2016, containing 20,985 sequences) using the Andromeda9 algorithm in the MaxQuant5 (v1.5.5.1) environment. The searching parameters were set as follows: trypsin/P, Asp-N, or Arg-C as the protease; oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), NEM(C), and carbamidomethyl(C) as variable modifications; up to two missed cleavages; minimal peptide length as 7; mass tolerance for MS1 was 4.5 ppm for main search and for MS2 was 0.5 Da; identification of second peptides enabled; LFQ quantification enabled, and match-between-runs within 2 min were enabled. A stringent 1% FDR was used to filter PSM, peptide, and protein identifications.

### Publication Abstract
Protein <i>S</i>-acylation (also called palmitoylation) is a common post-translational modification whose deregulation plays a key role in the pathogenesis of many diseases. Acyl-biotinyl exchange (ABE), a widely used method for the enrichment of <i>S</i>-acylated proteins, has the potential of capturing the entire <i>S</i>-acylproteome in any type of biological sample. Here, we showed that current ABE methods suffer from a high background arising from the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins. The background can be substantially reduced by an additional blockage of residual free cysteine residues with 2,2'-dithiodipyridine prior to the biotin-HPDP reaction. Coupling the low-background ABE (LB-ABE) method with label-free proteomics, 2&#x202f;895 high-confidence candidate <i>S</i>-acylated proteins (including 1&#x202f;591 known <i>S</i>-acylated proteins) were identified from human prostate cancer LNCaP cells, representing so-far the largest <i>S</i>-acylproteome data set identified in a single study. Immunoblotting analysis confirmed the <i>S</i>-acylation of five known and five novel prostate cancer-related <i>S</i>-acylated proteins in LNCaP cells and suggested that their <i>S</i>-acylation levels were about 0.6-1.8%. In summary, the LB-ABE method largely eliminates the coisolation of non-<i>S</i>-acylated proteins and enables deep <i>S</i>-acylproteomic analysis. It is expected to facilitate a much more comprehensive and accurate quantification of <i>S</i>-acylproteomes than previous ABE methods.

### Keywords
Palmitoylation; s-acylation; palmitoyl-proteomics; s-acylproteomics; lncap; lb-abe

### Affiliations
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center

### Submitter
Wei Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Yang
Cedars-Sinai Medical Center


