### Accession
PXD027525

### Title
Proteomic profiling to predict therapeutic response to anti-PD1 therapy in advanced melanoma

### Description
Purpose Antibody-blockade of PD-1 shows durable responses, but so far, few biomarkers accurately predict if patients with metastatic melanoma will respond.  Experimental design We analyzed baseline serum samples (n=56) and tumor cell cultures (n=8), from melanoma patients treated with anti-PD1 therapy. Two approaches concentrating low abundant proteins in serum and two different mass spectrometry (MS) methods were applied: depletion of high abundant proteins with shotgun-MS, and N-glycosite enrichment combined with SWATH-MS. Tumor cell cultures were processed as whole cell lysates with subsequent shotgun-MS.  Results Focusing on the non-responder proteome, we identified pathways such as inflammatory processes, cell adhesion and migration, scavenger receptor activity, RAGE receptor binding, platelet aggregation, neutrophil degranulation and integrin signaling to be upregulated. Analyzing the tumor cell proteome revealed a distinctive immunophenotype with CD antigens highly overexpressed in non-responders. Validation of a subset of these markers, performed by immunofluorescence staining of a tissue microarray, revealed a higher mean of positive cells in the tumor microenvironment of non-responders. Validation of serum proteome markers on a second baseline cohort by using a timsTOF for ion mobility MS, revealed significant differences between responder and non-responder for the proteins ORM2, SERPINA1, EFEMP1, and VASN. TCGA survival analysis demonstrated prognostic significance for multiple proteins of our signature correlating with lower overall survival in melanoma patients. Based on this study, we suggest a protein-panel for responsiveness to PD-1 blockade consisting of 14 serum and 33 tumor cell markers that will be the basis for further research.

### Sample Protocol
Study cohort All samples were collected after written informed consent and approval of local ethics committee (Swissethics, Kantonale Ethikkommission Zürich, BASEC-Nr.PB.2017-00494) in accordance with Good Clinical Practice guidelines and the Declaration of Helsinki. The initial study cohort included 56 melanoma patients, which were treated with anti-PD-1 therapy at University Hospital Zurich where blood samples (n=56) were drawn at timepoint baseline, meaning prior to therapy. Tumor tissue which was used for cultivation of primary melanoma cells (n=8), originated from surgical excisions of those patients. Clinical parameters were documented at baseline, between –8 and +5 days from the start of the treatment, with a median of 0 days, meaning most samples were collected on the day of treatment initiation. Only deviating from this, two LDH measurements at day 22 after treatment initiation and seventeen S100 concentrations which were determined after the start of treatment (range: 1–64 days). According to therapy response, patients were assigned to subgroup responder (R) or non-responder (NR) for data analysis. Response to therapy was evaluated after 4 months of treatment. R (n=36) were classified as undergoing a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR), and NR (n=20) were defined as stable disease (SD) or progressive disease (PD) state. PFS represents the period between the treatment initiation and the date of progression or death. Patients’ characteristics and parameters are provided in Figure 1b and Table S1. For validation, we further collected melanoma tumor tissues (n=113; Table S2) from 30 patients on a tissue microarray (TMA) and obtained an additional baseline serum cohort (n=17; Table S3) (Ethikkommission der Medizinischen Universität Wien, EK1890/2018).   timsTOF data acquisition  Enzymatic digestion was performed, employing an in-solution digestion protocol (Humphrey, 2018) as previously described (Weiss, 2021). After sample clean-up via SDB-RPS StageTips (Humphrey, 2018), peptides were eluted, dried and reconstituted in 5μl 30% FA containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and diluted with 40μl of loading solvent (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid). Of this solution, 500nl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC-system (Thermo). Peptides were concentrated onto a pre-column (2cm×75μm C18 Pepmap100, Thermo) at a flow rate of 10μl/min, using mobile phase A (97.9% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA). By elution from the pre-column, they were separated to an analytical column (25cm×75μm Aurora Series emitter column; Ionopticks), applying a flow rate of 300nl/min and using a gradient of 7% to 40% mobile phase B (80% ACN, 20% H2O, 0.1% FA) over 55min, resulting in a total LC run time of 85min including washing and equilibration steps. MS analyses were accomplished using timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650V. The timsTOF Pro was operated in Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Trapped ion mobility separation was achieved by applying a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 to 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 166ms. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.88s. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded using a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700. Collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 52eV and quadrupole isolation width was set to 2Th for m/z<700 and 3Th for m/z>700.

### Data Protocol
For ion mobility mass spectrometry (IMMS) data, the software pipeline FragPipe (v13.0) employing the search algorithm MSFragger (v3.0) and Philosopher (v3.2.7) for peptide and protein identification statistics combined with IonQuant (v1.3.0) was used. Mass tolerance was set to 50ppm and 20ppm for MS1 and MS2, respectively. One missed cleavage was allowed. Fixed/variable modifications and peptide identification were set as described above. For protein quantification, a MaxLFQ approach with IonQuant was chosen. “Match-between-runs” (MBR) parameters were set to a retention time window of 1min and an ion mobility window of 0.05 1/K0. A MBR FDR cut-off value of 0.01 on ion, peptide and protein level was applied. Statistical analysis was performed using Perseus (v1.6.14.0), as described above. For each variable, Wilcoxon rank sum tests were calculated with “Response” as group variable. If the sample size per group was <5, no Wilcoxon rank sum test was applied. Additionally, a principal component analysis (PCA) was applied (R-function prcomp) whereby data was scaled for analysis. In the PCA, variables with a p-value<0.05 were included. Wilcoxon rank sum test was calculated with the first principal component as dependent variable and “Response” as group variable. Statistical analyses were conducted with R (v4.0.5). The significance level was set to alpha=0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Shotgun-ms, Immunotherapy, Serumdepletion, Swath-ms, Predictive biomarker

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Joint Metabolome Facility, Department of Analytical Chemistry


