### Accession
PXD003159

### Title
Heptad-specific phosphorylation of RNA polymerase II CTD

### Description
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) consists of heptad repeats with the consensus motif Y1-S2-P3-T4-S5-P6-S7. Dynamic phosphorylation of the CTD coordinates Pol II progression through the transcription cycle. Monoclonal antibodies have been used to study in vivo the potentially phosphorylated CTD amino acids (Y1, S2, T4, S5 and S7). However, the epitopes detected by antibodies can be masked by proteins or modifications at neighbouring sites. Therefore, the effectiveness of antibodies in western blot or ChIP analysis reflects the number of accessible CTD phosphorylation marks, but not the total number of phosphorylations. Most importantly, CTD phospho-specific antibodies do not provide any heptad - (location) specific information of CTD phosphorylation. Due to these limitations, the principles and patterns of CTD phosphorylation remained elusive. Here, we use genetic and mass spectrometric approaches to directly detect and map phosphosites along the entire CTD. We confirm phosphorylation of CTD residues Y1, S2, T4, S5 and S7 in mammalian and yeast cells. Although specific phosphorylation signatures dominate, adjacent CTD repeats can be differently phosphorylated, leading to a high variation of coexisting phosphosites in mono- and di-heptad CTD repeats. Inhibition of CDK9 kinase specifically reduces S2 phosphorylation levels within the CTD.

### Sample Protocol
CTD sequences were cloned into the expression vector LS*mock, which carries the haemagglutinin (HA)-tagged mouse Rpb1 gene. A point mutation (N793D) in Rpb1 confers resistance to α-amanitin and allows the chemical ‘knock-out’ and functional replacement of endogeneous Pol II. For MS analysis, Rpb1 was purified by immunoprecipitation (IP) using a combination of two phospho-CTD-specific antibodies (α-S2P (3E10) and α-S5P (3E8)) or HA-tag-specific antibodies. The CTD phospho-specific antibodies purified the hyperphosphorylated Pol IIO form to an extent of 80-90%. The detection of the two main Rpb1 species (IIO- and IIA-form) using Coomassie stained SDS-PAGE served as quality control for efficient purification of recombinant Rpb1. The two different Pol II forms were separately excised and subjected to in-gel cleavage, followed by TiO2-phospho-enrichment and liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer output was processed for downstream analyses and visualizations using R (http://www.r-project.org). All data obtained from the same variant and same experimental condition were pooled. Only peptides with a search engine rank of 1 were considered for downstream analysis. Phosphosite assignments were made by comparing site- specific phosphorylation probabilities, as calculated by PhosphoRS with the probability thresholds defined by analysing synthetic peptides as follows: MS output of synthetic peptide runs were processed in the same way as for the biological samples. We determined the fraction of false positive phosphorylation assignments by calculating the ratio of unexpected, false positive versus total phoshorylation assignment as a function of a range of threshold levels on the PhosphoRS site probabilities. For this procedure we separated the data based on the total number of phosphorylation events per peptide (Ptotal) as the site probabilities were inversely correlated with Ptotal. Accordingly we defined specific thresholds for each level of Ptotal to yield a false positive rate of 20%. In the biological samples, PhosphoRS sites not passing this filter were marked ambiguous. In addition, peptides with both Y1P and C-terminal PK were removed. Context-independent reporting of site-specific phosphorylation included only unambiguous assignments. Phosphorylation pattern analysis and context-dependent reporting excluded instances in which ambiguous sites were present in the respective context. For example, analysis of phosphorylation patterns in mono-heptads included only heptads that did not have ambiguous phosphorylation calls.

### Publication Abstract
The carboxy-terminal domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) consists of heptad repeats with the consensus motif Y1-S2-P3-T4-S5-P6-S7. Dynamic phosphorylation of the CTD coordinates Pol II progression through the transcription cycle. Here, we use genetic and mass spectrometric approaches to directly detect and map phosphosites along the entire CTD. We confirm phosphorylation of CTD residues Y1, S2, T4, S5, and S7 in mammalian and yeast cells. Although specific phosphorylation signatures dominate, adjacent CTD repeats can be differently phosphorylated, leading to a high variation of coexisting phosphosites in mono- and di-heptad CTD repeats. Inhibition of CDK9 kinase specifically reduces S2 phosphorylation levels within the CTD.

### Keywords
Pol ii ctd; ctd heptads; ctd phosphosites; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Biomedical Center Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Biomedical Center Munich Molecular Biology Großhaderner Strasse 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried


