### Accession
PXD014314

### Title
Proteomic-based identification of oocyte maturation-related proteins in mouse GV oocytes

### Description
In this study, we applied 1D SDS-PAGE and RP-LC-MS/MS to investigate the proteins stored in GV mouse oocytes. This high-performance strategy allowed us to define a set of 1405 different mouse GV oocyte proteins. It is confirmed that this study will help us to understand the diverse biological processes occurring in mouse oocytes and during early embryo development. However, compared with proteomic analysis of other cells and tissues, such as embryonic stems from cells and liver, the proteins identified in mature mouse oocytes were limited. This was mainly due to the fact that oocytes obtained from each mouse were very limited. We believe that the catalog of maternal proteins presented in this article is a starting point and we anticipate that more researches on the oocyte proteome will deduce most of the maternal proteins.

### Sample Protocol
1 Oocyte collection GV oocytes were selected from ICR female mice, weighing 25-30g, approximately 46-48 hours after intraperitoneal injection of 10 IU pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG). By removing and mincing ovaries, cumulus-enclosed oocytes were released in HEPES-CZB. Cumulus cells were subsequently removed by repeated pipetting through a narrow-bore pipette. Afterwards, zona pellucidae (ZP) were removed by treating oocytes with acid Tyrode solution (pH 2.5) for a few seconds, followed by mechanical shearing. During this process, oocyte morphology was rigorously monitored and the oocytes with shape-abnormalities or with cytoplasmic-abnormalities (dark cytoplasm, granular cytoplasm, and refractile body) were discarded. Only the denuded oocytes with normal morphology were selected for further investigation. ZP-free oocytes were washed 3 times in 0.01 M PBS and stored in lysis buffer at -80°C if necessary. 2 Oocyte protein extraction The qualified oocytes with rigorous criteria were homogenized in a lysis buffer consisted of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS), 65 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and 1% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL, USA), and kept at 4 °C for 1 h. The mixture was centrifugated at 40,000 × g at 4 °C for 1 h, the supernatant was collected by removing the insoluble material. Protein concentration was detected using the Bradford method taking BSA as the internal standard [5].  3 One-dimensional SDS-PAGE and in-gel digestion Briefly, proteins extracted from the 11,000 GV oocytes were dissolved in SDS-PAGE loading buffer, which were then loaded in a single lane on a 1-mm-thick 10% polyacrylamide gel. After separation, the gel was visualized by Coomassie brilliant blue staining according to a published procedure [6]. Thereafter, the gel was cut into 30 slices, and each slice was cut into 1 mm3 gel particles for in-gel digestion. In-gel digestion was performed as following: wash gel particles for 3 times in deionized water and subsequently dehydrate with 100% acetonitrile (ACN) for 10 min. The particles were incubated with 10 mM DTT in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h at 56°C for the propose of protein reduction. The resulting free thiol (-SH) groups were subsequently alkylated by incubating the samples with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min in the dark. Wash the gel with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and decolore twice with 50% ACN solution and dehydrate with 100% ACN sequentially. The gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 12 h at 37°C for protein digestion. Supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, and the remaining peptides were extracted by incubating the gel pieces twice with 30% ACN in 3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), followed by dehydration with 100% ACN. The extracts were combined and lyophilized to dryness, and the resulting peptides were used for mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
1 Online reverse-phase LC-MS/MS In terms of capillary reverse-phase LC (cLC) and mass spectrometric analysis, 30 fractions were sequentially loaded onto a Michrom peptide CapTrap (MW 0.550 kD, 0.5×2 mm; Michrom BioResources, Inc., Auburn, CA) at a flow rate of 50 μl/min with buffer A (see below). The trap column effluent was then transferred to a reverse-phase microcapillary column (0.1×150 mm, packed with Magic C18, 5 μm, 100 ?; Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA). The reverse-phase separation of peptides was performed using the following buffers: 5% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 95% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (buffer B); a 56-min gradient (54.5% buffer B for 41 min, 90% buffer B for 5 min, and 5% buffer B for 10 min). Peptide analysis was performed using Finnigan LTQ Orbitrap (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA) coupled directly to an LC column. An MS survey scan was carried out for the m/z range 400-1800, and MS/MS spectra were acquired from the survey scan for the top 10 most intense ions (as determined by Xcaliber mass spectrometer software in real time). Dynamic mass exclusion windows of 60 s were applied, and siloxane (m/z 445.120025) was ruled as an internal standard [7]. 2 Database search DTA files (Bioworks version 3.3) in ASCII format for each MS/MS spectrum with a minimum ion count of 8 were generated from the original data for the peptide mass range of 400-8,000. The resulting spectra were independently captured from the International Protein Index Mouse database (ipi.MOUSE.v3.30, downloaded from http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/IPI), containing 56450 entries by using SEQUEST analysis software (Bioworks version 3.3, ThermoFinnigan). Carbamido methylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine was considered as a variable modification. The initial mass tolerances for protein identification on MS and MS/MS peaked at 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively. Two missed cleavages were permitted. Singly charged ions were discarded since that they were small in quantity. SEQUEST search results to the process with the Trans-Pipeline Proteomics (TPP) software. The protein false positive rate (FDR) was estimated by searching against the database of the reversed amino acid sequence, which was considered to be false positive, and it was calculated by TPP software. All output files were searched against the forward and reversed IPI mouse database, separately, and FDR for all matched peptide-to-spectrum was calculated. For bioinformatics analysis, each IPI accession number was converted to an Entrez Gene ID according to the IPI protein cross-references file, which was downloaded from http://ftp.ebi.ac.uk/pub/databases/IPI. Babelomics was applied to find statistically over- and underrepresented GO categories in our oocyte proteome dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Oocyte proteins play an important role in oocyte maturation, fertilization and embryonic development. However, the protein composition of mouse germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes is still unclear. Using one-dimensional Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate Polyacrylamide Gel Electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE) and Reverse-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS), we constructed a protein profile of mouse GV oocytes. First, our proteomics profile identified 1,405 different proteins from 11,000 mouse GV oocytes lacking zona pellucida. Second, with detailed bioinformatics analysis, a group of proteins that play an essential role in oocyte maturation was screened. In addition, the expression and localization of suppressor of G2 allele of skp1(SUGT1, also called SGT1), heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K&#xa0;(Hnrpk), Seruin, Cullin1(Clu1) and nuclear distribution protein C (Nudc) in mouse ovaries and early embryos were also captured and investigated in this study. Moreover, the protein profile was submitted to the Proteomics Identifications Database (PRIDE) and is available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD014314. Our research provides valuable resources for the study of oocyte proteins and oocyte maturation and helps to clarify the mechanisms of oocyte maturation.

### Keywords
Gv oocytes, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Huai’an Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Huai’an, 223002, P.R. China; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, P.R. China
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Huai’an Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Huai’an, P.R. China

### Submitter
Senyang Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Senyang Cao
Center of Reproductive Medicine, Huai’an Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital, Huai’an, 223002, P.R. China; State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, P.R. China


