### Accession
PXD021320

### Title
AltFUS interactome from mitochondrial extracts

### Description
Novel functional coding sequences (altORFs) are camouflaged within annotated ones (CDS) in a different reading frame. We discovered an altORF nested in the FUS CDS encoding a conserved 170 amino acid protein, altFUS. AltFUS is endogenously expressed in human tissues, notably in the motor cortex and motor neurons. Overexpression of wild-type FUS and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-linked FUS mutants is known to trigger toxic mechanisms in different models. These include an inhibition of autophagy, loss of mitochondrial potential, and accumulation of cytoplasmic aggregates. We show here that altFUS, not FUS, is responsible for the inhibition of autophagy. AltFUS is also pivotal in the mechanisms leading to the mitochondrial potential loss and accumulation of cytoplasmic aggregates. Suppression of altFUS expression in a Drosophila model of FUS-related toxicity protects against neurodegeneration. Some mutations found in ALS patients are overlooked because of their synonymous effect on the FUS protein. Yet we showed they exert a deleterious effect via their missense consequence on the overlapping altFUS protein. These findings demonstrate that FUS is a bicistronic gene and suggest that both proteins, FUS and altFUS, cooperate in toxic mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial extracts of HEK293 cells were centrifuged at 13 000 x g for 10 mins at 4 °C to remove the supernatant and were resuspended in FPLC buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % Triton X-100, pH 7.5, filtered with 0.2 μm filters) at 2 mg/mL for a total of 4 mg of mitochondrial proteins. Samples were incubated on ice for 15 mins and then centrifuged at 10 000 x g for 5 mins at 4 °C and the supernatant was loaded in the injection syringe without disrupting the pellet. The FPLC was performed on a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 200 pg column (GE Healthcare, Chicago, USA) at 4 °C. The column was pre-equilibrated with the FPLC buffer for up to 0.2 CV (column volume) and the sample was applied at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min with a pressure alarm set at 0.5 MPa. The elution was performed over 72 fractions of 1.5 mL for a maximum of 1.1 CV. For altFUS probing by western blot, proteins were precipitated from 150 μL of each 4 fractions in technical duplicates. First, 600 μL of methanol was added to each tube and mixed gently, before adding 150 μL of chloroform. Tubes were gently inverted 10 times before adding 450 μL of milliQ H2O and vortexing briefly. After centrifugation at 12 000 x g for 3 mins, the upper phase was discarded, and 400 μL of methanol was added. Tubes are centrifuged at 16 000 x g for 4 mins and the pellet was resuspended in loading buffer. For interactome analysis by mass spectrometry, fractions of interest (8 to 14) were pooled together and incubated at 4 °C overnight with magnetic FLAG beads (Sigma, M8823) pre-conditioned with FPLC buffer. The beads were then washed 3 times with 5 mL of FPLC buffer, and 5 times with 5 mL of 20 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC). Proteins were eluted and reduced from the beads using 10 mM DTT (15mins at 55 °C), and then treated with 20 mM IAA (1 hour at room temperature in the dark). Proteins were digested overnight by adding 1 μg of trypsin (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) in 100 μL ABC at 37 °C overnight. Digestion was quenched using 1 % formic acid and supernatant was collected. Beads were washed once with acetonitrile/water/formic acid (1/1/0.01 v/v) and pooled with supernatant. Peptides were dried with a speedvac, desalted using a C18 Zip-Tip (Millipore Sigma, Etobicoke, Ontario, Canada) and resuspended into 30 μl of 1% formic acid in water prior to MS analysis. Peptides were separated in a PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The setup used a 0–35% gradient (0–215 min) of 90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 200 nL/min followed by acetonitrile wash and column re-equilibration for a total gradient duration of 4 h with a RSLC Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dionex). Peptides were sprayed using an EASYSpray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 2 kV coupled to a quadrupole-Orbitrap (QExactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Full-MS spectra within a m/z 350–1600 mass range at 70,000 resolution were acquired with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1e6 and a maximum accumulation time (maximum IT) of 20 ms. Fragmentation (MS/MS) of the top ten ions detected in the Full-MS scan at 17,500 resolution, AGC target of 5e5, a maximum IT of 60 ms with a fixed first mass of 50 within a 3 m/z isolation window at a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25. Dynamic exclusion was set to 40 s.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW files were searched with Andromeda search engine implemented in MaxQuant 1.5.5.1. The digestion mode was set at Trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptides. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Precursor and fragment tolerances were set at 4.5 and 20 ppm respectively. Files were searched using a target-decoy approach against UniprotKB (Homo sapiens 03/2017 release) with the addition of altFUS sequence for a total of 92,949 entries. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 1% for peptide-spectrum-match, peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Altfus, Alternative protein

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada

### Submitter
Marie A Brunet

### Lab Head
Dr Roucou Xavier
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Genomics, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Canada


