### Accession
PXD035842

### Title
Proteomic Evaluation of the Influence of Shear Stress and BRD4-Inhibition on Human Umbilical Vein Endothelial Cells

### Description
Atherosclerosis is an important pathological factor in the development of cardiovascular diseases. In addition to increased plasma lipid concentrations, irregular/oscillatory shear stress and inflammatory processes trigger pathophysiological changes. Inhibitors of the transcription modulatory bromo- and extra-terminal domain (BET) protein family (BETi) could offer a possible therapeutic approach due to their anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, the influence of laminar shear stress, inflammation and BETi on human endothelial cells in an atherosclerosis in vitro model was investigated using global protein expression profiling. For this purpose, human umbilical cord derived vascular endothelial cells (HUVEC) were treated with TNFα to mimic the inflammatory condition and were exposed to 24h laminar shear stress in the presence or absence of a BRD4 inhibitor, JQ1. Data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS) alloqed us to quantify 3316 proteins for further statistical analysis. Differentially regulated proteins indicate a clear influence of inflammation and shear stress on human endothelial cells. Overall, application of JQ1 is led to significant changes in the proteome, including a strong anti-inflammatory response as well as a potentially negative impact on atherosclerosis formation. To our knowledge, this is the first proteomics study on HUVEC which investigates the influence of shear stress and BET inhibition in TNFα inflammatory endothelial cell culture model.

### Sample Protocol
Harvested cells were suspended in 50 µl lysis buffer and lysed by sonication in a waterbath (4°C, 6x5 min intervals). Protein concentrations were estimated by BCA assay and low volume UV detection . Excess DNA was degraded by Nuclease digestion. Following centrifugation the supernatants were transferred to fresh tubes, and proteins precipitated by acetone precipitation . Protein precipitates were washed twice with 80% aqueous ethanol, then dissolved by heating in 20 µl LDS loading buffer. After centrifugation, samples  were loaded onto a 4-12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels and run into the gel for 1.5 cm. Following Coomassie staining, the protein areas were cut out, diced and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and finally overnight digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, the solution dried in a Speedvac and kept at -20 °C for further analysis.  For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 200 µg and separated into twelve fractions using a basic pH reversed phase C18 separation on an FPLC system and a staggered pooling scheme. All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Switzerland). Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (nanoElute) hyphenated to a hybrid timed ion mobility-quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, all Bruker, USA). In brief, 300 ng equivalents of peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water), enriched on a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (0.3 cm × 300 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a reversed-phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (Aurora 25 cm × 75 µm, IonOpticks) using a 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl min-1, and a column temperature of 50 ⁰C. DDA analysis was performed in PASEF mode with 10 PASEF scans per topN acquisition cycle. Singly charged precursors were excluded by their position in the m/z–ion mobility plane, and precursors that reached a target value of 20,000 arbitrary units were dynamically excluded for 0.4 min. The quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and to 3 Th for m/z > 700. TIMS elution voltages were calibrated linearly to obtain the reduced ion mobility coefficients (1/K0) using three Agilent ESI-L Tuning Mix ions (m/z 622, 922 and 1,222). Two technical replicates per C18 fraction were acquired. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis was performed in diaPASEF mode (Meier et al. 2020) using  32 × 25 Th isolation windows from m/z 400 to 1,200 to include the 2+/3+/4+ population in the m/z–ion mobility plane. The collision energy was ramped linearly as a function of the mobility from 59 eV at 1/K0=1.6Vs cm−2 to 20 eV at 1/K0=0.6Vs cm−2. For further statistical analysis, four independent biological replicates per condition were analysed by two replicate MS injections each, resulting in a total of eight injections per condition.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using the Pulsar algorithm in Spectronaut Software version 14.2 (Biognosys) using default settings. All DIA data were searched against the UniProtKB Homo sapiens reference proteome (revision 01-2020) augmented with a set of 51 known common laboratory contaminants at default settings. For quantitation, up to the 6 most abundant fragment ion traces per peptide, and up to the 10 most abundant peptides per protein were integrated and summed up to provide protein area values. Mass and retention time calibration as well as the corresponding extraction tolerances were dynamically determined. Both identification and quantification results were trimmed to a False Discovery Rate of 1% using a forward-and-reverse decoy database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Atherosclerosis is an important risk factor in the development of cardiovascular diseases. In addition to increased plasma lipid concentrations, irregular/oscillatory shear stress and inflammatory processes trigger atherosclerosis. Inhibitors of the transcription modulatory bromo- and extra-terminal domain (BET) protein family (BETi) could offer a possible therapeutic approach due to their epigenetic mechanism and anti-inflammatory properties. In this study, the influence of laminar shear stress, inflammation and BETi treatment on human endothelial cells was investigated using global protein expression profiling by ion mobility separation-enhanced data independent acquisition mass spectrometry (IMS-DIA-MS). For this purpose, primary human umbilical cord derived vascular endothelial cells were treated with TNF&#x3b1; to mimic inflammation and exposed to laminar shear stress in the presence or absence of the BRD4 inhibitor JQ1. IMS-DIA-MS detected over 4037 proteins expressed in endothelial cells. Inflammation, shear stress and BETi led to pronounced changes in protein expression patterns with JQ1 having the greatest effect. To our knowledge, this is the first proteomics study on primary endothelial cells, which provides an extensive database for the effects of shear stress, inflammation and BETi on the endothelial proteome.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis, Proteomics, Shear stress, Endothelial, Bet-inhibitor, Lc-ms/ms, Dia-ms, Huvec, Jq1, Brd4

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics


