### Accession
PXD016413

### Title
Degrasyn exhibits antibiotic activity against multi-resistant Staphylococcus aureus by modifying several essential cysteines

### Description
In this dataset, we investigate the targets of degrasyn in the methicillin-sensitive S. aureus strain NCTC 8325. This includes data on enrichment studies and competition studies with conventional ABPP using a degrasyn-derived probe, competition studies with residue-specific proteomics using the isoDTB-ABPP method and global analysis of protein expression levels in response to degrasyn treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The data consists of four different kinds of experiments:  Enrichment studies with conventional ABPP: Bacterial suspension of S. aureus NCTC 8325 was treated with the degrasyn probe or DMSO as a control and incubated for 1 h at 200 rpm at 37 °C. After harvest, lysis and adjustment of protein concentrations, the solution was modified with Biotin-azide using click chemistry and precipitated. The pellets were washed, re-dissolved and biotinylated proteins enriched on avidin-agarose. After enrichment, the proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with Lys-C and trypsin and the reaction was quenched with formic acid. The samples were desalted using SepPak C18 columns and lyophilized. The residues were redissolved in 1% FA and filtered. Samples were analyzed with an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC system using an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm trap and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 separation column in an EASY-spray setting coupled to a Q Exactive Plus. Peptide samples were loaded on the trap, separated on the analytical column. Spray voltage 2.0 kV, capillary temperature 275 °C, TOP12 data dependent mode, resolution of R = 140,000 and an AGC target of 3e6 in a scan range of 300 - 1500 m/z with a maximum injection time of 80 ms for the full scans, monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion was enabled. Precursors with charge states >1 and intensities greater than 1e4 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation window of 1.6 m/z, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy of 27%, scan range of 200 – 2000 m/z to an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum injection time of 100 ms for MS2s.   Competition studies with conventional ABPP: The same procedure as described for the enrichment studies was followed with the following exception: The bacterial suspension was pre-treated with degrasyn in DMSO (or DMSO as a control) for 45 min at 200 rpm at 37 °C before treatment with the degrasyn-derived probe.  Competition studies with isoDTB-ABPP: Lysates of S. aureus NCTC8325 were adjusted to 1 mg/mL and pre-treated with degrasyn or DMSO as a control. IA-alkyne in DMSO was added to the lysate with and without competitor and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. The samples were clicked to the heavy (DMSO-treated) and light (compound-treated) isoDTB tags. The light- and heavy-labeled samples were combined and precipitated. The protein precipitates were washed, re-dissolved and enriched on high capacity streptavidin agarose beads. After enrichment, the proteins were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide. The proteins were digested with trypsin. The beads were washed and modified peptides eluted and dried under vacuum. The residues were redissolved in 1% FA and filtered. Samples were analyzed using a Qexactive Plus mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC system. Samples were loaded on an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 trap column and separation was carried out on an Acclaim C18PepMapRSLC column. TOP10 data-dependent mode, scan range 300-1500 m/z, resolution of 70,000, AGC target of 3e6 with 80 ms maximum injection time for full scans. The most intense peaks were selected for MS2 measurement with the following criteria: Minimum AGC target 1e3, isotope exclusion and dynamic exclusion enabled, peaks with unassigned charge or a charge of +1 excluded. Resolution of 17,500, AGC target 1e5, maximum injection time 100 ms, isolation window 1.6 m/z, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalized collision energy: 27%) for MS2.  Global analysis of protein expression levels: S. aureus NCTC8325 were grown in the presence of degrasyn or DMSO as a control. The bacteria were harvested, lysed and the protein concentrations adjusted. Subsequently, proteins were precipitated and the pellets were washed. The following steps from digestion to filtering, were performed as described for conventional ABPP. Samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 nano HPLC with an Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 μm ID x 2 cm trap and an Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC, 75 μM ID x 15 cm separation column coupled to Thermo Fischer LTQ Orbitrap Fusion. Samples were loaded on the trap and separated on the analytical column. 3 second top speed data dependent mode, resolution of 120,000, ion target of 4e5, scan range of 300 – 1700 m/z for full scans. Monoisotopic precursor selection and dynamic exclusion enabled. Precursors with charge states of 2 – 7 and intensities greater than 5e3 were selected for fragmentation. Isolation window of 1.6 m/z, target of 1e2, maximum injection time 250 ms, “inject ions for all available parallelizable time”, higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and detection in the ion trap for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The data consists of four different kinds of experiments:  Enrichment studies with conventional ABPP: Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant 1.6.0.16 software with Andromeda as search engine using the following parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed and oxidation of methionine as dynamic modification, trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme, 4.5 ppm for precursor mass tolerance (main search ppm) and 0.5 Da for fragment mass tolerance (ITMS MS/MS tolerance). Searches were performed against the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 12.09.2018). Quantification was performed using label-free quantification (LFQ). The match between runs (default settings) option was used. Identification was done with at least 2 unique peptides and quantification only with unique peptides.  Competition studies with conventional ABPP: The same procedure as for the enrichment studies was applied.  Competition studies with isoDTB-ABPP: MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0). Standard settings were used with the following changes and additions: A modified FASTA database, based on the UniProt database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 12.09.2018), with individual substitutions of cysteines with the placeholder “U” were used as described previously. Labels were set on the placeholder amino acid “U” for the light isoDTB tag as light label (C28H46N10O6S1Se-1) and the heavy isoDTB tag as heavy label (C2413C4H46N815N2O6S1Se-1). A multiplicity of 2 was set and a maximum number of labeled amino acids of 1. The digestion enzyme was set to Trypsin/P with maximum number of missed cleavages of 2. No variable modifications were included. The “Re-quantify” option was enabled. Carbamidomethyl (C2H3NO) was used as fixed modification on cysteine. Contaminants were included. Peptides were searched with a minimum peptide length of 7 and a maximum peptide mass of 4,600 Da. “Second peptides” and “Dependent peptides” were disabled and the option “Match between run” was enabled with a Match time window of 0.7 min and an alignment window of 20 min. An FDR of 0.01 was used for Protein FDR, PSM FDR and XPSM FDR.  Global analysis of protein expression levels: MS raw files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.16 as described above for conventional ABPP. Statistical analysis was performed as described above using Perseus version 1.6.2.2.

### Publication Abstract
Degrasyn inhibits deubiquitination enzymes and has anti-cancer activity. We here show that it also exhibits antimicrobial activity against multi-resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Structure activity relationship studies demonstrate an important role of the electrophilic &#x3b1;-cyanoacrylamide moiety as a Michael acceptor. A suite of chemical proteomic techniques unraveled binding of this moiety to various cysteine residues of essential proteins in a reversibly covalent manner.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, S. aureus, Isodtb-abpp, Antibioitcs

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Garching bei München, Germany.

### Submitter
Stephan M. Hacker

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Garching bei München, Germany.


