### Accession
PXD006656

### Title
Mapping the spatial proteome of metastatic cells in colorectal cancer

### Description
Here, we aimed to study metastasis mechanisms using spatial proteomics applied to the KM12 cell model of metastasis. KM12 cells were metabolically labelled using SILAC. SILAC has been successfully used for the analysis of proteome turnover and for the identification of changes in proteome localization as a consequence of DNA damage.10,23-24 Subcellular fractionation of the KM12 cells into five subcellular fractions corresponding to cytoplasm (CEB), plasma, mitochondria and ER/golgi membranes (MEB), nuclear (NEB), chromatin-bound (NEB-CBP) and cytoskeletal proteins (PEB) contributed to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying CRC metastasis. Protein abundance and localization were measured in parallel for the five separate subcellular fractions, providing a map draft of the spatially deregulated protein complexes and networks in CRC metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Human colon cancer cells KM12C and KM12SM were supplemented with L-lysine and L-arginine (light medium) or [13C6]-L-lysine and [13C6]-L-arginine (heavy medium). . Both cell lines were labeled with heavy and light medium to perform forward and reverse SILAC experiments as biological and technical replicates.After 8 cell doublings, to ensure a >98% of labeled amino acids incorporation, cells were resuspended with 4 mM EDTA PBS pH 7.3 and washed with ice-cold PBS prior to fractionation with the Subcellular Protein Fractionation Kit for Cultured Cells (Pierce).  Protein concentration after subcellular fractionation was quantified using the 2D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare). Then, 25 μg of each subcellular fraction was separated by SDS PAGE. Gels were stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen). Lanes containing forward and reverse experiments for each fraction were cut into 20 slices that were further cut in small pieces prior to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Peptides were extracted using 100% ACN and 0.5% TFA. Extracted peptides were dried and purified using a Zip Tip with 0.6 μl C18 resin (Millipore). Finally, samples were reconstituted in 5 μl 0.1% formic acid/2% ACN before LC-MS/MS. Peptides were trapped in a C18-A1 ASY-Column 2-cm precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and eluted to a reverse phase column (15 cm x 75 μm inner diameter, Nanoseparations) packed with 3 μm particle C18 resin, where they were separated using a 150 min gradient from 0 to 35% buffer B (Buffer A: 0.1% Formic acid/2% ACN; Buffer B: 0.1% Formic acid in ACN) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The LC system, a NanoEasy HPLC (Proxeon), was coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) via an electrospray ion source (Proxeon).

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 1.3.0.339, Thermo Scientific). Proteins were identified by interrogating the human SwissProt Database (SwissProt_57.15.fasta) using Mascot (version 2.3, MatrixScience). Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fix modification while oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and [13C6]-Arg, [13C6]-Lys were set as variable modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da, respectively, and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Identified peptides were filtered using Percolator algorithm with a q-value threshold of 0.01 and a Mascot significant threshold of 0.05.  Only those proteins quantified with at least 2 unique peptides in both forward and reverse experiments were considered in the analysis. Protein ratios with variability greater than 20% were discarded from the analysis. All experiments were corrected by normalizing data against the 5% trimmed mean of the data set to center the log2 ratio distribution to zero.21 As we previously described for KM12 cells,21 arginine to proline conversion did not affect quantification accuracy.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the second deadliest cancer worldwide. Here, we aimed to study metastasis mechanisms using spatial proteomics in the KM12 cell model. Cells were SILAC-labeled and fractionated into five subcellular fractions corresponding to: cytoplasm, plasma, mitochondria and ER/golgi membranes, nuclear, chromatin-bound and cytoskeletal proteins and analyzed with high resolution mass spectrometry. We provide localization data of 4863 quantified proteins in the different subcellular fractions. A total of 1318 proteins with at least 1.5-fold change were deregulated in highly metastatic KM12SM cells respect to KM12C cells. The protein network organization, protein complexes and functional pathways associated to CRC metastasis was revealed with spatial resolution. Although 92% of the differentially expressed proteins showed the same deregulation in all subcellular compartments, a subset of 117 proteins (8%) showed opposite changes in different subcellular localizations. The chaperonin CCT, the Eif2 and Eif3 initiation of translation and the oxidative phosphorylation complexes together with an important number of guanine nucleotide-binding proteins, were deregulated in abundance and localization within the metastatic cells. Particularly relevant was the relationship of deregulated protein complexes with exosome secretion. The knowledge of the spatial proteome alterations at subcellular level contributes to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying colorectal cancer metastasis and to identify potential targets of therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Subcellular fraction, Colorectal cancer, Lc-ms/ms, Silac

### Affiliations
CANCER MOLECULAR PATHOLOGY AND THERAPEUTIC TARGETS. HOSPITAL LA PAZ INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH RESEARCH (IDIPAZ)
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas, CIB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Alberto Pelaez García

### Lab Head
Dr Ignacio Casal
Functional Proteomics Laboratory, Centro de Investigaciones Biologicas, CIB-CSIC, Madrid, Spain


