### Accession
PXD021793

### Title
Unbiased label-free quantitative proteomics of Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) mutations in CCNF reveals activation of the apoptosis pathway

### Description
The past 10 years has seen a rapid acceleration in the discovery of new genetic causes of ALS, with more than 20 putative ALS-causing genes now cited.  These genes express proteins that cover a diverse range of molecular functions, including free radical scavenging (cf SOD1), regulation of RNA homeostasis (cf TDP-43, FUS), and protein degradation through the ubiquitin-proteasome system (cf ubiquilin-2, Cyclin F) and autophagy.  However, not all of the reported ALS-causing genes have been replicated in subsequent genetic studies – raising significant question marks on the true validity of some putative ALS genes (such as profilin and angiogenin).  Furthermore, it still remains unclear what common molecular mechanisms or pathways link these diverse genes/proteins, such that defects in these individual proteins ultimately converge to cause ALS.  This study seeks to develop an innovative pipeline to start to address some of these questions.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin digestion LC-MS/MS Proteins were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) respectively, and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein) (V5111, Promega, WI, USA) overnight at 37°C. The digestion was inactivated by the addition of 2μL of formic acid. Tryptic peptides were desalted on a pre-equilibrated C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (A57003100K, Agilent, CA, USA) and eluted in 50 % (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Reverse phase C18 Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (RP-LC-MS/MS) Lyophilised peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and bath sonicated for 20 minutes. The resuspended peptides are then centrifuged at 14, 000xg for 15 minutes to remove any insoluble debris, and the clarified peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS. The peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) fitted with the Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), making use of a 60 min gradient (2–95% v/v acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v formic acid) running at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluted from the nano LC column were subsequently ionized into the Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray source is fitted with an emitter tip 10μm (New Objective, Woburn, MA) and maintained at 1.6 kV electrospray voltage. The temperature of the capillary is set to 250°C. Precursor ions are selected for MS/MS fragmentation using a data-dependent “Top 10” method operating in FT acquisition mode with HCD fragmentation. FT-MS analysis on the Q Exactive Plus was carried out at 70,000 resolution and an AGC target of 1x106 ions in full MS. MS/MS scans were carried out at 17,500 resolution with an AGC target of 2x104 ions. Maximum injection times are set to 30 and 50 milliseconds respectively. The ion selection threshold for triggering MS/MS fragmentation was set to 25,000 counts and an isolation width of 2.0 Da was used to perform HCD fragmentation with normalised collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software 2.2 (Thermo) incorporating the Sequest search algorithm. Peptide identifications were determined using a 20-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a 0.1-Da MS/MS fragment ion tolerance for FT-MS and HCD fragmentation. Carbamidomethylation modification of cysteines was considered a static modification while oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, GlyGly residues on lysine, and acetyl modification on N-terminal residues were set as variable modifications allowing for maximum two missed cleavages. The data was processed through Percolator for estimation of false discovery rates. Protein identifications were validated employing a q-value of 0.01. Label-free quantitation (LFQ) using intensity-based quantification was carried out using default parameters in Proteome Discoverer2.2 incorporating “unique” peptides for quantification and “total peptide amount” normalisation. The data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD00XXX. Biological pathway analysis and predictions were carried out using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN, Version June 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteogenomics, Amytrophic lateral sclerosis, Ipscs, Neurodegeneration, Ccnf, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Macquarie University
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 209, Australia

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Health and Human Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 209, Australia


