### Accession
PXD000124

### Title
mESC shotgun and positional proteomics based on deep proteome sequence database (derived from RIBOseq data)

### Description
Shotgun and positional proteomics study of a mouse embryonic stem cell line. We devised a proteogenomic approach constructing a custom protein sequence search space, built from both SwissProt and RIBO-seq derived translation products, applicable for LC-MSMS spectrum identification.  To record the impact of using the constructed deep proteome database we performed two alternative MS-based proteomic strategies: (I) a regular shotgun proteomic and (II) an N-terminal COFRADIC approach. The obtained fragmentation spectra were searched against the custom database (combination of UniProtKB-SwissProt and RIBO-seq derived translation sequences) using three different search engines: OMSSA (version 2.1.9), X!Tandem (TORNADO, version 2010.01.01.04) and Mascot (version 2.3). The first two were run from the SearchGUI graphical user interface (version 1.10.4). A combination of X!Tandem and Mascot was used for the N-terminal COFRADIC analysis, a combination of all three search engines for the shotgun proteome analysis. Note that OMMSA cannot cope with the protease setting semi-ArgC/P needed to analyze N-terminal COFRADIC data.For the shotgun proteome data, trypsin was set as cleavage enzyme allowing for one missed cleavage, and singly to triply charged precursors or singly to quadruple charged precursors were taken into account respectively for the Mascot or X!Tandem/OMSSA search engines, and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to respectively 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. Methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide, pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) were set as variable modifications. For the N-terminal COFRADIC analysis the protease setting semi-ArgC/P (Arg-C specificity with arginine-proline cleavage allowed) was used. No missed cleavages were allowed and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were also set to respectively 10 ppm and 0.5 Da. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation to methionine-sulfoxide and 13C3D2-acetylation of lysines were set as fixed modifications. Peptide N-terminal acetylation or 13C3D2-acetylation and pyroglutamate formation of N-terminal glutamine were set as variable modifications and instrument setting was put on ESI-TRAP. Protein and peptide identification in addition to data interpretation was done using the PeptideShaker algorithm (http://code.google.com/p/peptide-shaker, version 0.18.3), setting the false discovery rate to 1% at all levels (protein, peptide, and peptide to spectrum matching). Aforementioned tools and algorithms (SearchGui, X!Tandem, OMSSA, and PeptideShaker) are freely available as open source.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
An increasing number of studies involve integrative analysis of gene and protein expression data, taking advantage of new technologies such as next-generation transcriptome sequencing and highly sensitive mass spectrometry (MS) instrumentation. Recently, a strategy, termed ribosome profiling (or RIBO-seq), based on deep sequencing of ribosome-protected mRNA fragments, indirectly monitoring protein synthesis, has been described. We devised a proteogenomic approach constructing a custom protein sequence search space, built from both Swiss-Prot- and RIBO-seq-derived translation products, applicable for MS/MS spectrum identification. To record the impact of using the constructed deep proteome database, we performed two alternative MS-based proteomic strategies as follows: (i) a regular shotgun proteomic and (ii) an N-terminal combined fractional diagonal chromatography (COFRADIC) approach. Although the former technique gives an overall assessment on the protein and peptide level, the latter technique, specifically enabling the isolation of N-terminal peptides, is very appropriate in validating the RIBO-seq-derived (alternative) translation initiation site profile. We demonstrate that this proteogenomic approach increases the overall protein identification rate 2.5% (e.g. new protein products, new protein splice variants, single nucleotide polymorphism variant proteins, and N-terminally extended forms of known proteins) as compared with only searching UniProtKB-SwissProt. Furthermore, using this custom database, identification of N-terminal COFRADIC data resulted in detection of 16 alternative start sites giving rise to N-terminally extended protein variants besides the identification of four translated upstream ORFs. Notably, the characterization of these new translation products revealed the use of multiple near-cognate (non-AUG) start codons. As deep sequencing techniques are becoming more standard, less expensive, and widespread, we anticipate that mRNA sequencing and especially custom-tailored RIBO-seq will become indispensable in the MS-based protein or peptide identification process. The underlying mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium with the dataset identifier PXD000124.

### Keywords
Mesc 14, Shotgun, Swissprot, N-terminal cofradic, Ribo-seq, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
Faculty of Bioscience Engineering

### Submitter
Gerben Menschaert

### Lab Head


