### Accession
PXD016989

### Title
A signaling hub of insulin receptor dystrophin glycoprotein complex and plakoglobin regulates muscle size

### Description
Signaling through the insulin receptor governs central physiological functions related to cell growth and metabolism. Here we show by tandem native protein complex purification approach and super-resolution STED microscopy that insulin receptor activity requires association with the fundamental structural module in muscle, the dystrophin glycoprotein complex (DGC), and the desmosomal component plakoglobin (g-catenin). The integrity of this high-molecular-mass assembly renders skeletal muscle susceptibility to insulin because DGC-insulin receptor dissociation by plakoglobin downregulation reduced insulin signaling and caused atrophy. Furthermore, low insulin receptor activity in muscles from transgenic or fasted mice decreased plakoglobin-DGC-insulin receptor content on the plasma membrane, but not when plakoglobin was overexpressed. By masking b-dystroglycan LIR domains, plakoglobin prevents autophagic clearance of plakoglobin-DGC-insulin receptor co-assemblies and maintains their function. Our findings establish DGC as a signaling hub, and provide a possible mechanism for the insulin resistance in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, and for the cardiomyopathies seen with plakoglobin mutations.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fraction from Resource Q was loaded on SDS PAGE and the proteins in the lane were reduced carbamidomethylated and trypsinized in gel. LC-MSMS was done using the Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
MS data was analyzed on the Proteome Discoverer platform using the Sequest and Mascot search engine

### Publication Abstract
Signaling through the insulin receptor governs central physiological functions related to cell growth and metabolism. Here we show by tandem native protein complex purification approach and super-resolution STED microscopy that insulin receptor activity requires association with the fundamental structural module in muscle, the dystrophin glycoprotein complex (DGC), and the desmosomal component plakoglobin (&#x3b3;-catenin). The integrity of this high-molecular-mass assembly renders skeletal muscle susceptibility to insulin, because DGC-insulin receptor dissociation by plakoglobin downregulation reduces insulin signaling and causes atrophy. Furthermore, low insulin receptor activity in muscles from transgenic or fasted mice decreases plakoglobin-DGC-insulin receptor content on the plasma membrane, but not when plakoglobin is overexpressed. By masking &#x3b2;-dystroglycan LIR domains, plakoglobin prevents autophagic clearance of plakoglobin-DGC-insulin receptor co-assemblies and maintains their function. Our findings establish DGC as a signaling hub, and provide a possible mechanism for the insulin resistance in Duchenne Muscular Dystrophy, and for the cardiomyopathies seen with plakoglobin mutations.

### Keywords
Plakoglobin, Insulin receptor, Dystrophin

### Affiliations
Department of Biology  Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Shenhav Cohen
Department of Biology  Technion, Haifa 32000, Israel


