### Accession
PXD046847

### Title
Identification of sulfhydryl-containing proteins and further evaluation of the selenium- tagged redox homeostasis-regulating proteins:Identification of cysteine sites using competitive rdTOP-ABPP strategy.The competitive rdTOP-ABPP strategy be used to reidentify the cysteine sites labeled by Se-SMs.

### Description
The competitive rdTOP-ABPP strategy be used to reidentify the cysteine sites labeled by Se-SMs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates (1mL, 2 mg/mL) were labeled with Se-SMs (100 μM) or DMSO (control) and allowed to incubate at 25 °C for 1 hour. After that, the lysates were incubated with IA-alkyne (100 μM) at 25 °C for 1 h. The resulting lysates were precipitated with 2.5 mL methanol/chloroform (v:v=4:1), washed two times with 1 mL of ice-cold MeOH and resuspended in 0.4% SDS/PBS.The samples were then treated with Desthiobiotin-PEG3-Azide, followed with streptavidin enrichment and on-bead trypsin digestion as described above. The beads were collected and washed by 1 mL of distilled water and 1 ml of 100 mM TEAB buffer for twice before being suspended in 200 μL of 100 mM TEAB buffer. Then 8 μL of 4% D13CDO (Sigma-Aldrich) or HCHO (Sigma-Aldrich) was added to the vehicle and Se-SMs-treated samples to be light and heavy labeled, respectively. Then 8 μL of 0.6 M NaBH3CN was added to the samples. After being washed by 100 mM TEAB buffer twice, the two samples were mixed and washed with 1 mL distilled water twice, followed by on-bead elution with 3×200 mL 1% TFA in 70% CH3CN at room temperature. The released peptides were concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge, reconstituted in 10 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water and then subjected for LC–MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS was performed on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with an EASY nLC 1200 system. The peptides were separated using an increasing gradient of aqueous acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in H2O, and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. The flow rate was 3 μL/min for loading and 0.3 μL/min for eluting. Labeled peptide samples were loaded onto an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, ES900) packed with 15 cm × 3 μm C18 resin. Under the positive-ion mode, full-scan mass spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 350 to 2000 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer with mass resolution of 70 000. MS/ MS fragmentation is performed in a data-dependent mode, in which the 20 most intense ions were selected from each full-scan mass spectrum for fragmentation by high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD). MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 17,500 using the Orbitrap analyzer. Other important parameters: isolation window, 1.6 m/z units; default charge, 2+; normalized collision energy, 28%; maximum IT, 50 ms; dynamic exclusion, 20.0 s.

### Publication Abstract
Chemoproteomic profiling of sulfhydryl-containing proteins has consistently been an attractive research hotspot. However, there remains a dearth of probes that are specifically designed for sulfhydryl-containing proteins, possessing sufficient reactivity, specificity, distinctive isotopic signature, as well as efficient labeling and evaluation capabilities for proteins implicated in the regulation of redox homeostasis. Here, the specific selenium-containing probes (Se-probes) in this work displayed high specificity and reactivity toward cysteine thiols on small molecules, peptides and purified proteins and showed very good competitive effect of proteins labeling in gel-ABPP. We identified more than 6000 candidate proteins. In TOP-ABPP, we investigated the peptide labeled by Se-probes, which revealed a distinct isotopic envelope pattern of selenium in both the primary and secondary mass spectra. This unique pattern can provide compelling evidence for identifying redox regulatory proteins and other target peptides. Furthermore, our examiation of post-translational modification (PTMs) of the cysteine site residues showed that oxidation PTMs was predominantly observed. We anticipate that Se-probes will enable broader and deeper proteome-wide profiling of sulfhydryl-containing proteins, provide an ideal tool for focusing on proteins that regulate redox homeostasis and advance the development of innovative selenium-based pharmaceuticals.

### Keywords
Rdtop-abpp;ia-alkyne; npsp;npss;dpds;ebselen

### Affiliations
Shandong Normal University

### Submitter
Zhongyao Jiang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhenzhe Chen
Shandong Normal University


