### Accession
PXD035833

### Title
Structural and proteomic repercussions of growth hormone receptor deficiency on the pituitary gland – lessons from a translational pig model

### Description
Growth hormone receptor deficiency (GHRD) results in low serum insulin-like growth factor 1 but high, non-functional GH levels. This study investigates the histomorphological and molecular alterations associated with GHRD. Pituitary glands from 6 months old GHR-KO pigs and control animals were compared using a quantitative stereological approach and label-free proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen tissue samples from the adenohypophysis were transferred into pre-cooled tubes and cryo-pulverized using a CP02 Automated Dry Pulverizer (Covaris, Woburn, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Next, ~10 mg of tissue powder was lysed in 8 M urea/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate by ultrasonication (18 cycles of 10 s pulse and 20 s pause) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Protein content of lysates was quantified using a Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). Before digestion, disulfide bonds in a 20 microgram of protein were reduced (45 mM dithiothreitol/20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 30 min, 56°C) and cysteine residues were alkylated (100 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min, room temperature), followed by quenching of a residual iodoacetamide with dithiothreitol (90 mM, 15 min, room temperature). Proteins were digested with modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for 16 h at 37°C (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) using its built-in search engine Andromeda and the NCBI RefSeq Sus scrofa database (downloaded in April 2020) alongside the MaxQuant contaminants fasta file. Protein intensities were normalized with the MaxLFQ label-free normalization approach. All statistical and bioinformatics analyses were done using Perseus or the R framework (R Core Team, 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Growth hormone receptor deficiency (GHRD) results in low serum insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1) and high, but non-functional serum growth hormone (GH) levels in human Laron syndrome (LS) patients and animal models. This study investigated the quantitative histomorphological and molecular alterations associated with GHRD. Pituitary glands from 6&#x2009;months old growth hormone receptor deficient (GHR-KO) and control pigs were analyzed using a quantitative histomorphological approach in paraffin (9 GHR-KO [5 males, 4 females] vs. 11 controls [5 males, 6 females]), ultrathin sections tissue sections (3 male GHR-KO vs. 3 male controls) and label-free proteomics (4 GHR-KO vs. 4 control pigs [2 per sex]). GHR-KO pigs displayed reduced body weights (60% reduction in comparison to controls; p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.0001) and decreased pituitary volumes (54% reduction in comparison to controls; p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.0001). The volume proportion of the adenohypophysis did not differ in GHR-KO and control pituitaries (65% vs. 71%; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.0506) and GHR-KO adenohypophyses displayed a reduced absolute volume but an unaltered volume density of somatotrophs in comparison to controls (21% vs. 18%; p&#x2009;=&#x2009;.3164). In GHR-KO pigs, somatotroph cells displayed a significantly reduced volume density of granules (23.5%) as compared to controls (67.7%; p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;.0001). Holistic proteome analysis of adenohypophysis samples identified 4660 proteins, of which 592 were differentially abundant between the GHR-KO and control groups. In GHR-KO samples, the abundance of somatotropin precursor was decreased, whereas increased abundances of proteins involved in protein production, transport and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress were revealed. Increased protein production and secretion as well as significantly reduced proportion of GH-storing granules in somatotroph cells of the adenohypophysis without an increase in volume density of somatotroph cells in the adenohypophysis could explain elevated serum GH levels in GHR-KO pigs.

### Keywords
Brain, Animal model, Growth hormone receptor deficiency, Proteomics, Pig

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Bachuki Shashikadze
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


