### Accession
PXD007614

### Title
Diverse peptide hormones affecting root growth identified in the Medicago truncatula secreted peptidome

### Description
Multigene families encoding diverse secreted peptide hormones play important roles in plant development. A need exists to efficiently elucidate the structures and post-translational-modifications of these difficult-to-isolate peptide hormones in planta so that their biological functions can be determined. A mass spectrometry and bioinformatics approach was developed to comprehensively analyse the secreted peptidome of Medicago hairy root cultures and xylem sap. We identified 759 spectra corresponding to the secreted products of twelve peptide hormones including four CEP (C-TERMINALLY ENCODED PEPTIDE), two CLE (CLV3/ENDOSPERM SURROUNDING REGION RELATED) and six XAP (XYLEM SAP ASSOCIATED PEPTIDE) peptides. The MtCEP1, MtCEP2, MtCEP5 and MtCEP8 peptides identified differed in post-translational-modifications. Most were hydroxylated at conserved proline residues but some MtCEP1 derivatives were tri-arabinosylated. In addition, many CEP peptides possessed unexpected N- and C-terminal extensions. The pattern of these extensions suggested roles for endo- and exoproteases in CEP peptide maturation. Longer -than -expected, hydroxylated and homogeneously modified mono- and tri-arabinosylated CEP peptides corresponding to their in vivo structures were chemically synthesised to probe the effect of these post-translational-modifications on function. The ability of CEP peptides to elevate root nodule number was increased by hydroxylation at key positions. MtCEP1 peptides with N-terminal extensions or with tri-arabinosylation modification, however, were unable to impart increased nodulation. The MtCLE5 and MtCLE17 peptides identified were of precise size, and inhibited main root growth and increased lateral root number. Six XAP peptides, each beginning with a conserved DY sulfation motif, were identified including MtXAP1a, MtXAP1b, MtXAP1c, MtXAP3, MtXAP5 and MtXAP7. MtXAP1a and MtXAP5 inhibited lateral root emergence. Transcriptional analyses demonstrated peptide hormone gene expression in the root vasculature and tip. Since hairy roots can be induced on many plants, their corresponding root cultures may represent ideal source materials to efficiently identify diverse peptide hormones in vivo in a broad range of species.

### Sample Protocol
Axenic cultures of Medicago roots transformed with A. rhizogenes ARqua1 containing the empty vector (pK7WG2D.1) or pK7WG2D.1 with 35S:MtCEP1 were established. Root cultures were grown in 150 mL liquid Fåhraeus medium containing 5 mM KNO3 and 1% sucrose in the dark for 14 days. Medicago plants grown for 6 weeks on a potting mix were decapitated and xylem sap (~600 µL/plant) was collected under normal root pressure for 8 hours on ice. Sap was stored at -20 °C and the 20 mL cumulative volume was centrifuged to remove debris before processing. Seeds of Glycine max cultivar Williams 82 were germinated and xylem sap was extracted from 8-10 week old plants. In planta peptides in root cultures and xylem sap were concentrated for MS analysis using o-chlorophenol/acetone precipitation followed by size exclusion chromatography and concentration/desalting by reversed-phase chromatography using C18 micro-pipette tips. After lyophilisation, samples were resuspended in 400 µL of 3% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid prior to nano-liquid chromatography-electrospray ionisation (LC-ESI)-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files generated by nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST against Medicago peptide databases containing about 225 sequences froming known members of the peptide families for CLE, CEP, RGF, IDA, PSK, PSY, CEP-like, CIF, EPF and XAP. The bioinformatics strategy screened for spectra corresponding to in planta peptides (selecting no enzyme cleavage) ranging in length from 6 to 150 amino acids to ensure that all possible larger than expected species were identified. The fragmentation type used was high energy collision dissociation (HCD), and the precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.08 Da, respectively. A maximum of 3 equal dynamic modifications were allowed per peptide for oxidation at M and P (mass shift of + 15.995 Da), sulfation of S, T and Y (mass shift of + 79.957 Da), pentosylation of P (mass shift of + 132.11 Da), tri-arabinosylation of P (mass shift of + 412.127 Da) and deamidation at N and Q (mass shift of + 0.984 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Multigene families encoding diverse secreted peptide hormones play important roles in plant development. A need exists to efficiently elucidate the structures and post-translational-modifications of these difficult-to-isolate peptide hormones <i>in planta</i> so that their biological functions can be determined. A mass spectrometry and bioinformatics approach was developed to comprehensively analyze the secreted peptidome of <i>Medicago</i> hairy root cultures and xylem sap. We identified 759 spectra corresponding to the secreted products of twelve peptide hormones including four CEP (<i>C</i>-TERMINALLY <i>E</i>NCODED <i>P</i>EPTIDE), two CLE (<i>CL</i>V3/<i>E</i>NDOSPERM SURROUNDING REGION RELATED) and six XAP (<i>X</i>YLEM SAP <i>A</i>SSOCIATED <i>P</i>EPTIDE) peptides. The MtCEP1, MtCEP2, MtCEP5 and MtCEP8 peptides identified differed in post-translational-modifications. Most were hydroxylated at conserved proline residues but some MtCEP1 derivatives were tri-arabinosylated. In addition, many CEP peptides possessed unexpected <i>N</i>- and <i>C</i>-terminal extensions. The pattern of these extensions suggested roles for endo- and exoproteases in CEP peptide maturation. Longer than expected, hydroxylated and homogeneously modified mono- and tri-arabinosylated CEP peptides corresponding to their <i>in vivo</i> structures were chemically synthesized to probe the effect of these post-translational-modifications on function. The ability of CEP peptides to elevate root nodule number was increased by hydroxylation at key positions. MtCEP1 peptides with <i>N</i>-terminal extensions or with tri-arabinosylation modification, however, were unable to impart increased nodulation. The MtCLE5 and MtCLE17 peptides identified were of precise size, and inhibited main root growth and increased lateral root number. Six XAP peptides, each beginning with a conserved DY sulfation motif, were identified including MtXAP1a, MtXAP1b, MtXAP1c, MtXAP3, MtXAP5 and MtXAP7. MtXAP1a and MtXAP5 inhibited lateral root emergence. Transcriptional analyses demonstrated peptide hormone gene expression in the root vasculature and tip. Since hairy roots can be induced on many plants, their corresponding root cultures may represent ideal source materials to efficiently identify diverse peptide hormones <i>in vivo</i> in a broad range of species.

### Keywords
Medicago truncatula, Lc-ms/ms, Secretoer peptide hormones

### Affiliations
Australian National University, ACT, Australia
Australian National University

### Submitter
Neha Patel

### Lab Head
Dr Michael A. Djordjevic
Australian National University, ACT, Australia


