### Accession
PXD004419

### Title
Proteomic analysis uncovers common effects of IFN-γ and IL-27 on antigen presentation  machinery components in human cancer cells

### Description
IL-27, a member of the IL-12- family of cytokines, has shown anti-tumor activity in several pre-clinical models due to anti-proliferative, anti-angiogenic and immune-enhancing effects. On the other hand, IL-27 demonstrated immune-regulatory activities and inhibition of auto-immunity in mouse models. Also, we reported that IL-27, similar to IFN-, induces the expression of IL-18BP, IDO and PD-L1 immune-regulatory molecules in human cancer cells. Here, a proteomic analysis reveals that IL-27 and IFN- display a broad overlap of functions on human ovarian cancer cells. Indeed, among 990 proteins modulated by either cytokine treatment in SKOV3 cells, 814 showed a concordant modulation by both cytokines, while a smaller number (176) were differentially modulated. The most up-regulated proteins were common to both IFN-γ and IL-27. In addition, functional analysis of IL-27- regulated protein networks highlighted pathways of interferon signaling and regulation, antigen presentation, protection from natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, regulation of protein polyubiquitination and proteasome, aminoacid catabolism and regulation of viral protein levels.

### Sample Protocol
Cell treatments for proteomic analysis were carried out in culture medium with 0.1% FCS. The cells were lysed, solubilized, denatured and reduced using a solution of 4% SDS with 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT. Samples were then processed according to the FASP Protein Digestion Kit instructions (ExpedeonInc, Cat.No. 44250). Sequencing grade trypsin was then added to the samples at a ratio of 1:50 (mg trypsin: mg protein)and incubated overnight at 37 °C. After digestion peptides were collected with two washes with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Each digested sample was desalted on StageTips and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data were analyzed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8), quantification was performed using the built-in label-free quantification algorithm, enabling the ‘Match between runs’ option. Label-free experiments were analyzed with the freely available Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
IL-27, a member of the IL-12-family of cytokines, has shown anti-tumor activity in several pre-clinical models due to anti-proliferative, anti-angiogenic and immune-enhancing effects. On the other hand, IL-27 demonstrated immune regulatory activities and inhibition of auto-immunity in mouse models. Also, we reported that IL-27, similar to IFN-&#x3b3;, induces the expression of IL-18BP, IDO and PD-L1 immune regulatory molecules in human cancer cells. Here, a proteomic analysis reveals that IL-27 and IFN-&#x3b3; display a broad overlap of functions on human ovarian cancer cells. Indeed, among 990 proteins modulated by either cytokine treatment in SKOV3 cells, 814 showed a concordant modulation by both cytokines, while a smaller number (176) were differentially modulated. The most up-regulated proteins were common to both IFN-&#x3b3; and IL-27. In addition, functional analysis of IL-27-regulated protein networks highlighted pathways of interferon signaling and regulation, antigen presentation, protection from natural killer cell-mediated cytotoxicity, regulation of protein polyubiquitination and proteasome, aminoacid catabolism and regulation of viral protein levels.Importantly, we found that IL-27 induced HLA class I molecule expression in human cancer cells of different histotypes, including tumor cells showing very low expression. IL-27 failed only in a cancer cell line bearing a homozygous deletion in the B2M gene. Altogether, these data point out to a broad set of activities shared by IL-27 and IFN-&#x3b3;, which are dependent on the common activation of the STAT1 pathway. These data add further explanation to the anti-tumor activity of IL-27 and also to its dual role in immune regulation.

### Keywords
Interferon gamma; proteomic analysis; hla class i;  apm, Antigen presentation machinery., Interleukin-27; ifn-γ, Il-27

### Affiliations
Gaslini Children's Hospital
Core Facilities, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy

### Submitter
Andrea Petretto

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Petretto
Core Facilities, Istituto Giannina Gaslini, Genoa, Italy


