### Accession
PXD031355

### Title
A Bacterial Mannose Binding Lectin as a Tool for the Enrichment of C-and O- Mannosylated Peptides

### Description
C-mannosylated peptides are easily detected by mass spectrometry (MS) from purified proteins but not from complex biological samples. Enrichment of specific glycopeptides by lectin affinity prior to MS analysis has been widely applied to support glycopeptide identification, but was up till now not available for C-mannosylated peptides. Here we used the α-mannose-specific Burkholderia cenocepacia lectin A (BC2L-A) and show that, in addition to its previously demonstrated high-mannose N-glycan binding capability, this lectin is able to retain C- and O-mannosylated peptides. Next to testing binding abilities to standard peptides, we applied BC2L-A affinity to enrich C-mannosylated peptides from complex samples of tryptic digests of HEK293 and MCF10A whole cell extracts, which led to the identification of novel C-mannosylation sites. In conclusion, BC2L-A enabled specific enrichment of C- and O-mannosylated peptides and might have superior properties over other lectins for binding to α-mannose-terminating glycans.

### Sample Protocol
Adherent HEK293 and MCF10A total cell extracts were reduced, alkylated and digested with PNGase F and trypsin. Purified BC2L-A lectin was conjugated to NHS-Agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol and BCL2-A-agarose slurry was packed in PFA 1/16” (OD) x 0.040” (ID) tubing (IDEX Health & Science) to a final column length of ~2 m. The 2 m long BC2L-A column was equilibrated in BC2L-A running buffer (25mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2) at 4°C using a ÄKTA FPLC system (GE Healthcare Europe GmbH, Denmark). PNGase F digested tryptic peptides were injected onto the 2 m BC2L-A column and washed with BC2L-A running buffer until absorbance (214 nm) was <5 mAU. Finally, bound C- and O-mannosylated glycopeptides were eluted by injecting 3 mL 25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM CaCl2, 20 mM EDTA and collected in six 500 µL fractions. Elution fractions were desalted by C18 Stage Tips (Empore), evaporated to dryness, and reconstituted in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid before mass spectrometric analyses. 10 µL of each BC2L-A elution fraction was injected using a EASY-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced via a nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Fusion/Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometers (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The EASY-nLC 1000 and 1200 were operated using a single analytical column setup (PicoFrit Emitters, 75-μm inner diameter; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (1.9-μm particle size; Dr. Maisch). Peptides were separated across 120 min at 200 nL/min; gradient elution was achieved by nLC1000/1200 solvent A (0.1% formic acid),  nLC1000 solvent B (100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid ) and nLC1200 solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid ). For nLC 1000 it was set for 2–20% B for 95 min followed by 20–80% B for 10 min and finally 80% B for 15 min. For nLC 1200 it was set for 2–25% B for 95 min followed by 25–100% B for 10 min and finally 100% B for 15 min.  Precursor MS1 scan (m/z 355–1700) was acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution setting of 120,000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS/MS and ETciD-MS/MS of multiply charged precursors (z = 2–6) in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 10,000–50,000 ions was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events; MS2 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 (HCD and ETciD).

### Data Protocol
Data analyses was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data files (.raw and .mgf) were processed using the Sequest HT node and searched against the canonical human proteome downloaded (January 2013) from the UniProtKB database (http://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion mass tolerance to 0.02 Da. Up to 2 missed trypsin (full- and semi-specific) cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) was set as a fixed modification for cystein, and oxidation (15.9949 Da) was set as variable modification for methionine. In addition, Hex (162.0528 Da) was set as variable modification for serine, threonine, and tryptophan while dHex-Hex (308.1107 Da) was set as variable modifications for serine and threonine. Peptide confidence levels were calculated using the Target Decoy PSM Validator node and results were filtered for high-confidence (p < 0.01) identifications only. All C- and O-mannosylated peptide spectral matches were inspected manually to validate the accuracy of the identifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
O-mannosylation, Glycoproteomics, C-mannosylation, Bc2l-a lectin, Etcid

### Affiliations
University of Copenhagen
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Copenhagen Denmark

### Submitter
Adnan Halim

### Lab Head
Dr Adnan Halim
University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health Sciences Centre for Glycomics Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine Copenhagen Denmark


