### Accession
PXD028714

### Title
EIF5A hypusinaion in hepatic cells

### Description
determin the impact fatty acids and spermidine on EIF5A hysusinaion, and examined the role of EIF5A hysusination in hepatocytes

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 8M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysateCells were lysed in lysis buffer containing 100 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8), 8M Urea and 0.2% SDS, followed by 5 min of ultrasonication on ice. The lysate was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃. The supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were mixed with 4 volume of chilled acetone, and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was collected, washed with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer [0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5), 6M Urea]. Followed by trypsin digestion, peptide extraction, column separation, the peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI). was centrifuged at 12000 g for 15 min at 4℃. The supernatant was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56℃, and subsequently alkylated with iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Then samples were mixed with 4 volume of chilled acetone, and incubated at -20℃ for at least 2 h. After centrifugation, the pellet was collected, washed with cold acetone, and dissolved by dissolution buffer [0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8.5), 6M Urea]. Followed by trypsin digestion, peptide extraction, column separation, the peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray Flex™ (ESI).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD, Thermo)was used to search in Mus_musculus_uniprot_2019.01.18.fasta (85165 sequences) database.

### Publication Abstract
Spermidine is a natural polyamine that has health benefits and extends life span in several species. Deoxyhypusine synthase (DHPS) and deoxyhypusine hydroxylase (DOHH) are key enzymes that utilize spermidine to catalyze the post-translational hypusination of the translation factor EIF5A (EIF5A<sup>H</sup>). Here, we have found that hepatic DOHH mRNA expression is decreased in patients and mice with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH), and hepatic cells treated with fatty acids. The mouse and cell culture models of NASH have concomitant decreases in Eif5a<sup>H</sup> and mitochondrial protein synthesis which leads to lower mitochondrial activity and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation. Spermidine treatment restores EIF5A<sup>H</sup>, partially restores protein synthesis and mitochondrial function in NASH, and prevents NASH progression in vivo. Thus, the disrupted DHPS-DOHH-EIF5A<sup>H</sup> pathway during NASH represents a therapeutic target to increase hepatic protein synthesis and mitochondrial fatty acid oxidation (FAO) and prevent NASH progression.

### Keywords
Mouse, Hepatic cells

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disorders, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore
Duke-NUS Medical School

### Submitter
Jin Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Zhou
Cardiovascular & Metabolic Disorders, Duke-NUS Medical School, Singapore


