### Accession
PXD001540

### Title
Are you also what Your Mother Eats? Distinct Proteomic Portrait as a Result of Maternal High-Fat Diet in the Cerebral Cortex of the Adult Mouse.

### Description
Background: Epidemiological studies suggest an association between maternal obesity and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes in offspring.  Objective: To compare the global proteomic portrait in the cerebral cortex between mice born to mothers on a high-fat or control diet who themselves were fed a high-fat or control diet.  Methods: Male mice born to dams fed a control (C) or high fat (H) diet four weeks before conception and during gestation and lactation were assigned to either C or H diet at weaning. Mice (n=24) were sacrificed at 19-weeks and their cerebral cortices were pooled into 8 samples and analysed using an iTRAQ based 2D LC-MS methodology.  Results: A total of 6,695 proteins were identified and fully quantified (q<0.01).  Approximately 10% of these proteins demonstrated a minimum of one Standard Deviation of regulation across all biological replicates in at least one of the experimental groups (CH, HC, HH) relative to the control (CC). Principal component analysis and hierarchical clustering analysis showed that mice clustered based on the diet of the mother and not their current diet. In silico bioinformatics analysis revealed that maternal high-fat diet was significantly associated with response to hypoxia/oxidative stress and apoptosis in the cerebral cortex of the adult offspring. Conclusion: Maternal high-fat diet was associated with distinct endophenotypic changes of the adult mouse cerebral cortex independent of the diet of the offspring. The identified modulated proteins could represent novel therapeutic targets for the prevention of neuropathological features resulting from maternal obesity.

### Sample Protocol
Proven C57b1/6 dams were fed a control (C) (21% kcal fat, 17% kcal protein, 63% kcal carbohydrate, n=4) or high fat (H) chow diet (45% kcal fat, 20% kcal protein, 35% kcal carbohydrate; Special Diet Services, UK, n=4) for four weeks before conception and during gestation and lactation. At weaning, four-week old male offspring were assigned to a C or H diet, generating four groups (Figure 1A).  Nineteen week-old mice were anesthetized, perfused intracardially with phosphate buffered saline, brains removed, dissected for frontoparietal cortices and snap frozen. Experimental procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Southampton and the Home Office.   To each specimen, 200 μL of dissolution buffer (0.5 M TEAB and 0.05% SDS) was added and then homogenized using the FastPrep system (Savant Bio 101 FastPrep FP 120-120 V) followed by pulsed probe sonication. Lysates were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 40C. The supernatants from each lysate were measured for their total protein content using the BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. A multiplex set of eight pooled specimens was generated, consisting of two biological replicates for each of the four conditions (Fig 1). For each pool, 33.3 μg of three respective lysates from each condition were combined, giving 100 μg of final protein content for each iTRAQ label. Proteins were then iTRAQ labelled as per manufacturers instructions.  Labelled peptides were lyophilised separately and serially reconstituted in 100 μL of 2% ACN 0.1% NH4OH and subjected to high-pH RP fractionation. This was performed on the Ultimate LC Packings pump equipped with photodiode array detector using the Waters, XBridge C8 column (150 x 3.0 mm, 3.5 μm particle).  The LC-MS experiments were performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system hyphenated with the high-resolution nano-ESI LTQ-Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Individual peptide fractions were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid and approximately 500ng of peptide material was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 (100 μm x 2 cm C18, 5 μm particle trapping column at 5 μL/min flow rate for 8 min. Peptides were eluted at 300 nl x min-1 over a gradient of 6-30 % (75 mins), and 35-85 % (10 mins) organic phase (95% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in aqueous phase (2% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and were resolved on an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (C18 75 μm × 25 cm, 2 μm particle) retrofitted to a PicoTip nESI emitter (New Objective). Electrospray ionisation was conducted at 2.4 kV and precursor ions were characterised with an Obitrap Elite – Velos pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) at 240,000 mass resolution. The top 7 precursor ions per MS scan (minimum intensity; 500, minimum charge state; +2) were characterised by HCD (15,000 mass resolution, 1.2 Da isolation window, 40 keV collision energy) and CID (ion trap MS, 2 Da isolation window, 35 keV) with a dynamic exclusion (±10 ppm) of 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The unprocessed raw files were submitted to Proteome Discoverer 1.4 for target decoy searching with SequestHT. Percolator was used to estimate FDR with a threshold of ≤ 0.01. Spectra were searched for fully tryptic peptides allowing 2 missed cleavages, a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm, a minimum peptide length of 6. The search allowed for variable modification of; oxidation (M), deamidation (N, Q) and iTRAQ (Y). Methythio (C), iTRAQ (K and N-terminus) were set as fixed modifications. The fragment ion mass tolerances were set at 0.02 Da for the FT-acquired HCD spectra and 0.5 Da for the IT-acquired CID spectra. Spectra were searched against the UniProtKB TREMBL mouse proteome (Dec 2013). Reporter ions were extracted with a tolerance of 20 ppm. Protein ratios were normalized on protein median.

### Publication Abstract
Epidemiological studies suggest an association between maternal obesity and adverse neurodevelopmental outcomes in offspring. Our aim was to compare the global proteomic portrait in the cerebral cortex between mice born to mothers on a high-fat or control diet who themselves were fed a high-fat or control diet. Male mice born to dams fed a control (C) or high-fat (H) diet 4 weeks before conception and during gestation, and lactation were assigned to either C or H diet at weaning. Mice were killed at 19 weeks and their cerebral cortices were analysed using a two-dimensional liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry methodology. In total, 6&#x2009;695 proteins were identified (q&lt;0.01), 10% of which were modulated in at least one of the groups relative to controls. In silico analysis revealed that mice clustered based on the diet of the mother and not their own diet and that maternal high-fat diet was significantly associated with response to hypoxia/oxidative stress and apoptosis in the cerebral cortex of the adult offspring. Maternal high-fat diet resulted in distinct endophenotypic changes of the adult offspring cerebral cortex independent of its current diet. The identified proteins could represent novel therapeutic targets for the prevention of neuropathological features resulting from maternal obesity.

### Keywords
Brain, Obesity, Maternal, Cerebral cortex, High-fat diet, Proteomics, 2d lc-ms/ms, Itraq

### Affiliations
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK
Cancer Sciences Faculty of Medicine  University of Southampton

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Spiros Garbis
Cancer Sciences Faculty of Medicine  University of Southampton


