### Accession
PXD006081

### Title
Mass spectrometry analysis of cleavage sites for different protease allergens in human IL-33

### Description
The cytokine interleukin-33 (IL-33) is an epithelial alarmin with critical roles in allergic inflammation and type 2 immunity. The project aims at the characterization of the direct cleavage of IL-33 by allergen proteases, resulting in its activation, and in the subsequent induction of type 2 cytokine production in group 2 innate lymphoid cells. The present dataset contains mass spectrometry analyses to map the cleavage sites for 9 distinct allergens proteases in the human IL-33 sequence.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant human IL-33 protein produced in vitro in rabbit reticulocyte lysate was either untreated (control) or incubated with allergens extracts or allergen proteases for 1 h at 37°C. Cleavage products were analyzed by 1D SDS-PAGE. Processed fragments were excised from the gels and further in-gel digested using a specific proteolytic enzyme to map the central domain of the protein and identify neo N-terminal peptides resulting from allergen cleavage in this region. To confidently identify the neo N-terminal peptide for each allergen-processed IL-33 fragment, a comparative mapping was performed with IL-33 full-length isolated from the control gel lane. Proteins were in-gel reduced with 25mM of DTT and alkylated with 100mM of chloroacetamide, then digested by addition of either 0.6µg of trypsin (Promega) or 1.5µg of V8 endoproteinase Glu-C/V8 (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubation at 37°C overnight. Peptides were extracted from the gel and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific). Peptides were separated on a C-18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 50 cm; in-house packed with Reprosil C18) equilibrated in 95% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 5% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), using a 5 to 50% gradient of solvent B in 105min at 300 nl/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software. MS survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120000. Peptides ions were automatically selected and sequenced either by CID (collision induced dissociation) in the linear ion trap or by HCD (Higher-energy collisional dissociation) in the c-trap with analysis of the fragments in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30000.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were converted to the mzdb format  and processed with the mzdb-access library (https://github.com/mzdb) to generate peaklists. Data was searched with Mascot (version 2.5.2) against a custom-made database containing all rabit entries from the UniProtKB database (Swiss-Prot/TrEmbl release 2014-11-06, Oryctolagus cuniculus taxonomy, 22920 entries), plus human IL33 sequence, as well as C-terminal truncated forms of human IL33 resulting from allergen cleavage in the central domain of the protein at all possible amino acids between T64 and T114. The search included methionine oxidation as a variable modification, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Specificity of digestion was set for cleavage after K or R in the case of trypsin-digested samples, and after E and D (except when followed by P) for V8 endoproteinase Glu-C -digested samples, and two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for the precursor ion. It was set to 0.8Da for fragment ions in CID mode (detection in the ion trap) and 20 mmu in HCD mode (detection in the orbitrap). Validation of identifications was performed through a false discovery rate set to 1% at protein and peptide sequence match level, determined by target-decoy search using the in-house-developed software Proline (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/). Raw MS signal extraction of identified neo N-terminal peptides was performed with Proline across samples treated with different allergens.

### Publication Abstract
Allergic inflammation has crucial roles in allergic diseases such as asthma. It is therefore important to understand why and how the immune system responds to allergens. Here we found that full-length interleukin 33 (IL-33<sub>FL</sub>), an alarmin cytokine with critical roles in type 2 immunity and asthma, functioned as a protease sensor that detected proteolytic activities associated with various environmental allergens across four kingdoms, including fungi, house dust mites, bacteria and pollens. When exposed to allergen proteases, IL-33<sub>FL</sub> was rapidly cleaved in its central 'sensor' domain, which led to activation of the production of type 2 cytokines in group 2 innate lymphoid cells. Preventing cleavage of IL-33<sub>FL</sub> reduced allergic airway inflammation. Our findings reveal a molecular mechanism for the rapid induction of allergic type 2 inflammation following allergen exposure, with important implications for allergic diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Interleukin-33, Lc-ms/ms, Protease processing, Peptide mapping

### Affiliations
CNRS/IPBS
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, University of Toulouse

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, University of Toulouse


