### Accession
PXD025852

### Title
An in situ ascorbate peroxidase 2-based labeling method and its application in detecting exosome proteins released from mouse proximal tubule cells under oxidative stress

### Description
Here, we developed an in situ labeling approach to identify exosome-loaded proteins, which bypasses the traditional exosome isolation steps. In this method, an engineered ascorbate peroxidase targeting to endosomes-destined exosomes was used to label proteins loaded inside exosomes released from kidney proximal tubule-derived cells. Mass spectrometry analysis of the kidney proximal tubule-derived cells identified oxidative stress-induced exosome proteome alteration.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested overnight directly on beads with sequence-grade trypsin after denaturation with 8M urea (50mM Tris-HCl, pH8.0), reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation using iodoacetamide. Digested peptides were cleaned using the C18 spin column (Harvard Apparatus #744101) and then lyophilized. Digested peptide samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), to which an Ultimate 3000 nano-UΗPLC system (Thermo Fisher) is connected. The peptide samples were first trapped on a Pepmap100 C18 peptide trap (5um, 0.3X5mm) and then washed at 20 μl/min using 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid for 10 min. Next, the cleaned peptides were washed off the trap and further separated on a Pepman 100 RSLC C18 column (2.0 μm, 75-μm × 150-mm) at 40 C using a gradient of between 2% to 40% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid over 40 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluted peptides were introduced into MS via nano-electrospray ionization and the MS analysis were performed using data-dependent acquisition in positive mode with the Orbitrap MS analyzer for precursor scans at 120,000 FWHM from 300 to 1500 m/z and the ion-trap MS analyzer for MS/MS scans at top-speed mode (3-second cycle time). Collision-induced dissociation method was used to fragment the precursor peptides with a normalized energy level of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS and MS/MS spectrum for each sample were filtered and processed using the Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Fisher) and then submitted to SequestHT search algorithm against the Uniprot mouse database (10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance: 10ppm, product ion mass tolerance: 0.6 Da, with static Carbamidomethylation of +57.021 Da and dynamic oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da). Perculator PSM validator algorithm was used for peptide spectrum matching validation and false discovery rate estimation.

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular vesicle exosome mediates intercellular communication by transporting macromolecules such as proteins and ribonucleic acids (RNAs). Determining cargo contents with high accuracy will help decipher the biological processes that exosomes mediate in various contexts. Existing methods for probing exosome cargo molecules rely on a prior exosome isolation procedure. Here we report an in situ labelling approach for exosome cargo identification, which bypasses the exosome isolation steps. In this methodology, a variant of the engineered ascorbate peroxidase APEX, fused to an exosome cargo protein such as CD63, is expressed specifically in exosome-generating vesicles in live cells or in secreted exosomes in the conditioned medium, to induce biotinylation of the proteins in the vicinity of the APEX variant for a short period of time. Mass spectrometry analysis of the proteins biotinylated by this approach in exosomes secreted by kidney proximal tubule-derived cells reveals that oxidative stress can cause ribosomal proteins to accumulate in an exosome subpopulation that contains the CD63-fused APEX variant.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mouse, Apex2, Lc-ms/ms, Exosomes, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA

### Submitter
Sang-Ho Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Sang-Ho Kwon
Department of Cellular Biology and Anatomy, Medical College of Georgia, Augusta University, Augusta, GA, USA


