### Accession
PXD041752

### Title
Tear proteome analysis by LC-MS/MS

### Description
We have analysed the tear proteome from multiple volunteers without ocular disease using untargeted LC-MS/MS with and without pre-fractionation of peptide digests. Standard LC-MS/MS was compared to results from fractionation by mixed-mode cation exchange SPE and reverse-phase HPLC fractionation. The combined analysis of all these samples resulted in the identification of 886 proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Tear samples (on-strip) were incubated with 200 µL ABC buffer (100 mM, pH 8.5) for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath, followed by addition of 5 µL of 100 mM DTT (20 min at 37°C) and 10 µL of 100 mM IAM (30 min at 37°C in the dark) for reductive alkylation, prior to digesting with 1 µg trypsin for 16 h at 37°C. Digests were then subjected to SPE (HLB or MCX) or HPLC fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected onto an Aeris™ PEPTIDE XB-C18 (1.7 µm, 100 × 2.1 mm) with SecurityGuard ULTRA C18-peptide guard column (Phenomenex) using a Shimadzu Nexera UHPLC system. Gradient elution was performed at 40°C with a flow rate of 0.3 mL/min using a gradient of water (A) and ACN (B), both containing 0.1% FA. Initial conditions were 5% B for 2.5 min, increased to 30% over 37.5 min, up to 50% in 2 min, 90% within 2 min, held for 3 min before re-equilibration of the column. A AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600 system, equipped with a DuoSpray source in positive mode, was used for data-dependent acquisition of peptide digests with top 15 ions chosen for MS/MS and a total cycle time of 1.05 s. IDA data were searched with ProteinPilot 5.0.3 (through the cloud-based Sciex OneOmics Suite 3.1 platform) against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database containing common protein contaminants (release date March 2019). The search was performed using the Paragon algorithm with the following criteria: iodoacetamide as cysteine alkylation, trypsin for digestion and human species. Proteins and peptides were identified at a threshold of 1% global false discovery rate (FDR).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition, Tear proteome, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Université du Québec à Montréal (UQÀM), Chemistry Department / Pharmaqam, Montréal, QC, Canada
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) Montreal (Quebec), Canada

### Submitter
Lekha Sleno

### Lab Head
Dr Lekha Sleno
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Research Group Chemistry Department, Université du Québec à Montréal (UQAM) Montreal (Quebec), Canada


