### Accession
PXD034445

### Title
HeLa cells were transfected with MARVELD1, then treated with or without HU treatment,following with IP and LC-MSMS analysis

### Description
To analyze MARVELD1 interacting proteins, HeLa cells were transfected with MARVELD1-Flag or pcDNA3.1 (PC), then treated with 8 mM Hydroxyurea (MCE, USA) or DMSO for 24 h, and subjected to IP assays with anti-DYKDDDDK magnetic agarose (Thermo, USA). After washing five times with PBS buffer, samples were boiled in 2× SDS loading buffer, resolved in SDS-PAGE, visualized by Coomassie Blue staining, and subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis (PTM Bio, China, project number: FA203GI).

### Sample Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 16 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 andthe fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass spectra were searched against XXX database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any)was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Metwas specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
The DNA damage response (DDR) plays crucial roles in cancer prevention and therapy. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) mediates multiple signal transduction in the DDR as a master regulator. Uncovering the regulatory factors of PARP1 contributes to a more comprehensive view of tumorigenesis and treatment strategies. Here, we reveal that MARVELD1 acts as a mediator of DDR to perform early events and maintain genome stability. Mechanistically, PARP1 PARylates MARVELD1 at D102, D118 and D130, and in turn, MARVELD1 stabilizes PARP1 by enhancing NAA50-mediated acetylation, thus forming a positive feedback loop. MARVELD1 knockout mice and their embryo fibroblasts exhibit genomic instability and shorter half-life of PARP1. Moreover, MARVELD1 partnering with PARP1 facilitates resistance to genotoxic drugs and disrupts PARP inhibitor (PARPi) effect in PDX model of colorectal cancer (CRC). Overall, our results underline the link between MARVELD1 and PARP1 in therapeutic resistance based on DDR and provide new insights for clinical tumor therapy of PARPi.

### Keywords
Hela cells lc-msms marveld1 hu

### Affiliations
School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin City,China

### Submitter
Haoxiu Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Haoxiu Sun
School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin City,China


