### Accession
PXD028943

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of TrkA and TrkB signaling in SH-SY5Y neuroblastoma cells

### Description
Human neuroblastoma cells (SH-SY5Y) were engineered to have stable expression of either TrkA (NTRK1) or TrkB (NTRK2) receptors. The cells were pretreated with 0.5 μM Trametinib, 2.5 μM Gefitinib, and combination of 0.25 μM Trametinib and 1.25 μM Gefitinib. Stimulation of TrkA and TrkB-expressing SH-SY5Y cells was carried out 30 minutes following inhibitor addition, using 100 ng/mL of recombinant NGF (#450-01) and BDNF (#450-02), respectively (both from Peprotech). The stimulated and unstimulated controls are included.

### Sample Protocol
Sample Preparation   Cells were resuspended in 100ul of ice cold 8M urea/50Mm Tris HCL with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (Roche). Each sample was sonicated (Syclon Ultrasonic Homogenizer) for 2 x 9 seconds at a power setting of 15%to disrupt the cell pellet. The protein samples were normalized to 550ug. Each sample was reduced by adding 8mM dithiothreitol (dtt) and mixing (thermomixer 1200rpm, 30°C) for 60 min and carboxylated by adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and mixing (thermomixer 1200rpm, 30°C) for 30 min the dark. The solution was diluted with 50mM Tris HCL to bring the urea concentration down to below 1M. NB: (Urea must be below 2M to prevent inhibition of trypsin). lyophilized trypsin (sequencing grade trypsin from Promega) was resuspended with 50Mm Tris HCL at a concentration of 0.5ug/µl and added to each solution. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin (1:100 enzyme to protein ratio) with gentle shaking (thermomixer 850rpm, 37°C). The digestion was terminated by adding formic acid to 1% final concentration and cleaned up using c18 (HyperSep SpinTip P-20, BioBasic C18, Thermo Scientific).  Phosphopeptide enrichment was carried out with TiO2 (Titansphere Phos-TiO Bulk 10 um, (GL Sciences Inc, Tokyo, Japan) using an adapted method previously described (1). In summary, each sample was incubated with TiO2 beads for 30 minutes by rotation in 80% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid, 5mM monopotassium phosphate, 20mg/ml 2,5- dihydroxybenzoic acid, this step was carried out twice. The beads were washed 5 times in 80% acetonitrile/1% trifluoroacetic acid, before elution of the phosphopeptides with 50% acetonitrile, 7% ammonium hydroxide. The two eluents from each sample were then pooled and dried down.  LCMSMS Method (Bruker timsTof Pro)  Samples were run on a Bruker timsTof Pro mass spectrometer connected to a Evosep One liquid chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and each sample was loaded on to an Evosep tip. The Evosep tips were placed in position on the Evosep One in a 96-tip box. The autosampler picks up each tip, elutes and separates the peptides using a set chromatography method (30 samples a day) The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100-1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 5 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.03s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometer raw data was searched against the Homo sapiens subset of the Uniprot Swissprot database (reviewed) using the search engine Maxquant (release 2.0.1.0) In brief, specific parameters were used (Type: TIMS DDA, Variable mods; Phospho (STY ), Deamidation (NQ). Each peptide used for protein identification met specific Maxquant parameters, i.e., only peptide scores that corresponded to a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 were accepted from the Maxquant database search. Phospho (STY)Site intensities with localization scores > 0.75 were used for relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding cell state transitions and purposefully controlling them is a longstanding challenge in biology. Here we present cell state transition assessment and regulation (cSTAR), an approach for mapping cell states, modelling transitions between them and predicting targeted interventions to convert cell fate decisions. cSTAR uses omics data as input, classifies cell states, and develops a workflow that transforms the input data into mechanistic models that identify a core signalling network, which controls cell fate transitions by influencing whole-cell networks. By integrating signalling and phenotypic data, cSTAR models how cells manoeuvre in Waddington's landscape<sup>1</sup> and make decisions about which cell fate to adopt. Notably, cSTAR devises interventions to control the movement of cells in Waddington's landscape. Testing cSTAR in a cellular model of differentiation and proliferation shows a high correlation between quantitative predictions and experimental data. Applying cSTAR to different types of perturbation and omics datasets, including single-cell data, demonstrates its flexibility and scalability and provides new biological insights. The ability of cSTAR to identify targeted perturbations that interconvert cell fates will enable designer approaches for manipulating cellular development pathways and mechanistically underpinned therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Neuroblastoma.

### Affiliations
University College Dublin
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4.

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Boris Kholodenko
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4.


