### Accession
PXD018002

### Title
Analysis of protein interaction partners of TDIF

### Description
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated as by-products of metabolism can induce stochastic damage to cellular components including DNA. A localised oxidative damage may arise during transcriptional activation at promoters of protein coding genes. ROS are generated during oxidative demethylation of histones and 5-methyl cytosine in promoter CpG clusters. ROS induced oxidation of DNA bases, mainly 7,8-dihydro-8-oxoguanine (8-oxoG) is normally resolved through a well characterised repair pathway where the oxidised base is first removed by components of base excision repair (BER) pathway, and the resulting breaks in the DNA backbone are subsequently repaired by the single-strand repair (SSBR) machinery that includes TDP1 and XRCC1. In this project we have identified the role of a putative mitotic assembly protein, TDIF in ROS induced single strand break repair. Using semi-quantitative LC-MS/MS and biochemical assays we show that the long isoform of TDIF specifically interacts with SSBR machinery after oxidative damage.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were grown on 15-cm tissue culture plates in MEM supplemented with 10% FBS until they reached 70% confluency. Cells were transfected using polyethylenimine (PEI) with 10ug of either empty vector (pEGFPc1) or pEGFPc1-TDIF long (LTR) and pEGFPc1-TDIF short (STR) plasmids, left to grow for 48 hours and treated with 10uM H2O2 before harvesting in NP-40 cell lysis buffer. Cell lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation using 25uL of GFP-Trap_MA beads (ChemoTek) and washed 3X with NP-40 buffer, 2x with wash buffer (without detergent) before separation on a magnet. Wash buffer was carefully removed and dried beads were subjected to sample processing protocol for downstream mass spectrometry. Bead samples were resuspended in 100 mM AB, pH 8. Reduction was performed by the addition of 50mM TCEP and incubation for 10 minutes at 70°C. After cooling to room temperature, 50 mM iodoacetamide was added and the samples were incubated in the dark with shaking for 30 min at room temperature. Lyophilized trypsin was dissolved in 100 mM AB to a final concentration of 0.1 µg/µL and 20 µL of enzyme solution were added to the samples. Digestion was performed at 37°C for 6h. The digestion was stopped by lowering the pH to 3.0 with 10% FA. Digested peptides were desalted with C18 spin columns (P/N 89870, Pierce, Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions except that 0.5% tri-flour acetic acid was replaced by 0.5% FA. Digested and cleaned samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.5% FA before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 uHPLC (Thermo Scientific) with an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 trap column (3 µm particle size, 75 µm X 150 mm) and an EASY-Spray™ C18 column (2 µm particle size, 50 µm X 150 mm) using an 80 min gradient at 0.25 µl/min with 0.1% FA in water (mobile phase A) and 0.1% FA in 80% ACN (mobile phase B) as follows: 0-5 min, hold at 3% B; 5-60 min, from 3% B to 40% B; 60-65 min, from 40% B to 90% B; 65-70 min, hold at 90% B; 70-71 min, from 90% B to 3% B; 71-80 min, re-equilibrate at 3% B. MS/MS analysis was performed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific) hybrid ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-SprayTM Ion Source. MS survey scans in positive ion mode were acquired in the FT-orbitrap analyzer using an m/z window from 375 to 1600, a resolution of 60,000, and an automatic gain control target setting of 1 × 10E6. The 20 most intense precursor ions were selected for the acquisition of MS/MS spectra in the ion trap (Normal Scan Rate) using collision-induced dissociation with normalized collision energy of 35%, activation time of 10 ms, activation Q of 0.25, isolation width of 2 Th, and automatic gain control target value of 1 × 10E4. Ions with charge state 1+ were excluded from precursor selection. Monoisotopic precursor selection was activated. Dynamic exclusion for precursor ions was applied for 45 s after 1 fragmentation count and a repeat duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data files were used for protein identification using MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.5.1. Default MaxQuant parameters were used except for the following: protein database was the Human Uniprot proteome (downloaded on the 28th September, 2017) and a fasta file containing the theoretical sequence of GFP-TDIF-L and GFP-TDIF-S; LFQ quantification was selected, unique peptides were used for quantification, minimum ration count was set to 1, calculation of iBAQ values was selected; variable modifications, Oxidation(M); fixed modifications, Carbamydomethylation(C). The statistical analyses of MaxQuant LFQ intensities were performed by Perseus (Tyanova et al, 2016) as follows. The dataset was filtered to remove proteins with less than three values in at least one group (GFP, LTR-TDIF or STR-TDIF). LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed and missing values were replaced using a downshifted normal distribution of the total matrix (width 3, downshift 1.8). The quantitative differences between conditions were evaluated after hierarchical clustering of the data and graphical representation in a volcano plot (Student t-test with false discovery rate of 0.05 and artificial within groups variance S0=1).

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative genome damage is an unavoidable consequence of cellular metabolism. It arises at gene regulatory elements by epigenetic demethylation during transcriptional activation<sup>1,2</sup>. Here we show that promoters are protected from oxidative damage via a process mediated by the nuclear mitotic apparatus protein NuMA (also known as NUMA1). NuMA exhibits genomic occupancy approximately 100&#x2009;bp around transcription start sites. It binds the initiating form of RNA polymerase II, pause-release factors and single-strand break repair (SSBR) components such as TDP1. The binding is increased on chromatin following oxidative damage, and TDP1 enrichment at damaged chromatin is facilitated by NuMA. Depletion of NuMA increases oxidative damage at promoters. NuMA promotes transcription by limiting the polyADP-ribosylation of RNA polymerase II, increasing its availability and release from pausing at promoters. Metabolic labelling of nascent RNA identifies genes that depend on NuMA for transcription including immediate-early response genes. Complementation of NuMA-deficient cells with a mutant that mediates binding to SSBR, or a mitotic separation-of-function mutant, restores SSBR defects. These findings underscore the importance of oxidative DNA damage repair at gene regulatory elements and describe a process that fulfils this function.

### Keywords
Dna repair; tdif; hydrogen peroxide (h2o2); immunoprecipitation; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Firth Court, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK
University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Adelina E Acosta-Martin

### Lab Head
Dr Sherif F El-Khamisy
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Firth Court, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK


