### Accession
PXD039549

### Title
HEK 293T LCMS after 8h of treatment with Actinomycin D

### Description
Investigation of proteomic changes in HEK 293T cells after 8h of actinomycin D treatment with special focus on RNA modifying enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digests to oligopeptides of HEK cell total proteome (n=4) were desalted (SepPak C18 cartridges) and analyzed on LC-MS (nanoLC Ultimate 3000 and Orbitrap Eclipse). For more detail see manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software and a human .fasta file. Then, using the Perseus software, data was cleaned from potential contaminants etc. Missing data points were imputated from normal distribution using Perseus' default settings. Data in manuscript is displayed as Vulcano plot generated by Perseus using its default settings.

### Publication Abstract
RNA is dynamically modified and has the potential to respond to environmental changes and tune translation. The objective of this work is to uncover the temporal limitation of our recently developed cell culture NAIL-MS (nucleic acid isotope labelling coupled mass spectrometry) technology and overcome it. Actinomycin D (AcmD), an inhibitor of transcription, was used in the NAIL-MS context to reveal the origin of hybrid nucleoside signals composed of unlabelled nucleosides and labelled methylation marks. We find that the formation of these hybrid species depends exclusively on transcription for Poly-A RNA and rRNA but is partly transcription-independent for tRNA. This finding suggests that tRNA modifications adapt and are dynamically regulated by cells to overcome <i>e.g.</i> stress. Future studies on the tRNA modification mediated stress response are now accessible and the temporal resolution of NAIL-MS is improved by the use of AcmD.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms, Hek cells, Silac, Pulse-chase

### Affiliations
Goethe University, Institute for Pharmaceutical Chemistry
Goethe University Frankfurt

### Submitter
Gregor Ammann

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Kaiser
Goethe University, Institute for Pharmaceutical Chemistry


