### Accession
PXD021509

### Title
High throughput microfluidic 3D biomimetic model enabling quantitative description of human breast tumor microenvironment

### Description
Cancer is driven by genetic aberrations in the tumor cells and fundamental changes in the tumor microenvironment (TME). These changes offer potential targets for novel therapeutics, yet lack of in vitro 3D models recapitulating this complex microenvironment impedes such progress. Here, we generated tumor-stroma spheroids reflecting the in vivo TME of early and advanced breast tumor, using a high throughput microfluidic system. The spheroids, composed of tumor cells, fibroblasts and activated immune cells, were generated and cultivated on-chip in alginate (Alg) or alginate-alginate sulfate (Alg/Alg-S) hydrogels.

### Sample Protocol
The overall sample processing workflow followed a previously published on-micro SPE tip protocol (PMID: 25755294). 1 µL of the resulting reconstituted sample was analyzed in each LC-MS/MS run. For each biological repeat (n=3), at least three technical replicates (i.e., replicate LC-MS/MS analyses of the same sample) were used across the whole study. The sample was loaded with the autosampler directly onto an in-house prepared bead-packed nano-LC column, which was made from a 75 μm ID and 360 μm OD fused-silica capillary tubing with a pulled tip packed with 15 cm of 1.9 μm ReproSil-Pur 120Å C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). Peptides were eluted at a flow of 150 nL/min from the analytical column using a nano-LC pump with a 60-minute linear gradient from 1% solvent B to 25% solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile) mixed with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The voltage of 2.3 kV was applied to electrospray the eluting peptides directly into an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ mass spectrometer equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos acquired mass spectrometry data were analyzed with ProteomeDiscoverer (v.2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and searched against a human protein database (UniProt, released March 13, 2018, containing 20,302 reviewed sequences) combined with common contaminant proteins. Orbitrap-detected HCD spectra were searched using the Sequest HT search algorithm with 15 ppm and 0.04 Da mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions, respectively. The database search was limited to only fully tryptic peptides, with up to two missed cleavage sites per peptide in the search, and the minimum peptide sequence length was set to 5 amino acid residues. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a static modification. N-terminal protein acetylation, methionine oxidation, deamidation on asparagine/glutamine and lysine acetylation were selected as dynamic modifications. For protein identifications, at least one high confidence peptide sequence was required, and a target 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was used for protein identification. Protein quantitation was performed through label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis using ProteomeDiscoverer (v. 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The FDR ≤ 1% was applied for all peptide-level identifications. Both, unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. Precursor abundance was calculated based on intensity and a normalization based on total peptide amount was used for all samples. Protein ratio calculation was done by summed abundance and a replicate based resampling was used for LFQ intensity imputation.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer is driven by both genetic aberrations in the tumor cells and fundamental changes in the tumor microenvironment (TME). These changes offer potential targets for novel therapeutics, yet lack of in vitro 3D models recapitulating this complex microenvironment impedes such progress. Here, we generated several tumor-stroma scaffolds reflecting the dynamic in vivo breast TME, using a high throughput microfluidic system. Alginate (Alg) or alginate-alginate sulfate (Alg/Alg-S) hydrogels were used as ECM-mimics, enabling the encapsulation and culture of tumor cells, fibroblasts and immune cells (macrophages and T cells, of the innate and adaptive immune systems, respectively). Specifically, Alg/Alg-S was shown capable of capturing and presenting growth factors and cytokines with binding affinity that is comparable to heparin. Viability and cytotoxicity were shown to strongly correlate with the dynamics of cellular milieu, as well as hydrogel type. Using on-chip immunofluorescence, production of reactive oxygen species and apoptosis were imaged and quantitatively analyzed. We then show how macrophages in our microfluidic system were shifted from a proinflammatory to an immunosuppressive phenotype when encapsulated in Alg/Alg-S, reflecting in vivo TME dynamics. LC-MS proteomic profiling of tumor cells sorted from the TME scaffolds revealed upregulation of proteins involved in cell-cell interactions and immunomodulation in Alg/Alg-S scaffolds, correlating with in vivo findings and demonstrating the appropriateness of Alg/Alg-S as an ECM biomimetic. Finally, we show the formation of large tumor-derived vesicles, formed exclusively in Alg/Alg-S scaffolds. Altogether, our system offers a robust platform for quantitative description of the breast TME that successfully recapitulates in vivo patterns. STATEMENT OF SIGNIFICANCE: Cancer progression is driven by profound changes in both tumor cells and surrounding stroma. Here, we present a high throughput microfluidic system for the generation and analysis of dynamic tumor-stroma scaffolds, that mimic the complex in vivo TME cell proportions and compositions, constructing robust in vitro models for the study of the TME. Utilizing Alg/Alg-S as a bioinspired ECM, mimicking heparin's in vivo capabilities of capturing and presenting signaling molecules, we show how Alg/Alg-S induces complex in vivo-like responses in our models. Alg/Alg-S is shown here to promote dynamic protein expression patterns, that can serve as potential therapeutic targets for breast cancer treatment. Formation of large tumor-derived vesicles, observed exclusively in the Alg/Alg-S scaffolds suggests a mechanism for tumor survival.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment, Proteomic profiling, Breast cancer, Alginate, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States
Northeastern University

### Submitter
Michal Gregus

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander R. Ivanov
Barnett Institute of Chemical and Biological Analysis, Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Northeastern University, 360 Huntington Ave., Boston, Massachusetts 02115, United States


