### Accession
PXD009199

### Title
Mapping Ubiquitination Sites in Alzheimer's Disease

### Description
Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) is characterized by the deposition of protein aggregates such as  neurofibrillary  tangles  (NFTs)  and  amyloid  (Aβ)  plaques  in  the  brain. Post-translational modification  through ubiquitylationplays  critical  roles in clearing  misfolded  protein aggregates. Investigating  global  ubiquitylation changes inAD brain  may  provide  insights  regarding  the underlying  mechanisms  of  proteostasis  and  disease  pathogenesis.Here,  we  utilizedan immunoaffinity approach to specifically enrichubiquitinated(di-glycine) peptides frompostmortemhuman control and AD braintissues.Mass spectrometry(MS)based proteomicanalysis identified global ubiquitylation changes associated with ADand hierarchical clustering of the human brain ubiquitylome clearly classified AD cases from healthy controls based on ubiquitylation patterns. Polyubiquitin linkage analysis identified increased levels of all seven polyubiquitin linkage typesas well as total ubiquitin in the AD brain tissues.We also report novel ubiquitylation sites in the microtubulebinding repeatof Tauwith potential implicationsfor Tauaggregation. Dually modified peptides with both phosphorylation and ubiquitylationsites, many of which originated from Tauprotein  are also differentially  enriched  in  AD.Furthermore, all  the KXGS  motifswithin themicrotubule  binding  region  (MTBR)of Tauprotein,which  represents  the  core  ofNFTs,are enriched  among dually modified  peptides. Collectively,  these  studieshighlight  the utility  of  an immunoaffinity enrichment approach coupled with MSanalysis for mapping AD associated global ubiquitylome changesas well as to gain insights intounderlying proteostasis pathwaysaltered in AD brain.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue homogenization and enzymatic digestion for global proteome analysis Tissue  samples  were  prepared  essentially  as  previously  described  with  brief  modifications. Post-mortem  human  frontal  cortex  brain  samples  from  five  AD casesand  five  healthy  controls were  homogenized  in  8M  urea  lysis  buffer  (8M  urea,  100  mM  NaHPO4 buffer  system,  pH  8.5, supplemented  with  HALT  protease  and  phosphatase  cocktail  inhibitors,  (ThermoFisher,  Cat# 78440) using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance)per manufacturer’s protocol. Each tissue sample was placed in 1.5ml Rino tubes containing 750 mg stainless steel beads (0.9–2 mm indiameter). 500 μl 8M urea  lysis  buffer  was  added  to  eachtissueand  blended  twice  for  5min at 4°C. Homogenates were transferred to a clean Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged at 10,000xg for 5 min and sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) 3 times for 5s with 15s intervals of rest at 30% amplitude to disrupt nucleic acids. Protein concentration was determined by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) method.Prior to trypsin digestion, 100 μg protein homogenates were diluted with 50 mM NH4HCO3to approximately 2M urea concentration and reduced using 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min, and alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested with 1:100 (w/w) lysC endopeptidase (Wako) at room temperaturefor 3 hr followed by  further overnight digestion with 1:50 (w/w) trypsin (Promega) at RT. Tryptic peptides were acidified using 1% FA and 0.1% TFA before desalting and purification using Sep-Pak C18 columns (Waters). Peptides were eluted in 50% acetonitrile and were dried using a SpeedVac (Savant).  Immunoaffinity purification of K-ε-GG peptides from human brain Enrichment for ubiquinatied peptides was carried out with a PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit (Cell Signaling) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 10 mg of brain tissue from control and AD caseswas homogenized in 8M urea lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM NaHPO4 buffer system,  pH  8.5, supplemented with HALT protease and phosphatase cocktail inhibitors, (ThermoFisher, Cat# 78440)) using a Bullet Blender (Next Advance) per manufacturer’s protocol. Protein extracts were reduced, alkylated and enzymatically digested as described above. Tryptic peptides were acidified using 1% FA and 0.1% TFA before desalting and purification using Sep-Pak  C18 columns (Waters). Peptides eluted in 50% acetonitrile were frozen at -80°C  overnight followed by drying using lyophilization. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in immunoaffinity purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) followed by affinity enrichment using (PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit, Cell Signaling) as follows: peptide mix in IAP buffer was incubated with anti-K-ε-GG antibody conjugated beads for 2 hr at 4°C. The beads were washed with IAP buffer four times and affinity enriched peptides were eluted using 0.15% TFA(v/v)twice followed by desalting using StageTips before LC-MS/MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Dried peptides were reconstituted in peptide loading buffer (0.1% formic acid, 0.03% trifluoroacetic acid, 1% acetonitrile) containing 0.2 pmol of isotopically labeled peptide calibrants (ThermoFisher, #88321). Approximately 1 µg of peptides were separated on homemade C18 fused silica column (75 μm internal diameter) with a 140-min gradient at a rate of 400nL/min with 3% to 80%(buffer A: water with 0.1% formic acid and buffer B: acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) ranging  from 3% to 99% buffer B (3% to 30% for the first 105 minutes, 30% to 60% within 20 minutes, 60% to 99% within 5 minutes and 99% for 10 minutes at a rate of 300ηL/min. Peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (ThermoFisher). The  mass spectrometer duty cycle was programmed to collect at top speed with 3 second cycles. Each cycle consists of a MS1 scan (400-1500 m/z range, 50 ms maximum injection time, 120,000 resolution and an automatic gating control target of 200,000 ion counts) collected in the orbitrap followed by higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra (quadrupole isolation mode, 1.6 m/z isolation window, 0.5 m/z offset, 30% collision energy, 10,000 ion counts target for automatic gating control, 35 ms maximum ion time and Orbitrap resolution of 30,000). Dynamic exclusion was set to exclude previously sequenced precursor ions for 30 s within a 10 ppm window. Precursor ions with charge states 2-7 were included. Each K-ε-GG peptide sample was injected twice for LC-MS/MS technical replicates and peptide ion intensities were measured using label freequantification (LFQ).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant for LFQRaw  files from the  10global  proteome LC-MS/MS analysis  weresearched  using MaxQuant v1.6.0.1 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Raw files from the 20 ubiquitin enrichmentLC-MS/MSanalysis were searched using MaxQuant v.5.3.30 with integrated Andromeda search engine40.A separate search was performed on the 20 ubiquitin enrichment raw files for doubly  modified  peptides  with  both  ubiquitylation  and  phosphorylation  sites  using  MaxQuant  v1.5.5.1. UniProt protein  sequencescontaining  both  Swiss-Prot  and  TrEMBL  human  protein  sequences (90,411 target sequences downloaded April 21, 2015), wereduplicated into a reverted (decoy) peptide database, searched, andused to control peptide and razor protein false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%within MaxQuant. Methionine oxidation (+15.9949 Da), asparagine and glutamine deamidation     (+0.9840     Da),     N-terminal     acetylation     (+42.0106     Da)     and     cysteine carbamidomethylation  (+57.0215  Da)  were  assigned  as  fixed  modifications.  Ubiquitylation (+114.043Da) was  assigned  as  a  variable  modification.  For  doubly  modified  peptide  searches, both ubiquitylation and phosphorylation (+79.9663Da) were included as variable modificationson lysine and serine, threonine, or tyrosine, respectively. Tryptic peptides with only 2 miscleavages were included in eachdatabase search. A precursor mass tolerance of ±20 ppm was applied prior to  mass  accuracy  calibration  and  ±4.5  ppm  after  internal  MaxQuant  calibration.  Other  search settings included a maximum peptide mass of 6,000 Da, a minimum peptide length of 6 residues, 0.05 Da tolerance for high resolution Orbitrap MS/MS scans, or 0.6 Da for low resolution MS/MS scans obtained in the linear ion trap. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide spectral matches, proteins, and site decoy fraction were all set to 1%. The label-free quantitation (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used for protein quantitation as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Several neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's Disease (AD) are characterized by ubiquitin-positive pathological protein aggregates. Here, an immunoaffinity approach is utilized to enrich ubiquitylated isopeptides after trypsin digestion from five AD and five age-matched control postmortem brain tissues. Label-free MS-based proteomic analysis identifies 4291 unique ubiquitylation sites mapping to 1682 unique proteins. Differential enrichment analysis shows that over 800 ubiquitylation sites are significantly altered between AD and control cases. Of these, &#x2248;80% are increased in AD, including seven poly ubiquitin linkages, which is consistent with proteolytic stress and high burden of ubiquitylated pathological aggregates in AD. The microtubule associated protein Tau, the core component of neurofibrillary tangles, has the highest number of increased sites of ubiquitylation per any protein in AD. Tau poly ubiquitylation from AD brain homogenates is confirmed by reciprocal co-immunoprecipitation and by affinity capture using tandem ubiquitin binding entities. Co-modified peptides, with both ubiquitylation and phosphorylation sites, are also enriched in AD. Notably, many of the co-modified peptides mapped to Tau within KXGS motifs in the microtubule binding region suggesting that crosstalk between phosphorylation and ubiquitylation occurs on Tau in AD. Overall, these findings highlight the utility of MS to map ubiquitylated substrates in human brain and provides insight into mechanisms underlying pathological protein posttranslational modification in AD.

### Keywords
Ad, Gg remnant peptides, Ubiquitylome

### Affiliations
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry
Emory University

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Emory University School of Medicine Department of Biochemistry


