### Accession
PXD022181

### Title
Exosomal markers in secretome of Kamepferitrin-treated HepG2 cells

### Description
Kaempferitrin is extracted in significantly high quantities from the leaves of Cinnamomum osmophloeum, which belongs to the genus Cinnamomum, the same genus many antidiabetic herbal remedy in Chinese medicine. Oral administration of kaempferitrin reduces blood sugar in alloxan-induced diabetic rats.  In this project, we studied the differential expression profile with proteomic approach using the liver cancer cell line hepG2, as liver cells were responsible for the regulation of lipid generation systemically.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2 cells were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 4 mM glutamine and 10% foetal bovine serum without the addition of phenol red for 24 hrs. The cells were rinsed thourouly with PBS to remove any traces of serum, followed by incubation in DMEM + 4 mM glutamine (no phenol red) for 24 hrs. The cells in the test group were treated with 10 μM kaempferitrin in the same medium for another 24 hrs, and cells that were not treated with kaempferitrin were used as a control group. At the end of 24 hrs, the conditioned medium was collected, passed through a 0.22-μM filter to remove cell debris, and concentrated in an Amicon column with a 3-KD cutoff (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) via centrifugation at 11,000 g. The concentration step was accompanied by several rounds of washing with PBS to facilitate desalting. The eluate was frozen before proteomics study. Secreted proteins were first resuspended in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and 8 M urea. The proteins were further reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at room temperature for 30 min and S-alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark for 30 min. The resulting proteins were digested with endopeptidase Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO, Tokyo, Japan) at room temperature for 2 h, diluted 8-fold with 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and further digested with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega, Mannheim, Germany) at room temperature overnight. Dimethyl peptide labelling was performed as previously described To further increase peptide identification, the abovementioned dimethyl-labelled peptides were further fractionated using a StageTip-based strong exchange method as previously described (Rappsilber, Mann et al. 2007). The desalted peptides were loaded onto an in-house StageTip containing a small portion of EmporeTM Cation Exchange-SR membrane (3M Company, St. Paul, MN, USA). The loaded peptides were washed with 15% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. Finally, the peptides were eluted sequentially using increasing salt concentrations (30, 60, 90, 200, and 500 mM ammonium acetate in 15% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA). The eluted peptides were desalted, vacuum-dried, and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile and 0.5% acetic acid for downstream analyses. The fractionated peptides were analysed using a nanoflow LC-MS/MS on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Dionex, Germering, Germany; now Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), which was online-coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a 100 m X 15 cm tip column, which was packed in-house with 3-m ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ reverse-phase beads (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 500 nL/min by gradient elution with two mobile phases: 0.5% acetic acid in water (Buffer A) and a mixture of 0.5% acetic acid and 80% ACN (Buffer B). The initial LC condition was 5% Buffer B, and the gradient was 5% to 10% Buffer B for 5 min, 10% to 40% Buffer B for 60 min, 40% to 100% Buffer B for 5 min, and 100% Buffer B for 10 min.  The LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. A spray voltage of 2400 V was applied. The full MS scan spectra (m/z 300 – 1600) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap analyser with a target AGC value of 5 x 105. The top 10 most intense precursor ions with charge states ≥ +2 were sequentially isolated with an isolation width of 2 Da and a target AGC value of 1 x 104. The selected precursor ions were fragmented using collision-induced dissociation in the linear ion trap with 35% normalized collision energy. The activation q was set to 0.25, and the activation time was set to 30 ms. Dynamic exclusion was set at 90 s with an exclusion list size of 500. A lock mass of m/z 445.120024 was applied for all LC-MS/MS analyses (Olsen, de Godoy et al. 2005). In our study, we analysed two independent biological batches in triplicate LC-MS/MS runs for each SCX fraction.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from LC-MS/MS were analysed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.30) (Cox and Mann 2008). The peak lists were searched with Andromeda against the SWISS-PROT sequence database (version 2014_09 with 7,914 rat sequence entries). The enzyme specificity was trypsin with up to two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were N-acetylation of proteins and oxidation of methionine. The minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Parent masses and fragment ions were searched with a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. False discovery rates (FDRs) at the peptide and protein levels were fixed at 1%. Quantitative information (treatment/control or H/L) corresponding to each protein was calculated with at least two quantifiable peptides using MaxQuant.  The potential up- or down-regulated protein targets from each biological batch were initially filtered with Perseus software (version 1.3.0.4) using the quantitative information obtained from MaxQuant. The significant cutoff thresholds were based on the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR calculation (threshold value p < 0.05) (Cox and Mann 2008). Only the protein candidates that were similarly up-regulated or down-regulated in the two biological batches were selected (Table 1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Secretome, Kamepferitrin

### Affiliations
Fu Jen Catholic University
Department of Applied Chemistry, Chaoyang University of Technology, 168 Jifong East Road, Wufong, Taichung 41349, Taiwan

### Submitter
Wei-Chi Ku

### Lab Head
Dr Meng-jen Lee
Department of Applied Chemistry, Chaoyang University of Technology, 168 Jifong East Road, Wufong, Taichung 41349, Taiwan


