### Accession
PXD024050

### Title
Peptidomics of enteroendocrine cells and characterisation of potential effects of a novel preprogastrin derived-peptide on glucose tolerance in lean mice

### Description
To analyse the peptidomics of mouse enteroendocrine cells (EECs) and human gastrointestinal (GI) tissue and identify novel gut derived peptides.  High resolution nano-flow liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LCMS) was performed on (i) flow-cytometry purified NeuroD1 positive cells from mouse and homogenised human intestinal biopsies, (ii) supernatants from primary murine intestinal cultures, (iii) intestinal homogenates from mice fed high fat diet. Candidate bioactive peptides were selected on the basis of species conservation, high expression/biosynthesis in EECs and evidence of regulated secretion in vitro. Candidate novel gut-derived peptides were chronically administered to mice to assess effects on food intake and glucose tolerance.

### Sample Protocol
FACS sorted cell analysis: YFP positive cells (EECs) were sorted into Protein LoBind Eppendorf tubes with 800 μL 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)and centrifuged (12 000 g, 5 min, 4⁰C). The aqueous phase was collected and dried overnight in a centrifugal vacuum concentrator and stored at -70⁰C. The samples were extracted by SPE and analysed by nano LC-MS using data dependent acquisition  Mouse Tissue samples: Mice were culled and the GI tracts dissected out. ~30 mg pieces of mouse GI mucosa were flushed with PBS and homogenised in 250 uL 6 M guanidine hydrochloride with Lyzing MatrixD beads using a FastPrep-24 homogeniser. 4 cycles of 40 seconds shaking at 6 m/s was used to homogenise tissue. Samples were crashed with 80% ACN and centrifuged (12 000 g, 5 min, 4⁰C). The aqueous phase was removed and dried overnight in a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were extracted using SPE (Waters Oasis HLB Prime uElution plates) and then analysed by nano LC-MS/MS using a data dependent acquisition.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched using PEAKS, with a no-enzyme setting. Modifications included fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation modification as well as variable N-terminal pyroglutamate, N-terminal acetylation and C-terminal amidation modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enteroendocrine cells; peptidomics; mass spectrometry; prohormones; granins; progastrin

### Affiliations
University of Cambridge
Wellcome Trust, MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge.

### Submitter
Richard Kay

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Fiona Gribble
Wellcome Trust, MRC Institute of Metabolic Science, University of Cambridge.


