### Accession
PXD035329

### Title
The CRL4B E3 ubiquitin ligase complex regulates mitosis by recruiting phospho-specific DCAFs

### Description
The cullin scaffolds CUL4A and CUL4B assemble E3-ligase complexes regulating multiple mostly chromatin-associated cellular functions. Although they are structurally similar, we found that the unique N-terminal extension of CUL4B is heavily phosphorylated during mitosis, and this pattern is perturbed in CUL4B-P50L XLID patients. Indeed, phenotypic characterization and mutational analysis revealed that CUL4B phosphorylation is required for efficient progression through mitosis, controlling spindle positioning and cortical tension. Interestingly, while CUL4B phosphorylation triggers chromatin exclusion, it also promotes binding to actin regulators and two unconventional DCAFs, LIS1 and WDR1. Indeed, LIS1 and WDR1 directly bind DDB1, but their binding is enhanced by phosphorylation-dependent interactions with the unique amino terminal domain of CUL4B. Together, our studies uncover specific functions of CRL4B in mitosis, and identify previously unrecognized DCAFs that bind CUL4B by a phosphorylation-dependent mechanism.

### Sample Protocol
Profiling of CUL4B phosphorylation sites by quantitative mass spectrometry: HA-tagged CUL4B was immunoprecipitated form around 1x108 mitotic cells as described above. After a last wash with MilliQ water the dried beads were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The proteins were eluted from beads by 3x30 min incubation in 6 M urea / 2 M thiourea at room temperature. Supernatants were reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were pre-digested with 1:100 w/w LysC (Wako) for 4 h, diluted in 4 volumes of water and digested with 1:100 w/w trypsin (Serva) overnight. Samples were incubated in TFA (0.5% V/V) for 1 h at 4°C and centrifuged for 10 min at 4000 × g. Peptide supernatants were purified using C18 Sep-Pak columns (Waters), eluted in 50% acetonitrile and acidified with TFA to 6% V/V. Phosphopeptides were enriched using titanium dioxide resin as described (Borisova et al., 2017) and desalted using reversed-phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007).  Samples were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1200, Thermo Scientific). They were loaded onto a C18 reversed-phase column (55 cm length, 75 mm inner diameter) and eluted with a gradient from 2.4 to 32% ACN containing 0.1% formic acid in 90 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,650, resolution: 60,000, target value: 3e6, maximum injection time: 60 ms) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 15 most intense precursor ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (normalized collision energy: 30%, resolution: 30,000, target value: 1e5, maximum injection time: 60 ms, isolation window: 1.4 m/z). Precursor ions with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states of +1 or higher than +6, were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 s. CUL4B interaction profiling by quantitative mass spectrometry: HA-tagged CUL4B or the phosphorylation deficient mutants NP1 and P50L were immunoprecipitated as described above from around 7,5 x 107 SILAC labeled and mitotic arrested cells. On the last washed the beads were combined from all three conditions. Bound proteins were eluted in 2x NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer (Life Technologies) supplemented with 1 mM DTT, heated at 70 °C for 10 min, alkylated by addition of 5.5 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min, and separated by SDS–PAGE on a 4–12% gradient Bis–Tris gel. Proteins were stained using the Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Life Technologies) and digested in-gel using trypsin (Serva). Peptides were extracted from the gel using a series of increasing acetonitrile percentages and desalted using reversed-phase C18 StageTips. Mass spectrometry acquisition and analysis were performed as described above with following modifications. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (23 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 1.6 to 52 % acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 175 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1,650, resolution: 70,000, target value: 3e6, maximum injection time: 20 ms) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated, fragmented by higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) and scanned in the Orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution: 35,000, target value: 1e5, maximum injection time: 120 ms, isolation window: 2.6 m/z). Precursor ions with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states of +1 or higher than +7, were excluded from fragmentation. Precursor ions already selected for fragmentation were dynamically excluded for 25 s.

### Data Protocol
Profiling of CUL4B phosphorylation sites by quantitative mass spectrometry: . Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008). Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the posttranslational modification scoring algorithm. Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a reference proteome database containing human protein sequences obtained from UniProtKB (version 2020_02) using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 p.p.m. in MS mode, 20 p.p.m. in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity, and allowing up to two miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, phosphorylation (STY) and N-ethylmaleimide modification of cysteines (mass difference to cysteine carbamidomethylation) were searched as variable modifications. The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). CUL4B interaction profiling by quantitative mass spectrometry: MaxQuant analysis was performed as described above, without setting phosphorylation (STY) as a variable modification. Potential contaminants, reverse hits, hits only identified by site and hits with no unique peptides were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spindle positioning, Phosphorylation, Dcaf, Cell cortex, Mitosis, E3 ubiquitin ligase, Cell cycle regulation

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz, Germany


