### Accession
PXD035349

### Title
Membrane Fraction Complexome of Nitrososphaera viennensis with BN-PAGE and Examination of the Archaeal Ammonia Monooxygenase Complex via SDS-Tricine-PAGE

### Description
Information on the files related to the respective experiments can be found in the metadata file titled “Metadata_for_Nviennensis_Experiments.xlsx”. The data found here encompasses three related mass spectrometry experiments: 1.)  BN-PAGE: Biomass of Nitrososphaera viennensis grown in a bioreactor was lysed and membrane fractions were harvested using an ultracentrifuge. Membrane proteins were extracted using n-dodecyl-beta-D-maltoside (DDM) and loaded on a 3-12% gradient blue native PAGE gel. Selected bands were cut out and analyzed via mass spectrometry.   2.) SDS-Tricine-PAGE of AMO Band: A band containing a large amount of the ammonia monooxygenase complex (AMO) was denatured and run on a 15% SDS-Tricine-PAGE gel to identify individual subunits.   3.) AmoC from SDS-Tricine-PAGE: A band containing a high amount of AmoC from the SDS-Tricine-PAGE gel was processed with three separate digestive enzymes (trypsin, chymotrypsin, or GluC) to identify unique peptides among the six AmoC homologs found in the genome of N. viennensis.

### Sample Protocol
The Coomassie-stained gel bands were destained with a mixture of acetonitrile (Chromasolv®, Sigma-Aldrich) and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich). The proteins were reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (Roche) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Trypsin (Promega; Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade) digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Trypsin was used for all digestions except for the AmoC digestion using chymotrypsin or GluC.  Chymotrypsin (Roche) digestion was carried out at 25°C for 5 hours in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate.  GluC (Roche) digestion was carried out at 37°C overnight in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. 10% formic acid was used to stop the digestion and peptides were extracted twice with 5% FA for 10min in a cooled ultrasonic bath. Extracted peptides were pooled and desalted using C18 Stagetips.  Peptides were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nanosystem (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X, equipped with a nano-spray ion source using coated emitter tips (PepSep, MSWil). Full details can be found in publication.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.6.0) and spectra searched against Nitrososphaera_viennensis reference proteomes (Uniprot, downloaded fall 2021), with a starting site modification to AmoC4 in the Nitrosopheara_viennensis proteome (Uniprot AmoC4 protein accession: A0A060HLS1, see publication for details), and a database containing common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity (or corresponding enzyme used in the digestion) and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. The output option of iBAQ with log fit was selected. All other parameters were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ammonia oxidizing archaea, Ammonia oxidation, Archaea, Nitrification, Copper membrane cound monooxygenase, Ammonia monooxygenase

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics, Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Logan Hodgskiss

### Lab Head
Dr Christa Schleper
Archaea Biology and Ecogenomics, Department of Functional and Evolutionary Ecology, University of Vienna


