### Accession
PXD011814

### Title
Quantitative Analysis of Global Proteome in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
In total, 5,840 protein groups were identified, among which 5,188 proteins were quantified. The fold-change cutoff was set when proteins with quantitative ratios above 1.5 or below 0.667 are deemed significant. Among the quantified proteins, 95 proteins are up-regulated and 155 proteins are down-regulated in group gr1-seedling/WT-seedling.

### Sample Protocol
1. Protein Extraction Samplewas first grinded by liquid nitrogen, then the powderwastransferred to 5 mL centrifuge tube and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2mM EDTA, 10mM DTT and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% TCA for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM TEAB, pH 8.0) and the protein concentration was determined with 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 2. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Approximately 50μg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin for the following experiments. 3. TMT Labeling After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for 6-plexTMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent (defined as the amount of reagent required to label 100 μg of protein) were thawed and reconstituted in 24 μL ACN. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation.    4. HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions.Then, the peptides were combined into 18 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. 5. LC-MS/MS Analysis Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (Thermo). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% ACN) over 26 min, 24% to 36% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3min then holding at 80% for the last 3min, all at a constant flow rate of 350nL/min on an EASY-n LC 1000 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol: The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniprotArabidopsis thaliana database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and oxidation on Met and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. For quantification method, TMT-6plex was selected. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. GO Annotation The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudouridine (&#x3a8;) is widely distributed in mRNA and various non-coding RNAs in yeast and mammals, and the specificity of its distribution has been determined. However, knowledge about &#x3a8;s in the RNAs of plants, particularly in mRNA, is lacking. In this study, we performed genome-wide pseudouridine-sequencing in Arabidopsis and for the first time identified hundreds of &#x3a8; sites in mRNA and multiple &#x3a8; sites in non-coding RNAs. Many predicted and novel &#x3a8; sites in rRNA and tRNA were detected. mRNA was extensively pseudouridylated, but with &#x3a8;s being under-represented in 3'-untranslated regions and enriched at position 1 of triple codons. The phenylalanine codon UUC was the most frequently pseudouridylated site. Some &#x3a8;s present in chloroplast 23S, 16S, and 4.5S rRNAs in wild-type Col-0 were absent in plants with a mutation of SVR1 (Suppressor of variegation 1), a chloroplast pseudouridine synthase gene. Many plastid ribosomal proteins and photosynthesis-related proteins were significantly reduced in svr1 relative to the wild-type, indicating the roles of SVR1 in chloroplast protein biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Our results provide new insights into the occurrence of pseudouridine in Arabidopsis RNAs and the biological functions of SVR1, and will pave the way for further exploiting the mechanisms underlying &#x3a8; modifications in controlling gene expression and protein biosynthesis in plants.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Seedling, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, The Peoples Republic of China.
PTM Biolabs lnc.

### Submitter
xiaomei li

### Lab Head
Dr lirong sun
Department of Biology, Henan University, Kaifeng 475001, The Peoples Republic of China.


