### Accession
PXD025481

### Title
Single cell chemical proteomics (SCCP) interrogates the timing and heterogeneity of cancer cell commitment to death

### Description
Chemical proteomics studies the effects of drugs upon cellular proteome. Due to the complexity and diversity of tumors, the response of cancer cells to drugs is also heterogeneous, and thus proteome analysis at single cell level is needed. So far, single cell proteomics techniques have not been quantitative enough to tackle the drug effects on the target proteins. Here, we developed the first single cell chemical proteomics (SCCP) technique and studied with it the time-resolved response to anticancer drugs methotrexate, camptothecin and tomudex of individual adenocarcinoma A549 cells. For each drug SCCP identified and quantified 1,000-2,000 proteins across >150 single cells in a time course of treatment up to 48 h, revealing the early emergence of cellular subpopulations committed and uncommitted to death. SCCP represents a novel approach to exploring the heterogeneous response to drugs of cancer cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culturing treatment Human A549 lung adenocarcinoma cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS, 2 mM L-glutamine and 100 U/mL penicillin/streptomycin at 37°C in 5% CO2. Cells were then cultured and treated with MTX, CPT and TDX at LC50 concentrations for 3, 6, 12, 24 and 48 h (for CPT and TDX only 12, 24 and 48 h treatment were performed). Control cells were treated with DMSO. After each incubation time point, the supernatant was collected and the attached were harvested by centrifugation. Both types of cells (detached and adhered) were washed 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Isolation of single cells by FACS Collected attached cells were subjected to FACS analysis in FACSAriaTM Fusion. Individual singlet cells were collected in a 96-well Lo-Bind plate containing 5 µL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) per well. A total of 96 single cells were sorted for each condition/drug (untreated and treated cells) using separate plates. In addition, a third plate was prepared, being dedicated only to CP. On that plate, 200 cells (100 treated plus 100 control) were collected per well in the first two rows.  Protein extraction and digestion Proteins from single cells and CPs were extracted in four freeze – thaw cycles. Plates were frozen in liquid nitrogen and immediately heated at 37°C for 2 min. Proteins were denatured by heating the plates at 90°C for 5 min. Finally, 1 µL of 25 ng/µL sequencing grade trypsin in 100 mM TEAB was dispensed using a MANTIS® automatic dispenser. In the case of CP, digestion was achieved with 2 µL of trypsin solution added. Plates were incubated at 37°C overnight (16 h). TMT labeling Both TMT10plex™ and 16-channel TMTpro™  were used in this study. Unless specified, each TMT10plex™ set contained 4 control cells and 4 treated cells with tags interspaced, as well as a single channel with CP (200 cells in channel 131). Peptides were TMT-labeled by dispensing 1 µL of the respective TMT reagent dissolved in dry acetonitrile (ACN) at a concentration of 10 µg/µL using the MANTIS robot. Plates were incubated at room temperature (RT) for 2 h and then the reaction was quenched by adding 1 µL of 5% hydroxylamine, following incubation at RT for 15 min. In the case of TMTpro™ labeling, each set contained 6 control cells and 6 treated cells with the tags interspaced. The CP was split in two channels, 126 and 127N, one composed of 100 control cells and the other one 100 treated cells. Samples were pooled into MS-sample vials with glass insert and dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. Dry peptides were resuspended in 7 µL of 2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Bulk proteome analysis 1x10*6 cells were harvested and washed twice with PBS. To each cell pellet, 150 µL of 8M urea in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) pH 8.5 were added, tubes were sonicated in bath at 4°C for 5 min and probe-sonicated for 40 s with a Vibra-cell™ ultrasonic liquid processor. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 g and 4°C. Protein concentration was measured with BCA protein assay. Proteins were reduced by adding 20 mM dithiothreitol in 50 mM AmBic and incubated at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. Finally, proteins were digested by adding trypsin in a 1:50 ratio and incubating overnight at 37°C. The resulting peptides were cleaned-up on HyperSep™ filter plate then dried in a speed vacuum concentrator. Dried samples were dissolved in 100 mM TEAB and labeled with TMT10plex™ reagents that were dissolved in dry ACN and then mixed with the peptide solutions and incubated at RT for 1 h. The reaction was quenched by adding 11 µL of 5% hydroxylamine and finally, samples with different TMT labels were pooled, cleaned-up on HyperSep™ filter plate and dried in a speed vacuum concentrator prior. RPLC-MS/MS analysis Peptide samples were separated on a Thermo Scientific™ Ultimate™ 3000 UHPLC using a 10 min loading at 3 µL/min flow rate to a trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100, 2 cm x 75 µm, 3 µm, 100 Å). The separation was performed on an EASY-Spray™ C18 analytical column (25 cm x 75 µm, 1.9 µm, 300 Å – ES802A). A constant flow rate of 100 nL/min was applied during sample separation achieved in a linear gradient ramped from 5%B to 27%B over 120 min, with solvents A and B being 2% ACN in 0.1% FA and 98% ACN in 0.1% FA, respectively. LC-MS/MS data were acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer, using nano-electrospray ionization in positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 1.9 kV. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode parameters were set as follows: isolation of top 20 precursors in full mass spectra at 120,000 mass resolution in the m/z range of 375 – 1500, maximum allowed injection time (IT) of 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 10 ppm for 45 s, MS2 isolation width of 0.7 Th with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) of 35% at resolution of 50,000 and maximum IT of 150 ms in a single microscan.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from LC-MS/MS were analyzed on Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (ThermoFisher Scientific), searching proteins against SwissProt human database (release July 30, 2019 with 20,373 entries) and known contaminants with Mascot Server v2.5.1 (MatrixScience Ltd, UK) allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as TMTpro or TMT6plex lysine and N-termini were set as variable modifications. Percolator node in Proteome Discoverer was set to target false discovery rate (FDR) at 1% with validation based on q-value.         The TMT reporter ion abundances (RIA) at a peptide level were extracted from the search results. The subsequent analyses were performed in the RStudio (version 1.3.1073) programming language environment, the software for multivariate data analytics SIMCA (v. 15.0.2.5959, Sartorius) and Perseus software platform. Peptides from single cells with RIAs exceeding 10% of the abundance values for the respective carrier channel were filtered out, being considered a result of co-isolation or other interferences, resulting in about 30% of the peptides were discarded for further analysis. After filtering, the remaining RIAs were arranged into a matrix of peptide IDs (rows) vs. single cells (columns). All RIAs were log2-transformed and the data were normalized in columns by subtracting their median values computed, ignoring the missing values. Peptides quantified in less than ten cells were discarded (usually <0.05% peptides per dataset). Protein-level quantification was achieved by attributing each unique peptide to its respective master protein (top ranked protein identified with unique peptides within a protein group) and taking as protein relative abundance the median RIA value among the peptides belonging to that protein. The new relative abundance matrix (protein IDs vs. single cells) was again normalized by calculating the median value for each column (or single cell), and then, subtracting the median value calculated to each abundance on the respective column. Missing values in the resulting matrix were imputed based on the normal distribution of valid values (method available in Perseus software platform24), using a width of 0.3 standard deviations of the Gaussian distribution of the valid values and a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations. Finally, the batch effects across the TMT sets were corrected by applying an empirical Bayesian framework in the SVA package.  The obtained matrix of relative protein abundances was used for statistical analysis. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to determine the separation degree between the control and drug-treated cells and to identify the outliers (single cells outside the limits of the PCA diagram with p < 0.05), which were removed from subsequent analysis. Resulting data were analyzed by orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) and clustering analysis, and the fold changes were presented as volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical proteomics studies the effects of drugs upon a cellular proteome. Due to the complexity and diversity of tumors, the response of cancer cells to drugs is also heterogeneous, and thus, proteome analysis at the single-cell level is needed. Here, we demonstrate that single-cell proteomics techniques have become quantitative enough to tackle the drug effects on target proteins, enabling single-cell chemical proteomics (SCCP). Using SCCP, we studied here the time-resolved response of individual adenocarcinoma A549 cells to anticancer drugs methotrexate, camptothecin, and tomudex, revealing the early emergence of cellular subpopulations committed and uncommitted to death. As a novel and useful approach to exploring the heterogeneous response to drugs of cancer cells, SCCP may prove to be a breakthrough application for single-cell proteomics.

### Keywords
Tmt labeling; drug sensitivity; resistance to drugs; cell death; methotrexate; camptothecin; tomudex

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum A9, Solnavägen 9, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Zubarev
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry & Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Biomedicum A9, Solnavägen 9, SE-171 77 Stockholm, Sweden


