### Accession
PXD020922

### Title
PRM-based quantitative proteomic analysis of mouse tissues, testicular cells and cell lines

### Description
PRM analysis of RPL39L, RPL10L and RPL3L in 9 mouse tissues, including testis, fat, brain, liver, kidney, lung, skeletal muscle, heart and spleen; PRM analysis of RPL39 and RPL39L, RPL10 and RPL10L, and RPL22 and RPL22L1 in testicular cells; PRM analysis of RPL39L and RPL39 in RibosomeRPL39L-/- and wild type mouse spermatocytes and spermatids; PRM analysis of 17 down-regulated proteins and 1 unchanged protein (DYNC1LI2) in RibosomeRPL39L-/- testes; PRM analysis of RPL39 and RPL39L in GC-1 ribosomes, and RibosomeRPL39L-/- and wild type N2a ribosomes, Consistency between the observed and expected signal ratios of the light and heavy peptides by PRM in serial dilution experiments. Bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a negative control.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from 9 mouse testicular tissues, germ cells and cell lines, including 9 mouse tissues, testicular cells, RibosomeRPL39L-/- testes, GC-1 ribosomes, RibosomeRPL39L-/- and wild type N2a ribosomes, and were digested by trypsin. The resulting peptide sample, mixed with isotope-labeled heavy peptides were subjected into an easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 30 minutes gradient (3% to 5% buffer B for 3sec, 5% to 15% buffer B for 11min 56sec, 15% to 28% buffer B for 10min 30sec, 28% to 38% buffer B for 3min 45sec, 38% to 100% buffer B for 3sec, and 100% buffer B for 3min 43sec) or a 95 minutes gradient(3% to 5% buffer B for 5 sec, 5% to 15% buffer B for 40 min, 15% to 28% buffer B for 34 min 50 sec, 28% to 38% buffer B for 12 min, 38% to 100% buffer B for 5 sec, and 100% buffer B for 8 min). The analysis was conducted using a scheduled method on an LTQ Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer with the following parameters: higher-energy collisional at 30eV. AGC target at 5.0E4 , scan range (m/z) at 150–2,000.

### Data Protocol
PRM data were processed with Skyline Daily. At least three transitions per precursor were used to quantify the targeted peptides in the samples. Peptide intensity was calculated as the sum of the corresponding transition peak areas. And peak areas ratios of the endogenous to heavy peptides across samples were used for quantification

### Publication Abstract
Ribosomes are highly sophisticated translation machines that have been demonstrated to be heterogeneous in the regulation of protein synthesis<sup>1,2</sup>. Male germ cell development involves complex translational regulation during sperm formation<sup>3</sup>. However, it remains unclear whether translation during sperm formation is performed by a specific ribosome. Here we report a ribosome with a specialized nascent polypeptide exit tunnel, Ribosome<sup>ST</sup>, that is assembled with the male germ-cell-specific protein RPL39L, the paralogue of core ribosome (Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>) protein RPL39. Deletion of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> in mice causes defective sperm formation, resulting in substantially reduced fertility. Our comparison of single-particle cryo-electron microscopy structures of ribosomes from mouse kidneys and testes indicates that Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> features a ribosomal polypeptide exit tunnel of distinct size and charge states compared with Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> predominantly cotranslationally regulates the folding of a subset of male germ-cell-specific proteins that are essential for the formation of sperm. Moreover, we found that specialized functions of Ribosome<sup>ST</sup> were not replaceable by Ribosome<sup>Core</sup>. Taken together, identification of this sperm-specific ribosome should greatly expand our understanding of ribosome function and tissue-specific regulation of protein expression pattern in mammals.

### Keywords
Quantification，testicular tissues, Prm

### Affiliations
18351998967
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (lab head)

### Submitter
Yao liping

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (lab head)


