### Accession
PXD006719

### Title
Breast Cancer Non-Glyco

### Description
Breast cancer is a very common disease in women and its treatment is complicated due to its very heterogeneous nature.  The outcome of treatment is consequently highly variable, some patients respond completely to surgical removal of the primary tumour whilst others suffer progression and metastasis regardless of (neo-) adjuvant therapy. Here we present an analysis of a second overlapping set of paired tumours, both synchronous local and asynchronous distant metastases. We show the most significant changes in intracellular protein expression occur in the enzymes involved in pathways of glycoprotein synthesis and decoration during progression, in remodelling of the extra-cellular matrix and in changes in protein translation initiation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from the tumours after freezing in liquid nitrogen and then pulverising. An All-Prep kit was used to extract DNA and RNA and the protein concentration of each sample was determined.Samples were then heated at 95 °C for 10 minutes, spun down and run on 1D gel electrophoresis. Samples were than alkylated with 400 µl 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min in dark at room temperature. Trypsin digestion of samples was done with 12.5 ng/µl Promega trypsin and samples dissolved and run on LC-MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometric data was analyzed in Progenesis LC-MS. Data was then submitted to Mascot for identification using the UniProt database release 2014 filtered for H. sapiens. A pairwise t-test for each protein was made between the primary and metastasis tumours for both the lymph node and the distant groups. Patients with missing values were removed for these calculations. Qlucore Omics Explorer, version 2 (Qlucore AB, 3, Lund, Sweden) software was used for statistical analysis of the protein expression profiles. Principal component analysis (PCA) plots were made for both the distant and lymph node tumours. The functional enrichment and pathway analysis was carried out with MetaCore™ version 6.14.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pathway analysis, Lymph node metastases, Distant metastases, Biomarkers, Breast cancer, Protein glycosylation, Extra-cellular proteins, Protein translation, Mass spectrometry, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Immunotechnology
Lund University, Immunotechnology, LTH

### Submitter
Emila Kurbasic

### Lab Head
Dr Peter James
Lund University, Immunotechnology, LTH


