### Accession
PXD043738

### Title
Time-Dependent Effects of Anesthetic Administration on the Rat Hypothalamus and Cerebral Cortex Peptidome

### Description
Prohormone-derived neuropeptides act as cell-cell signaling molecules to mediate a wide variety of biological processes in the animal brain. Mass spectrometry-based peptidomic experiments are valuable approaches to gain insight into the dynamics of individual peptides under different physiological conditions or experimental treatments. However, the use of anesthetics during animal procedures may confound experimental peptide measurements, especially in the brain where anesthetics act. Here, we investigate the effect of the commonly used anesthetics isoflurane and sodium pentobarbital on the peptide profile in the rodent hypothalamus and cerebral cortex, as assessed by label-free quantitative peptidomics. Our results showed that neither anesthetic dramatically alters peptide levels, although extended isoflurane exposure did cause changes in a small number prohormone-derived peptides in the cerebral cortex. Overall, our results demonstrate that acute use of anesthetics can be used in peptidomic experiments of the hypothalamus and cerebral cortex without dramatic confounding of experimental results.

### Sample Protocol
All animal procedures were carried out with prior approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln (Project #2113). Sprague Dawley (232 ± 25 g, range 190-288 g, approximately two months of age) were obtained from the Charles River Laboratories (001CD).   For the “No anesthesia” control group, decapitation was performed quickly, and the hypothalamus and cerebral cortex were immediately dissected, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored in dry-ice or -80 °C until peptide extraction. For animals in groups receiving anesthetics, the effect of anesthesia was monitored by loss of the righting reflex, and the loss of consciousness was verified by toe pinch test, after which animals were rapidly decapitated and tissues isolated as described above. For the “Sodium pentobarbital (<6 min)” group, 200 mg/kg of sodium pentobarbital was administered by intraperitoneal injection. For "Isoflurane (<6 min)" group, animals received 5% isoflurane in oxygen at a rate of 1.5 L/min in a 3.2 L anesthetic chamber. For the “Isoflurane (60 min)” group, animals were initially exposed to 5% isoflurane in oxygen in an induction box until loss of righting reflex, after which they were transferred to a nose cone and maintained at approximately 1.5-2% isoflurane.   Processing of tissues and peptide extraction were performed on the same day as dissection. Frozen tissues were manually homogenized in two extraction stages. For the first stage, each tissue was homogenized by using a plastic pestle (Bel-Art) in 400 μL of ice-cold acidified acetone (40:6:1 acetone: water: con. HCl), followed by sonication for 10 min and brief vortex mixing. The samples were centrifuged (15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and kept on ice. For the second stage, the pellet was then homogenized in 400 μL of acidified water (0.25% acetic acid) using a plastic pestle, sonicated for 10 minutes, and then briefly vortexed. The samples were centrifuged (15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C), and the supernatant was combined with the extracts from the first extraction stage. Combined extracts were vacuum concentrated to remove water and acetone, and then resuspended in 300 μL of 5% acetonitrile (ACN)/water with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Each sample was then centrifuged (15,000 × g, 10 min, 4 °C) and filtered through 30 kDa molecular weight centrifugal filter (Millipore Sigma, UFC503024) by centrifugation (14,000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C). To ensure low molecular weight species passed through the filter, the filter was rinsed 2 times by adding 200 μL of 5% ACN/water with 0.1% FA and centrifuging (14,000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C). The filtrate containing low molecular weight compounds was dried using a vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide extracts were redissolved in 200 μL of 5% ACN/water with 0.1% FA, desalted using C18 SPE columns (Thermo Scientific, 889870), dried by vacuum concentration, and then stored at -20 °C until analysis.  Peptide extracts were dissolved in 12 μL of 3% ACN/water with 0.1% FA, and the total protein concentration was determined using bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific, 23235). Each sample was diluted to 0.1 μg/μL total protein in 3% ACN/water and 0.1% FA, and 3 μL (300 ng) of each sample was analyzed by LC-MS and LC-MS/MS. For batch effect considerations, pooled quality control samples were injected at regular intervals, and samples were injected in a random order.  LC-MS and LC-MS/MS analysis were performed using a Waters ACQUITY UPLC M-Class instrument coupled to a Waters Xevo G2-XS mass spectrometer equipped with a Waters Z spray NanoLockSpray ionization source. The mobile phases for LC separation were: Solvent A (water with 0.1% FA) and Solvent B (ACN with 0.1% FA). The column compartment temperature was 35 °C and the autosampler compartment temperature was 8 °C. Following injection, samples were first loaded onto a Waters nanoEase M/Z symmetry C18 trap column (180 μm × 20 mm, product #186008821) for online desalting (flow rate: 5 μL/min, composition: 1% B for 10 min), and separations were performed on a Waters nanoEase-C18 column (75 μm × 250 mm, product #186008818) using the following gradient: 0−40 min, 3−40% B; 40−44 min, 40−85% B; 44−48 min, 85% B; 48−50 min, 85−3% B; 50−60 min, 3% B, using a flow rate of 0.35 μL/min. Positive ion mode was used with a mass range of 100–2000 m/z. For each MS scan, three precursor ions were chosen for MS/MS analysis (collision-induced dissociation) using data-dependent acquisition (peak intensity threshold of 5000). The MS and MS/MS scan times were 0.1 s and 0.5 s, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification was performed with PEAKS Studio X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) using the rat SwissProt reference proteome from UniProt. The following parameters were used for peptide identification: unspecific digestion, 10 ppm parent mass error tolerance, 0.1 Da fragment mass error tolerance, 1% for the FDR threshold, and variable PTMs set as oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminus), acetylation (N-terminus), pyroglutamylation (E or Q), and phosphorylation (S, T, or Y). Peptide peak areas were determined using label-free quantification using PEAKS Q Module for ID-transfer with a 20.0 ppm mass error tolerance and a 2.5 min retention time shift tolerance, and normalized to total ion current. The data was manually inspected to identify any ambiguous peptide identifications made during the ID-transfer step, and peptide features with ambiguous identifications or peptides with less than five total MS2 identifications were filtered from the list. Peak areas were calculated as the sum of each charge state for a given peptide.  Data were batch corrected using the statTarget R package, where a peptide was considered present if it was measured in at least 50% of the samples per group. Peptides deemed absent were omitted after batch correction. Missing value imputations were performed using k-nearest neighbor (knn; k=10). Present peptides underwent a log2 transformation and were normalized using EigenMS facilitated by R package ProteoMM.   Differential peptides were assessed using parametric (t-test) and non-parametric (Wilcoxon rank-sum) statistical tests to account for the degree, direction, and difference between each pair of time points within each tissue. For both statistical tests, the Benjamini-Hochberg (BH) procedure was applied to correct for multiple hypothesis testing. Peptides were considered differential when they passed with a BH corrected p-value less than 0.05 in both statistical tests. The fold change (FC) was calculated for each peptide to quantify the magnitude difference between each pair of two groups. In this statistical analysis, six pairs of comparisons were performed, i.e., each group is compared to all other groups. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed using R package pcaMethods. Data preprocessing and statistical analysis were prepared using the R statistical software version 4.2.1.

### Publication Abstract
Prohormone-derived neuropeptides act as cell-cell signaling molecules to mediate a wide variety of biological processes in the animal brain. Mass spectrometry-based peptidomic experiments are valuable approaches to gain insight into the dynamics of individual peptides under different physiological conditions or experimental treatments. However, the use of anesthetics during animal procedures may confound experimental peptide measurements, especially in the brain, where anesthetics act. Here, we investigated the effects of the commonly used anesthetics isoflurane and sodium pentobarbital on the peptide profile in the rodent hypothalamus and cerebral cortex, as assessed by label-free quantitative peptidomics. Our results showed that neither anesthetic dramatically alters peptide levels, although extended isoflurane exposure did cause changes in a small number of prohormone-derived peptides in the cerebral cortex. Overall, our results demonstrate that acute anesthetic administration can be utilized in peptidomic experiments of the hypothalamus and cerebral cortex without greatly affecting the measured peptide profiles.

### Keywords
Cerebral cortex, Keywords peptidomics, Neuropeptides, Hypothalamus, Anesthetics

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
James Checco

### Lab Head
Dr James Checco
University of Nebraska-Lincoln


