### Accession
PXD017717

### Title
Protein S-glutathionylation in HeLa cells identified by nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS/MS

### Description
Cysteine modifications have been widely detected among different protein in different species. Here, we examined protein glutathionylation in HeLa cells under both untreated and diamide-treated conditions. A strategy using resin-assisted enrichment of glutathionylated proteins or peptides after biotin-switch is commonly used for detection of glutathionylation and other reversible cysteine modifications, and was also applied in this study. Using these strategies we identified a large number of glutathionylated protein with modification sites under both untreated and diamide-treated conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and treatment: HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium (DMEM, GIBCO BRL) supplemented with 10% FBS, 100 μg/ml streptomycin and 100 U/ml penicillin (GIBCO BRL) in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator at 37 °C. Half of the cultured cells (5~10 dishes) were treated with 1 or 10 mM diamide for 15 min, the diamide was removed, and then both diamide-treated and untreated cells were incubated with 50 mM N-Ethylmaleimide (NEM) for a further 15 min before harvesting. Untreated and diamide-treated cells were each harvested and lysed in 3 ml ice-cold cell lysis buffer (Beyotime, P0013) with 0.1 M NEM (Sigma Aldrich) and ultra-protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The soluble part of the cell lysis was separated by centrifugation and subjected to the biotin-switch assay. Biotin-switch assay: The supernatant of the cell lysis (3 ml) was mixed with 12 ml urea-containing cysteine modification buffer (CMBU, 0.1 M HEPES-NaOH, pH 7.4, 1% SDS, 1 mM EDTA, 8 M urea) with a complete ultra-protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 0.1 M NEM. Samples were placed for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA on ice for 30 min. The pellet was collected by centrifugation and washed once with 5% TCA and twice with 70% acetone, and dissolve in 300 μl of CMBU. Then 6 ml GRX reduction buffer [0.5 mM GSH, 1 mM NADPH (Sigma Aldrich), 0.25 U/ml glutathione reductase (Sigma Aldrich), 60 μg of purified E. coli GRX3 C14S/C65Y or GRX3 C11S/C14S/C65Y, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0] was added, and samples were incubated for 15 min at 37 °C. After reduction, samples were quenched with TCA and protein precipitation was carried out as above. The pellet was dissolved in 300 μl of CMBU with 0.2 mM biotin-maleimide (Sigma Aldrich), and was placed for 30 min at RT, and then protein precipitation was carried out as above. The pellet was dissolved in 100 μl of CMBU. Detection of protein glutathionylation by nanoLC-LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS/MS: Dissolved protein of 60 μl was mixed with 1.5 ml 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer pH 8.0. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) of 10 μg, was added and the digestion system was kept at 37 °C for 24-48 h. After trypsin digestion, 4 M NaCl and 10% SDS were added to adjust the concentration of NaCl and SDS to 0.15 M and 0.1% respectively. Then streptavidin beads (Sigma Aldrich) washed three times with IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.1% SDS) were added and the sample was incubated with rotation at 4 °C overnight. The beads were collected by centrifugation and subsequently washed with 3×100 μl IP buffer, with 5×100 μl ACN/1 M NaCl (25/75, v/v) and with 2×100 μl with ACN/water (20/80, v/v). Bound peptides were eluted using 20-30 μl ACN/10% FA/2 mM biotin (70:10:20, v/v/v; biotin ∼99 %, Sigma Aldrich) by incubation for 2 h at 37 °C with occasional resuspension. Rotary evaporation of the eluate was performed in a vacuum drier to reduce the volume to 4-6 μl. Then the samples were reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA, further desalted using a C18 reverse phase column (filled with 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ from Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch), and loaded using a C18 reverse phase column (filled with 5 μm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ from Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch) onto LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fischer Scientific). The second MS spectra were searched in the human database (uniprot_human_proteome_20160229_con) using the SEQUEST search engine. The number of entries in the database actually searched was 92181. Sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) was used to generate peptides. The number of missed and/or non-specific cleavages permitted was 2. There is no fixed modification and biotin-maleimide or NEM modification of cysteine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was 20 ppm, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was 0.5 Da. The matching of searched peptide and MS spectra (PSM) was filtered by Percolator calculation, and the false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated using the q value (which was controlled to be smaller than 1%). The identified peptides were combined into proteins by the Maximum Parsimony Principle.

### Publication Abstract
Heat shock protein 70 (Hsp70) proteins are a family of ancient and conserved chaperones. Cysteine modifications have been widely detected among different Hsp70 family members <i>in vivo</i>, but their effects on Hsp70 structure and function are unclear. Here, we treated HeLa cells with diamide, which typically induces disulfide bond formation except in the presence of excess GSH, when glutathionylated cysteines predominate. We show that in these cells, HspA1A (hHsp70) undergoes reversible cysteine modifications, including glutathionylation, potentially at all five cysteine residues. <i>In vitro</i> experiments revealed that modification of cysteines in the nucleotide-binding domain of hHsp70 is prevented by nucleotide binding but that Cys-574 and Cys-603, located in the C-terminal &#x3b1;-helical lid of the substrate-binding domain, can undergo glutathionylation in both the presence and absence of nucleotide. We found that glutathionylation of these cysteine residues results in unfolding of the &#x3b1;-helical lid structure. The unfolded region mimics substrate by binding to and blocking the substrate-binding site, thereby promoting intrinsic ATPase activity and competing with binding of external substrates, including heat shock transcription factor 1 (Hsf1). Thus, post-translational modification can alter the structure and regulate the function of hHsp70.

### Keywords
Biotin switch, Nanolc-ltq-orbitrap xl ms/ms, S-glutathionylation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biophysics， Chinese Academy of Sciences
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Hong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Perrett
Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences


