### Accession
PXD015090

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome data of peanut seedlings under salt stress

### Description
Soil salinity is one of the major factors that limits area of cultivable land and yield potential of crops. Considered as a moderately salt sensitive economically-important crop, biological processes involved in salt stress response in peanut remain elusive. Publishing of the genomic sequence of cultivar peanut represent a new opportunity for further research. ABA INSENSITIVE 4 (ABI4) is an evolutionary conserved transcription factor. Mutation of ABI4 in Arabidopsis enhanced salt tolerance of seedlings significantly by targeting and down-regulating of HKT1;1. However, few achievements were reported in other aspects. In this study, AhABI4s in peanut were first cloned and silenced via virus-induced gene silencing method. Phenotype analysis showed that down-regulation of AhABI4s enhanced salt tolerance of peanut significantly. According to proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, expression of 1,900 proteins and 2,620 phosphorylation sites were predicted to be affected by silencing of AhABI4s under salt stress. Proteins with ion transporting activity were enriched by GO analysis. Further analysis showed that, 31 proteins may participate in homeostasis maintain of Na+, K+, Ca2+, H+ and Cl- in plant cells. Combined transcriptome and proteome analysis indicated that 63 genes may regulated by AhABI4s directly and 7 of them, ABI5-like5, RABA1f, SCAMP3, PK, RP-S26e, HSP70, cysteine proteinase inhibitor, were able to interact with the predicted ion transporters. Silencing of AhABI4s altered down-stream protein-protein interaction network to regulate expression/phosphorylation level of ion transporters, and finally influence homeostasis under salt stress. This work provides novel insights for salt response mechanism research and offer important evidence for protein function study.

### Sample Protocol
Mature seeds of Arachis hypogasa L. cultivar Fh2 were used for test. Dry seeds with similar size were sterilized with 0.1% H2O2 for 12h, and then rising the seed by sterilized deionized water for three times, 1 minute each. After cleaning, the seeds were then laid on water-wet degreasing cotton in seedling-raising disks. These disks were placed at 26°C in darkness for 3 days, and then the germinated seeds were exposed to long-day conditions (LD; 16h light and 8h dark cycle). Two-functional-leaves seedlings were transplant to hydroponic-box and cultured with 1/5 Hoagland's nutrient solution. psTRV1 and psTRV2 were used for VIGS assays. psTRV1, psTRV2 and psTRV2:AhABI4 vectors were transformed into Agrobacterium tumefaciens GV3101 competent cells by freeze and thaw methods, respectively. Positive clones were selected by bacterial colony PCR. A single colony was inoculated to 10mL of LB liquid medium (50mg/L kanamycin and 20mg/L rifampicin), and culture in a shaking incubator until the culture OD600 reaches about 0.6. For the secondary activation, 2mL of the culture were inoculated to 100mL of LB liquid medium (50mg/L kanamycin, 20mg/L rifampicin, 10mM MES and 20μM acetylsyringone), and grown over night until the culture OD600 reaches about 1.0-1.5. Agrobacterium cells were collected by centrifugation of 6000rpm for 10 min at room temperature, resuspending in MMA solution (10mM MES, 10mM MgCl2 and 20μM acetylsyringone) to a final concentration of OD600=1.0 and then left at room temperature for 3 hours without shaking. For vacuum infiltration, seedlings of 5-day-old were dipped into the suspension entirely and subjected to 700-800 MPa for 50s, and then releasing the vacuum slowly. Infiltrated seedlings were kept under dark for 16 hours, and then subjected to 16h light/8h dark photoperiod cycle at 25°C. For proteome and phosphoproteome analysis, leaf and root samples from mock and AhABI4-silenced plant treated with or without 200 mM NaCl were collected before and after 16h of treatment, and frozen in liquid nitrogen. Each sample were collected from at least 30 individual seedlings, mixed thoroughly. Three independent biological replicates were obtained for each group. Sample was first grinded by liquid nitrogen, and then sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China) in lysis buffer. An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was added and vortexed. After centrifugation (4°C, 10 min, 5 000g), the upper phenol phase was collected. Proteins were precipitated by adding four volumes of ammonium sulfate-saturated methanol and incubated at -20 °C for 6 h. After centrifugation at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone for three times. The protein was redissolved in 8 M urea and the protein concentration was determined with BCA Protein Assay kit (Pierce, Bonn, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, USA) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT labeling kit (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA). For phosphoproteome analysis, peptide mixtures were first incubated with IMAC microspheres suspension. The IMAC microspheres with enriched phosphopeptides were collected by centrifugation, and the supernatant was removed. To remove nonspecifically adsorbed peptides, the IMAC microspheres were washed with 50% acetonitrile/6% trifluoroacetic acid and 30% acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, sequentially. To elute the enriched phosphopeptides from the IMAC microspheres, elution buffer containing 10% NH4OH was added and the enriched phosphopeptides were eluted with vibration. The supernatant containing phosphopeptides was collected and lyophilized for LC-MS/MS analysis. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA) couple to the Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA), combining with UPLC.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were first filtered, and the clean data were aligned to the reference genome (Arachis hypogaea cv. Tifrunner, https://www.peanutbase.org/peanut_genome). The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the transcriptome database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the N-terminal and phosphor_STY (serine, threonine, and tyrosine) were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProtGOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Identified proteins domain functional description were annotated by InterProScan (a sequence analysis application) based on protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) is a database that integrates diverse information about protein families, domains and functional sites, and makes it freely available to the public via Web-based interfaces and services. Central to the database are diagnostic models, known as signatures, against which protein sequences can be searched to determine their potential function. InterPro has utility in the large-scale analysis of whole genomes and meta-genomes, as well as in characterizing individual protein sequences. Here, we used wolfpsort a subcellular localization predication soft to predict subcellular localization. Wolfpsort is an updated version of PSORT/PSORT II for the prediction of eukaryotic sequences. Special for protokaryon species, Subcellular localization prediction soft CELLO was used. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. For further hierarchical clustering based on different protein functional classification (such as: GO, Domain, Pathway, Complex). We first collated all the categories obtained after enrichment along with their P values, and then filtered for those categories which were at least enriched in one of the clusters with P value <0.05. This filtered P value matrix was transformed by the function x = −log10 (P value). Finally, these x values were z-transformed for each functional category. These z scores were then clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. Cluster membership were visualized by a heat map using the “heatmap.2” function from the “gplots” R-package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peanut; salt stress tolerance; ion transporters; protein phosphorylation; protein-protein interaction network

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, 271018 Shandong, China

### Submitter
Fengzhen Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Fengzhen Liu
College of Agronomy, Shandong Agricultural University, Tai’an, 271018 Shandong, China


