### Accession
PXD031165

### Title
1 Identification of replisome-associated proteins in Drosophila embryos and cultured cells using iPOND coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry

### Description
Replication of the eukaryotic genome requires the assembly of thousands of replisomes that must work in concert to accurately replicate a cell’s genetic and epigenetic information. Defining replisome-associated proteins is a key step in understanding how genomes are replicated and repaired in the context of chromatin to maintain genome stability. To identify replisome-associated proteins, we performed iPOND (Isolation of Proteins on Nascent DNA) coupled to quantitative mass spectrometry in Drosophila embryos and cultured cells. We identified 76 and 416 replisome-associated proteins in post-MZT embryos and Drosophila cultured S2 cells, respectively . By performing a targeted screen of a subset of these proteins, we demonstrate that BRWD3, a targeting specificity factor for the DDB1/Cul4 ubiquitin ligase complex (CRL4), functions at the replisome to promote replication fork progression and maintain genome stability. Altogether, our work provides a valuable resource for those interested in the DNA replication, repair and chromatin assembly during development.

### Sample Protocol
TMT Labeling. After verifying iPOND was successful by Western blot (5% of total material) purified material was precipitated using methanol and chloroform and washed with methanol to remove excess detergent. Protein was resuspended in 5 µL fresh 1% Rapigest. 32.5 µL of mass spectrometry grade water with HEPES (pH 8.0 at a final concentration of 100mM). Disulfide bonds were reduced with freshly made 5mM TCEP and incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. Fresh Iodoacetamide was added at a final concentration of 10mM to acetylate free sulfhydryl bonds. Protein was digested overnight with 0.5 µg trypsin at 37oC with shaking and covered from light. The next day, samples were labeled using a TMT10plex kit (Thermo Scientific catalog #90110). TMT labels were resuspended in acetonitrile and each sample was incubated with the appropriate amount of TMT reagent for 1 hour at room temperature. Excess label was neutralized with 0.4% final concentration of ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour. Samples were mixed and acidified with formic acid to a pH 2. The mixed sample was reduced to 1/6 of the original volume using a SpeedVac, and brought back up to original volume with Buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Rapigest was cleaved by incubating for one hour at 42oC. The samples were centrifuged at 14,000 rpm for 30 minutes and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and stored at -80oC until mass spectrometry analysis.  Peptide samples were directly loaded onto MudPIT microcolumns using a high-pressure chamber. Samples were then desalted for 30 minutes with buffer A (97% water, 2.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v/v). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher) or Exploris480 (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer equipped with an Ultimate3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher).  MudPIT experiments were performed with 10µL sequential injections of 0, 10, 30, 60, and 100% buffer C (500mM ammonium acetate in buffer A), followed by a final injection of 90% buffer C with 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v) and each step followed by a 130 minute gradient from 5% to 80% B with a flow rate of 300nL/minute when using the Q-Exactive HF and 500nL/minute when using the Exploris480 on a 20cm fused silica microcapillary column (ID 100 um) ending with a laser-pulled tip filled with Aqua C18, 3µm, 100 Å resin (Phenomenex). Electrospray ionization (ESI) was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.0kV when using the Q-Exactive HF and 2.2kV when using the Exploris480 with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Using the Q-Exactive HF, data-dependent acquisition of mass spectra was carried out by performing a full scan from 300-1800 m/z with a resolution of 60,000. The top 15 peaks for each full scan were fragmented by HCD using normalized collision energy of 38, 0.7 m/z isolation window, 120 ms maximum injection time, at a resolution of 45,000 scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 60s. Using the Exploris480, data-dependent acquisition of mass spectra was carried out by performing a full scan from 400-1600m/z at a resolution of 120,000. Top-speed data acquisition was used for acquiring MS/MS spectra using a cycle time of 3 seconds, with a normalized collision energy of 36, 0.4m/z isolation window, 120ms maximum injection time, at a resolution of 45,000 with the first m/z starting at 110. Peptide identification and TMT-based protein quantification was carried out using Proteome Discoverer 2.3 or 2.4. MS/MS spectra were extracted from Thermo Xcalibur .raw file format and searched using SEQUEST against a Uniprot drosophila melanogaster proteome database (downloaded February 6th, 2019 and containing 21114 entries). The database was curated to remove redundant protein and splice-isoforms, and supplemented with common biological MS contaminants. Searches were carried out using a decoy database of reversed peptide sequences and the following parameters: 10ppm peptide precursor tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids, trypsin cleavage with a maximum of two missed cleavages, dynamic methionine modification of 15.995 Da (oxidation), static cysteine modification of 57.0215 Da (carbamidomethylation), and static peptide N-terminal and lysine modifications of 229.1629 Da (TMT sixplex).

### Data Protocol
iPOND-TMT data analysis. To determine enrichment or depletion of the proteins, the TMT intensities for each protein was log2 transformed and samples were normalized based on median TMT intensity per channel. Log2-transformed, median normalized TMT intensities were further normalized to the level of Histone H4, as the resulting incorporation of this histone should be identical between each sample. Enrichment values were calculated based on this normalized data. Cellular localization data was determined for each protein using the Gene Ontology Cellular Compartment (FlyBase v2021_05). Proteins that lacked any nuclear or chromatin compartmental data were removed from the datasets. To determine if a protein was significantly enriched or depleted in the pulse or chase embryo samples, an unpaired t-test was performed for each protein. Our uncorrected p values were validated because our positive controls (known replication proteins) were identified. For S2 cell data, an unpaired t-test was performed for each protein with a Benjamini, Krieger and Yekutieli multiple test correction and false discovery rate of 5%. For the pathway enrichment analysis of enriched proteins, PANTHER Gene Ontology was used. Enriched proteins were inputted and the default background for Drosophila melanogaster was selected. The biological process pathway was used, and the results were exported to Excel and the top 10 pathways were chosen by q-value, and visualized in Graphpad Prism For network clustering, all of the proteins enriched in the embryo and S2 pulse were loaded as separate networks in Cytoscape v3.9.0. The resulting interactions were visualized using the STRING network with the stringApp, using the Drosophila melanogaster setting with additional interactors and a confidence score cutoff of 0.8.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryogenesis, Replication fork, Genome stability, Drosophila, Dna replication

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Department of Chemistry
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212

### Submitter
Madison Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jared T. Nordman
Department of Biological Sciences, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37212


