### Accession
PXD003287

### Title
ib101206 - proteome data analysis 

### Description
P2 is a spontaneous mutant selected from P1, an entomopathogenic fungus Beauveria bassiana that hyper-produces extracellular protease(s), compared to P1. The major expressed serine protease, called SBP, is shown to be up-regulated at the transcriptional level in the P2 mutant strain. The insecticidal potential of P1 and P2 strains was evaluated against Tuta absoluta larvae under laboratory conditions. Both strains are effective but P2 showed stronger effect than P1. Median lethal concentration (LC50) of P2 is 26 fold lower than that of P1. Median lethal times (LT50) of P1 and P2 are 4.38 and 0.84 days using 105 conidia ml-1. Enzymatic assays analysis showed that extracellular enzymes are differently expressed by the two strains, especially proteases and chitinases. Two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry analysis confirmed the overexpression by P2 strain of protease and chitinase and revealed further the over-expression of several protease isoforms. Here we show a direct link between fungal enzymatic profile and insect’s pathogenesis, giving a molecular explanation for the insecticidal potential of B. bassiana fungus.

### Sample Protocol
PROTEIN EXTRACTIONS, 2D-PAGE, IN-GEL DIGESTION OF PROTEINS AND SAMPLE PREPARATION FOR MS ANALYSIS: DATA ACQUISITION AND DATABASE SEARCHING

### Data Protocol
Mascot, MS Amanda and Sequest algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) were used for protein identification against the UniProt Beauvaria bassiana database (http://www.uniprot.org/taxonomy/176275 ; 22,152 entries). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 2 Da and 1 Da, respectively. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were searched as dynamic and static modifications, respectively. Peptide validation was performed using Target Decoy PSM Validator and only “high confidence” peptides were retained corresponding to a 1% false positive rate at peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Beauvaria bassiana

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Valorisation de la Biomasse et de Production de Protéines chez les Eucaryotes, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, BP1177, 3018 Sfax-Tunisia. University of Sfax
Plateforme Proteome Bordeaux

### Submitter
Dupuy Jean-William

### Lab Head
Dr Ali gargouri
Laboratoire de Valorisation de la Biomasse et de Production de Protéines chez les Eucaryotes, Centre de Biotechnologie de Sfax, BP1177, 3018 Sfax-Tunisia. University of Sfax


