### Accession
PXD033528

### Title
A Conformation specific Nanobody Targeting the NMN-activated State of SARM1

### Description
Upon axonal injury, Sterile alpha (SAM) and Toll/interleukin-1 receptor (TIR) motif containing 1 (SARM1) is activated by nicotinamide mononucleotide (NMN) to deplete NAD and consequently promote the process of axon degeneration (AxD). Currently, only the inactive form of SARM1 in its auto-inhibitory conformation has been resolved. The flexibility of the enzymatically active form of SARM1 has so far precluded its structural determination. To solve the problem, we generated a stabilizing nanobody, Nb-C6, that specifically recognized 30 only the NMN-activated form of SARM1. The conformation specificity was verified by immunoprecipitation and surface plasmon resonance. Fluorescently labeled Nb-C6 could immunostain only the activated SARM1 in cells stimulated with CZ-48, a permeant mimetic of NMN. Expression of Nb-C6 in live cells resulted in stabilization of the active form of the endogenous and exogenous SARM1, producing and elevating cellular levels of cyclic ADP-ribose, a calcium messenger. Cryo-EM of the NMN-activated SARM1 complexed by Nb-C6 showed an octameric structure resembling a “blooming lotus” with the ARM domains bending significantly inward and swinging out together with the TIR domains to form the “petals of the lotus”. Nb-C6 bound to the SAM domain of the activated SARM1 and stabilized its Armadillo repeat motif domain. Analyses using hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS), and cross-linking MS (XL-MS) indicate that the activated SARM1 is highly dynamic and flexible and the neighboring TIRs form dimers via the surface close to one BB loop. The Nanobody is thus a valuable tool for delineating the mechanism of activation of SARM1 in AxD and other cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
HDX was performed by pre incubating 2µM SARM1 with 2 mM NAD or 200 µM NMN at 28C for 10 min. After equilibration, H/D exchange was carried out by 10 fold dilution into a D2O buffer (25 mM HEPES pHread 8.0, 150 mM NaCl) to a final volume of 100 uL. After 10s, 30 s, 1 min, 5 min and 30 min of incubation at 28C, the reaction was quenched by addition of ice-cold quench solution (1:1, v/v) containing 2M guanidinium hydrochloride and 0.2M citric acid, resulting in a final pH of 2.2. This preparation was digested on an immobilized pepsin column inside a manual HDX system with the temperature maintained at 0 °C. Eluted peptides were desalted using chilled trap column (1mm × 15mm, Acclaim PepMap300 C18, 5μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 5 min at a flowrate of 200μL/min and 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase. Subsequent peptide separation was performed on the chilled ACQUITY BEH C18 (2.1 x 50mm) analytical column using a first gradient ranging from 9 to 45 % of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) for 10 min followed by a second gradient ranging from 45 to 99% of buffer B for 1 min, at an overall flow rate of 50μl/min. Peptides were ionized via electrospray ionization and analyzed by Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were collected in triplicate for each exchange period. Non-deuterated samples peptide identification was performed via data dependent tandem MS/MS experiments. The reported pHread values are direct pH meter readings of the D2O buffer solutions calibrated with standard buffer solutions made with H2O and are uncorrected for the isotope effect at the glass electrode.  Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) Crosslinking sample preparation was started with pre-incubating dtSARM1 (in 20 mM HEPES pH8.4) with 2 mM NAD or 200 μM NMN on ice for 10min. Ligand binding SARM1 was incubated with DSBU crosslinker (Thermo Fisher) to a final concentration of 200 μM for 30 min at 25℃, and quenched with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins were denatured with 10 mM DTT and 8 M urea for 60 min then alkylated by 50 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min in dark. Then the protein was digested by trypsin (trypsin: protein = 1:20, w/w) overnight at 37℃. Tryptic peptides were desalted using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns and loaded (700ng in 0.1% formic acid) onto a nano-trap column (75μm i.d. × 2cm precolumn, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Subsequent separation was performed on the analytical column (50μm × 15cm, Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2μm, 100Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a first gradient ranging from 2 to 8 % of buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) for 5 min followed by a second gradient ranging from 8 to 43% of buffer B for 80 min, and third gradient ranging from 43 to 50% of buffer B for 5 min at an overall flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized via nano-electrospray ionization and analyzed by Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) using sceHCD-MS2 fragmentation approach.

### Data Protocol
Hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry (HDX-MS) Non-deuterated samples peptide identification was performed via tandem MS/MS experiments and analyzed by Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher). Maximum of three missed cleavage sites for trypsin per peptide; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification was used. Mass analysis of the peptide centroids was carried by HDExaminer v3.3 (Sierra Analytics, Modesto, CA), followed by manual verification for each peptide. No corrections for back exchange that occurs during digestion and LC separation were applied. Crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher) with XlinkX software 2.5 was used to analyze and identify the crosslinking peptides and the parameters were as follows: maximum of three missed cleavage sites for trypsin per peptide; cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Searches were performed against a database containing the sequence of SARM1 and contaminant proteins (CRAPome/Strep tag AP). Search results were filtered by requiring precursor tolerance (±10 ppm) and fragment tolerance (±20 ppm). FDR threshold was set to 1% at Crosslink and CSM level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hdx-ms, Xl-ms, Sarm1, Adp ribosyl cyclase

### Affiliations
Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China, 518172
CUHKSZ

### Submitter
Goran Stjepanovic

### Lab Head
Dr Goran Stjepanovic
Kobilka Institute of Innovative Drug Discovery, School ofMedicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China, 518172


