### Accession
PXD025259

### Title
The proteomic change of GES1 infected by Helicobacter pylori OMVs

### Description
We investigated the effect of H.pylori OMVs on cellular events by detecting proteomic changes in GES1 cells. GES1 cells cocultured with increasing concentrations of H.pylori OMVs were subjected to quantitative proteomic analyses using label-free methods for relative quantitation.

### Sample Protocol
OMVs were isolated using size-exclusion chromatography (SEC).For protein extraction, RIPA buffer was added into the OMVs cocultured GES1 cells, FASP procedure was used for protein digestion. For proteomic analysis, the peptides (~1μg each sample) were loaded on a nanoflow HPLC Easy-nLC1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using a 90min LC gradient at 300nl/min

### Data Protocol
All preliminary data processing was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 using an ion currently-based label-free quantification method.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Helicobacter pylori</i> (<i>H. pylori</i>) is known to be a major pathogen causing gastric diseases through its direct localization in gastric epithelium cells. <i>H. pylori</i> releases outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) throughout the growth process. The content, function, and mechanism of <i>H. pylori</i> OMVs in gastric epithelial cells remain unclear. In this study, we extracted and characterized <i>H. pylori</i> OMVs of two strains (standard strain NCTC11637 and clinical strain Hp-400) and analyzed the specific content by proteomic technology. We identified more than 400 proteins in <i>H. pylori</i> OMVs. In addition, we investigated the impact of <i>H. pylori</i> OMVs on cellular functions by detecting proteomic changes in GES1 cells. GES1 cells cocultured with increasing concentrations of <i>H. pylori</i> OMVs were subjected to quantitative proteomic analyses using label-free methods for relative quantitation. The results showed that a total of 4261 proteins were verified, 153 of which were significantly altered in abundance when cocultured with NCTC11637 OMVs, and a total of 4234 proteins in Hp-400 OMVs, 390 of which were significantly altered. Gene ontology analysis and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes pathway mapping identified significantly altered inflammatory and cancer signaling pathways, including metabolic pathways and the PI3K-Akt signaling pathway. Furthermore, we explored the proteomic changes in GES1 cells induced by <i>H. pylori</i>. Bioinformatics analysis showed that changes in multiple pathways coincided with OMV-mediated proteomic changes. Based on these results, <i>H. pylori</i> induced pathogenicity in epithelial cells at least partially by secreting OMVs that mediated dramatic and specific proteomic changes in host cells. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD025216, PXD025259, and PXD025281.

### Keywords
Proteomic; ges1; helicobacter pylori; omvs

### Affiliations
Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University

### Submitter
Sisi Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Lianmei Zhao
Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University


