### Accession
PXD020601

### Title
Serum proteomics in COVID-19 patients: Altered coagulation and complement status as a function of IL-6 level

### Description
Over 5 million people around the world have tested positive for the beta coronavirus SARS-CoV- 2 as of May 29, 2020, a third of which in the United States alone. These infections are associated with the development of a disease known as COVID-19, which is characterized by several symptoms, including persistent dry cough, shortness of breath, chills, muscle pain, headache, loss of taste or smell, and gastrointestinal distress. COVID-19 has been characterized by elevated mortality (over 100 thousand people have already died in the US alone), mostly due to thromboinflammatory complications that impair lung perfusion and systemic oxygenation in the most severe cases. While the levels of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-6 (IL-6) have been associated with the severity of the disease, little is known about the impact of IL-6 levels on the proteome of COVID-19 patients. The present study provides the first proteomics analysis of sera from COVID-19 patients, stratified by circulating levels of IL-6, and correlated to markers of inflammation and renal function. As a function of IL-6 levels, we identified significant dysregulation in serum levels of various coagulation factors, accompanied by increased levels of anti-fibrinolytic components, including several serine protease inhibitors (SERPINs). These were accompanied by up-regulation of the complement cascade and antimicrobial enzymes, especially in subjects with the highest levels of IL- 6, which is consistent with an exacerbation of the acute phase response in these subjects. Although our results are observational, they highlight a clear increase in the levels of inhibitory components of the fibrinolytic cascade in severe COVID-19 disease, providing potential clues related to the etiology of coagulopathic complications in COVID-19 and paving the way for potential therapeutic interventions, such as the use of pro-fibrinolytic agents.

### Sample Protocol
Protein pellets from serum samples were digested in an S-Trap filter (Protifi, Huntington, NY), following the manufacturer’s procedure. Briefly, ~50 μg of serum proteins were first mixed with 5% SDS. Samples were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 55°C for 30 minutes, cooled to room temperature, and then alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Afterward, phosphoric acid was added to the samples to a final concentration of 1.2% followed by 6 volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol; 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB); pH 7.1). After gentle mixing, the protein solution was loaded onto an S-Trap filter, spun at 2000 g for 1 minute, and the flow-through collected and reloaded onto the filter. This step was repeated three times, and then the filter was washed with 200 μL of binding buffer 3 times. Finally, 1 μg of sequencing-grade trypsin and 150 μL of digestion buffer (50 mM TEAB) were added onto the filter and digested at 47°C for 1 hour. To elute peptides, three step-wise buffers were applied, with 200 μL of each with one more repeat; these included 50 mM TEAB, 0.2% formic acid in water, and 50% acetonitrile and 0.2% formic acid in water. The peptide solutions were pooled, lyophilized, and resuspended in 0.1 % formic acid. Nano Ultra-High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (MS) metabolomics: A total of 200 ng of each sample was loaded onto individual Evotips for desalting and then washed with 20 μL 0.1% formic acid followed by the addition of 100 μL of storage solvent (0.1% formic acid) to keep the Evotips wet until analysis. The Evosep One system was coupled to the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Data were collected over an m/z range of 100 to 1700 for MS and MS/MS on the timsTOF Pro instrument using an accumulation and ramp time of 100 milliseconds.

### Data Protocol
Post processing was performed with PEAKS studio (Version X+, Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON). Pathway analyses were performed with the DAVID software and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis. Graphs and statistical analyses were prepared with GraphPad Prism 8.0 (GraphPad Software, Inc, La Jolla, CA), GENE E (Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA), and MetaboAnalyst 4.0.28

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2; serum; disease severity; clot; inflammation

### Affiliations
University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics

### Submitter
Ryan Hill

### Lab Head
Dr Kirk Hansen
Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics


