### Accession
PXD015850

### Title
Human and Nonhuman Primate Lineage-Specific Footprints in the Salivary Proteome

### Description
Proteins in saliva are needed for preprocessing food in the mouth, maintenance of tooth mineralization, and protection from microbial pathogens. Novel insights into human lineage-specific functions of salivary proteins and clues to their involvement in human disease can be gained through evolutionary studies, as recently shown for salivary amylase AMY1 and salivary agglutinin deleted in malignant brain tumors 1/gp340. However, the entirety of proteins in saliva, the 20 salivary proteome, has not yet been investigated from an evolutionary perspective. Here, we compared the proteomes of human saliva and the saliva of our closest extant evolutionary relatives, chimpanzees and gorillas, using macaques as an outgroup, with the aim to uncover features in saliva protein composition that are unique to each species.We found that humans produce a waterier saliva, containing less than half total protein than great apes and OldWorldmonkeys. For all major salivary proteins in humans, we could identify counterparts in chimpanzee and gorilla saliva. However, we 25 discovered unique protein profiles in saliva of humans that were distinct from those of nonhuman primates. These findings open up the possibility that dietary differences and pathogenic pressures may have shaped a distinct salivary proteome in the human lineage.

### Sample Protocol
Fromhumans and chimpanzees, saliva was collected by expectoration. Chimpanzees were previously trained by the care taker to voluntarily expectorate into a 85 plastic cup. Gorilla (Western lowland gorilla) and Rhesus macaque saliva was collected with a soft disposable plastic Pasteur pipette (VWR, Radnor, PA). Gorillas were trained to open their mouth upon the caretaker giving a signal. Only Rhesus macaques were under sedation while saliva samples 90 were collected. Neither of the animals or human individuals were closely related. All samples were immediately transferred into a polypropylene tube that was kept on ice. Sodium azide was added to a final concentration of 0.1% w/v, and saliva samples were centrifuged at 12,000  g for 15 min at 4C to 95 remove particulate matter. The thus clarified saliva supernatant was recovered and aliquots were stored frozen at80C until further analysis. Insoluble material was removed from each saliva sample by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 5 min at 4ºC. The supernatant was transferred to an ultrafiltration device (Vivaspin VS0102, MWCO 10,000, Sartorius Stedim, Bohemia, NY) and centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 45 min at 4ºC. The protein retentate was washed and resuspended in ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0) prior to tryptic digestion. Each sample was adjusted to 50 µg protein (micro BCA assay, Thermo Pierce). Proteins were denatured in 1.6 M urea, reduced by the addition of 24 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at 55°C, and alkylated by the addition of 76 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. After quenching with 70 mM DTT for 20 min at 37°C) and the removal of urea by buffer exchange, proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega; E:S ratio 1:50) for 16 h at 37°C. An additional bolus of trypsin was added to the mixture after 16 h prior to stopping the reaction by the addition of 0.4% TFA for one additional hour. Digests were desalted over C-18-tips (Pierce) and resuspended in 12 µl 0.1% formic acid. For retention time normalization, we used custom-synthesized, optimized variants of the iRT peptide standards (50 nM final; (Escher et al., 2012). Five µl of each sample was injected for data acquisition in randomized order using an QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific). Tryptic digests were loaded onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 µm x 2 cm,) and subsequently separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (ES803, 75 µm × 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å).  Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water; mobile phase buffer B was composed of acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Samples were loaded onto the trap column for 9 min at 2 µl/min.  Mobile phase B increased from 2% to 32% at 150 min at a flowrate of 200 nl/min followed by a 30-min wash at 72% and a 20-min re-equilibration at 0% B. Data were acquired in positive ionization mode in data-dependent acquisition mode (DDA).  DDA-acquisition parameters were as follows: Precursor ion survey scans from 350 to 1200 m/z were acquired at 70k resolution (at 200 m/z) with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0 × 106 ion counts. Subsequent MS/MS analyses were conducted using a Top20 approach. The most abundant precursors (intensity greater than 2.0 × 104 ions) were isolated in the quadrupole mass analyzer using a 2.5-Da m/z isolation window, and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 28. Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution setting of 17,500, an AGC target setting 1 × 105, and a maximum ion accumulation time of 150 ms. Previously analyzed precursor ions and isotopes were dynamically excluded for 40 s. Only precursors with assigned charge states larger than 1 were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification in samples analyzed by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS was performed using the PEAKS Studio software suite (version 8.0; [10]). Raw instrument data were refined using the following parameters: scans were merged over 10 min retention time windows using a 10-ppm precursor m/z error tolerance; precursor mass and charge states (z = 1-10) were corrected. Other data pre-processing (centroiding, deisotoping, and deconvolution) was performed automatically. Feature detection was performed on each raw instrument file individually. PEAKS database searching was performed against a custom database comprised of the combined UniProtKB entries for Pan troglodytes (Chimpanzee), Gorilla gorilla (Gorilla), Macaca mulatta (Rhesus macaque), and the human SwissProt database entries. In addition, we added sequences that were used in the protein sequence alignments (described below) that were not part of the respective databases. Search parameters were: parent mass error tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass error tolerance 0.05 Da; trypsin enzyme specificity with cleavage prior to proline permitted; variable modifications: pyro-glu (Q), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ); maximal two variable modifications per peptide; one non-specific cleavage specificity on either termini, maximal two missed cleavages, maximal two variable posttranslational modifications per peptide. The false discovery rate was estimated using the decoy-fusion approach (1% on the PSM-level). Proteins with at least two unique peptides were considered. Protein significance threshold was set at 20 (-10lgP). A comprehensive spectral library was generated from the search results using the Skyline open-source software tool [11]. For each of the targeted proteins, we selected peptides that were shared among all proteins and used the MS1 filter capability of Skyline to extract ion abundances from MS1 scans for label-free quantitation [12]. MS1 peak features had to elute within 5 min of the predicted elution time window of the targeted peptide identified by MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins in saliva are needed for preprocessing food in the mouth, maintenance of tooth mineralization, and protection from microbial pathogens. Novel insights into human lineage-specific functions of salivary proteins and clues to their involvement in human disease can be gained through evolutionary studies, as recently shown for salivary amylase AMY1 and salivary agglutinin DMBT1/gp340. However, the entirety of proteins in saliva, the salivary proteome, has not yet been investigated from an evolutionary perspective. Here, we compared the proteomes of human saliva and the saliva of our closest extant evolutionary relatives, chimpanzees and gorillas, using macaques as an outgroup, with the aim to uncover features in saliva protein composition that are unique to each species. We found that humans produce a waterier saliva, containing less than half total protein than great apes and Old World monkeys. For all major salivary proteins in humans, we could identify counterparts in chimpanzee and gorilla saliva. However, we discovered unique protein profiles in saliva of humans that were distinct from those of nonhuman primates. These findings open up the possibility that dietary differences and pathogenic pressures may have shaped a distinct salivary proteome in the human lineage.

### Keywords
Primates, Proteome, Saliva

### Affiliations
The Forsyth Institute
FORSYTH INSTITUTE

### Submitter
Markus Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hardt
The Forsyth Institute


