### Accession
PXD016993

### Title
Identification of SurA inter-domain dynamics and client binding by XL-MS

### Description
We present XL-MS data of apo-SurA and SurA in complex with OmpX to define (1) interdomain interactions in the periplasmic chaperone SurA, and (2) the binding site of OmpX on SurA.

### Sample Protocol
apo-SurA was prepared at a concentration of 5 µM in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, whilst SurA-OmpX complexes were assembled by mixing SurA and OmpX such that the final concentration of each was 5 µM, in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 0.24 M urea. DSBU (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) was added at 10x (apo-SurA) or 10-400x (SurA:OmpX) molar equivalents relative to the concentration of SurA, and the crosslinking reaction was left to proceed for 45 min at room temperature before quenching by adding 0.2 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. The crosslinked material was separated by SDS-PAGE and gel bands corresponding to either SurA alone or the SurA:OmpX complex were excised and the proteins trypsinised in-gel as described previously 46. Peptides (5 µL) were injected onto a reverse-phase Acquity M-Class C18, 75 µm x 150 mm column (Waters, UK) and separated by gradient elution of 1-50 % (v/v) solvent B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water) over 60 min at 300 nL.min-1. The eluate was infused into an Orbitrap Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) mass spectrometer operating in positive ion mode. Orbitrap calibration was performed using Ultramark solution (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Data acquisition was performed in DDA mode and fragmentation was performed using HCD. Each high-resolution full scan (m/z range 500-2000, R =120,000) was followed by high-resolution product ion scans (R=15,000), with a normalised collision energy of 30 %. The 15 most intense ions in the MS spectrum were selected for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was used.   Single Cys variants of OmpX (M41C, I102C, K122C, V167C) were conjugated with MTS-diazirine, as described previously. SurA-OmpX complexes were assembled by mixing SurA with each OmpX variant such that the final concentrations of each was 10 µM and 5 µM, respectively, in 10 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 8.0, 0.24 M urea. Photocrosslinking was performed for 30 sec using a UV LED irradiation platform. The crosslinked material was separated by SDS-PAGE. The gel band corresponding to the crosslinked complex was excised and the proteins were trypsinised in-gel, as described previously. To detect additional modified peptides, reduction of the crosslinker and thiol capture was performed to enrich crosslinked peptides. Peptides (5 µL) were injected onto a reverse-phase Acquity M-Class C18, 75 µm x 150 mm column (Waters, UK) and separated by gradient elution of 1-50 % (v/v) solvent B (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile) in solvent A (0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water) over 60 min at 300 nL.min-1. The eluate was infused into a Xevo G2-XS (Waters, UK) mass spectrometer operating in positive ion mode. Mass calibration was performed by infusion of aqueous NaI (2 µg/µL). [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (GluFib) was used for the lock mass spray, with a 0.5 s lock spray scan taken every 30 s. The lock mass correction factor was determined by averaging 10 scans. Data acquisition was performed in DDA mode with a 1 s MS scan over m/z 350-2000. The 4 most intense ions in the MS spectrum were selected for MS/MS by CID, each with a 0.5 s scan over m/z 50-2000. The collision energy applied was dependent upon the charge and mass of the selected ion. Dynamic exclusion of 60 s was used. Data processing and modification localization was performed using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions).

### Data Protocol
The acquired .raw data files of the cross-linked samples were converted to .mgf-files using PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatics Solutions). MeroX 1.6.6 was used to detect DSBU crosslinked peptides. PEAKS Studio 8.5 was used to detect tag-transfer crosslinked peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The periplasmic chaperone SurA plays a key role in outer membrane protein (OMP) biogenesis. E. coli SurA comprises a core domain and two peptidylprolyl isomerase domains (P1 and P2), but its mechanisms of client binding and chaperone function have remained unclear. Here, we use chemical cross-linking, hydrogen-deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, single-molecule FRET and molecular dynamics simulations to map the client binding site(s) on SurA and interrogate the role of conformational dynamics in OMP recognition. We demonstrate that SurA samples an array of conformations in solution in which P2 primarily lies closer to the core/P1 domains than suggested in the SurA crystal structure. OMP binding sites are located primarily in the core domain, and OMP binding results in conformational changes between the core/P1 domains. Together, the results suggest that unfolded OMP substrates bind in a cradle formed between the SurA domains, with structural flexibility between domains assisting OMP recognition, binding and release.

### Keywords
Ompx, E coli, Xl-ms, Sura

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, U.K.
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Sheena E Radford
Faculty of Biological Sciences, Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, LS2 9JT, U.K.


