### Accession
PXD039569

### Title
Herpes simplex virus type 1 modifies the protein composition of extracellular vesicles to promote neurite outgrowth and facilitate neuroinfection

### Description
Herpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) is a highly contagious and prevalent human pathogen that causes many diseases, including encephalitis. During primary infection, HSV-1 infects epithelial cells and then neurites of peripheral neurons, establishing lifelong infection in the neuronal cell body. Neurites are highly dynamic structures that grow or retract in the presence of attractive or repulsive cues, respectively. Whether HSV-1 modulates these cues and thereby neurite outgrowth was not known. Here, we show that HSV-1 glycoprotein G (gG) reduces the inhibitory effect of epithelial cells on neurite outgrowth, facilitating viral infection of neurons through neurite ends. The mechanism of action involves the modification of the protein composition of extracellular vesicles (EV), including increased amount of galectin-1. We show that galectin-1 located in EV produced during HSV-1 infection of epithelial cells promotes neurite outgrowth, and this activity can be partially neutralized by antibodies. This study provides new insights into the neurotropism of HSV-1, identifying for the first time a viral protein that modifies the protein composition of EV to increase neurite outgrowth and neuronal infection.

### Sample Protocol
Stably transduced ARPE-19 cells were seeded in 6-well plates at 6x105 cells per well and cultured overnight. The next day, the cells were washed and 1 mL of pure D/F12 medium was added. After 24 hours, the conditioned medium was collected. The conditioned media were centrifuged at 2,000 g for 5 min to remove large cell debris. Then 10 min of centrifugation at 17,000 g was applied to further remove small cell fragments and large EV from the conditioned medium. The resulting supernatant was named total conditioned medium (TCM). To prepare the vesicle free fraction (VFF) and vesicle-enriched fraction (VRF), the TCM harvested from ARPE-19 cells was dropwise filtered using 0.22 µm filter (Merck Millipore Ltd.), and further ultracentrifuged at 120,000 g for 2 hours using TLA 120.2 rotor with Optima MAX-XP ultracentrifuge (Beckman Coulter Life Sciences). The supernatant is considered to be VFF, which mainly contains secreted soluble factors. The pellet was resuspended with pure D/F12 and considered the VRF.  VRF (vesicle-enriched fraction) samples were diluted in 2x SDC lysis buffer (2% SDC, 20mM DTT, 80mM CAA), heated for 10 min at 95 C and cooled down. To each sample 1 µg sequence grade trypsin (Promega) and 1 µg LysC (Wako) was added and incubated over night at 37 C. After acidifying the samples with formic acid (1% final concentration), peptides were extracted and cleaned-up using stage tips protocol (Rappsilber et al, 2003). Peptides were eluted from stage tips (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), dried using speed vac system, resolved in 3% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid and injected into the LC-MS/MS system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using MaxQuant software package v1.6.3.4. The internal Andromeda search engine was used to search MS2 spectra against a decoy human UniProt database (HUMAN.2019-07) and human herpes simplex Uniprot database (9294) containing forward and reverse sequences. The FDR (false discovery rate) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification (LFQ intensity values). Five replicates were assigned to each experimental group and data were filtered for minimum value of three in at least one group, and for proteins with a minimum of three MS/MS counts. Differential protein abundance was calculated using student«s t-test. Top-regulated proteins were defined with a cut-off of 15% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Herpes simplex virus, Neuroinfection, Neurite outgrowth

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite
Max-Delbrueck Center, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Max-Delbrueck Center, Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany


