### Accession
PXD012170

### Title
The Paramecium Ezl1 protein mediates dual methylation of H3 lysines 9 and 27

### Description
The goal of the present project was to determine which Paramecium histone H3 residues are methylated in an Ezl1-dependent manner.

### Sample Protocol
Using a FLAG-HA double-affinity purification, full-length FLAG-HA-tagged Ezl1wt and the catalytic mutant Ezl1H526A were immunoprecipated from nuclear extracts prepared 12 hours after the onset of sexual events in transformed Paramecium cells, depleted for the endogenous Ezl1 protein in the case of FLAG-HA-Ezl1H526A. In vitro histone methyltransferase assays were performed with immunoprecipitated Ezl1wt and Ezl1H526A proteins from three biological replicates (independent nuclear extracts) and with recombinant histone tetramers (2 µg per reaction), assembled with wild-type Paramecium H3 (H3P1) histones as substrates and 30 µM S-adenosyl-methionine as methyl donor, in the presence of 4 mM DTT, in a volume of 25 µL per reaction, for 1 hour at 30°C. The same reactions with histones only were performed in triplicate as negative controls. The reaction products were separated by SDS-PAGE, stained with colloidal blue and the band corresponding to histone H3 was excised for each sample. Each band was analyzed in a single run at the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data was processed using the Mascot (2.5.1), myProMS (3.6) and Skyline (4.1) software and subsequent statistical analysis was performed using R.

### Publication Abstract
In animals and plants, the H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 chromatin silencing marks are deposited by different protein machineries. H3K9me3 is catalyzed by the SET-domain SU(VAR)3-9 enzymes, while H3K27me3 is catalyzed by the SET-domain Enhancer-of-zeste enzymes, which are the catalytic subunits of Polycomb Repressive Complex 2 (PRC2). Here, we show that the Enhancer-of-zeste-like protein Ezl1 from the unicellular eukaryote Paramecium tetraurelia, which exhibits significant sequence and structural similarities with human EZH2, catalyzes methylation of histone H3 in vitro and in vivo with an apparent specificity toward K9 and K27. We find that H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 co-occur at multiple families of transposable elements in an Ezl1-dependent manner. We demonstrate that loss of these histone marks results in global transcriptional hyperactivation of transposable elements with modest effects on protein-coding gene expression. Our study suggests that although often considered functionally distinct, H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 may share a common evolutionary history as well as a common ancestral role in silencing transposable elements.

### Keywords
Polycomb, Histone, Methylation

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


