### Accession
PXD003761

### Title
Comparative proteomic analysis reveals differential root proteins in Medicago sativa and Medicago truncatula in response to salt stress

### Description
we used two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry to characterize the proteome-level changes associated with salt stress response in Medicago sativa cv. Zhongmu-1 and Medicago truncatula cv. Jemalong A17 roots. The tandem mass spectrometry analysis of the differentially accumulated proteins resulted in the identification of 60 and 26 proteins in Zhongmu-1 and Jemalong A17 roots, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
To identify M. sativa and M. truncatula proteins potentially involved in regulating salt tolerance, three independent replicates of one-month-old seedling root samples were collected from Zhongmu-1 and Jemalong A17 plants treated with 300 mM NaCl for 8 h (Long et al., 2015). Untreated roots were used as controls. Root samples were ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. Total protein extracts were prepared from the ground root samples using an optimized TRIzol method. The protein concentrations of the supernatants were determined using the 2-D Quant kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Significantly up- or down-regulated protein spots were excised from gels and destained for 2 h at room temperature using a freshly prepared wash solution consisting of 100% acetonitrile, 50 mM NH4CHO3 (50:50 v/v). Proteins were digested using a trypsin solution according to an established method (Xiong et al., 2011). Peptide mixtures were analyzed using the ABI 4800 Proteomics Analyzer (Applied Biosystems), which is a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time of flight (MALDI-TOF/TOF) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
We used ImageMaster™ 2D Platinum Version 5.0 to perform ANOVA. Comparisons of the mean differences were completed using Duncan’s multiple range test at P < 0.05. The protein spots were determined to be significantly up- or down-regulated when the abundance fold change was more than 1.5 at P < 0.05. Proteins were identified using peak lists for searches against the NCBInr database with the Mascot search engine (http://www.matrixscience.com/).

### Publication Abstract
Salt stress is an important abiotic stress that causes decreased crop yields. Root growth and plant activities are affected by salt stress through the actions of specific genes that help roots adapt to adverse environmental conditions. For a more comprehensive understanding of proteins affected by salinity, we used two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry to characterize the proteome-level changes associated with salt stress response in Medicago sativa cv. Zhongmu-1 and Medicago truncatula cv. Jemalong A17 roots. Our physiological and phenotypic observations indicated that Zhongmu-1 was more salt tolerant than Jemalong A17. We identified 93 and 30 proteins whose abundance was significantly affected by salt stress in Zhongmu-1 and Jemalong A17 roots, respectively. The tandem mass spectrometry analysis of the differentially accumulated proteins resulted in the identification of 60 and 26 proteins in Zhongmu-1 and Jemalong A17 roots, respectively. Function analyses indicated molecule binding and catalytic activity were the two primary functional categories. These proteins have known functions in various molecular processes, including defense against oxidative stress, metabolism, photosynthesis, protein synthesis and processing, and signal transduction. The transcript levels of four identified proteins were determined by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Our results indicate that some of the identified proteins may play key roles in salt stress tolerance.

### Keywords
Salt stress, Root, Medicago, 2-de, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Ruicai Long

### Lab Head
Dr Qingchuan Yang
Institute of Animal Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences


