### Accession
PXD044293

### Title
In vitro and In vivo Antimicrobial Potential of Lithium Complex against Multi Drug Resistant Acinetobacter baumannii

### Description
Acinetobacter baumannii is a Gram-negative ESKAPE pathogen, accountable for lethal nosocomial infections, owing to its high pathogenicity and multi-drug resistance (MDR). Hence, the World Health Organization (WHO) has prioritized this bacterium against which new pharmacophores are required urgently. Therefore, this study evaluates the antimicrobial potential of lithium complex based on salicylic acid, and 1,10-phenanthroline ([Li(phen)2sal]) against MDR A. baumannii (MDRAB) through growth inhibition, time-kill assay, biofilm inhibition, and eradication alongside microscopy. The mechanism of action was proposed by flow cytometry and proteomic analysis. Moreover, its in-vivo efficacy was assessed using  A. baumannii-induced pneumonia model in mice. Results showed that lithium complex significantly inhibited the bacterial growth at 16-32 µg/ml. Time kill analysis revealed that the compound retarded the bacterial growth after 2-3 h of treatment. Lithium complex significantly inhibited and eradicated >70% of biofilms at the MIC level which is a key problem of indwelling and prosthetic devices. Light and atomic force microscopy further indicated disarticulated biofilm and ruptured cellular membrane post-lithium complex treatment. Proteomic analysis revealed that lithium complex exerted oxidative stress on A. baumannii which may contribute to cell rupturing. Flow cytometry confirmed the role of lithium complex in cytoplasmic membrane disintegration. The compound ameliorated the pneumonia symptoms at non-toxic doses of 20 and 40 mg/kg in the pre-clinical A. baumannii-induced pneumonia model as evident by the significant reduction in bacterial burden and parenchymal inflammation. Taken together, these findings suggest that the lithium complex can be a potential drug candidate against MDR A. baumannii.

### Sample Protocol
A. baumannii ATCC 19606 was cultured in 100 ml TSB at 37°C under constant shaking until the O.D. reached 0.5. For the treated sample, the culture was further incubated with the compound for 2 h. Later, the bacterial cells were washed with normal saline and palleted by centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 15 min at 4. Both the treated and untreated samples were then suspended in a 3 ml disintegration buffer, as reported previously (31). The samples were then sonicated on ice (3, and unbroken cells were separated by centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 5 min. Supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 3500 rpm for 30 min to fully isolate the proteins in buffer. Samples were then passed through 0.45 µm syringe filter (Millipore, USA) and stored at -20°C. Samples were quantified through QubitTM Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Initially, 1M ammonium bicarbonate (160 µl) was added to protein samples (200 µg) to adjust the basic pH of the samples. Then 45 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the mixture was incubated at 95°C for 30 min on thermomixer (Eppendorf AG, Germany). Samples were then allowed to cool down and in the next step 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added for alkylation. Samples were then incubated in dark for 15 min at room temperature. Afterwards, the volume of samples was adjusted by adding 700 µl of distilled water. Then, trypsin was added at 1:50 ratio and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C in shaking incubator (32,33). Trypsin activity was stopped by adding 50 µl of 1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Later, samples were desalted through in house assembled reverse phase C18 cartridges, and the eluents were vacuum dried completely. Samples were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) TFA and were quantified by using Qubit kit. Samples were then run in triplicate on nano-LC–MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF-X (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) with an EASY-LC 1000 system (ThermoFisher Scientific USA) (34).

### Data Protocol
All the raw files generated by MS were transferred to MaxQuant (v2.3.2, Matrix Science, UK) for protein identification and to obtain LFQ intensities for quantification. The search was performed through Andromeda with default search settings at 1% discovery rate. The generated spectra were then matched against the Acinetobacter baumannii reference fasta file from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/) database. Search parameters were adjusted as: carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation was set as variable modification alongside protein amino termini acetylation (35). Proteins were identified based on one unique peptide and quantified based on two unique peptides. FDR cutoff was set to 5%. For data analysis, Perseus software (v2.0.6.0) was used. The student t-test was applied to find the significant difference in LFQ intensities among groups. Moreover, differential proteins were then analyzed for Gene Ontology (GO) through STRING database (version 11.5) (https://string-db.org/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multi drug resistant, Acinetobacter baumannii, Lithium complex, Biofilm, Nosocomial infections, Metal complexes

### Affiliations
International center for chemical and biological sciences
Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi-75270, Pakistan

### Submitter
Munazza Raza

### Lab Head
Dr Munazza Raza
Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and Drug Research, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, University of Karachi, Karachi-75270, Pakistan


