### Accession
PXD028948

### Title
C. difficle p-cresol production

### Description
To identify the cellular localisation of the HpdBCA decarboxylase complex, a plasmid based HpdB-SNAP-tag  translational fusion was constructed using a C. difficile compatible plasmid (pMTL84151) under control of the hpdBCA promoter. The hpdB coding sequence omitting the stop codon, was fused via a linker to a SNAP-tag (Table 1). Confirmation of HpdB linked to the SNAP-tag was carried out via western blot, and mass spectrometry, in which we identified six peptides, four with 100% identity and two with 99% identity unique to HpdB. Localisation of HpdB was visualised by confocal microscopy in 630Δerm and the p-cresol deficient mutant (hpdC::CT) (carrying the HpdB-SNAP-tag fusion (PhpdB-CDS-SNAP), in the presence and absence of p-HPA) to induce  HpdBCA production.

### Sample Protocol
To investigate expression localisation of HpdB, a translational fusion was constructed with the promoter region of hpdBCA and the HpdB coding sequence joined via a linker to a SNAP-tag carried in a pMTL84151 vector to give plasmid PhpdB-CDS-SNAP. Construction of the plasmid was carried out in a two-stage process. Samples were prepared by overnight culture of 630Δerm PhpdB-CDS-SNAP being back diluted to an OD590nm of 0.5 and 1 ml added to BHIS +/- 2 mg/ml p-HPA and grown for four hours. Following growth 10 ml of the cultures were pelleted and frozen at -80°C. Pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of binding buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 300 mM NaCl, 25 mM imidazole) and transferred to a lysis matrix B tube and then ribolysed at 6.0 m/s for 40 s. Samples were centrifuged and the supernatant saved. In duplicate for each culture sample 15 µl of the supernatant was added to 5 µl of 4X loading dye (Thermofisher) and the sample heated at 95°C for 5 minutes before loading on to two separate 10% Bis-Tris gels which were run at 180V 400A. Gel sections were prepared for enzymatic digestion where cysteine residues were reduced with dithiothreitol and derivatised by treatment with iodoacetamide to form stable carbamidomethyl derivatives. Trypsin digestion was carried out overnight at room temperature after initial incubation at 37oC for 2 hours. The peptide sample was resuspended in 40ul of resuspension buffer (2% ACN in 0.05% FA), 10ul of which was injected to be analysed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separation was performed using a U3000 UHPLC NanoLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK). Peptides were resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75um C18 Pepmap column (50cm length) using a three-step linear gradient of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250nl/min over 60 min starting at 5% B (0-5 minutes) and increasing solvent to 40% B (5-40 minutes) prior to a wash step at 99% B (40-45 minutes) followed by an equilibration step at 5% B (45-60 minutes). The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.3. The instrument was first programmed to acquire using an Orbitrap-Ion Trap method by defining a 3s cycle time between a full MS scan and MS/MS fragmentation by collision induced dissociation. Orbitrap spectra (FTMS1) were collected at a resolution of 120,000 over a scan range of m/z 375-1600 with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 4.0e5 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms. Monoisotopic precursor ions were filtered using charge state (+2 to +7) with an intensity threshold set between 5.0e3 to 1.0e20 and a dynamic exclusion window of 35s ± 10 ppm. MS2 precursor ions were isolated in the quadrupole set to a mass width filter of 1.6 m/z. Ion trap fragmentation spectra (ITMS2) were collected with an AGC target setting of 1.0e4 (100%) with a maximum injection time of 35 ms with CID collision energy set at 35%.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (ThermoScientific; v2.5). The raw data file was processed and searched using the Sequest (Eng et al; PMID 24226387) search algorithms against the C. difficile (UniProtKB 2021_03; TrEMBL 35,322 entries) database. All database searching was performed at a stringency of 1% FDR including a decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hpdbca decarboxylase

### Affiliations
King's College London
Infection Biology – LSHTM, Keppel street, WC1E 7HT

### Submitter
Steven Lynham

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Lisa Dawson
Infection Biology – LSHTM, Keppel street, WC1E 7HT


