### Accession
PXD022879

### Title
Adaptive responses of Pseudomonas aeruginosa to treatment with antibiotics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs

### Description
Circumventing or overwhelming the bacterial adaptation capabilities is key to combatting multidrug-resistant pathogens like Pseudomonas aeruginosa. We investigated the physiological stress exerted by approved antibiotics (ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, rifampicin, gentamicin, tobramycin, azithromycin, tigecycline, polymyxin B, colistin, ceftazidime, meropenem, piperacillin/tazobactam), experimental antibiotics (CHIR-090) and NSAIDs (acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin), diclofenac, ibuprofen), and studied the bacterial response on the proteome level. Radioactive pulse-labeling of newly synthesized proteins followed by 2D-PAGE was used to monitor the acute response of P. aeruginosa to antibiotic treatment. Subsequently, marker proteins were excised from non-radioactive gels and identified by mass spectrometry. We generated a reference library of P. aeruginosa proteomic responses and implemented a mathematical comparison of the profiles. Proteomic signatures were derived for clinically relevant target areas.

### Sample Protocol
P. aeruginosa cells were disrupted and cytosolic proteins separated via 2D-PAGE. Protein spots were excised from preparative 2D gels and subjected to tryptic in-gel digestion. Identification was performed on a nanoAcquitiyUPLC (Waters, Milford, USA) coupled to a Synapt G2-S high resolution mass spectrometer equipped with a lock spray source for electrospray ionization and a ToF detector (Waters). Peptides were loaded onto a trap column and separated on an analytical column (C18) using a H2O/acetonitrile gradient with 0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using the ProteinLynxGlobalServer 2.5.2 software (Waters) with a non-redundant version of the P. aeruginosa PA01 database (5562 proteins; NCBI reference sequence: NC_0 02516.2, added manually: trypsin, keratin). The following settings were used: peptide tolerance, automatic; fragment tolerance, automatic; minimum fragment ion matches per peptide, 2; minimum fragment ion matches per protein, 4; maximum protein mass, 300,000 Da; primary digest reagent, trypsin; secondary digest reagent, none; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl C; variable modifications, deamidation N, deamidation Q, oxidation M; and false positive rate, 4.

### Publication Abstract
Pseudomonas aeruginosa is among the highest priority pathogens for drug development because of its resistance to antibiotics, extraordinary adaptability, and persistence. Antipseudomonal research is strongly encouraged to address the acute scarcity of innovative antimicrobial lead structures. In an effort to understand the physiological response of P. aeruginosa to clinically relevant antibiotics, we investigated the proteome after exposure to ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, rifampicin, gentamicin, tobramycin, azithromycin, tigecycline, polymyxin B, colistin, ceftazidime, meropenem, and piperacillin-tazobactam. We further investigated the response to CHIR-090, which represents a promising class of lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis inhibitors currently under evaluation. Radioactive pulse-labeling of newly synthesized proteins followed by two-dimensional polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was used to monitor the acute response of P. aeruginosa to antibiotic treatment. The proteomic profiles provide insights into the cellular defense strategies for each antibiotic. A mathematical comparison of these response profiles based on upregulated marker proteins revealed similarities of responses to antibiotics acting on the same target area. This study provides insights into the effects of commonly used antibiotics on P. aeruginosa and lays the foundation for the comparative analysis of the impact of novel compounds with precedented and unprecedented modes of action.

### Keywords
Lps biosynthesis inhibition, Proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Stress response, Mode of action

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany

### Submitter
Dominik Wüllner

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Elisabeth Bandow
Applied Microbiology, Faculty of Biology and Biotechnology, Ruhr University Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany


