### Accession
PXD043382

### Title
Proteomics analysis of JOSD2-overexpression in NIH/3T3 cells

### Description
DUBs exert their biological functions through specific substrates. Theoretically, as a substrate protein of JOSD2, its ubiquitination will be cut by JOSD2. In this regard, an analysis of ubiquitinome assay was performed to identify the potential substrates of JOSD2 in NIH/3T3 cells transfected with Flag-vector or Flag-JOSD2 plasmids.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was sonicated on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail，50μM PR-619 ). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The sample was slowly added to the final concentration of 20% v/v TCA to precipitate protein, then vortexed to mix and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The precipitated protein was washed with pre-cooled acetone for 3 times and dried for 2 h. The protein sample was then redissolved in 200 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. To enrich diglycine lysine modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Anti-diglycine lysine antibody conjugated agarose beads-PTM1104 , PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed for four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads for three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

### Data Protocol
The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 7% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 40 min, 24% to 32% in 12 min and climbing to 80% in 4 min then holding at 80% for the last 4 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro2 (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.65 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.  1.1.2. Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nih/3t3, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Josd2

### Affiliations
Wenzhou Medical University

### Submitter
Jibo Han

### Lab Head
Dr Jibo Han
Wenzhou Medical University


