### Accession
PXD045227

### Title
DOPA formation on tyrosine Y150 of Ribonucleotide reductase QSK R2e variant from Gardnerella vaginalis.

### Description
With a crystal structure and mass spectrometry on recombinantly expressed and purified Ribonucleotide reductase QSK R2e variant from Gardnerella vaginalis we show that this protein has a modified DOPA (3,4-Dihydroxy-L-phenylalanine) in the active site analogous to what was observed for the VPK variant. Moreover, we show that this DOPA formation is facilitated by the coexpression of partner proteins NrdI and surprisingly also NrdH and R1 from the same organism.

### Sample Protocol
Starting from purified solutions of Gardnerella vaginalis Ribonucleotide reductase QSK R2e (expressed in E. coli K12 vector) at concentration of 400 µM. Five different conditions of R2 expression were tested: i) expressed alone (control); ii) expressed with NrdH; iii) expressed with NrdI; iv) expressed with NrdH and NrdI; v) expressed with NrdH, NrdI and R1. Each condition was tested in triplicate digestion assay (resulting in 15 samples) using approximately 50 µg of protein in each individual sample.  For digestion, 3 µL of the original protein solutions was used in each sample and diluted into 100 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer pH 7.6, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT)). After heating at 95°C in a heater block with mild shaking for 15 min, samples were allowed to cool down, and 10 µL of 0.04M chloroacetamide were added (approx. final conc. 4mM). Afterwards, protein samples were cleaned using SP3 magnetic beads broadly following Hughes et al (PMID: 30464214).  Briefly, the bottles of Sera-Mag Speed beads (Cytiva P/N 65152105050250 and P/N 45152105050250) were shaken gently until no deposit was observed, and 50 µL was taken from each bead type into one tube. The 100 µL of beads were washed 3x with water (Optima LCMS grade P/N W6-212 from Fisher Scientific) by repeating the following steps 3x: placing the tubes on the magnetic rack, allowing beads to attach for 30s, removing and discarding all liquid from the beads, taking the tube out from the magnetic rack, and adding 500 µL H2O with gentle pipetting mixing. The final 500 µL beads solution was the stock solution and always gently mixed by pipetting prior to drawing a 25 µL aliquot to add to each sample.  After adding the SP3 magnetic beads to the samples with gentle pipetting mixing, 250 µL of acetonitrile was added, and then the tubes were placed in the rotating incubator with gentle mixing for 20min. Thereafter, tubes were placed in the magnetic rack, and beads allowed to settle for 2min. All liquid was removed and discarded. There followed 2 washes with 200 µL of 70% EtOH and a final wash with 200 µL of acetonitrile. The dry beads with bound proteins were reconstituted in 90 µL of trypsin solution (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate buffer pH 7.6, 2 µg trypsin) and gently mixed by pipetting. Then 10 µL of acetonitrile was added and incubation at 37°C with mild shaking followed for 14h. The samples were then placed in the magnetic rack, and after 2 min the liquid from each sample was collected and transferred to a fresh tube. The samples were again placed in the magnetic rack, and after 2 min the liquid from each sample was collected and transferred to a LCMS vial (Waters P/N 186000384C). The vials were then dried in the speedvac. To each vial 100 µL of 10% formic acid solution in LCMS grade water (Optima LCMS grade P/N W6-212 from Fisher Scientific) was added to dissolve the peptides. From each sample LC-MS run triplicates (yielding 45 LCMS raw files) were done, the auto sampler (Ultimate 3000 RSLC system, Thermo Scientific Dionex) injecting 1 µl into a C18 trap desalting column (Acclaim pepmap, C18, 3 m bead size, 100Å, 75 m x 20 mm, nanoViper, Thermo). After 6 min of flow at 5 µL/min with the loading pump, the 10-port valve switched to analysis mode in which the NC pump provided a flow of 250 nL/min through the trap column. The curved gradient (curve 6 in the Chromeleon software) then proceeded from 3% mobile phase B (90% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 5% water, 0.1% formic acid) to 45% B in 50min followed by wash at 99% B and re-equilibration. Total LC-MS run time is 24 min longer than the gradient time. We used a nano EASY-Spray column (pepmap RSLC, C18, 2µm bead size, 100Å, 75µm x 50cm, Thermo) on the nano electrospray ionization (NSI) EASY-Spray source (Thermo) at 60°C. Online LC-MS/MS was performed in DDA (data dependent acquisition) mode using a hybrid Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). FTMS master scans with 120,000 resolution (and mass range 300-1500 m/z) were followed by data-dependent MS/MS (60,000 resolution) on the top 5 ions using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at 30% normalized collision energy. Precursors were isolated with a 2 m/z window and an isolation offset of 0.5m/z. Automatic gain control (AGC) targets were 1e6 for MS1 and 1e5 for MS2. Maximum injection times were 100ms for MS1 and MS2. The entire duty cycle lasted ~1s. Dynamic exclusion was used with 30s duration. Precursors with charge states 2-7 were included. An underfill ratio of 1% was used. All chemical reagents are LCMS or Bio ultra-grade and purchased from Sigma Aldrich/Merck unless stated otherwise.

### Data Protocol
The 45 LCMS raw files were processed in PEAKS Studio 11 (build 20230414, BSI - Bioinformatics Solutions Inc), each file being quantified individually. Enzyme was trypsin, instrument was Orbitrap (Orbi-Orbi), fragmentation method HCD and acquisition DDA.  The processing workflow was a PEAKS Q (de novo assisted Quantification), which began with a Data Refine Step with Chimera feature association, then a Denovo step with a precursor mass error tolerance of 10 ppm, a fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da, carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification, and deamidation (NQ) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications, with a maximum of 3 variable modifications per peptide.  There followed a DB search against a concatenated database of 5559 protein entries including sequences from E. coli K12 and Gardnerella vaginalis proteomes from uniprot.org plus the Ribonucleotide reductase QSK R2e variant and the NrdI isoform sequences produced recombinantly for these experiments. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages was allowed, digest mode was specific, peptide length was 6-45 aas, and Deep Learning Boost was used. The other settings were the same as in the Denovo step. The report filters were PSM FDR 1%, -10LgP >= 15, Protein Unique Peptides >= 1, Denovo Only ALC(%) >= 50, Denovo Only Fully Matched = No.  For the final step, the Label Free Quantification, settings employed were: Mass Error Tolerance of 20.0 ppm, Retention Time Shift Tolerance was Auto detect, Feature Intensity > 100000, 0 < RT < max, Base Sample was average. Peptide Feature Filters were: Avg. Area >= 200000, Quality >= 20.0, Peptide Id Count >= 0 per group, 2 <= Charge <= 5. Finally, TIC was used as normalization method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tyrosine, Gardnerella vaginalis, 3, Qexactive hf, Ptm, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine, Dopa, Ribonuclotide reductase

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, SciLifeLab, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden
Clinical Proteomics Unit, Dep. of Oncology-Pathology

### Submitter
Rui Branca

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtio
Dept. Oncology-Pathology, SciLifeLab, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden


