### Accession
PXD019107

### Title
IgE Effector Mechanisms, in Concert with Mast Cells, Contribute to Acquired Host Defense against Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Best known for their roles in allergic diseases, the physiologic function of immunoglobulin E (IgE) and mast cells (the so-called allergy module of immunity) has been enigmatic. Recent evidence shows that allergic reactions can help to protect against the toxicity of venoms. As bacteria are a potent alternative source of toxins, we assessed the potential role of the allergy module in antibacterial host defense. We observed that the immune response against S. aureus skin infection includes specific IgEs and substantially improves systemic host defense against secondary S. aureus infections in mice. This acquired protection depends on functional IgE effector mechanisms and mast cells. Our results reveal the powerful antibacterial potential of the allergy module and therefore a novel physiologic function of IgEs and mast cells.

### Sample Protocol
For generation of supernatants for analysis by mass spectrometry (MS), FSCMCs were sensitized overnight with 1 µg/ml anti-DNP IgE (or non-sensitized). The next day, cells were washed 2x in DMEM (without supplements) and resuspended at a density of 107 cells/ml in DMEM. Cells were then seeded at 50 µl in triplicates in 96 well round bottom plates and pre-warmed 10 minutes at 37°C in an incubator. Next, 50 µl of pre-warmed 20 ng/ml DNP-HSA in DMEM was added and samples were incubated 1 hour at 37°C. Cellular responses were stopped by incubation for 10 minutes on ice. After 5 min centrifugation at 500 g and 4°C, cell-free supernatant was transferred into protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf), snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until analysis by MS.  Supernatants were processed for LC-MS/MS using an adapted Single-Pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) methodology published by Hughes et al. (16). In short, equal volumes (125 μl/6250 µg) of two different kind of paramagnetic carboxylate modified particles (SpeedBeads 45152105050250 and 65152105050250, GE Healthcare) were mixed, washed three times with 250 µl water and reconstituted to a final concentration of 50 μg/μl with LC-MS grade water (LiChrosolv, MERCK KgaA, Germany). Supernatants (70 µL) were mixed and normalized to a final volume of 100 μl with 5x sample buffer (10% SDS, 200 mM HEPES, pH 8.0) to a final concentration of 2% SDS, proteins reduced with a final concentration of 10 mM DTT and incubated at 56°C for 1 hour. After cooling down to room temperature, reduced cysteines were alkylated with iodoacetamide at a final concentration of 55 mM for 30 min in the dark. For tryptic digestion, 400 μg of mixed beads were added to reduced and alkylated samples, vortexed gently and incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature. The formed particles-protein complexes were precipitated by addition of acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70% [V/V], mixed briefly before incubating for 18 minutes at room temperature. Particles were then immobilized using a magnetic rack (DynaMag-2 Magnet, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and supernatant discarded. SDS was removed by washing two times with 200 μl 70% ethanol and one time with 180 μl 100% acetonitrile. After removal of organic solvent, particles were resuspended in 100 μl of 50 mM NH4HCO3 and samples digested by incubating with 1 μg of trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were cleaned by acidifying the samples to a final concentration of 1% TFA prior to immobilizing the beads on the magnetic rack to perform solid phase extraction of the recovered supernatant using C18 SPE columns (SUM SS18V, NEST group) according to the manufacturer. Peptides were eluted using two times 50 µl 90% acetonitrile, 0.4% formic acid, dried in a vacuum concentrator before reconstitution in 26 µl of 5% formic acid (Suprapur, MERCK).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.06 (20,456 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to two miscleavage sites. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine was set as a variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Data were searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.025 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence. For calculation of protein areas Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer, were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping were enabled with total peptide amount used for normalization between individual runs.  Downstream data analysis was performed in R version 3.5.1 (2018-07-02). Data were background corrected and normalized using the normalize_vsn function (18). Visual inspection of features with missing values showed missing values to be highly biased to specific samples and lower intensity proteins. For this reason, we imputed missing values using random draws from a left-shifted distribution (impute function with argument fun="MinProb", DEP package). Next, technical replicates were averaged, and differential abundance was tested using the limma package (19). Features with an absolute log2 fold change > 1 and FDR < 0.05 were considered differentially abundant. Gene ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed using GORILLA (20). All significantly upregulated (log2 fold change > 1 and FDR < 0.05) and all other proteins (background) were entered as two unranked lists and enriched GO molecular function terms where identified by hypergeometric testing. GO molecular function terms with an adjusted p-value (FDR) < 0.05 were selected as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Allergies are considered to represent mal-directed type 2 immune responses against mostly innocuous exogenous compounds. Immunoglobulin E (IgE) antibodies are a characteristic feature of allergies and mediate hypersensitivity against allergens through activation of effector cells, particularly mast cells (MCs). Although the physiological functions of this dangerous branch of immunity have remained enigmatic, recent evidence shows that allergic immune reactions can help to protect against the toxicity of venoms. Because bacteria are a potent alternative source of toxins, we assessed the possible role of allergy-like type 2 immunity in antibacterial host defense. We discovered that the adaptive immune response against Staphylococcus aureus (SA) skin infection substantially improved systemic host defense against secondary SA infections in mice. Moreover, this acquired protection depended on IgE effector mechanisms and MCs. Importantly, our results reveal a previously unknown physiological function of allergic immune responses, IgE antibodies, and MCs in host defense against a pathogenic bacterium.

### Keywords
Ige antibodies, Bacterial infection, Host defense, Human allergies, Mast cells

### Affiliations
Dept. of Medicine 1, Laboratory of Infection Biology, Medical University of Vienna
Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Andre Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Sylvia Knapp
Dept. of Medicine 1, Laboratory of Infection Biology, Medical University of Vienna


