### Accession
PXD003132

### Title
Citrullination of latency-associated peptide of TGF beta1

### Description
Enzymatic citrullination of latency-associated peptide of TGF beta1 by PAD2

### Sample Protocol
The samples were acetone precipitated, alkylated, and digested by trypsin, and analyzed with  nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. ). The mobile phase consisted of water/acetonitrile (98:2 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent B). Peptides were separated with a 10 min gradient from 5 to 35 % of solvent B. After the gradient phase, the percentage of solvent B was raised to 100 % in 2 min and kept there for 8 min. Data dependent acquisition was enabled and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the top 10 ions from the survey scan with dynamic exclusion time of 5 s was performed in each cycle. To focus on the peptides containing the RGD motif of LAP, two replicate pilot runs of LAP sample using mass-to-charge (m/z) survey scan range 800-2500 (to enhance detection of peptides of > 20 residues in length) were first performed. Based on the results of the pilot runs, an inclusion list containing m/z ratios of deamidated and unmodified doubly and triply charged ions of LAP-derived peptide RGDLATIHGMNRPFLLLMATPLER (the m/z ratio of doubly charged deamidated form was calculated from unmodified form) and triply charged peptide GDLATIHGMNRPFLLLMATPLER was applied and the m/z ratio range for survey scan was set to 500-2000 while other parameters were left unchanged.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were searched with Proteome Discoverer software, version 1.4. (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using Mascot search (Matrix Science) against human Swiss-Prot entries (UniProtKB  release 2015_08) allowing for 5 ppm peptide mass tolerance and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.015 Da. Carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, and citrullination (R), deamidation (N, Q) and oxidation (M) as dynamic modifications were included. Maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Decoy database search using reversed human Swiss-Prot sequences was performed and false discovery rate was calculated by the Proteome Discoverer software. The peptides that were identified when the false discovery rate was set to <0.05 were accepted for further analysis. The spectra leading to identification of citrullinated peptide (excluding those with C-terminal citrulline) were manually inspected with Proteome Discoverer software. Only the citrullinations that were visible in the b or y fragment ion or in the subsequent b or y ion series were accepted. The citrullinations that could not be reliably distinguished from deamidations of N or Q were omitted.

### Publication Abstract
In inflammatory arthritis peptidyl arginine deiminase (PAD) enzymes can citrullinate arginine residues in extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins, such as collagens and fibronectin. This may lead to the generation of anti-citrullinated protein antibodies, important diagnostic markers in rheumatoid arthritis. In addition, the citrullination may directly affect protein function. Based on structural analysis, we found that most ECM-associated growth factors (GFs) have arginine residues in their receptor recognition sites. Thus, they are potential functional targets of extracellular citrullination. To examine this further, we focused on the citrullination of transforming growth factor-&#x3b2;s (TGF-&#x3b2;), well-known ECM-associated GFs. PAD-treatment of CHO-LTBP1 cell derived matrix, rich with TGF-&#x3b2;, decreased the level of TGF-&#x3b2; activity as detected by HaCaT and MLEC-PAI-1/Lu reporter cells. Additional experiments indicated that PAD-treatment inhibits the integrin-mediated TGF-&#x3b2; activation since PAD-treatment decreased the binding of integrin &#x3b1;V&#x3b2;6 ectodomain as well as integrin-mediated spreading of MG-63 and HaCaT cells to &#x3b2;1-latency associated peptide (TGF-&#x3b2;1 LAP). The citrullination of the RGD site, an important integrin recognition motif, was confirmed by mass spectrometry. Furthermore, the citrullination of active TGF-&#x3b2;1 inhibited its binding to recombinant TGF-&#x3b2; receptor II, and prevented its ability to activate TGF-&#x3b2; signaling. Thus, extracellular PAD activity can affect the function of ECM-associated growth factors by different mechanisms. Importantly, the citrullination of both latent and active TGF-&#x3b2; has the potency to regulate the inflammatory process.

### Keywords
Tgfb1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku FI20014 Turku FINLAND

### Submitter
Pekka Rappu

### Lab Head
Dr Jyrki Heino
Department of Biochemistry University of Turku FI20014 Turku FINLAND


