### Accession
PXD008103

### Title
Proteomics study of 1630 death registries

### Description
The death registries of the plague epidemics of 1630, stored at the Archivio di Stato of Milano, have been interrogated via the EVA film technology (ethyl vinyl acetate film studded with crushed strong anion and cation exchangers as well as C8 resins). The EVA diskettes have been left in contact with the lower right margins of 10 different foils pertaining to the peak months of the raging disease (June through end of September) for 60-90 min and then the captured material, after elution and digestion, analyzed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were eluted from the diskettes sequentially with 200 μL of volatile buffers (formate at pH 3, followed by ammonia at pH 10). The dried eluates were loaded on precast gradient SDS PAGE (Invitrgen), the stained lanes were cut in pieces and reduced by 1.5 mg/ml DTT and alkylated by 10 mg/ml of IAA in 100 mM AMBIC. The proteins were digested by trypsin, overnight at 37°C. In addition the The peptide mixtures were purified by C18 pipette tips and analysed by nLC MSMS, using an Orbitrap Fusion trihybrid mass spectrometer coupled with a nano-flow UHPL system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, USA). The peptides were separated, after trapping on a C18 pre-column, using a gradient of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, over 50 min at flow rate of 300 nL/min, at 40°C.  The peptides were fragmented in the linear ion trap by a data-dependent acquisition method, by selecting the 40 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data and Mascot (version 2.4.1) using a merged mgf file (by using http://www.proteinmetrics.com/merging-multiple-mgf-files/). The protein databases were SwissProt without taxonomy restriction (545536 total sequences, 194023197 total residues), to explore a wide range of potentially organisms and then two targeted databases: UniProt_Yersina pestis (24291 total sequences, 7342141 total residues), and Swiss Prot, selecting Viridiplantae and bacteria taxonomy (35228 and 555426 total sequences). The tolerance on parents was 20 ppm and on fragments was 0.80 Da, ion score cut off of 20. The sequences of peptides ectracted from the searching against Y pestis and bacteria databases were used to perform MetaProteomics analyses by unipept.ugent.be. The variable modifications allowed were oxidation on methionine. The false discovery rate was below 0.1% and the identified proteins contained at least 2 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yersina pestis, Eva film, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, NR4 7UA
Università di Milano

### Submitter
Alfonsina D'Amato

### Lab Head
Dr Alfonsina D'Amato
Quadram Institute Bioscience, Norwich Research Park, NR4 7UA


