### Accession
PXD021427

### Title
Analysis of differentially expressed secreted proteins in cell culture supernatant of hBMEC in E.coli infection

### Description
The blood brain barrier (BBB) acts both a physical as well as a metabolic barrier isolating the Central Nervous System (CNS) from systemic circulation, blocking intravascular toxin entry and promoting toxic substance elimination to blood stream. The BBB is formed by four main cellular elements: endothelial cells, astrocyte end-feet, microglial cells, and pericytes. There is strong evidence that astrocytes are able to regulate the phenotypes of endothelial cells by directly contacting or secreting a range of chemical agents, resulting in BBB permeability changes and so on. Conversely, endothelium-derived leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) has been shown to induce astrocytic differentiation, from studies in normal condition of cell culture. However, in pathological conditions, the specific regulatory mechanism that endothelial cells exert on astrocytes is still less known. In our recently study, a transwell-based, endothelial-astrocyte co-culture model was established to investigate this regulatory relationship in bacterial infection. An extraintestinal pathogenic Escherichia. coli strain was used to infect human brain microvascular endothelial cells (hBMEC) planted in the upper chamber, astrocytes co-cultured in the bottom well were actived without direct contact with bacteria or endothelial cell. The transcription levels of some chemokines and cytokines such as TNF-α and CXCL10 were significantly upregulated. We hypothesized that the secreted proteins from endothelial cells is the main cause of astrocyte activation and the culture supernatant of hBMEC infected by E.coli was obtained to perform the mass spectrometry analysis. In summary, the proteomic identification results showed that 2,692 common proteins were identified in the two groups of control and infected hBMEC, including 140 differentially expressed proteins. The bioinformatics analysis indicated that differentially expressed proteins are mainly classified into structural molecular activity and constituent of ribosome. KEGG pathway enrichment analysis showed that many proteins are involved in focal adhesion as well as a bunch of signaling pathways, PI3K-Akt, Rap1, Ras, MAPK and NF-kappaB signaling pathways, for example. The present study laid an important foundation for the subsequent study of secreted proteins of hBMEC in bacterial infections.

### Sample Protocol
Primary hBMECs was divided into control as well as infected groups and was starved in serum-free medium (1:1 mixture of Ham’s F-12 and M-199) for 16 h, then the medium of control group was replaced by fresh serum-free medium when the other group was infected by Escherichia. coli strain PCN033 for 3 h (MOI=10) at 37℃. Cell culture supernatant from infected and control groups was obtained and centrifugated at 4,000 rpm for 15 min at 4℃. The insoluble debris was removed and supernatant was centrifugated at 15,000 g for 2 h at 4℃. Protein concentration in supernatant was measured using BCA protein assay kit, then was reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and 40 mM chloroacetamide at 95℃ for 5 min. Alkylated proteins were diluted to fivefold with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate and digested with Lys-C in a 1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for 3h at 37℃. Trypsin was added to a final 1:50 (wt/wt) enzyme-to-protein ratio for overnight digestion. The digested peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, and 250 μL ethyl acetate was added to 250 μL digested solution. The mixture was shaken for 2 min and then centrifuged at 20,000 g for 2 min to obtain aqueous and organic phases. The aqueous phase was collected and desalted, using 100 mg Sep-pak C18 column. The in-house-constructed immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) tip was made by capping the end with a 20 μm polypropylene frits disk. Peptides were dissolved in 4 μL of 0.3% formic acid with 3% (vol/vol) acetonitrile and injected into an EasynLC 1000. Peptides were separated on a 45-cm in-house packed column (360 μm OD × 75 μm inner diameter) containing C18 resin (2.2 μm, 100 Å), with a 30-cm column heater, and the temperature was set at 50℃. The mobile phase buffer consisted of 0.1% formic acid in ultrapure water (buffer A) with an eluting buffer of 0.1% formic acid in 80% (vol/vol) acetonitrile (buffer B) run with a linear 45- or 60-min gradient of 6–30% buffer B at flow rate of 250 nL/min. The EasynLC 1000 was coupled online with a hybrid high-resolution LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, in which a full-scan MS (from m/z 350 to 1,500 with the resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400), followed by MS/MS on the 10 most intense ions (normalized collision energy, 30%; automatic gain control 3E4, maximum injection time, 100 ms).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were processed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.3.0.5). The tandem mass spectra results were used to match with the Human UniProt database (uniprot_Human_159691_20170809.fasta; http://www.uniprot.org/). Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance value for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 6 ppm for the main search. The FDR was set to less than 1%. Proteins were quantified using label-free quantification, and the relative protein abundances are presented as the Infect/Control ratios. Proteins with expression change more than 2 times or less than 0.5 times and P value less than 0.05 are regarded as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Secreted proteins; hbmec; e.coli; infection

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China
The Cooperative Innovation Center for Sustainable Pig Production, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China

### Submitter
Dong Huo

### Lab Head
Dr Xiangru Wang
State Key Laboratory of Agricultural Microbiology, College of Veterinary Medicine, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, Hubei, China


