### Accession
PXD006476

### Title
S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase participates in DNA methylation inheritance

### Description
DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is essential for mammalian development and maintenance of DNA methylation following DNA replication in cells. The DNA methylation process generates S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine, a strong inhibitor of DNMT1. Here we report that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH/AHCY), the only mammalian enzyme capable of hydrolyzing S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine binds to DNMT1 during DNA replication. SAHH activates DNMT1 in vitro and its overexpression in mammalian cells leads to hypermethylation of the genome, whereas its inhibition by adenosine periodate resulted in hypomethylation of the genome. Hypermethylation was consistent in both gene bodies and repetitive DNA elements leading to both down- and up-regulation of genes. Similarly, hypomethylation led to both up- and down-regulation of genes suggesting methylated regions influence gene expression either positively or negatively. Cells overexpressing SAHH specifically up-regulated metabolic pathway genes and down-regulated PPAR and MAPK signaling pathways genes. Therefore, we suggest that alteration of SAHH level in the cell leads to aberrant DNA methylation, altered metabolite levels and gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Bt-DNMT1 capture HeLa clone 3 (stabely expressing Bt-DNMT1) chromatin (1 mg, formaldehyde fixed) was used to capture Bt-DNMT1 and other bound proteins. Streptavidin beads were added to the chromatin and incubated for 2 hrs at 4 ˚C with end over end mixing. Following incubation, beads were clarified using a magnetic rack and washed thrice with high salt wash buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.4, 2 M NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 7 µg/ml PMSF, 1X protease inhibitor mix). Chromatin from HeLa cells not expressing Bt-DNMT1 was used as the control. Beads were resuspended in SDS loading buffer, subjected to SDS-PAGE separation and visualized using silver stain.  In gel digestion and LC-MS/MS analysis Gel separated proteins were cut and digested with trypsin.  Each peptide digest was analyzed using 1D LC-MS/MS on Easy nLC1000-QExactive Orbitrap with the following gradient: 2 min at 5% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1% formic acid (FA), 20 min to 40% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2 min to 70% ACN, 0.1% FA, 2 min at 70% ACN, 0.1% FA, 1 min to 5% ACN, 0.1% FA and 3 min at 5 min ACN, 0.1% FA. The top 10 most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Data analysis was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 against uniprot_human_up000005640.fasta database complemented with streptavidin sequence and sequences of common contaminants. Peptide and protein grouping validation was set at 1% FDR. Quantitative values of proteins were derived using TopN peptides for label-free analysis and comparison.

### Publication Abstract
DNA (cytosine-5) methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) is essential for mammalian development and maintenance of DNA methylation following DNA replication in cells. The DNA methylation process generates S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine, a strong inhibitor of DNMT1. Here we report that S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase (SAHH/AHCY), the only mammalian enzyme capable of hydrolyzing S-adenosyl-l-homocysteine binds to DNMT1 during DNA replication. SAHH enhances DNMT1 activity in vitro, and its overexpression in mammalian cells led to hypermethylation of the genome, whereas its inhibition by adenosine periodate or siRNA-mediated knockdown resulted in hypomethylation of the genome. Hypermethylation was consistent in both gene bodies and repetitive DNA elements leading to aberrant gene regulation. Cells overexpressing SAHH specifically up-regulated metabolic pathway genes and down-regulated PPAR and MAPK signaling pathways genes. Therefore, we suggest that alteration of SAHH level affects global DNA methylation levels and gene expression.

### Keywords
Dnmt1, Cell cycle, Sahh

### Affiliations
New England Biolabs Inc.
New England Biolabs

### Submitter
V K Chaithanya Ponnaluri

### Lab Head
Dr Sriharsa Pradhan
New England Biolabs Inc.


