### Accession
PXD046664

### Title
Proteomic analysis reveals the composition of glutamatergic organelles of auditory inner hair cells

### Description
In the ear, inner hair cells (IHCs) employ sophisticated glutamatergic ribbon synapses with afferent neurons to transmit auditory information to the brain. The presynaptic machinery responsible for neurotransmitter release in IHC synapses includes proteins such as the multi-C2-domain protein otoferlin and the vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGluT3). Yet, much of this likely unique molecular machinery remains to be deciphered. The scarcity of material has so far hampered biochemical studies which require large amounts of purified sample. We developed a subcellular fractionation workflow combined with immunoisolation of VGluT3-containing membrane vesicles, allowing for the enrichment of IHC trafficking glutamatergic organelles that are likely dominated by synaptic vesicles (SVs) of IHCs. We have characterized their protein composition in mice before and after hearing onset using mass spectrometry and confocal imaging and provide a fully annotated proteome with hitherto unidentified proteins. Despite the prevalence of IHC marker proteins across IHC maturation, the profiles of trafficking proteins differed markedly before and after hearing onset. Our study provides an inventory of the machinery associated with synaptic vesicle-mediated trafficking and presynaptic activity at IHC ribbon synapses and serves as a foundation for future functional studies.

### Sample Protocol
Fractionation and immunoisolation samples were resuspended in 4X NuPAGE LDS Sample Buffer supplemented with 10% beta-mercaptoethanol and loaded onto NuPAGETM 4–12% Bis-Tris Gels (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Following detection by InstantBlue Coomassie Protein Stain (Expedeon), all visible bands were excised, cut into approximately 1x1x1 mm pieces, and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide, and overnight trypsinization. Tryptic peptides were extracted, dried, and reconstituted in 4% (v/v) acetonitrile 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Each gel-derived fraction was analyzed as technical duplicates. Individual fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house-packed C18 column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 30 cm length; Dr. Maisch GmbH). Fractionation-derived peptides (H, P1, S1, P2, S2) were separated using a 118-min gradient (start at 5% B for 3 min, increase to 8% B in 7 min, followed by 8–35% B for 90 min, 35–55% B for 7 min, 90% B for 4 min, reequilibration to 5% B for 6 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08% (v/v) formic acid in water as mobile phase B. Eluting peptides were analyzed in positive mode by a data-dependent acquisition method (data-dependent mode: cycle time; time between master scans: 3 s). MS1 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (full width at half maximum) covering a mass range of 350–1,600 m/z, 300% automatic gain control (AGC) target (100% = 1e6), and 25 ms maximum injection time. The intensity threshold was set to 5e3. Precursor ions were isolated using a 1.4 m/z isolation window, and a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of 28% was applied to obtain fragmented spectra. Only precursors with charge states from 2+ to 6+ were considered, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 25 s. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, 75% AGC target (100% = 1e5), 32 ms maximum injection time, and a fixed first mass of 110 m/z. Immunoisolation-derived peptides (VGluT3, control IgG, input S2) were separated using a 58-min gradient (start at 5% B for 0.3 min, increase to 10% B in 2.7 min, followed by 10–36% B for 37 min, 36–45% B for 5.9 min, 45–90% B for 2.1 min, 90% B for 4 min, reequilibration to 5% B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 80% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.08% (v/v) formic acid in water as mobile phase B. Eluted peptides were analyzed in positive mode using a data-dependent acquisition method (selecting the top 30 most abundant precursors for higher energy collision dissociation). MS1 spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 FWHM covering a mass range of 350–1,600 m/z, 100% AGC target (1e6), and 40 ms maximum injection time. The intensity threshold was set to 1e4. Precursor ions were isolated using a 1.6 m/z isolation window, and an HCD of 30% was applied for fragmentation. Only precursors with charge states from 2+ to 6+ were considered, and the dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s. MS2 spectra were acquired with a resolution of 15,000 FWHM, 100% AGC target (1e5), 54 ms maximum injection time, and a fixed first mass of 120 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw acquisition files were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.10.43) with the built-in Andromeda peptide search engine. The spectra were searched against the complete Mus musculus proteome sequence database generated from UniProt combining all Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL entries (UP000000589, accessed 10 May 2020, 55,398 entries). Trypsin/P was set as digestion enzyme allowing up to four miscleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethylated cysteines were set as fixed modifications with oxidation of methionines and N-terminal acetylation as variable, and a maximum number of five modifications per site was allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept at 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were defined as required for protein identification. The “Match between runs” option with default parameters was enabled, to allow identifications to be transferred to non-sequenced MS features in other LC-MS runs. For intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ), which normalizes each protein intensity by the corresponding number of identified peptides for any given protein, the “iBAQ” option was enabled. Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus software environment (version 1.6.10.43) using iBAQ values obtained through MaxQuant. Potential contaminants and identifications only by site or by reverse sequence were filtered out. iBAQ intensities were logarithmized (log2). For fractionation samples, the log2 iBAQ matrix was reduced based on valid values with a minimum of 100% (2 out of 2) valid values in at least one group. The remaining missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (downshift of 2.0 and distribution width of 0.5). Multiscatter plots displaying absolute Pearson’s correlation coefficients were generated for quality control purposes. Principal component analysis (PCA) was performed to assess variation between groups. Unsupervised hierarchical clustering analysis (row clustering with Euclidean distance, average linkage, preprocessed with k-means, with 300 clusters and 10 iterations) was performed after z-score normalization. Results were represented in the form of a heatmap of z-scored log2-transformed iBAQ intensities of the differentially expressed proteins (rows) across fractions (columns); from yellow (indicating higher abundance) to black (lower abundance), and grey indicating no identifications. The top categorical annotations, supplied as gene ontology (GO) cellular component (CC) and biological process (BP) terms, were assessed with the ShinyGO tool (version 0.75) with the following parameters: species “Mouse”; Fisher’s exact test with FDR correction (P < 0.05); top 50 most significant pathways; remove redundant pathways; pathways sorted by enrichment FDR. When ‘Remove redundant pathway’ is selected, similar pathways sharing 95% of genes are represented by the most significant pathway. Due to sample shortage, statistical analyses were performed on two technical replicates per fraction originating from one fractionation procedure (prepared from at least 100 organs of Corti). Final matrices were exported from Perseus and further processed in Microsoft Excel 365.  For immunoisolation-related samples, the log2 iBAQ matrix was reduced based on valid values with a minimum of 75% (3 out of 4) valid values in at least one group. Remaining missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (downshift of 1.4 and distribution width of 0.5).  The log2 iBAQ matrix was normalized by subtracting the mean log2 iBAQ value for a technical replicate from each individual value in that same technical replicate. A two-sample two-sided t test (5% FDR, s0 = 0) was performed between VGluT3 and control groups using the reduced log2 iBAQ matrix after normalization. A volcano plot representation was used to identify the most significant proteins by plotting –log10 adjusted P value versus log2 iBAQ fold change between VGluT3 and control groups individually. For 2D comparisons, previous iBAQ were averaged for each group, and the averaged log2 iBAQ fold change (VGluT3/control IgG) vs. log2 iBAQ fold change (VGluT3/Input) was plotted. Proteins with log2 iBAQ fold differences > 0 were defined to be enriched in VGluT3 immunoisolates over both control IgG and input. To increase confidence in identifications, a cutoff of log2 fold difference of 0.7 was set to include only proteins with at least 1.5-fold enrichment. Statistical analyses were performed on two biological replicates with two technical replicates per condition (at least 100 organs of Corti per condition). Final matrices were exported from Perseus and further processed in Microsoft Excel 365. Proteins significantly enriched in VGluT3 immunoisolates over controls (control IgG and input) were ranked by their relative enrichment for both age groups. Relative enrichment was defined as the average of log2 iBAQ (VGluT3/Control IgG) and log2 iBAQ (VGluT3/Control IgG).

### Publication Abstract
In the ear, inner hair cells (IHCs) employ sophisticated glutamatergic ribbon synapses with afferent neurons to transmit auditory information to the brain. The presynaptic machinery responsible for neurotransmitter release in IHC synapses includes proteins such as the multi-C<sub>2</sub>-domain protein otoferlin and the vesicular glutamate transporter 3 (VGluT3). Yet, much of this likely unique molecular machinery remains to be deciphered. The scarcity of material has so far hampered biochemical studies which require large amounts of purified samples. We developed a subcellular fractionation workflow combined with immunoisolation of VGluT3-containing membrane vesicles, allowing for the enrichment of glutamatergic organelles that are likely dominated by synaptic vesicles (SVs) of IHCs. We have characterized their protein composition in mice before and after hearing onset using mass spectrometry and confocal imaging and provide a fully annotated proteome with hitherto unidentified proteins. Despite the prevalence of IHC marker proteins across IHC maturation, the profiles of trafficking proteins differed markedly before and after hearing onset. Among the proteins enriched after hearing onset were VAMP-7, syntaxin-7, syntaxin-8, syntaxin-12/13, SCAMP1, V-ATPase, SV2, and PKC&#x3b1;. Our study provides an inventory of the machinery associated with synaptic vesicle-mediated trafficking and presynaptic activity at IHC ribbon synapses and serves as a foundation for future functional studies.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Trafficking, Vglut3, Proteomics, Inner hair cells

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany

### Submitter
Andreia P. Cepeda

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germany


