### Accession
PXD017213

### Title
Urinary proteomics in youths with and without type 1 diabetes

### Description
Diabetic kidney disease is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease worldwide. Our understanding of the early kidney response to chronic hyperglycemia remains incomplete. In this study, we aimed to uncover the early, dysregulated pathways in the diabetic kidney before the onset of microalbuminuria by analysing the urinary proteomes of otherwise healthy youths with and without type 1 diabetes. Our study population included two cohorts for the discovery (N = 30) and validation (N = 30) of differentially excreted proteins. Of the 2451 proteins identified, 576 were quantified in all samples from the discovery cohort, and 34 comprised the urinary signature for early type 1 diabetes after Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (Q < 0.05). The top pathways associated with this signature included lysosome, glycosaminoglycan degradation, and innate immune system (Q < 0.01). Notably, all enzymes involved in keratan sulfate degradation were significantly elevated in urines from youths with type 1 diabetes (fold change > 1.6). Increased urinary excretion of monocyte differentiation antigen CD14, hexosaminidase A, and lumican was also observed in the validation cohort (P < 0.05). Our findings draw attention to novel pathways such as keratan sulfate degradation in the early kidney response to hyperglycemia.

### Sample Protocol
Second-morning, midstream urines were collected, handled, and stored in accordance with the Standard Protocol for Urine Collection and Storage created by the Human Kidney and Urine Proteome Project (HKUPP) and the Human Proteome Organization (HUPO). After thawing, urines were vortexed and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes. To account for differences in hydration, we used volumes containing 90 μmol of urinary creatinine. Ammonium bicarbonate was added to increase alkalinity of samples (to a pH of 8) for later steps. Next, we passed the urines through Vivaspin Centrifugal Concentrators (VivaProducts) with 10-kDa cut-off membranes to isolate the protein content. (The filtrate was analysed in a separate peptidomics study: PXD012210.) Protein concentrations were measured in the retentate using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. A total of 200 μg of protein were denatured with urea, reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. Proteolysis was terminated the next day using formic acid. Peptides were subsequently speed-vacuumed to remove excess water content and reduce volumes to below 200 μL.  Next, we performed strong cation exchange high-performance liquid chromatography (SCX-HPLC). Peptides were loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL ATM column (The Nest Group Incorporation) containing a hydrophilic, anionic polymer (poly-2-sulfoethyl aspartamide). We created a 60-minute fractionation method with a linear gradient of 0.26 M formic acid in 5% acetonitrile as the running buffer and 1 M ammonium formate added as the elution buffer. We combined 12 of the 26 fractions, which covered the largest area on the chromatogram, into 3 pooled fractions. Further desalting and concentration were carried out with Agilent Technologies Bond Elut OMIX C18 tips. Peptides were then eluted in 5 μL of 65% acetonitrile and diluted with 60 μL of 0.1% formic acid in pure mass spectrometry-grade water.  Three fractions per youth were analyzed over a 60-minute gradient on a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC1000 system, coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer using nano-electrospray ionization. They were first loaded onto a 0.3 cm C18 pre-analytical column (IntegraFrit capillary, New Objective; inner diameter of 150 μm; 5 μm bead size; Agilent Pursuit C18, Agilent Technologies) and then a C18 resolving analytical column with dimensions 15 cm x 75 μm ID (PicoTip emitter, 8 μm tip, New Objective Agilent Pursuit C18, 3 μm bead size). Data-dependent acquisition mode was used with full MS1 scans from 400 – 1500 m/z with a resolution of 70,000 and MS2 scans of the top 12 parent ions with a resolution of 17,500. Xcalibur software (v. 3.0.63; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was utilized to generate RAW files of each run.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8) and were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (version July 2016) using the built-in Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate was set to 1% using a revert database for both proteins and peptides with a minimum length of six amino acids. The digestion mode was specific for trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; while methionine oxidation, proline oxidation, and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Potential contaminants were allowed in the search and manually removed post hoc. The initial peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm against a small ‘human-first-search’ database. The main search peptide mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm, and the fragment mass MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Matching between runs was selected. Stabilized label-free quantification (LFQ) of proteins derived from extracted ion current information from razor and unique peptides with a minimum ratio count of 2.  The fast LFQ option was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetes is the leading cause of end-stage renal disease worldwide. Our understanding of the early kidney response to chronic hyperglycemia remains incomplete. To address this, we first investigated the urinary proteomes of otherwise healthy youths with and without type 1 diabetes and subsequently examined the enriched pathways that might be dysregulated in early disease using systems biology approaches. This cross-sectional study included two separate cohorts for the discovery (N = 30) and internal validation (N = 30) of differentially excreted proteins. Discovery proteomics was performed on a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer. We then searched the pathDIP, KEGG, and Reactome databases to identify enriched pathways in early diabetes; the Integrated Interactions Database to retrieve protein-protein interaction data; and the PubMed database to compare fold changes of our signature proteins with those published in similarly designed studies. Proteins were selected for internal validation based on pathway enrichment and availability of commercial enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits. Of the 2451 proteins identified, 576 were quantified in all samples from the discovery cohort; 34 comprised the urinary signature for early diabetes after Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment (Q &lt; 0.05). The top pathways associated with this signature included lysosome, glycosaminoglycan degradation, and innate immune system (Q &lt; 0.01). Notably, all enzymes involved in keratan sulfate degradation were significantly elevated in urines from youths with diabetes (|fold change| &gt; 1.6). Increased urinary excretion of monocyte differentiation antigen CD14, hexosaminidase A, and lumican was also observed in the validation cohort (P &lt; 0.05). Twenty-one proteins from our signature have been reported elsewhere as potential mediators of early diabetes. In this study, we identified a urinary proteomic signature for early type 1 diabetes, of which lysosomal enzymes were major constituents. Our findings highlight novel pathways such as keratan sulfate degradation in the early kidney response to hyperglycemia.

### Keywords
Urine, Type 1 diabetes, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Julie Anh Dung Van

### Lab Head
Dr Ana Konvalinka
Toronto General Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada


