### Accession
PXD020270

### Title
Identification of oxidized cysteine residues in signaling proteins in U937 cells at basal levels and upon diamide and hypochlorous acid stimulations.

### Description
Here, we report a detection of oxidative post-translational modifications (ox-PTM) of Cys residues in the U937 cell line either non-stimulated or stimulated with diamide, a thiol-oxidizing agent at 0.5mM for 20min or HOCl at 100µM for 10min. Reversible Cys ox-PTMs were labelled using a bioswitch method using a Maleimide-(Polyethylene Glycol)2-Biotin (Mal-PEG2-Bio) probe independently of the oxidation type. Labeled proteins were analyzed by Mass spectrometry. We identified Cys ox-PTMs encompassing 1473 proteins containing at least ox-PTM-modified Cys. These sites include ox-PTM sites previously described in vitro validating the approach. Numerous novel Cys susceptible to ox-PTMs were identified including signaling proteins, including kinases, phosphatases and transcription and translation factors and proteins relevant to virus-host interactions.

### Sample Protocol
U937 cells were plated at a concentration of 106 cells/mL in RPMI supplemented with 1% L-glutamine, 1% HEPES and 10% FCl-III. Sixteen hours before stimulation, the medium was replaced by DMEM w/o PR containing 2% FCI-III and 1% L-glutamine. At the time of stimulation, the medium was replaced by DMEM w/o PR containing 1% L-glutamine, 2% FCI-III and 0.5mM diamide (20min) or 100µM HOCl (10min). Treatments were pursued for the indicated times.  At time of harvesting, cells were immediately transferred to pre-chilled tubes and washed in cold ddPBS before trichloroacetic acid. After TCA/acetone addition, samples were sonicated (3x15 pulses, 70%, UP50H sonicator, Hielscher) with rounds on ice. Samples were stored at -80°C for at least 2h before further processing. TCA/acetone precipitated proteins were used for alkylation with 3mM N-ethylmaleimide (NEM) in 0.5M Tris, 1% SDS pH 7.3 for 30min at room temperature (RT). Next, reduction was performed using 4mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 0.5M Tris, 1% SDS pH 7.0 for 1h at RT followed by labeling with 0.25mM EZ-Link Maleimide-PEG2-Biotin (Mal-PEG2-Bio) for 2h at RT.  Tryptic digests, either from in-gel digestion or from the elution from NeutrAvidin resin in the approaches with in-solution trypsin digestion, were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system. Tryptic peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap (2 cm x 75 um; ThermoScientific PN164946) at a flow rate of 2ul/min. Peptide were then eluted and separated using an Easy Spray Column (50 cm x 75 um; ThermoScientific PN ES803) and a 45 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 40 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 5 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min. Solvent A was composed of 0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water. Peptides were then electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap AGC (Auto Gain control) and the maximum injection time were set at 4e5 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (30% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 sec to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm).

### Data Protocol
The Lumos data files were converted into Mascot Generic Format (MGF) using RawConverter (v1.1.0.18; The Scripps Research Institute) operating in a data dependent mode. Monoisotopic precursors having a charge state of +2 to +7 were selected for conversion. This mgf file was used to search a database (Homo sapiens, NCBI; 99742 entries) using Mascot algorithm (Matrix Sciences; version 2.4), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin at a maximum of 1 missed cleavage. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Oxidation of methionine (Met+15.99Da), alkylation of Cys with NEM (Cys+125.05Da) and maleimide-PEG2-Biotin-labeled Cys with (or Mal-PEG2-Bio, Cys+525.23Da) were specified in the Mascot search parameters as variable modifications. The Mascot data files were imported into Scaffold (v4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) for comparison of different samples based on their mass spectral counting. Scaffold was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. For label-free quantification (LFQ), only peptides containing at least 1 Cys-ox-PTMs and detected in at least two out of the three biological replicates were considered for spectral counting. Scaffold algorithms were used to perform standard cutoffs of significance for peptide ion signal peak intensity-based quantification. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction and a false discovery rate (FDR) <1%. Protein identification was accepted if it could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified oxidized peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Protein disulfide isomerases (PDIs) catalyze redox reactions that reduce, oxidize, or isomerize disulfide bonds and act as chaperones of proteins as they fold. The characteristic features of PDIs are the presence of one or more catalytic thioredoxin (TRX)-like domains harboring typical CXXC catalytic motifs responsible for redox reactions, as well as non-catalytic TRX-like domain. As increasing attention is paid to oxidative post-translational modifications of cysteines (Cys ox-PTMs) with the recognition that they control cellular signaling, strategies to identify sites of Cys ox-PTM by redox proteomics have been optimized. Exploration of an available Cys redoxome dataset supported by modeled structure provided arguments for the existence of an additional non-catalytic thiol-disulfide motif, distinct from those contained in the TRX type patterns, typical of PDIAs. Further structural analysis of PDIA3 and 6 allows us to consider the possibility that this hypothesis could be extended to other members of PDI. These elements invite future studies to decipher the exact role of these non-catalytic thiol-disulfide motifs in the functions of PDIs. Strategies that would allow to validate this hypothesis are discussed.

### Keywords
Signaling, Cysteine, Post-translational modifications, Redox, Oxidation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
CRCHUM - Université de Montréal
CRCHUM-Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2X 0A9, Canada.

### Submitter
Nathalie Grandvaux

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Grandvaux
CRCHUM-Centre Hospitalier de l'Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC H2X 0A9, Canada.


