### Accession
PXD022807

### Title
Flow Cytometry Analysis of Circulating Extracellular Vesicle Subtypes from Fresh Body Fluids

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by shedding during different physiological processes and are increasingly thought to be new potential biomarkers. However, the impact of pre-analytical processing phases on the final measurement is not predictable and, for this reason, the translation of basic research into clinical practice has been precluded. Here we have optimized a simple procedure in combination with PFC, to identify, classify, enumerate, and separate circulating EVs from different cell origins. This protocol takes advantage of a lipophilic cationic dye (LCD) able to probe EVs. Moreover, the application of the newly optimized PFC protocol here described allowed the obtainment of repeatable EV counts. The translation of this PFC protocol to fluorescence-activated cell sorting allowed us to separate EVs from fresh peripheral blood samples. Sorted EV preparations resulted particularly suitable for proteomic analyses, which we applied to study their protein cargo. Here we show that LCD staining allowed PFC detection and sorting of EVs from fresh body fluids, avoiding pre-analytical steps of enrichment that could impact final results. Therefore, LCD staining is an essential step towards the assessment of EV clinical significance.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular vesicle (EVs) label-free Proteomics The number of purified EVs, established by FACS, was used to normalize proteomics analyses. In detail, 1 x 106 EVs separated by FACS were used for each proteomic detection. EV digested proteins were acquired in triplicate by LC-MS/MS using a Proxeon EASY-nLCII (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Milan, Italy) chromatographic system coupled to a Maxis HD UHR-TOF (Bruker Daltonics GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. In-source reference lock mass (1,221.9906 m/z) was acquired online throughout runs.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was carried out by the MASCOT search engine, assuming the carbamidomethylation and the methionine oxidation as fixed and variable modification, respectively. The Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) obtainable by MASCOT results from MS/MS data was used for approximate relative abundance of proteins in the mixture. Gene Ontology classification of identified proteins was carried out by PANTHER, which classified 58 identified EV proteins. Flow cytometry and emPAI protein data were analysed using the XLSTAT 2014 (Addinsoft, Paris, France) and GraphPad Prism 6 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Two-sided Student’s t-test or paired t-test were used as indicated. Statistical significance was accepted for p <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by shedding during different physiological processes and are increasingly thought to be new potential biomarkers. However, the impact of pre-analytical processing phases on the final measurement is not predictable and for this reason, the translation of basic research into clinical practice has been precluded. Here we have optimized a simple procedure in combination with polychromatic flow cytometry (PFC), to identify, classify, enumerate, and separate circulating EVs from different cell origins. This protocol takes advantage of a lipophilic cationic dye (LCD) able to probe EVs. Moreover, the application of the newly optimized PFC protocol here described allowed the obtainment of repeatable EVs counts. The translation of this PFC protocol to fluorescence-activated cell sorting allowed us to separate EVs from fresh peripheral blood samples. Sorted EVs preparations resulted particularly suitable for proteomic analyses, which we applied to study their protein cargo. Here we show that LCD staining allowed PFC detection and sorting of EVs from fresh body fluids, avoiding pre-analytical steps of enrichment that could impact final results. Therefore, LCD staining is an essential step towards the assessment of EVs clinical significance.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; polychromatic flow cytometry; biomarkers; proteomics; fresh peripheral blood.

### Affiliations
University "G. d'Annunzio" of Chieti-Pescara 
Center for Advanced Studies and Technology, "G. d'Annunzio" University, Chieti, Italy

### Submitter
Piero Del Boccio

### Lab Head
Dr Piero Del Boccio
Center for Advanced Studies and Technology, "G. d'Annunzio" University, Chieti, Italy


