### Accession
PXD044302

### Title
Breakdown of hardly degradable carbohydrates (lignocellulose) in a two-stage anaerobic digestion plant is favored in the main fermenter

### Description
Key questions: • Are hydrolysis fermenters useful for the biogas process? • How redundant are the different functions? • Does the function of MAGs differ in the different fermenters? • Which depencies exist (transporters vs. producers?), antimicrobial genes, antibiotic resistencies,phages-hosts? • Can we quantify the biomass turnover? • Can we find new pathways for SAO and Methanogenesis? • How active are the MAGs?

### Sample Protocol
Phenol extraction Metaproteome analysis was carried out in triplicates. Therefore, 5 g silica beads (0,5 mm), 2 g of the sample (triplicates for each sample), 3,5 mL phenol solution (10 g phenol in 1 mL ultrapure water) and 2 mL 2 M sucrose solution were added to a 50 mL tube. The tubes were added to a FastPrep™ (FastPrep-96, MP Biomedicals, Eschwege, Germany) and the cells were disrupted at 1.800 U/min for 5 min. Afterwards, the tubes were centrifuged (10 min, 10.000 g, room temperature (RT)), the upper phenol phase was transferred to a new 50 mL tube. Furthermore, the proteins were washed with 1 M sucrose solution on a shaker (120 rpm, 10 min, RT) and centrifuged again (10 min, 10.000 g, RT). The proteins were precipitated with ammonium acetate in methanol precipitation. Ammonium acetate in methanol precipitation The four-fold volume (4v/v) of ice-cold (-20 °C) ammonium acetate in methanol was added to the protein solutions and incubated for 20 min at –20 °C. The mixtures were centrifuged (10 min, 10.000 g, 4 °C) and the supernatant was carefully discarded. These steps were one time repeated. Subsequently, the pellets were dried and solved in Urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 0,01 g/mL 1,4-Dithiothreitol (DTT)) (DOI: 10.1016/j.nbt.2013.01.002) and the concentration was determined using amido black assay (PMID: 1221733; PMID: 2525554). FASP digestion For the FASP digestion (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.1322; https://doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.037309) 100 µg protein of each sample was loaded together with 200 µL 8 M Urea buffer (incubation for 5 min before) on a FASP filter (Pall Nanosep 10K Omega, MWCO 10 kDa) and centrifuged (10-20 min, 10.000 g, RT). Afterwards, 200 µL 8 M Urea buffer was added and the samples were centrifuged (10 min, 10.000 g, RT). Reduction and alkylation of proteins were carried out by addition of 100 µL DTT (20 min, 300 rpm, 56 °C) and 100 µL iodoacetamide (IAA) (20 min, 300 rpm, RT, in the dark). After Reduction and alkylation, the flow through was removed and the proteins were washed once for 2 min with 100 µL 8 M Urea buffer, three times with 100 µL 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and centrifuged (5 min, 10.000 g, RT) after each washing step. Subsequently, the flow through was removed and the bottom of the tube was washed with 250 μL ABC buffer. 200 µL trypsin solution was added to each sample (2 h, 300 rpm, 37 °C) in an enzyme to protein ratio of approximately 1 to 100 and after incubation centrifuged (5 min, 10.000 g, RT). The remaining peptides dissolved in 5 µL extraction buffer (50 mM ABC buffer + 5 % Acetonitrile) and were centrifuged (5 min, 10.000 g, RT) across the filter unit. Then, the filter unit was washed with 50 µL LC-MS water and centrifuged (5 min, 10.000 g, RT). Finally, 30 µL of each sample was transferred into a new tube, acidified with 3 µL trifluoroacetic acid (1:200 diluted with LC-MS water) and centrifuged (10 min, 10.000 g, 4 °C). The supernatant was transferred into a HPLC vial. LC-MS/MS measurements The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an UltiMate® 3000 nano splitless reversed phase nanoHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich) coupled online to a timsTOF™ mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen). The peptides were loaded isocratically on a trap column (Dionex Acclaim, nano trap column, 100 μmi.d. x 2 cm, PepMap100 C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, nanoViper) with a flow rate of 7 μL/min solvent A (98 % ultrapure water, 2 % acetonitrile, 0,05 % TFA). For the chromatographic separation a Dionex Acclaim PepMap C18 RSLC Nano-reversed phase column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter and 250 mm length) was used. The column temperature was 40 °C and a flow rate of 300 nL/min was applied for a binary solvent A/B gradient (solvent A: 98 % ultrapure water, 2 % acetonitrile, 0,1 % formic acid; solvent B: 80 % acetonitrile, 10 % ultrapure water, 10 % trifluorethanol, 0,1 % formic acid). 1 µL of the sample was injected and the separation step started with 2 % solvent B for 5 min and the concentration was linear increased over a 120 min gradient to 44 %. Afterwards, the column was washed with 72 % solvent B for 10 min and re-equilibrated with 2 % loading B for 18 min. For the mass spectrometric measurement in positive mode, a data-dependent MS/MS method was chosen. The precursor ions were selected with the help of Trapped Ion Mobility Separation (TIMS), and a unique acquisition method, Parallel Accumulation Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) and trapped in quadrupole with a resolution of 50.000 and a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range from 150-2.200 Da. Subsequently, the fragment ions were produced from the 20 most intense precursors of each spectrum with collision-induced dissociation (CID) and analyzed in a TOF analyzer.

### Data Protocol
The timsTOF™ mass spectrometer MS/MS measurement raw data files were processed by the proteome discoverer software XX (version XX, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and converted into Mascot Generic File (mgf). The files were uploaded into the MPA software version 3.0. The first version was published by Muth et al. 2015 (https://doi.org/10.1021/pr501246w). For peptide- spectral matching the software X!Tandem (https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/bth092) and OMMSA (https://doi.org/10.1021/pr0499491) were used. All protein database searches used the following parameters: enzyme trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) as fixed modification, oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ± 0.02 Da precursor and ± 0.02 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions. For the used the protein identification the created metagenome was extended by database a metagenome of this biogas plant was created and combined with UniProtKB/SwissProt (release November 2017). All identified peptides were exported as csv, mapped against the identified genes from the metagagenome and collected in one fusion matrix. Spectral abundance of peptide identifications assigned to multiple proteins were distributed equally to all associated proteins. However, the main evaluation was carried out only for uniqe peptides. Taxonomic and functional annotation for proteins identified against UniProtKB/SwissProt were retrived from the UniProtKB homepage using the “retrieve/ID mapping” service (https://www.uniprot.org/uploadlists/, retrieved 15.11.2020).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Host-phage interactions, Metaproteomics, Hydrolysis fermenter, Biogas plant, Multi-omics, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Applied Biosciences and Process Engineering, Anhalt University of Applied Sciences, Microbiology, Bernburger Straße 55, 06354 Köthen, Germany
Otto-von-Guericke-University
Universitätsplatz 2
39106 Magdeburg
Germany

### Submitter
Patrick Hellwig

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Applied Biosciences and Process Engineering, Anhalt University of Applied Sciences, Microbiology, Bernburger Straße 55, 06354 Köthen, Germany


