### Accession
PXD024642

### Title
mTOR-mediated phosphorylation of VAMP8 prevents a starvation-induced VAMP8-SCFD1 interaction that promotes SNARE activity and autolysosome fusion

### Description
mTOR-mediated phosphorylation of VAMP8 prevents a starvation-induced VAMP8-SCFD1 interaction that promotes SNARE activity and autolysosome fusion

### Sample Protocol
Mixed 200μg protein with 8M UA in the 10K filter unit and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. Added 200μl UA and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min. Discarded the flow-through from the collection tube. Alkylated the proteins with IAA and incubated 45 min in the dark. Discarded the flow-through. Added 100μl UA and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min and this step repeat once. Added 200μl 50mM ABC and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 15 min and this step repeat once. Changed a new collection tube and added 4μg trypsin and incubated at 370C for 16 h. Centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min and collected the flow-through to a new tube. Added 50mM ABC and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min, collected the flow-through to the above tube and dried the sample with SpeedVac. The sample was dissolved in 0.1% TFA and desalted with C18 ZipTips and dried with SpeedVac, The sample were resuspened with 0.1% formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples were analyzed on Thermo Fisher LTQ Obitrap ETD mass spectrometry, Briefly, loaded sample onto an HPLC chromatography system named Thermo Fisher Easy-nLC 1000 equipped with a C18 colume (1.8mm，0.15×1,00mm). Solvent A contained 0.1% formic acid and solvent B contained 100% acetonitrile. The elution gradient was from 4% to 18% in 182 min, 18% to 90% in 13 min solvent B at a flow rate of 300nL/min. Mass spectrometry analysis were carried out carried out at the AIMSMASS Co.,Ltd.(Shanghai, China) in the positive-ion mode with an automated data-dependent MS/MS analysis with full scans (350-1600 m/z) acquired using FTMS at a mass resolution of 30,000 and the ten most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS. The MS/MS was acquired using higher-energy collision dissociation at 35% collision energy at a mass resolution of 15,000.

### Publication Abstract
The mammalian target of rapamycin (mTORC1) has been shown to regulate autophagy at different steps. However, how mTORC1 regulates the N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive protein receptor (SNARE) complex remains elusive. Here we show that mTORC1 inhibits formation of the SNARE complex (STX17-SNAP29-VAMP8) by phosphorylating VAMP8, thereby blocking autophagosome-lysosome fusion. A VAMP8 phosphorylation mimic mutant is unable to promote autophagosome-lysosome fusion in vitro. Furthermore, we identify SCFD1, a Sec1/Munc18-like protein, that localizes to the autolysosome and is required for SNARE complex formation and autophagosome-lysosome fusion. VAMP8 promotes SCFD1 recruitment to autolysosomes when dephosphorylated. Consistently, phosphorylated VAMP8 or SCFD1 depletion inhibits autophagosome-lysosome fusion, and expression of phosphomimic VAMP8 leads to increased lipid droplet accumulation when expressed in mouse liver. Thus, our study supports that mTORC1-mediated phosphorylation of VAMP8 blocks SCFD1 recruitment, thereby inhibiting STX17-SNAP29-VAMP8 complex formation and autophagosome-lysosome fusion.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agircultural University
Nanjing Agricultural Univeristy, Nanjing, China

### Submitter
RONG LIU

### Lab Head
Dr RONG LIU
Nanjing Agricultural Univeristy, Nanjing, China


