### Accession
PXD000405

### Title
Ndd1 phosphorylation pattern upon DNA damage

### Description
The transcriptional activator NDD1 was purified from wt and rad53 or mec1 mutant  treated with hydroxyurea or methyl-methanesulfonate via HTB-tag , digested directly from the streptavidin beads, and then subjected to LC-MSMS analysis. Beads were alternatively digested with trypsin and chymotrypsin for better sequence coverage.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Downregulation of specific transcripts is one of the mechanisms utilized by eukaryotic checkpoint systems to prevent cell cycle progression. Here we identified and explored such a mechanism in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. It involves the Mec1-Rad53 kinase cascade, which attenuates G(2)/M-specific gene transcription upon genotoxic stress. This inhibition is achieved via multiple Rad53-dependent inhibitory phosphorylations on the transcriptional activator Ndd1 that prevent its chromatin recruitment via interactions with the forkhead factor Fkh2. Relevant modification sites on Ndd1 were identified by mass spectrometry, and corresponding alanine substitutions were able to suppress a methyl methanesulfonate-induced block in Ndd1 chromatin recruitment. Whereas effective suppression by these Ndd1 mutants is achieved for DNA damage, this is not the case under replication stress conditions, suggesting that additional mechanisms must operate under such conditions. We propose that budding yeast cells prevent the normal transcription of G(2)/M-specific genes upon genotoxic stress to precisely coordinate the timing of mitotic and postmitotic events with respect to S phase.

### Keywords
Mms, Ndd1, Hydroxyurea, Dna damage, Transcription factor

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Mass Spectrometry Facility, University of Vienna

### Submitter
Dorothea Anrather

### Lab Head


