### Accession
PXD035807

### Title
Proteome of Mycobacterium tuberculosis treated with 2,4-disubstituted pyridine derivatives

### Description
Two selected compounds, 2,4-disubstituted pyridine derivatives (11 and 15), revealed significant bactericidal activity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis deposited within human macrophages as well as against biofilm-forming tubercle bacilli. The mass spectrometry-based proteomics (LC-MS/MS) of the wild-type tubercle bacilli growing in the subinhibitory concentration of 11 or 15 revealed 15 overproduced proteins not detectable in the control cells including virulence-related proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacterial cells treated with 11 and 15, alongside the untreated control, were lysed by ribolysis using the MP Bioruptor and compatible resin. Resulting protein lysates were precipitated with acetone and analysed by high-resolution mass spectrometry. The protein pellet was reconstituted in trypsin solution. The resulting tryptic peptides were next analyzed using the ion source of the Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Electron Corp) coupled to a nano-HPLC system fitted with a RP-18 column (Waters). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode with a selected mass range of 300–2000 mass/charge (m/z).

### Data Protocol
The raw result files were processed directly using the MaxQuant v.1.6.17.0 against the Mycobacterium tuberculosis proteome database obtained from https://mycobrowser.epfl.ch/.

### Publication Abstract
It was recently reported that 4-substituted picolinohydrazonamides carrying hydrophilic cyclic amines, such as morpholine and pyrrolidine, at the end of their thiosemicarbazide chain have potent antimycobacterial activity <i>in vitro</i> at concentrations below 1&#xa0;&#x3bc;g/ml. Here, two selected compounds, 2,4-disubstituted pyridine derivatives <b>11</b> and <b>15</b>, revealed significant bactericidal activity against <i>Mycobacterium tuberculosis</i> localized intracellularly within human macrophages, as well as against biofilm-forming tubercle bacilli. Mutants were selected that were resistant to the investigated compounds at an efficiency similar to that identified in the presence of the first line antituberculosis drug rifampicin. The resistant mutants were viable in the presence of the tested compounds exclusively on solid media. Genome-wide sequencing of the mutants selected in the presence of compound <b>11</b> revealed the accumulation of nonsynonymous mutations in the <i>mmpR5</i> gene encoding a transcriptional repressor of the MmpS5-MmpL5 efflux pump, whose upregulation has been associated with bedaquiline resistance. The depletion of MmpR5 in wild-type <i>M. tuberculosis</i> using CRISPR-Cas9 technology increased the resistance of this strain to compound <b>11</b>. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics (LC-MS/MS) of wild-type tubercle bacilli growing in subinhibitory concentrations of compounds <b>11</b> or <b>15</b> revealed 15 overproduced proteins not detectable in the control cells, including virulence-related proteins.

### Keywords
Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Antimicrobials

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology of Mycobacterium, Institute of Medical Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland
Institute of Medical Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Przemyslaw Plocinski

### Lab Head
Dr Jaroslaw Dziadek
Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology of Mycobacterium, Institute of Medical Biology of the Polish Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland


