### Accession
PXD005666

### Title
IL-22 Controls Iron-Dependent Nutritional Immunity Against Systemic Bacterial Infections

### Description
Host immunity limits iron availability to pathogenic bacteria, but whether immunity limits pathogenic bacteria from accessing host heme, the major source of iron in the body, remains unclear.   Using Citrobacter rodentium, a mouse enteric pathogen and Escherichia coli, a major cause of sepsis in humans as models, we find that interleukin-22, a cytokine best known for its ability to promote epithelial barrier function, also suppresses the systemic growth of bacteria by limiting iron availability to the pathogen. Using an unbiased proteomic approach to understand the mechanistic basis of IL-22 dependent iron retention in the host, we have identified that IL-22 induces the production of the plasma hemoglobin scavenger haptoglobin and heme scavenger hemopexin. Moreover, the anti-microbial effect of IL-22 depends on the induction of hemopexin expression, while haptogloblin is dispensable. Impaired pathogen clearance in infected Il22-/- mice was restored by hemopexin administration and hemopexin-deficient mice had increased pathogen loads after infection. These studies reveal a previously unrecognized host defense mechanism regulated by IL-22 that relies on the induction of hemopexin to limit heme availability to bacteria leading to suppression of bacterial growth during systemic infections.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were collected and albumin and immunoglobulins were depleted using a Proteome Purify2 column (R&D). The samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with  SimplyBlue SafeStain (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The protein samples were processed and analyzed at the Mass Spectrometry Facility of the Department of Pathology at the University of Michigan.   Gel slices (10 slices/lane) were destained with 30% methanol for 4 h.  Upon reduction (10 mM DTT) and alklylation (65 mM 2-Chloroacetamide) of the cysteines, proteins were digested overnight with sequencing grade, modified trypsin (Promega).  Resulting peptides were resolved on a nano-capillary reverse phase column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 micron, 25 cm, ThermoScientific) using a 1% acetic acid/acetonitrile gradient at 300 nl/min and directly introduced in to Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA).  MS1 scans were acquired at 120K resolution.  Data-dependent high-energy C-trap dissociation MS/MS spectra were acquired with top speed option (3 sec) following each MS1 scan (relative CE ~32%).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the data against Mus musculus database (UniProtKB) using Proteome Discoverer (v1.4, Thermo Scientific).  Search parameters included MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.2 Da; two missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidimethylation of cysteine was considered fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine were considered as potential modifications.  Percolator algorithm was used for discriminating between correct and incorrect spectrum identification.  The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated at the peptide level and peptides with <1% FDR were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Host immunity limits iron availability to pathogenic bacteria, but whether immunity limits pathogenic bacteria from accessing host heme, the major source of iron in the body, remains unclear. Using <i>Citrobacter rodentium</i>, a mouse enteric pathogen and <i>Escherichia coli</i>, a major cause of sepsis in humans as models, we find that interleukin-22, a cytokine best known for its ability to promote epithelial barrier function, also suppresses the systemic growth of bacteria by limiting iron availability to the pathogen. Using an unbiased proteomic approach to understand the mechanistic basis of IL-22 dependent iron retention in the host, we have identified that IL-22 induces the production of the plasma hemoglobin scavenger haptoglobin and heme scavenger hemopexin. Moreover, the anti-microbial effect of IL-22 depends on the induction of hemopexin expression, while haptogloblin is dispensable. Impaired pathogen clearance in infected <i>Il22<sup>-/-</sup></i> mice was restored by hemopexin administration and hemopexin-deficient mice had increased pathogen loads after infection. These studies reveal a previously unrecognized host defense mechanism regulated by IL-22 that relies on the induction of hemopexin to limit heme availability to bacteria leading to suppression of bacterial growth during systemic infections.

### Keywords
Bacterial infection, Hemopexin, Il-22

### Affiliations
University of Michigan
Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

### Submitter
Gabriel Nunez

### Lab Head
Dr Gabriel Nunez
Department of Pathology and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.


