### Accession
PXD011933

### Title
Human pancreatic endocrine cells, LC-MS3

### Description
FACS isolated human alpha and beta cells were analyzed by TMT 11-plex labeling, Off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation and LC-MS3 on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Sample Protocol
FACS isolated human alpha and beta cells were lyzed in SDS and processed by FASP labeled with TMT 11-plex, Off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation and LC-MS3 on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed using a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline, and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human uniprot datbase (March 11, 2014). The database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level anlysis. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. The wide tolerance window were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and linear discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modifications, while oxidation of methionine residues (+15.995) was set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Cell-identity switches, in which terminally differentiated cells are converted into different cell types when stressed, represent a widespread regenerative strategy in animals, yet they are poorly documented in mammals. In mice, some glucagon-producing pancreatic &#x3b1;-cells and somatostatin-producing &#x3b4;-cells become insulin-expressing cells after the ablation of insulin-secreting &#x3b2;-cells, thus promoting diabetes recovery. Whether human islets also display this plasticity, especially in diabetic conditions, remains unknown. Here we show that islet non-&#x3b2;-cells, namely &#x3b1;-cells and pancreatic polypeptide (PPY)-producing &#x3b3;-cells, obtained from deceased non-diabetic or diabetic human donors, can be lineage-traced and reprogrammed by the transcription factors PDX1 and MAFA to produce and secrete insulin in response to glucose. When transplanted into diabetic mice, converted human &#x3b1;-cells reverse diabetes and continue to produce insulin even after six months. Notably, insulin-producing &#x3b1;-cells maintain expression of &#x3b1;-cell markers, as seen by deep transcriptomic and proteomic characterization. These observations provide conceptual evidence and a molecular framework for a mechanistic understanding of in situ cell plasticity as a treatment for diabetes and other degenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Human, Tmt 11-plex, Endocrine cells, Lc-ms3

### Affiliations
Universitetet i Bergen
Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro L. Herrera
Department of Genetic Medicine and Development, University of Geneva, Switzerland


