### Accession
PXD036819

### Title
Control of intracellular pH and bicarbonate by CO2 diffusion into human sperm

### Description
Human sperm cell were analysed for their complete protein content and a few proteins of interest were absolutely quantified with labelled standard peptides and targeted mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were lysed with high percentage SDS, proteins were reduced, alkylated and tryptically digested. For the whole proteome analysis, an offline pre-fractionation was performed and then the fractions were measured in DDA mode. For absolute quantification, the samples were aliquoted and measured with different concentrations of standard peptides in targeted mode.

### Data Protocol
Whole proteome data was processed with MaxQuant, Excel and Perseus, and quantification data was processed with Skyline, Excel and R.

### Publication Abstract
The reaction of CO<sub>2</sub> with H<sub>2</sub>O to form bicarbonate (HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>)&#xa0;and H<sup>+</sup> controls sperm motility and fertilization via HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>-stimulated cAMP synthesis. A complex network of signaling proteins participates in this reaction. Here, we identify key players that regulate intracellular pH (pH<sub>i</sub>) and HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> in human sperm by quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) and kinetic patch-clamp fluorometry. The resting pH<sub>i</sub> is set by amiloride-sensitive Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchange. The sperm-specific putative Na<sup>+</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> exchanger SLC9C1, unlike its sea urchin homologue, is not gated by voltage or cAMP. Transporters and channels implied in HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> transport are not detected, and may be present at copy numbers &lt;&#x2009;10 molecules/sperm cell. Instead, HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> is produced by diffusion of CO<sub>2</sub> into cells and readjustment of the CO<sub>2</sub>/HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup>/H<sup>+</sup> equilibrium. The proton channel H<sub>v</sub>1 may serve as a unidirectional valve that blunts the acidification ensuing from HCO<sub>3</sub><sup>-</sup> synthesis. This work provides a new framework for the study of male infertility.

### Keywords
Human, Spermatozoa, Absolute quantification, Whole proteome

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany Bioanalytics, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germnay

### Submitter
Svenja Victoria Kaufmann

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Germany Bioanalytics, University Medical Center Goettingen, Germnay


