### Accession
PXD038743

### Title
Analysis of the protein distribution within the wheat endosperm

### Description
Starchy endosperm proteins determine wheat quality and exhibit, besides a quantitative protein gradient, a qualitative protein gradient from the outer to inner starchy endosperm. The goal was to investigate the relative differences in protein composition between the aleurone, sub-aleurone and inner endosperm. Using laser microdissection followed by nanoLC-MS/MS, an innovative method combining a high spatial specificity and analytical selectivity in sample-limited situations, 780 proteins were detected and classified by function. Relatively more gluten proteins were detected in the sub-aleurone compared to inner endosperm. Gluten composition-wise, the sub-aleurone is relatively more enriched in ω-gliadins, but impoverished in LMW-GS and γ-gliadins. While a basic set of albumins and globulins is detected across the entire endosperm, some proteins, like puroindoline-B, display an increasing (or decreasing) gradient. Histological origin and relative positioning of the endosperm cells are hypothesized to drive the protein gradient. Knowledge on this gradient provides major opportunities for the wheat manufacturing industry.

### Sample Protocol
Kernels were fixed to a sample plate by freezing them in a 3% carboxymethylcellulose solution in water on the sample plate. Cross-sections (25 µm), originating from the middle of the kernel, were obtained using a Cryostar NX70 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and were subsequently transferred to nuclease and human nucleic acid free PET-membrane-coated metal frame slides (1.4 μm; Leica, Herborn, Germany) that were kept on room temperature. Afterwards laser microdissection (LMD) was performed, using a Leica 6500 system (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany), to specifically isolate aleurone, sub-aleurone and inner endosperm tissue from the cross-sections. The UV laser (355 nm) with a pulse frequency of 80 Hz was set at a pulse energy of 60 µJ. 1-Propanol (50 µL) and 20 µL solution 1 (0.5 mol/L Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 2 mol/L urea) were added to the PCR tubes containing the tissue in 30 µL water. The tubes were mixed in a multitube vortexer for 2 min at 22 °C. Reduction was conducted by adding 5 µL tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 0.05 mol/L TCEP in solution 1) followed by mixing in a multitube vortexer for 2 min at 22 °C and shaking   for 30 min at 60 °C. Alkylation was performed by adding 10 µL chloroacetamide (CAA, 0.5 mol/L CAA in solution 1) followed by mixing in a multitube vortexer for 2 min at 22 °C and shaking at 37 °C for 45 min in the dark  . The solvent was removed in a rotational vacuum concentrator (Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen GmbH, Osterode, Germany) at 40 °C and 8 mbar to dryness. For hydrolysis, 50 ng (in case of inner endosperm tissue) or 100 ng (in case of sub-aleurone and aleurone tissue) of both trypsin and chymotrypsin in 100 µL Tris-HCl (0.1 mol/L, pH 7.8) were added. For all tissues, the enzyme:substrate ratio is estimated to be around 1:20 for both trypsin and chymotrypsin by considering a protein content of 10% in the inner-endosperm and 20% in the aleuron and sub-aleuron as reported in Wisse et al. . The tubes were incubated overnight (18 h) in the dark at 37 °C. Hydrolysis was stopped by adding 1 µL trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were desalted using C18 spin tips (10 µg binding capacity, ThermoScientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer guidelines. The peptides were eluted in two steps with each 20 µL of 50 % acetonitrile (v/v) containing 0.1 % formic acid (2 × 20 µL  ). The solvent was removed in a rotational vacuum concentrator at 40 °C and 8 mbar to dryness. The samples were stored at -20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were directly used as input in MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). For the first search, a large FASTA file containing all entries from Triticum aestivum of the UniProtKB database  (download 18.01.2022) were used and a false discovery rate of 100% on peptide level   was applied. Carbamidomethylation on cysteines was specified as fixed modification and the combination of chymotrypsin and trypsin as proteolytic enzymes with up to two allowed missed cleavage sites. Match-between runs (matching time window 0.7 min, alignment time window 20 min) was enabled, and the results were filtered for a minimal length of seven amino acids. From the identified proteins in the first search, a smaller database was built in UniProtKB. This FASTA file was used for the second search with 1% peptide and protein false discovery rate and in addition to the before mentioned parameters, the intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was applied. A total sum normalization of iBAQ protein intensities between samples was performed to correct for different total protein injection amounts.

### Publication Abstract
Wheat kernel proteins are not homogeneously distributed throughout the endosperm. The goal of this study was to investigate the relative differences in protein composition between the aleurone, sub-aleurone and inner endosperm. Using laser microdissection followed by nanoLC-MS/MS, an innovative method combining high spatial specificity and analytical selectivity in sample-limited situations, 780 proteins were detected and classified by function. A higher proportion of gluten proteins was detected in the sub-aleurone than inner endosperm. Composition-wise, gluten from the sub-aleurone is relatively more enriched in &#x3c9;-gliadins but impoverished in LMW-GS and &#x3b3;-gliadins. While a basic set of albumins and globulins was detected in all three microdissected endosperm tissues, specific proteins, like puroindoline B, displayed a gradient. This study provides indications that both histological origin and relative positioning of the tissues drive the protein distribution. Knowledge of this protein distribution offers significant opportunities for the wheat manufacturing industry. Data available via ProteomeXchange, identifier PXD038743.

### Keywords
Aleurone, Nanolc-ms/ms, Laser microdessected, Sub-aleurone, Inner endosperm, Triticum aesticum

### Affiliations
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institut of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institut of Technology
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany

### Submitter
Sabrina Geisslitz

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Anne Scherf
Department of Bioactive and Functional Food Chemistry, Institute of Applied Biosciences, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Karlsruhe, Germany


