### Accession
PXD010362

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from 4T1 breast cancer cells upon paclitaxel treatment

### Description
Increasing pre-clinical data suggest that chemotherapy may elicit pro-metastatic responses in breast cancer models. Primary tumours release extracellular vesicles (EVs) that can facilitate the seeding and growth of metastatic cancer cells in distant organs, but the effects of chemotherapy on pro-metastatic EVs are poorly understood. The goal of the project was to analyse the protein content in EVs released by the mouse breast cancer cell line 4T1 after treatment with the chemotherapeutic agent paclitaxel (PTX) or its vehicle control cremophor (CREMO).

### Sample Protocol
In order to isolate EVs, 4T1 were seeded in 15 cm cell culture dishes. When cells reached full adhesion and 40-50% confluence, supernatant was removed and replaced with EV-depleted medium containing the chemotherapeutic drugs or the corresponding vehicle controls. EV-depleted medium was prepared with 2 mM L-glutamine, 5% P/S and 5% FBS that was previously depleted of EVs by ultracentrifugation at 134,000xg for 16h at 4°C and by filtering through a 0.1 µm vacuum filtration bottle. Following treatment (72h), EVs were isolated from the conditioned medium using sequential ultracentrifugation, as previously described4. Briefly, conditioned medium was centrifuged at 500xg for 5 min, 2000xg for 5 min, and then 4600xg for 20 min, at 4°C to remove dead cells and debris. The medium was eventually ultracentrifuged at 134,000xg for 70 min at 4°C using a Beckman ultracentrifuge and a SW32Ti rotor. The pellet containing the EVs was washed in 35 ml of PBS and the EVs ultracentrifuged once more at 134,000xg for 70 min at 4°C. The resulting EV preparation was resuspended in 50-200 µl of PBS. EVs preparations (17 μg of total protein, in PBS solution) from paclitaxel- or vehicle-treated 4T1 cells were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  Briefly, each sample was digested in solution as described (Chopra et al. 2013 J Proteomics 2013). Peptides were desalted using StageTips and dried in a vacuum concentrator. For LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Database search was performed using Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) and SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer v.1.4. against a mouse Uniprot protein database. Data were further processed and inspected in ScaffoldTM 4.8.4 (Proteome Software). Normalized to total spectra quantitative values were utilized to compare the protein profile in EVs derived from in vitro cultured cancer cells. The normalization scheme in Scaffold adjusts the sum of the selected quantitative value for all proteins in the list within each MS sample to a common value: the average of the sums of all MS samples present in the experiment. This is achieved by applying a scaling factor for each sample to each protein or protein group adjusting in this way the selected value to a normalized “quantitative value”. Data were extracted from Scaffold and analyzed using R.  For the analysis of the 4T1-derived EVs, we applied a threshold of 30 as a minimum of the mean quantitative value for each protein to select for the most abundant proteins. The analysis was performed in two separate experiments. In order to merge the two independent experiments, we normalized the quantitative values of each protein to the mean quantitative value of all samples analyzed within the same experiment. We then performed an hierarchical clustering analysis. Statistical analysis was performed using a t-test and p-values were adjusted after correcting for a false discovery rate using a Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Cytotoxic chemotherapy is an effective treatment for invasive breast cancer. However, experimental studies in mice also suggest that chemotherapy has pro-metastatic effects. Primary tumours release extracellular vesicles (EVs), including exosomes, that can facilitate the seeding and growth of metastatic cancer cells in distant organs, but the effects of chemotherapy on tumour-derived EVs remain unclear. Here we show that two classes of cytotoxic drugs broadly employed in pre-operative (neoadjuvant) breast cancer therapy, taxanes and anthracyclines, elicit tumour-derived EVs with enhanced pro-metastatic capacity. Chemotherapy-elicited EVs are enriched in annexin A6 (ANXA6), a Ca<sup>2+</sup>-dependent protein that promotes NF-&#x3ba;B-dependent endothelial cell activation, Ccl2 induction and Ly6C<sup>+</sup>CCR2<sup>+</sup> monocyte expansion in the pulmonary pre-metastatic niche to facilitate the establishment of lung metastasis. Genetic inactivation of Anxa6 in cancer cells or Ccr2 in host cells blunts the pro-metastatic effects of chemotherapy-elicited EVs. ANXA6 is detected, and potentially enriched, in the circulating EVs of breast cancer patients undergoing neoadjuvant chemotherapy.

### Keywords
4t1, Paclitaxel, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
EPFL
Angiogenesis and Tumor Microenvironment Lab The Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) School of Life Sciences Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland

### Submitter
Chiara  Cianciaruso

### Lab Head
Dr Michele De Palma
Angiogenesis and Tumor Microenvironment Lab The Swiss Institute for Experimental Cancer Research (ISREC) School of Life Sciences Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne, Switzerland


