### Accession
PXD000218

### Title
System-level analysis of cancer and stomal cell specific proteomes reveals extensive reprogramming of phosphorylation networks by tumor microenvironment

### Description
DLD-1 cells  and mouse were treated with DMSO, GDC0941 and CAL101 for 2 hours. Proteins were digested with trypsin and phospho peptides were enriched using TiO2. Enriched phosphopeptides and peptides were analysed by LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.  (MS/MS data were converted to mgf files using Mascot Distiller (version 2.2) and searched against the UniProt-TrEMBL and UniProt SwissProt databases (release March 2012) and a decoy database using the Mascot search engine (version 2.2). The data was searched twice, restricting searches against human or mouse specific sequences in each separate search. For phosphoproteomics, tolerance windows were 3 p.p.m. and 600 mmu for parent and fragment ions, respectively. For proteomics, these were 5 p.p.m. and 50 mmu for parent and fragment ions, respectively. Allowed variable modifications were methionine oxidation, pyroglutamate at the N-terminus and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues. Significance of peptide identification was assessed by comparing results returned by searches against random and forward databases.  The probability of correct phosphorylation site assignment was determined by the Mascot delta score approach. Ambiguous phosphorylation site assignments are reported as gene name followed by start and end of the amino acid sequence

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The tumor microenvironment plays key roles in cancer biology, but its impact on the regulation of signaling pathway activity in cancer cells has not been systemically investigated. We designed an analytical strategy that allows differential analysis of signaling between cancer and stromal cells present in tumor xenografts. We used this approach to investigate how in vivo growth conditions and PI3K inhibitors regulate pathway activities in both cancer and stromal cell populations. We found that, despite inducing more modest changes in protein expression, in vivo growing conditions extensively rewired protein kinase networks in cancer cells. As a result, different sets of phosphorylation sites were modulated by PI3K inhibitors in cancer cells growing in tumors relative to when these cells were in culture. The p110&#x3b4; PI3K-selective compound CAL-101 (Idelalisib) did not inhibit markers of PI3K activity in cancer or stromal cells; however, unexpectedly, it induced phosphorylation on SQ motifs in both subpopulations of tumor cells in vivo but not in vitro. Thus, the interaction between cancer cells and the stroma modulated the ability of PI3K inhibitors to induce the activation of apoptosis in solid tumors. Our study provides proof-of-principle of a proteomics workflow for measuring signaling specifically in cancer and stromal cells and for investigating how cancer biochemistry is modulated in vivo.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Dld-1 cells

### Affiliations
Centre for Haemato Oncology

### Submitter
Vinothini Rajeeve

### Lab Head


