### Accession
PXD015273

### Title
Abundances of transcripts, proteins metabolites and lipids in the cell cycle of budding yeast.

### Description
This entry contains the proteomic files from a data set of RNAs, proteins, metabolites and lipids analyzed from the same staged samples of S. cerevisiae cells across the cell cycle.  Actively growing (un-arrested) diploid cells were collected by elutriation as 8 distinct size pools across the cell cycle in triplicate.  Yeast in these 24 aliquots were lysed and soluble and insoluble proteins were prepared for shotgun LC-MS/MS mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
1e9 cells from each of the 24 pools of the cell size series were resuspended in 10 mM Tris pH 7.8, 10 mM NaCl and disrupted by bead beating. Following clarification at 14,000 x g the supernatant (soluble proteins, file names S1-S24)were denature/alkylated and digested with trypsin using standard "in solution" methods.  The insoluble protein pellet from the lysis(file names P1-P24) were dissolved in 2% SDS, 50 mM ammonium carbonate and processed for trypsin digestion according to Lin et al. 2013.  Briefly, proteins were precipitated from the SDS solution with acetone and resuspended in 1% sodium deoxycholate for reduction/alkylation and digestion.  All peptide samples were desalted using C18 spin tips. For LC-MS/MS peptides were directly injected into a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion using nano-electrospray following separation on a 3-45% acetonitrile gradient over 70 minutes.  Data acquisition was with a data-dependent top speed HCD method.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and the label-free quantification workflow.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Lc-ms/ms, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin
University of Texas at Austin

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, the University of Texas at Austin


