### Accession
PXD005359

### Title
Effects of titanium dioxide (TiO2) nanoparticles (NPs) on endothelial cells

### Description
The widespread commercial use of TiO2-NPs, such as in medical stents, has led to extensive investigations on their toxicity and biological impact but lacks a detailed study on their effects. Proteomics and transcriptomics are key methodologies to unravel cellular dynamics, macromolecular interactions and biological response to NP exposure through the protein or gene identification and quantification. We focus on integration of several Omics strategies that could offer a more complex understanding of the impact. In this study, our goal was to gain insight into the cellular response after the exposure to sublethal concentration of TiO2-ultra small nanoparticles (USNPs) and NPs by analyzing the modification on the genomic and proteomic expression in human microdermal endothelial cells (HMEC-1). We investigated the correlation between the NP size and the cellular response to the exposure. We evaluated if multiOmics approaches could thus reveal more extensive information on the potential cellular responses to NPs exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Total RNA was extracted TRIzol® Plus RNA Purification Kit;  Life Technologies cat#12183-555)  and purified using DNA-free™ Kit (ambion, Life Technologies # AM1906 ) and  Qiagen RNeasy kit (Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). Then submitted for Applied Biosystems SOLiD high-throughput sequencing at the Science for Life Laboratories (Scilifelab) at KISP (Karolinska Institute Science Park). For proteomics, cells were lysed and concentrated using a 30K filter (Millipore, MA, USA). The samples were prepared using filter sided sample preparation (FASP). The peptides obtained were desalted using top-tips and analyzed using a reverse phase nano-LC (liquid chromatography) coupled to a hybrid LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Transcriptomic sequencing was achieved using Applied Biosystems SOLiD high-throughput sequencing where they were processed (Bowtie and HTSeq) and analyzed for differently expressed genes (DESeq version 1.18.0). All statistical calculations were performed using the R programming language. The principal component analysis (PCA) was done using the DESeq package using the “blind” method, the “fit-only” sharing mode and “local” fit type. For the heat maps, the experiments were sorted according to increasing P-values, using row-scaling and a cut-off of 0.01. Finally, the results were plotted using the heatmap.2 function of the gplots package.  Proteome discoverer (Thermo Scientific, version 1.3) was used for protein identification and quantitation using the SEQUEST algorithm (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version 1.4.0.288) along with X! Tandem (CYCLONE (2010.12.01.1). Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and for label free quantitation. Top 3 precursor intensity values were normalized, and proteomic differences were analysed for statistical significance by Mann-Whitney test (P value < 0.05) in Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR). From the statistically significant hits, fold change was calculated at the category level. The fold change was then transformed using log2 function and the P-value was –log10 transformed to be plotted in a volcano plot using R. A heat map was also generated in R by considering the common proteins identified from each sample sets of 30 nm and the USNP’s. Classification analyses were done in Panther, version 10 where annotations were derived and plotted in Excel 2013 (Microsoft, Redmond, WA).  Pathway enrichment analysis was also carried out using KEGG for differentially expressed transcripts and proteins using REVIGO.

### Publication Abstract
The large interactive surfaces of nanoparticles (NPs) increase the opportunities to develop NPs for vascular targeting. Proteomic analysis of endothelial cells exposed to NPs reveals the cellular response and turns the focus into the impairment of the endothelial permeability. Here, quantitative proteomics and transcriptome sequencing are combined to evaluate the effects of exposure to sub-lethal concentrations of TiO<sub>2</sub> -USNPs and TiO<sub>2</sub> -NPs on human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. Endothelial cells react to preserve the semi-permeable properties that are essential for vascular tissue fluid homeostasis, vascular development, and angiogenesis. The main impact of the exposure was alteration of functional complexes involved in cell adhesion, vesicular transport, and cytoskeletal structure. Those are the core cellular structures that are linked to the permeability and the integrity of the endothelial tissue. Moreover, the extracellular proteins uptake along wih the NPs into the endothelial cells escape the lysosomal degradation pathway. These findings improve the understanding of the interaction of NPs with endothelial cell. The effects of the studied NPs modulating cell-cell adhesion and vesicular transport can help to evaluate the distribution of NPs via intravenous administration.

### Keywords
Nanoparticles, Titanium dioxide, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Linkoping University
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine

### Submitter
Jacob Kuruvilla

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Cristobal
Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine


