### Accession
PXD011767

### Title
EGR1 regulation in human bone marrow stromal cells

### Description
Human bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) are key elements of the hematopoietic environment and they play a central role in bone and bone marrow physiology. However, how key BMSC functions are regulated is largely unknown. We analyzed the role of the immediate early response transcription factor EGR1 as key BMSC regulator and found that EGR1 was highly expressed in prospectively-isolated primary BMSCs, downregulated upon culture, and lower in non-CFU-F-containing CD45neg BM cells. Furthermore, EGR1 expression was lower in proliferative regenerating adult and fetal primary cells compared to adult steady-state BMSCs. Accordingly, EGR1 overexpression markedly decreased BMSC proliferation but considerably improved hematopoietic stroma support function as indicated by an increased production of transplantable CD34+CD90+ hematopoietic stem cells in expansion co-cultures. The improvement of BMSC stroma support function was mediated by increased expression of hematopoietic supporting genes, such as VCAM1 and CCL28. On the other hand, EGR1 knockdown increased ROS-mediated BMSC proliferation, and clearly reduced BMSC hematopoietic stroma support potential. These findings thus show that EGR1 is a key BMSC transcription factor with a dual role in regulating proliferation and hematopoietic stroma support function that is controlling a genetic program to coordinate the specific functions of BMSC in their different biological contexts.

### Sample Protocol
For sample preparation, cells were lysed with 0.1% RapiGest (Waters) in 100 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and extracted proteins were reduced/alkylated and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). Protein digests were differentially dimethyl labelled on columns as previously described (Jassinskaja et al., Cell Reports, 2017). Briefly, samples were labelled by flushing the columns with labelling reagent (light, intermediate or heavy using CH2O + NaBH3CN, CD2O + NaBH3CN or 13CD2O + NaBD3CN, respectively). Sample complexity was reduced by fractionation using OFFGEL isoelectric focusing (Agilent). The 12 fractions resolved were acidified and desalted with C18 Ultra-Micro SpinColumns (Harvard). Samples were reconstituted in 4% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid prior to MS analysis. MS analyses were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid MS system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher). On a 110-min gradient, one full scan spectrum from m/z 375 to 1500 at resolution 60,000 FWHM was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 15,000 FWHM) of the most intense ions (up to 15) from the full scan MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.0) (Cox and Mann, Nat Biotechnol, 2008). The derived peak list was searched using the in-built Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant against the Uniprot human database (downloaded 2016.10.13) together with 265 frequently observed contaminants (Andromeda configured database) and reversed sequences of all entries. A 1% false discovery rate (FDR) was required at both the protein level and the peptide level. Criteria for top differentially expressed proteins was set as the product of log2 ratios of shEGR1 to the two controls. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified.

### Publication Abstract
Human bone marrow stromal cells (BMSC) are key elements of the hematopoietic environment and they play a central role in bone and bone marrow physiology. However, how key stromal cell functions are regulated is largely unknown. We analyzed the role of the immediate early response transcription factor EGR1 as key stromal cell regulator and found that EGR1 was highly expressed in prospectively-isolated primary BMSC, down-regulated upon culture, and low in non-colony-forming CD45<sup>neg</sup> stromal cells. Furthermore, EGR1 expression was lower in proliferative regenerating adult and fetal primary cells compared to adult steady-state BMSC. Overexpression of EGR1 in stromal cells induced potent hematopoietic stroma support as indicated by an increased production of transplantable CD34<sup>+</sup>CD90<sup>+</sup> hematopoietic stem cells in expansion co-cultures. The improvement in bone marrow stroma support function was mediated by increased expression of hematopoietic supporting genes, such as <i>VCAM1</i> and <i>CCL28</i> Furthermore, EGR1 overexpression markedly decreased stromal cell proliferation whereas EGR1 knockdown caused the opposite effects. These findings thus show that EGR1 is a key stromal transcription factor with a dual role in regulating proliferation and hematopoietic stroma support function that is controlling a genetic program to co-ordinate the specific functions of BMSC in their different biological contexts.

### Keywords
Human, Stromal cells, Bone marrow

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Univsersity, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Jenny Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Jenny Hansson
Division of Molecular Hematology, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Lund Univsersity, Sweden


