### Accession
PXD029059

### Title
Identification of FgPacC interactor

### Description
Identification of Transcription factor FgPacC Interacting Protein by LC-MSMS

### Sample Protocol
1.Proteolysis (1) Sampling: Took 100μg (total amount of protein for digestion is adjusted according to the project requirements) and added it to a 1.5mL centrifuge tube;(2) Dilution of protein solution: If there is high concentration of urea or SDS in the protein solution, it should be diluted with 0.5M TEAB to make the final concentration of urea less than 2M, and the final concentration of SDS is less than 0.1%;(3) According to Trypsin enzyme (μg): substrate protein (μg) = 1:20, enzyme solution was added, vortexed, centrifuged at low speed for 1 minute, and incubated at 37°C for 4 hours; (4) Took out the digested peptide liquid for desalting;(5) Freeze-dried the peptide liquid obtained after salt removal. 2.HPLC The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), centrifuged at 20,000g for 10 minutes, and the supernatant was taken for injection. Separation was performed by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The sample was first enriched in trap column and desalted, and then entered a self-packed C18 column (75μm internal diameter, 3μm column size, 25cm column length) and separated at a flow rate of 300nL/min by the following effective gradient: 0~5 minutes, 5% mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA); 5~45 minutes, mobile phase B linearly increased from 5% to 25%; 45~50minutes, mobile phase B increased from 25% to 35%; 50~52 minutes, mobile phase B rose from 35% to 80%; 52~54 minutes, 80% mobile phase B; 54~60 minutes, 5% mobile phase B. The nanoliter liquid phase separation end was directly connected to the mass spectrometer. 3.Mass Spectrometry Detection The peptides separated by liquid phase chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for DDA (Data Dependent Acquisition) mode detection. The main parameters were set: ion source voltage was set to 1.9kV, MS1 scanning range was 350~1,500m/z; resolution was set to 60,000; MS2 starting m/z was fixed at 100; resolution was 15,000. The ion screening conditions for MS2 fragmentation: charge 2+ to 6+, and the top 30 parent ions with the peak intensity exceeding 10,000. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 seconds. The AGC was set to: MS1 3E6, MS2 1E5.

### Data Protocol
The protein identification uses experimental MS/MS data and aligns them with theoretical MS/MS data from database to obtain results. The whole process starts from converting raw MS data into a peak list and then searching matches in the database. The search results are subject to strict filtering and quality control, and possible protein identifications are produced. Finally, from the final protein identificationlist, functional annotation analysis such as GO, COG/KOG, and Pathway analysis are performed.

### Publication Abstract
Poaceae plants can locally accumulate iron to suppress pathogen infection. It remains unknown how pathogens overcome host-derived iron stress during their successful infections. Here, we report that Fusarium graminearum (Fg), a destructive fungal pathogen of cereal crops, is challenged by host-derived high-iron stress. Fg infection induces host alkalinization, and the pH-dependent transcription factor FgPacC undergoes a proteolytic cleavage into the functional isoform named FgPacC30 under alkaline host environment. Subsequently FgPacC30 binds to a GCCAR(R&#xa0;=&#xa0;A/G)G element at the promoters of the genes involved in iron uptake and inhibits their expression, leading to adaption of Fg to high-iron stress. Mechanistically, FgPacC30 binds to FgGcn5 protein, a catalytic subunit of Spt-Ada-Gcn5 Acetyltransferase (SAGA) complex, leading to deregulation of histone acetylation at H3K18 and H2BK11, and repression of iron uptake genes. Moreover, we identified a protein kinase FgHal4, which is highly induced by extracellular high-iron stress and protects FgPacC30 against 26S proteasome-dependent degradation by promoting FgPacC30 phosphorylation at Ser2. Collectively, this study uncovers a novel inhibitory mechanism of the SAGA complex by a transcription factor that enables a fungal pathogen to adapt to dynamic microenvironments during infection.

### Keywords
Fusarium graminearum;lc-msms

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Bingqin Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Xuewen Gao
Nanjing Agricultural University


