### Accession
PXD012762

### Title
pepper anther LC-MSMS -  Complementary Transcriptomic and Proteomic Analysis Reveals a Complex Network Regulating Pollen Abortion in GMS (msc-1) Pepper (Capsicum annuum L

### Description
This study will provides valuable information for a better understanding of GMS (msc-1) molecular mechanisms in pepper.

### Sample Protocol
Genic male-sterile line 16C1369A and its near isogenic male-fertile line 16C1369B, which were selected for proteomic and transcriptomic analysis, were grown in the plastic-covered tunnels at China Agricultural University, Beijing, China, in 2016. For proteomic, and gene expression, anthers were collected from flower buds at the key stage of pollen abortion, frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately, and then stored at -80 °C for later use.Anther proteins extraction and Label-free analysis were according to the methods described by Guo et al. (2017). For protein quantitation, at least detected two unique peptides in the three biological replicates, and the relative quantitative protein ratios between the two groups were calculated by comparing the average abundance values (three biological replicates). For differently expressed proteins (DEPs), a 2-fold cutoff was set to determine up-regulated and down-regulated. Additionally, proteins detected in only one group (the sterile line 16C1369A or fertile line 16C1369B) with at least two replicates were considered to be presence/absence proteins. In the presence/absence protein species difference analysis, the fold-change calculated based on the mean value of the lowest protein intensity detected in each group.

### Data Protocol
For protein quantitation, at least detected two unique peptides in the three biological replicates, and the relative quantitative protein ratios between the two groups were calculated by comparing the average abundance values (three biological replicates). For differently expressed proteins (DEPs), a 2-fold cutoff was set to determine up-regulated and down-regulated. Additionally, proteins detected in only one group (the sterile line 16C1369A or fertile line 16C1369B) with at least two replicates were considered to be presence/absence proteins. In the presence/absence protein species difference analysis, the fold-change calculated based on the mean value of the lowest protein intensity detected in each group.Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis of DEGs and DEPs were implemented by the GOseq R package (Young et al. 2010), in which gene length bias was corrected. GO terms with corrected P-value less than 0.05 were considered significantly enriched by DEGs and DEPs. The pathway of DEGs and DEPs analysis was performed using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (http://www.genome.jp/kegg). P-value ≤0.05 was used as the threshold to determine the significant enrichments of KEGG pathways.

### Publication Abstract
Pepper (<i>Capsicum annuum</i> L.) is a globally important horticultural crop. Use of the genic male-sterile (GMS) line enables efficient commercial hybrid pepper seed production. However, the mechanisms of pepper GMS functioning remain unclear. In this study, we used proteomic and transcriptomic analysis to identify proteins and genes related to genic male sterility. A total of 764 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) and 1069 differentially expressed genes (DEGs) were identified in the proteomic and transcriptomic level respectively, and 52 genes (hereafter "cor-DEGs-DEPs" genes) were detected at both levels. Gene ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis identified 13 DEPs and 14 DEGs involved in tapetum and pollen development. Among the 13 DEPs identified, eight were involved in pollen exine formation, and they were all up-regulated in the fertile line 16C1369B. For the 14 DEGs identified, <i>ABORTED MICROSPORES</i> (<i>AMS</i>) and <i>DEFECTIVE IN TAPETAL DEVELOPMENT AND FUNCTION1</i> (<i>TDF1</i>) were involved in tapetum development, and both are possibly regulated by <i>Msc-1</i>. All of these genes were detected and confirmed by qRT-PCR. The presence of these genes suggests their possible role in tapetum and pollen exine formation in GMS pepper. Most key genes and transcription factors involved in these processes were down-regulated in the sterile line 16C1369A. This study provides a better understanding of GMS (<i>msc-1</i>) molecular functioning in pepper.

### Keywords
Anther, Lc-msms, Pepper

### Affiliations
china agricultural university
College of Horticulture, 737, China Agricultural University, China

### Submitter
qing cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Huolin Shen
College of Horticulture, 737, China Agricultural University, China


