### Accession
PXD024631

### Title
STARS overexpression in the mdx mouse tibialis anterior muscle increases maximal isometric force production and regulates members of the keratin, NRF2 and OXPHOS pathways

### Description
Duchenne muscular dystrophy (DMD) is characterized by impaired cytoskeleton organization, cytosolic calcium handling  oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. This results in progressive and fatal muscle damage, wasting and weakness. The Striated Muscle activator of Rho signalling (STARS) is an actin binding protein that activates the myocardin-related transcription factor-A (MRTFA)/serum response factor (SRF) transcriptional pathway; a pathway that regulates cytoskeletal structure, muscle function, growth and repair. Here we investigated the regulation of several members of the STARS signalling pathway in muscle from patients with DMD and the dystrophin-deficient mdx and dko (utrophin‐ and dystrophin‐null) mice. A reduction in protein levels of STARS, SRF and RHOA, and an increase in MRTFA were observed in quadriceps muscle of patients with DMD. STARS, SRF and MRTFA mRNA levels were also decreased in DMD muscle, while Stars mRNA levels were decreased in mdx tibialis anterior (TA) muscle and Srf and Mrtfa mRNAs were decreased in dko TA muscle. Overexpressing the human STARS (hSTARS) protein in mdx TA muscle increased maximal isometric specific force by 13%. This was not associated with changes in muscle mass, fibre cross-sectional area (CSA), fibre type, centralized nuclei or collagen deposition. Proteomics screening identified 31 upregulated and 22 downregulated proteins or individual peptides that were significantly regulated by hSTARS overexpression. Pathway enrichment analysis indicated that hSTARS overexpression regulated the keratin, NRF2 and oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) pathways. These pathways are impaired in dystrophic muscle and regulate cytoskeleton organization, oxidative stress and mitochondrial energy production; processes that are vital for muscle function.  We conclude that increasing the STARS protein in dystrophic muscle improves muscle force production, potentially via its regulation of multiple pathways that positively influence cytoskeletal structure, oxidative stress and energy production.

### Sample Protocol
An aliquot of the protein lysates were lysed in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 1% sodium deoxycholate (DOC) and pulsed 5 times a sonicator. The samples were heated at 99C for 5 min and quantified via BCA assay. Approximately 50 g of protein was reduced in 10 mM dithioreitol (DTT) for 30 mins at 55oC, alkylated in the dark with 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1 hr at room temperature, and digested in trypsin (1 µg) at 37C for 16 hr. The tryptic peptides were purified using Pierce Detergent Removal Spin Columns (Thermo Fisher) and dried. The tryptic peptides were resuspended in 25 L of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid (loading buffer) for analysis by LC-MS/MS and Sequential windowed Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) as described previously

### Data Protocol
Using an in-house Australian Proteome Analysis Facility (APAF) statistical analysis program as described , the extracted sequential window acquisition of all theoretical fragment ion spectra mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS) peak areas were compared between groups. These peak areas were normalised to the total peak area of the respective sample and subjected to two samples T-Test to compare relative protein peak areas between sample groups. The protein T-tests with a p<0.05 and a fold change ±1.5 were highlighted as differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mdx mouse, Keratin, Adeno-associated virus, Nrf2, Stars, Oxphos, Muscular dystrophy, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109 Australia
Macquarie University

### Submitter
Albert Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Albert Lee
Centre for MND Research, Department of Biomedical Sciences, Macquarie University, North Ryde, NSW, 2109 Australia


