### Accession
PXD043613

### Title
Oxidative stress induces lysosomal membrane permeabilization and ceramide accumulation in retinal pigment epithelial cells

### Description
Oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration(AMD), the leading cause of blindness in the elderly, with retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) cells playing a key role. To better understand the cytotoxic mechanisms underlying oxidative stress, we used cell culture and mouse models of iron overload, as iron can catalyze reactive oxygen species formation in the RPE. Iron-loading of cultured iPS-RPE cells increased lysosomal abundance, impaired proteolysis, and reduced the activity of a subset of lysosomal enzymes,including lysosomal acid lipase and acid sphingomyelinase. In a murine model of systemiciron overload, RPE cells accumulated lipid peroxidation adducts and lysosomes, developed progressive hypertrophy, and underwent cell death. Proteomic and lipidomic analyses revealed accumulation of lysosomal proteins, ceramide biosynthetic enzymes, and ceramides. The proteolytic enzyme cathepsin D had impaired maturation. A large proportion oflysosomes were galectin-3 positive, suggesting cytotoxic lysosomal membrane permeabilization (LMP). Collectively, these results demonstrate that iron overload induces lysosomal accumulation and impairs lysosomal function, likely due to iron-induced lipid peroxides that can inhibit lysosomal enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated RPE cell pellets collected from five 12-month-old LS-HepcKO and six age-matched control (AlbCre-, Hepcf/f) mice were lysed, solubilized, and digested with the iST kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) per manufacturers protocol. Briefly, the resulting pellet was solubilized, reduced, and alkylated by the addition of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer containing tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-chloroacetamide, then heated to 95 °C for 10 minutes. Proteins were enzymatically hydrolyzed for 1.5 hours at 37 °C by addition of Lys-C and trypsin proteases. The resulting peptides were de-salted, dried by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA containing iRT (indexed retention time) peptides (Biognosys Schlieren, Switzerland). Samples were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and an EasySpray source. Data were collected using data independent acquisition (DIA). Tryptic digests were spiked with iRT standards and separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm idX 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column at 50 °C. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 210 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 125-minute gradient from 1 to 5% B in 15 min, 5-45% B in 140 min. The raw files for Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) were collected using the following settings: one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution and a scan range of 300-1650 m/z with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum inject time of 60 ms. This was followed by 22 (DIA) isolation windows with varying sizes at 30,000 resolution, an AGC target of 3e6, injection times set to auto, loop count and msx count of 1. The default charge state was 4, the first mass was fixed at 200 m/z, and the normalized collision energy (NCE) for each window was stepped at 25.5, 27, and 30.

### Data Protocol
The raw files for DIA analysis were processed with Spectronaut version 16 in DirectDIA mode using Mus muculus reference proteome from UniProt (25,125 reviewed canonical and isoform proteins). The default settings in Spectronaut were used for peptide and protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Oxidative stress has been implicated in the pathogenesis of age-related macular degeneration, the leading cause of blindness in older adults, with retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells playing a key role. To better understand the cytotoxic mechanisms underlying oxidative stress, we used cell culture and mouse models of iron overload, as iron can catalyze reactive oxygen species formation in the RPE. Iron-loading of cultured induced pluripotent stem cell-derived RPE cells increased lysosomal abundance, impaired proteolysis and reduced the activity of a subset of lysosomal enzymes, including lysosomal acid lipase (LIPA) and acid sphingomyelinase (SMPD1). In a liver-specific Hepc (Hamp) knockout murine model of systemic iron overload, RPE cells accumulated lipid peroxidation adducts and lysosomes, developed progressive hypertrophy and underwent cell death. Proteomic and lipidomic analyses revealed accumulation of lysosomal proteins, ceramide biosynthetic enzymes and ceramides. The proteolytic enzyme cathepsin D (CTSD) had impaired maturation. A large proportion of lysosomes were galectin-3 (Lgals3) positive, suggesting cytotoxic lysosomal membrane permeabilization. Collectively, these results demonstrate that iron overload induces lysosomal accumulation and impairs lysosomal function, likely due to iron-induced lipid peroxides that can inhibit lysosomal enzymes.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Age-related macular degeneration, Lysosome, Aging, Retina

### Affiliations
Adele Niessen Professor of Ophthalmology Vice Chair for Research FM Kirby Center for Molecular Ophthalmology Scheie Eye Institute University of Pennsylvania
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Joshua Dunaief, PhD, MD
Adele Niessen Professor of Ophthalmology Vice Chair for Research FM Kirby Center for Molecular Ophthalmology Scheie Eye Institute University of Pennsylvania


