### Accession
PXD022465

### Title
Characterization of epiploic adipose tissue

### Description
In this study, different adipose tissue samples (visceral (omental), subcutaneous, epiploic) from patients with different insulin status were collected. For the proteome analyses a sub-cohort consisting of nine insulin sensitive subjects, matched to nine insulin resistant subjects by sex, age and BMI.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from adipose tissue, precipitated using four volumes of ice-cold acetone. Protein separation was performed by 1-D SDS-PAGE (Biostep, Burkhardtsdorf, Germany). In-gel proteolytic cleavage (5 gel bands per samples), was conducted using trypsin. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nano-UPLC system (Ultimate 3000, Dionex, USA) coupled online to the mass spectrometer (QExactive HF, Thermo Scientific, USA) via a chip-based electrospray ionization source (Nanomate, Advion, USA).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were processed using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10. The database search was performed against the UniprotKB/Swissprot protein database of Homo sapiens (06 March 2019, only reviewed entries). False discovery rates for peptides and proteins were set to 1 %, and a maximum of two tryptic missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, and additionally, oxidation (Met) and acetylation (protein N-termini) were used as variable modifications. Proteins with at least two identified peptides were kept and protein quantification was based on the intensities of the top three identified peptides. Obtained data were Log2-transformed and median-normalized before calculation of p-values, which were adjusted according to Benjamini-Hochberg. These steps were conducted with R-3.6.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Obesity, Adipose tissue, Epiploic adipose tissue, Type-2-diabetes, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Phd Student
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Laura Krieg

### Lab Head
Dr Kristin Schubert
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ Leipzig, Germany


