### Accession
PXD032148

### Title
Sarcoptes scabiei somatic proteomes

### Description
Presently, there is a dearth of proteomic data for parasitic mites and their relationship with the host animals. Here, using a high throughput LC-MS/MS-based approach, we undertook the first comprehensive, large-scale proteomic investigation of egg and adult female stages of the scabies mite, Sarcoptes scabiei – one of the most important parasitic mites of humans and other animals worldwide. In total, 1,761 S. scabiei proteins were identified and quantified with high confidence. Bioinformatic analyses revealed differentially expressed proteins to be involved predominantly in biological pathways or processes including genetic information processing, energy (oxidative phosphorylation), nucleotide, amino acid, carbohydrate and/or lipid metabolism, and some adaptive processes. These proteomic data set will enable future molecular, biochemical and physiological investigations of early developmental stages of S. scabiei and the discovery of novel interventions targeting the egg stage, given its non-susceptibility to current acaricidal treatments.

### Sample Protocol
Sarcoptes scabiei was produced on pigs (3 months of age), isolated and stored using well-established protocols.      Proteins were extracted from each of the five replicates for each developmental stage (i.e. Ee, El and Af). In brief, 500 L of lysis buffer (8 M urea in 100 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) was added to individual samples (n = 15), subjected to three freeze (-196 °C) – thaw (37 °C) cycles [24] and centrifuged at 10000 ×g for 30 sec, ultrasonicated (20 kHz) using a BioRuptor (10 cycles: 30 sec on and 30 sec off) in tubes on ice. In-solution digestion was carried out using an established protocol [25]. In brief, samples containing proteins (50 μg) from either the Ee, El or Af stage were reduced with 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 55 °C for 45 min, alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at 22 °C for 30 min, and double-digested with Lys-C/trypsin mix (Promega, USA) at 37 °C for 16 h (4 h for Lys-C and 12 h for trypsin digestion). The tryptic samples were acidified with 1.0% (v/v) formic acid, purified using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters, USA). Then, samples were freeze-dried prior to re-suspension in aqueous 2% w/v acetonitrile and 0.05% w/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides were analysed using the Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dinoex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the enrichment-column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 2% v/v CH3CN containing 0.05% v/v TFA for 6 min, applied before the enrichment column was switched in-line with the analytical column. Solvent A was (v/v) 0.1% formic acid, 95% H2O, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide and Solvent B was (v/v) 0.1% formic acid, 95% acetonitrile, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide. The gradient was at 300 nl/min from (i) 0-6 min at 3% B; (ii) 6-95 min, 3-20% B; (iii) 95-105 min, 20-40% B; (iv) 105-110 min, 40-80% B; (v) 110-115 min, 80-80% B; (vi) 115-117 min 85-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 min before injecting the next sample. The Exploris 480 Orbitrap mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode, whereby full MS1 spectra were acquired in a positive mode (spray voltage of 1.9 kV, source temperature of 275 °C), 120000 resolution, AGC target of 3e6 and maximum IT time of 25 ms. The “top 3 second” acquisition method was used and peptide ions with charge states of 2-6 and intensity thresholds of ≥ 5e3 were isolated for MS/MS. The isolation window was set at 1.2 m/z, and precursors were fragmented using higher energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 30, a resolution of 15000, an AGC target of 7.5e5 and an automated IT time selected. Dynamic exclusion was set at 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
The UniProt repository was used for protein annotation (cellular compartment, subcellular location, transmembrane region and/or molecular function). Molecular functions of proteins were assigned according to Gene Ontology (GO) using the program InterProScan [28]. Venn diagrams were drawn using the VennDiagram package in R. Principal component analysis (PCA) and hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) were conducted using Perseus software (v.1.6.1.1) employing default settings [29]. Sequence homology searches were conducted using BLASTP (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins). Volcano plot analysis was employed to assess differential protein expression using Perseus software (v.1.6.1.1), with the false discovery rate (FDR) and fold change (FC) set at ≤ 0.01 and > 2, respectively. Biological functions were assigned to differentially expressed proteins using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [30]. KEGG pathway annotation was conducted employing KEGG BLASTP hits (E-value: < 10-5) and corresponding KEGG Orthology (KO) terms [31]. KO terms were then assigned to KEGG pathways and KEGG BRITE orthologous protein families by mapping these terms to the KEGG Orthology Based Annotation System (KOBAS) database [32]. Enriched KEGG pathways were identified using a cut-off of P < 0.01 (Fisher’s exact test). KEGG functional enrichments of differentially expressed proteins were integrated and displayed using the program FuncTree [33].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteomes; sarcoptes scabiei; parasitic mite; egg and adult stages; scabies; human

### Affiliations
Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia
The University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Tao Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Robin Beat Gasser
Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia


