### Accession
PXD033828

### Title
The role of FKBP51 in the activation of Akt oncogenic pathway

### Description
FKBP51 is an immunophilin with a relevant role in sustaining cancer cell growth and aggressiveness, particularly in melanoma. Thanks to its scaffold and isomerase activities, mediated by its TPR and FK1 domains, respectively, FKBP51 participates in several signaling pathways. Akt is a serine-threonine kinase that is constitutively active in many tumors with a role in cancer growth and resistance. FKBP51 forms a complex with Akt and PH-domain leucine-rich repeat protein phosphatase (PHLPP), which is reported to deactivate Akt. The effect of FKBP51 on Akt activation is far from being fully elucidated and opposite data emerge from literature. We recently identified a spliced FKBP51 isoform. In this paper, we interrogated the two FKBP51 isoforms in the regulation of Akt activation and the underlying mechanisms. Our finding shows that the pAkt levels were upregulated by the canonical but not the spliced FKBP51. We show that the TPR domain mediates Akt-K63-ubiquitination, an essential aspect of Akt activation. The spliced FKBP51s, lacking such domain, could not link K63-Ub residues to Akt. Unexpectedly, PHLPP silencing did not foster phosphorylation of Akt, and its overexpression even induced phosphorylation of Akt. Our finding shows that PHLPP stabilizes levels of the E3-ubiquitin ligase TRAF6, a known FKBP51 interactor. We observed an increased K63-ubiquitination of Akt upon PHLPP overexpression. A mass spectrometry-based proteome profile of melanoma cells highlighted a relevant role for such phosphatase in improving oncogenic hallmarks, first, cell proliferation. In conclusion, we show that canonical FKBP51 promotes Akt activation by serving as a scaffold to build the macro complex deputed to Akt ubiquitination and phosphorylation. The short FKBP51 isoform, even if it retains the ability to bind to Akt, cannot support Akt phosphorylation, being unable to engage K63-ubiquitin.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometric analysis, 15x106 A375 cells were seeded in 15cm-dishes and after 24 h were transfected to obtain the ectopic expression of FKBP51 along with, or without, the over-representation of PHLPP. As control cells we used A375 cells transfected with an empty vector (EV). Cells were harvested after 36h and then immunoprecipitated with 600 μL PierceTM Anti-DYKDDDDK Magnetic Agarose (Invitrogen Waltham, MA, USA), while the remaining 10% of whole lysates were used as input fractions. Pre-cleaning of the resin was performed in accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendations. Hence, samples were probed with resin and incubated on a shaker at 37°C for 20 minutes. After that, samples were washed three times with PBS and then eluted with 100 μL of LB 4X. Eluted samples were then diluted with LB 4X and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Distinct immunopurified protein samples were analyzed by 8% T SDS-PAGE. After staining with colloidal Coomassie blue, whole gel lanes were cut into 15 slices, minced and washed with water. Corresponding proteins were separately in-gel reduced, S-alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin, as previously reported (Parisi et al., 2021). Individual protein digests were then analyzed with a nanoLC-ESI-Q-Orbitrap-MS/MS platform consisting of an UltiMate 3000 HPLC RSLC nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) coupled to a Q-ExactivePlus mass spectrometer through a Nanoflex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 column (150 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and eluted with a gradient of solvent B (19.92/80/0.08 v/v/v water/acetonitrile/formic acid) in solvent A (99.9/0.1 v/v water/formic acid), at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient of solvent B started at 3%, increased to 40% over 40 min, raised to 80% over 5 min, remained at 80% for 4 min, and finally returned to 3% in 1 min, with a column equilibrating step of 30 min before the subsequent chromatographic run. The mass spectrometer operated in data-dependent mode using a full scan (m/z range 375-1,500, a nominal resolution of 70,000, an automatic gain control target of 3,000,000, and a maximum ion target of 50 ms), followed by MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a scan m/z range 200-2000, using a normalized collision energy of 32%, an automatic gain control target of 100,000, a maximum ion target of 100 ms, and a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion value of 30 s was also used. Duplicate analysis of each sample was performed to increase the number of identified peptides/protein coverage.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data files per lane were merged for protein identification into Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4 software (Thermo Scientific), enabling the database search by Mascot algorithm v. 2.6.1 (Matrix Science, UK) with the following parameters: UniProtKB human protein database (214889 sequences, 02/2020) including the most common protein contaminants; carbamidomethylation of Cys as fixed modification; oxidation of Met, deamidation of Asn and Gln, and pyroglutamate formation of Gln as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to ± 10 ppm and ± 0.05 Da, respectively. Proteolytic enzyme and maximum number of missed cleavages were set to trypsin and 2, respectively. Protein candidates assigned on the basis of at least two sequenced peptides and Mascot score ≥30 were considered confidently identified. Definitive peptide assignment was always associated with manual spectra visualization and verification. Results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate. A comparison with results from the corresponding control allowed to identify contaminant proteins that, nonetheless their abundance, were removed from the list of putative FKBP51-interacting partners, yielding the inventory reported in Table 1. Functional enrichment analysis was performed by using FunRich 3.1.3 (http://www.funrich.org). STRING (https://string-db.org) was used to visualize and integrate complex networks of proteomics or transcriptomics data.

### Publication Abstract
FKBP51 plays a relevant role in sustaining cancer cells, particularly melanoma. This cochaperone participates in several signaling pathways. FKBP51 forms a complex with Akt and PHLPP, which is reported to dephosphorylate Akt. Given the recent discovery of a spliced FKBP51 isoform, in this paper, we interrogate the canonical and spliced isoforms in regulation of Akt activation. We show that the TPR domain of FKBP51 mediates Akt ubiquitination at K63, which is an essential step for Akt activation. The spliced FKBP51, lacking such domain, cannot link K63-Ub residues to Akt. Unexpectedly, PHLPP silencing does not foster phosphorylation of Akt, and its overexpression even induces phosphorylation of Akt. PHLPP stabilizes levels of E3-ubiquitin ligase TRAF6 and supports K63-ubiquitination of Akt. The interactome profile of FKBP51 from melanoma cells highlights a relevant role for PHLPP in improving oncogenic hallmarks, particularly, cell proliferation.

### Keywords
Interactome, Lc-ms-ms, Fkbp51

### Affiliations
ISPAAM CNR
Proteomics, Metabolomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Piazzale Enrico Fermi 1, 80055 Portici (NA), Italy

### Submitter
CHIARA D'AMBROSIO

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Scaloni
Proteomics, Metabolomics & Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Institute for the Animal Production System in the Mediterranean Environment (ISPAAM), National Research Council, Piazzale Enrico Fermi 1, 80055 Portici (NA), Italy


