### Accession
PXD039576

### Title
Benchmarking of 5.5 cm, 50 cm and 110 cm micropillar array columns as compared to packed bed columns

### Description
A comprehensive proteome map is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Although great improvements in sample preparation, instrumentation and data analysis already yield-ed impressive results, current studies suffer from a limited proteomic depth and dynamic range there-fore lacking low abundant or highly hydrophobic proteins. Here, we combine and benchmark advanced micro pillar array columns (µPAC) operated at nanoflow with Wide Window Acquisition (WWA) and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine for data analysis to maximize chromatographic separation power, sensitivity and proteome coverage.  Our data shows that µPAC columns clearly outperform classical packed bed columns boosting peptide IDs by up to 50% and protein IDs by up to 24%. Using the above-mentioned analysis platform, more than 10,000 proteins could be identified from a single 2 h gradient shotgun analysis for a triple proteome mix of human, yeast and E. coli digests. At high sample loads of 400 ng all three uPAC types yielded comparable number of protein identifications, whereas the 50cm neo column performed best when lower inputs of less than 200 ng were injected. Due to its unique architecture, the 5.5 cm brick column facilitates a highly meandering flow along the brick-shaped micropillars leading to an effective flow path length similar to the 50 cm neo column, while at the same time allowing high flow rates up to 2.5 µL/min. This enables to reduce overhead time by applying high flow rates during sample loading and column equilibration improving sample throughput to ~100 samples per day, while maintaining high protein ID numbers. Particularly for the single cell field, for which throughput is currently one of the most limiting factors, this column could present a valuable asset.

### Sample Protocol
QC mix for initial benchmarking with packed bed columns LC-MS/MS Peptide Reference Mix (V7491, Promega) spiked into human K562 cell digest (V6951, Promega). Triple proteome mix HYE HeLa (H) (Thermo Scientific, Pierce™ HeLa Protein Digest Standard, 88328), yeast (Y) (Promega, MS Compatible Yeast Protein Extract, Digest, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, 100ug, V7461) and E. coli digests (E) (Waters, MassPREP E. coli Digest Standard, 186003196) were combined at a ratio of H:Y:E = 8:1:1, in 0.1% TFA. Samples were prepared in glass autosampler vials (Fisherbrand™ 9mm Short Thread TPX Vial with integrated glass micro-inserts, Cat. No. 11515924).  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS Samples were either analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano using a trap-and-elute regime (comparison of packed bed with µPAC columns) or using a Vanquish Neo UHPLC operated in direct injection mode (comparison of different µPAC columns). In both cases, the LCs were coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro interface (ThermoFisher Scientific). Analyte separation was performed using either the new generation prototype 110cm, 50 cm pillar array column or a 5.5 cm brick-shaped micropillar column prototype (Thermo Fisher). For benchmarking, classical packed bed columns were used: nanoEase M/Z Peptide CSH C18 Column (130Å, 1.7 μm, 75 μm X 250 mm, Waters, Germany) or PepMap C18 (500 mm × 75 μm ID, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). All columns were operated at 50°C and connected to an EASY-Spray™ bullet emitter (10 µm ID, ES993; Thermo Fisher Scientific) An electrospray voltage of 2.4 kV was applied at the integrated liquid junction of EASY-Spray emitter. To avoid electric current from affecting the upstream separation column, a stainless steel 50 µm internal bore reducing union (VICI; C360RU.5S62) was electrically connected to the grounding pin at the pump module. Peptides were separated using gradients ranging from 5 min to 120 min ramping time as detailed in Supplementary File 1. For comparison of the three micropillar array columns with one another, MS acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode, using a full scan with m/z range 380-1200, orbitrap resolution of 60.000, target value 100 %, and maximum injection time set to auto. 1 to 4 FAIMS compensation voltages were combined in a single run as detailed in Supplementary File 2 using a total cycle time of 3 sec. The precursor intensity threshold was set to 1e4. Dynamic exclusion duration was based on the length of the LC gradient and is also detailed in Supplementary File 2. Fragmentation by HCD was done using a normalized collision energy of 30 % and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000. Precursors isolation width was 4 Th for WWA. For benchmarking packed columns against micropillar columns, MS acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode, using a full scan with m/z range 380-1200, orbitrap resolution of 60.000, target value 100 %, and maximum injection time set to auto. -45V, -55V and -70V were used as FAIMS compensation voltages combined in a single run. The precursor intensity threshold was set to 1e4. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s +-10ppm after the first isolation and fragmentation. Fragmentation by HCD was done using a normalized collision energy of 30 % and MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 with a precursor isolation width of 1 Th.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra from raw data were imported to Proteome Discoverer (PD) (version 3.0.0.757, Thermo Scientific). Database search was performed using CHIMERYS as indicated against a combined database of human (uniprot reference, version 2022-03-04, 20,509 entries), yeast (uniprot reference, version 2015-01-13, 4,877 entries) and E. coli (uniprot reference, version 2021-11-19, 4,350 entries) as well as common contaminants (PD_Contaminants_IGGs_v17_tagsremoved, 344 entries). For QC mix samples (exclusively containing human digest), yeast and E. coli databases were removed for searches. Trypsin was specified as proteolytic enzyme, cleaving after lysine (K) and arginine (R) except when followed by proline (P) and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation of methionine (M) was set as variable modification. Identified spectra were rescored using Percolator and results were filtered for 1% FDR on peptide and protein level. Abundance of identified peptides was determined by label-free quantification (LFQ) using IMP-apQuant without match between runs (MBR).

### Publication Abstract
Comprehensive proteomic analysis is essential to elucidate molecular pathways and protein functions. Despite tremendous progress in proteomics, current studies still suffer from limited proteomic coverage and dynamic range. Here, we utilize micropillar array columns (&#xb5;PACs) together with wide-window acquisition and the AI-based CHIMERYS search engine to achieve excellent proteomic comprehensiveness for bulk proteomics, affinity purification mass spectrometry and single cell proteomics. Our data show that &#xb5;PACs identify &#x2264;50% more peptides and &#x2264;24% more proteins, while offering improved throughput, which is critical for large (clinical) proteomics studies. Combining wide precursor isolation widths of m/z 4-12 with the CHIMERYS search engine identified +51-74% and +59-150% more proteins and peptides, respectively, for single cell, co-immunoprecipitation, and multi-species samples over a conventional workflow at well-controlled false discovery rates. The workflow further offers excellent precision, with CVs &lt;7% for low input bulk samples, and accuracy, with deviations &lt;10% from expected fold changes for regular abundance two-proteome mixes. Compared to a conventional workflow, our entire optimized platform discovered 92% more potential interactors in a protein-protein interaction study on the chromatin remodeler Smarca5/Snf2h. These include previously described Smarca5 binding partners and undescribed ones including Arid1a, another chromatin remodeler with key roles in neurodevelopmental and malignant disorders.

### Keywords
Hela, Yeast, Orbitrap exploris 480, Micropillar array chromatography, Vanquish neo, Trap-and-elute, E. coli, Direct injection

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC)

### Submitter
Rupert Mayer

### Lab Head
Dr Karl Mechtler
Institute of Molecular Pathology (IMP), Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


