### Accession
PXD018071

### Title
Biotinylated surfome profiling of A. fumigatus during early development

### Description
Aspergillus fumigatus is one of the most common airborne fungi that cause invasive mycoses in immunocompromised patients and also allergic diseases in immunocompetent individuals. In both cases, the surface proteins mediate the first contact with the human immune system to evade immune responses or to induce hypersensitivity. The peptides exposed on the surface may be reasonable immunotherapy targets or may be used for diagnostic purposes. Several methods have been established to study the surface proteome (surfome) of A. fumigatus, like trypsin shaving, glucanase treatment, or formic acid extraction. Biotinylation coupled with LC-MS/MS identification of peptides is a particularly efficient method to identify the surface exposed regions of proteins that could mediate interaction with the host. After biotinylation of surface proteins during the germination process, we detected 314 surface proteins, including several well-known surface proteins (like RodA, CcpA, and DppV), allergens, heat shock proteins (Hsp), as well as some previously uncharacterized surface proteins. Using immunofluorescence microscopy, we confirmed the surface localization of several chaperone proteins. Collectively, our study generated a comprehensive data set of the A. fumigatus surfome. In addition, for many proteins it uncovers the regions that are exposed on the surface of spores or hyphae. These surface exposed regions could directly interact with host cells and may represent antigenic epitopes that induce protective immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
CEA10 strain was inoculated on Aspergillus minimal medium agar plates with 1% (w/v) glucose for 7 days at 37°C. Conidia were harvested in sterile H2O and separated from hyphae and conidiophores by filtering (30 µm). For germination of swollen conidia, 1e10 freshly collected conidia were incubated shaking in 50 mL RPMI 1640 for 5 hours (h) at 37°C. 1e9 conidia were germinated at the same condition for 8 h to get germlings, and 1e9 conidia in 100 mL RPMI 1640 for 14 h to get hyphae. Conidia, germlings, and hyphae were washed three times with PBS (pH 7.4) and then incubated in 5 mL of PBS containing 5 mg EZ-Link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Thermo Fisher, 21335) for 1 h at 4°C. The reaction was terminated by adding two volumes of 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 and further incubated for 30 min. After adding 500 µL of 0.5 mm diameter glass beads, conidia, germlings, and hyphae were disrupted using a Fastprep apparatus with settings of 6.5 m/s, 3 times for 30 s. The samples were then centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The supernatants were collected as the PBS extracts. The pellets were washed twice with 1 M NaCl and another three times with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, followed by extraction with the SDS buffer (2% SDS (w/v), 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 100 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl and 40 mM DTT) for 10 min at 100 °C. For purification of the biotinylated proteins, Roti-Magbeads Streptavidin (Carl Roth) was equilibrated by two washes in PBS, then incubated with the protein samples for 2 h in a rotating mixer at 4°C. The beads were washed five times with urea buffer. The binding proteins were eluted by incubating the beads with elution buffer (30 mM d-biotin, 8 M urea, 2% SDS and 100 mM Tris, pH 8) for 30 min at 50°C. The samples were reduced by adding 2 µL of 500 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine in 100 mM TEAB) for 1 h at 55°C. 2 µL 625 mM iodoacetamide was added to each sample and incubated for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. Protein was then precipitated using the methanol-chloroform-water method. Protein samples were resolubilized in 100 µL of 100 mM TEAB and sonicated for 10 min. Protein content was measured with a Merck Millipore Direct Detect spectrometer. The samples were treated with trypsin/Lys-C protease mix (Promega) at a protease:protein ratio of 1:25 for 16 h at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with 10 µL of 10% (v/v) formic acid and evaporated using a vacuum evaporator. Peptides were resolubilized in 25 µL 0.05% TFA and 2% ACN in water and sonicated for 15 min in a water bath before transfer to a 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filter. After 15 min of centrifugation at 14,000 × g (4°C), the samples were transferred to HPLC vials and stored at -20°C. LC-MS/MS analysis of tryptic peptides was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano instrument coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Tryptic peptides were trapped for 4 min on an Acclaim Pep Map 100 column (2 cm × 75 µm, 3 µm) at a flow-rate of 5 µL/min. The peptides were then separated on an Acclaim Pep Map column (50 cm × 75 µm, 2 µm) using a binary gradient (A: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O; B: 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in 90:10 (v/v) ACN/H2O): 0 min at 4% B, 6 min at 8% B, 30 min at 12% B, 75 min at 30% B, 85 min at 50% B, 90-95 min at 96% B, 95.1-120 min at 4 % B. Positively charged ions were generated by a Nanospray Flex Ion Source  using a stainless steel emitter with 2.2 kV spray voltage. Ions were measured in data-dependent MS2 (Top15) mode: Precursor ions (z=2–5) were scanned at m/z 300–1500 (resolution, R: 120,000 FWHM; automatic gain control, AGC target: 3e6; maximum injection time ITmax: 120 ms). Fragment ions generated in the HCD cell at 30% normalized collision energy using N2 were scanned (R: 15,000 FWHM; AGC target: 2e5; max. IT: 90 ms) using a dynamic exclusion of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were searched against the Aspergillus Genome database (AspGD) of Aspergillus fumigatus Af293 (http://www.aspergillusgenome.org/download/sequence/A_fumigatus_Af293/current/; 2019/02/03 YYYY/MM/DD) using Proteome Discoverer (PD) 2.2 and the algorithms of Mascot 2.4.1, Sequest HT, and MS Amanda 2.0. Two missed cleavages were allowed for tryptic peptides. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Dynamic modifications were set as oxidation (+15.995 Da) of Met and NHS-LC-Biotin (+339.162 Da) modification of Lys and the protein N-terminus. The static modification was set to carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of Cys. One unique rank 1 peptide with a strict target false discovery (FDR) rate of < 1% on both peptide and protein level (compared against a reverse decoy database) were required for positive protein hits. Protein abundance quantification was performed by the Minora algorithm of PD2.2 (area under the curve approach).

### Publication Abstract
<i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is one of the most common airborne molds capable of causing mycoses and allergies in humans. During infection, fungal surface proteins mediate the first contact with the human immune system to evade immune responses or to induce hypersensitivity. Several methods have been established for surface proteomics (surfomics). Biotinylation coupled with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identification of peptides is a particularly efficient method to identify the surface-exposed regions of proteins that potentially mediate interaction with the host. After biotinylation of surface proteins during spore germination, we detected 231 different biotinylated surface proteins (including several well-known proteins such as RodA, CcpA, and DppV; allergens; and heat shock proteins [HSPs]), as well as some previously undescribed surface proteins. The dynamic change of the surface proteome was illustrated by detection of a relatively high number of proteins exclusively at one developmental stage. Using immunofluorescence microscopy, we confirmed the surface localization of several HSPs of the HSP70 family, which may have moonlighting functions. Collectively, by comparing our data with data representative of previously published <i>A. fumigatus</i> surface proteomes, our study generated a comprehensive data set corresponding to the <i>A. fumigatus</i> surfome and uncovered the surface-exposed regions of many proteins on the surface of conidia or hyphae. These surface-exposed regions are candidates for direct interaction with host cells and may represent antigenic epitopes that either induce protective immune responses or mediate immune evasion. Thus, our data sets provided and compiled here represent reasonable immunotherapy and diagnostic targets for future investigations.<b>IMPORTANCE</b><i>Aspergillus fumigatus</i> is the most important airborne human-pathogenic mold, capable of causing both life-threatening invasive pulmonary aspergillosis in immunocompromised patients and allergy-inducing infections in individuals with atopic allergy. Despite its obvious medical relevance, timely diagnosis and efficient antifungal treatment of <i>A. fumigatus</i> infection remain major challenges. Proteins on the surface of conidia (asexually produced spores) and mycelium directly mediate host-pathogen interaction and also may serve as targets for diagnosis and immunotherapy. However, the similarity of protein sequences between <i>A. fumigatus</i> and other organisms, sometimes even including the human host, makes selection of targets for immunological-based studies difficult. Here, using surface protein biotinylation coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis, we identified hundreds of <i>A. fumigatus</i> surface proteins with exposed regions, further defining putative targets for possible diagnostic and immunotherapeutic design.

### Keywords
Allergens, Surfome, Lc-ms/ms, Aspergillus fumigatus, Surface biotinylation

### Affiliations
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany
Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute

### Submitter
Thomas Krüger

### Lab Head
Dr Axel A. Brakhage
Molecular and Applied Microbiology, Leibniz Institute for Natural Product Research and Infection Biology - Hans Knöll Institute, Adolf-Reichwein-Str. 23, 07745, Jena, Germany


