### Accession
PXD015483

### Title
A conserved signaling complex controls warm temperature-mediated plant growth

### Description
The model plant Arabidopsis thaliana responds to mild high temperature by increased elongation growth of organs to enhance cooling capacity, in a process called thermomorphogenesis. Our understanding of the genetic regulation of thermomorphogenesis has increased in recent years. However, hardly anything is known about molecular mechanisms outside A. thaliana and cellular signaling pathways have been underexplored. Therefore, we mapped changes in protein phosphorylation in A. thaliana and crops exposed to warm temperature. Based on these results, we identified and characterized a novel, functionally conserved signaling complex of MITOGEN-ACTIVATED PROTEIN KINASE KINASE KINASE KINASEs (MAP4KS) in warm temperature-mediated growth regulation in plants. This contributes to our understanding of warm temperature signaling, and can help guarantee food security under a changing climate

### Sample Protocol
GFP co-immunoprecipitation: Col-0, pTOT3::GFP:TOT3 seedlings and 35S::GFP seedlings were grown in similar conditions as used for the time-dependent phosphoproteome profiling. 10 day-old light-grown seedlings were collected at 0 min at 21 °C and at 60 min after being transferred to 28 °C. For each condition and genotype, three biological replicates were obtained. 1 g of finely ground plant materials was mixed thoroughly with 2.2 ml extraction buffer (50 mM TRIS-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP40) and sonicated. Debris was removed from the samples by centrifugation. 2 mL of sample was diluted 5-fold with extraction buffer without NP40, then mixed with 50 μL pre-equilibrated GFP-Trap®_MA beads (Chromotek) and rotated for 2 h at 4 °C to maximize the protein binding. After that, the solution was removed and beads were washed three times with wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl) and then washed once with 1 mL 50 mM TEAB (pH 8.0) (Thermo Fischer). On-bead digestion was performed on the bound proteins in 50 μL TEAB and 0.5 μg trypsin (Promega) for 2 h at 37 °C. The supernatant was retained. Beads were washed twice with 23 μL 50 mM TEAB and the wash solutions were pooled with the previous supernatant. Disulfide bonds were reduced by adding TCEP and iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher) to a final concentration of 10 mM and 15 mM respectively and incubated at 30 °C. The remained iodoacetamide was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 4 mM. 0.5 µg trypsin was added to the sample and incubated overnight at 37°C to complete the digestion. The digestion was stopped by adjusting the sample to 1% TFA and samples were desalted using C18 Bond Elut tips (Agilent Technologies). Tandem affinity purification: Three pull-downs were performed on NGSrhino-TOT3 expressing transgenic cultures using the cell culture TAP extraction protocol (12) with 1% digitonin added, and a shortened benzonase treatment time of 15 min. To isolate protein complexes, 25 mg total protein extract was incubated 45 min with 50 mL magnetic IgG antibody bead suspension, prepared in-house as described (13). Beads were washed three times with 500 mL TAP extraction buffer and one time with 500 mL TAP extraction buffer without detergent. For on-bead protein digestion, the beads were washed with 500 mL 50 mM NH4HCO3 (pH 8.0). The wash buffer was removed and 50 mL 50 mM NH4OH was added together with 1 mg Trypsin/Lys-C and incubated at 37°C for 4 h in a thermomixer at 800 rpm. Next, the digest was separated from the beads and overnight incubated with 0.5 mg Trypsin/Lys C at 37 °C. Finally, the digest was centrifuged at 20800 rcf in an Eppendorf centrifuge for 5 min, the supernatant was transferred to a new 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, and the peptides were dried in a Speedvac and stored at -20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. The peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) as previously reported (Nelissen et al, 2015, Plant Cell, 27, 1605-1619)

### Data Protocol
GFP co-immunoprecipitation: After MS-based identification of co-immunoprecipitated proteins, proteins were were considered as potential interactors of TOT3 if they were present in pTOT3::GFP:TOT3 samples and not in the other samples; or if the fold-change of the LFQ intensity was 10-fold higher in the pTOT3::GFP:TOT3 samples, compared to Col-0 and 35S::GFP samples, either at 21°C or 28°C.   Tandem affinity purification: After MS-based identification of co-purified proteins, specific proteins were detected by comparison against a list of non-specific proteins (15), built from 213 pull-downs with 42 different bait proteins, similar as previously described (12). True interactors that might have been missed because of their presence in the list of non-specific proteins were retained through a semi-quantitative analysis. In this approach, average normalized spectral abundance factors (NSAF) of the identified Arabidopsis proteins in the TOT3 samples were compared against the corresponding average NSAF deduced from the control pull-down dataset. For stringent filtering of specific proteins, only proteins identified with at least two peptides were retained that were highly (at least 10-fold) and significantly [-log10(p-value(T-test)) ≥10] enriched compared to the control dataset.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Thermomorphogenesis, Arabidopsis, Kinase

### Affiliations
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium;  (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.
VIB

### Submitter
Lam Dai Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Ive De Smet
(1) Department of Plant Biotechnology and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium;  (2) VIB Center for Plant Systems Biology, B-9052 Ghent, Belgium.


