### Accession
PXD030579

### Title
Glycosylated proteins identified for the first time in the alga Euglena gracilis

### Description
Protein glycosylation, and in particular N-linked glycans, is a hall mark of Eukaryotic cells and has been well studied in mammalian cells and parasites. However, little research has been conducted to investigate the conservation and variation of protein glycosylation pathways in other eukaryotic organisms. Euglena gracilis is an industrially important microalga, used in the production of biofuels and nutritional supplements. It is evolutionarily highly divergent from green algae and more related to Kinetoplastid pathogens. It was recently shown that E. gracilis possesses the machinery for producing a range of protein glycosylations and make simple N-glycans, but the modified proteins were not identified. This study identifies the glycosylated proteins, including transporters, extra cellular proteases and those involved in cell surface signalling. Notably, many of the most highly expressed and glycosylated proteins are not related to any known sequences and are therefore likely to be involved in important novel functions in Euglena.

### Sample Protocol
Euglena gracilis Z (CCAP1224/5Z) was grown in 15 ml of EG:JM + glucose (15 g/L) at 30 °C with shaking (50 rpm) and illumination (800 lx) until late log phase (10 days) in triplicate. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (1000 xg) and resuspended in supernatant (1 ml). Extra cellular proteins The supernatant from the cell culture was filtered (0.2 µm) and lyophilised. The material was dissolved in ammonium bicarbonate (2.5 ml, 50 mM) and desalted using a PD 10 column (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech AG) equilibrated and eluted with ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) the resultant material was again lyophilised and dissolved in MQ H2O (0.4 ml).  Glycoprotein preparation The resuspended Euglena cells from the culturing (1 ml) were diluted with 5x Binding/Wash buffer (0.25 ml) containing phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (2 mM) and lysed by sonication (3 x 10 s, 25% amplitude, 30 s off between each pulse) and centrifuged (5 min, 1000 xg). Not all cells were lysed. Total lysate containing the equivalent of 1.1 mg of protein (Easy Bradford BioRad, BSA standards) was then used for glycoprotein purification using both ConA and WGA Glycoprotein Isolation Kits (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Protein quality was assed using silver stained SDS-PAGE (Bolt 4-12% Bis-TRIS plus, Invitrogen) using SeeBlue Plus2 Pre-stained Protein Standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as the standard.  Protein digestion and analysis by mass spectrometry Protein digestion and analysis was performed by The Advanced Proteomics Facility at Oxford University. Protein samples were digested according to the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) procedure.26 Peptide digest was treated with PNGase F and analysed by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC/MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Elite™ Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using CID fragmentation.  Peptides were loaded on a C18 PepMap100 pre-column (300 µm i.d. x 5 mm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 12 μL/min in 100% buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water). Peptides were then transferred to an in-house packed analytical column heated at 45°C (50cm, 75 µm i.d. packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated using a 60 min gradient from 8 to 30% buffer B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min. Survey scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution to a scan range from 350 to 1500 m/z. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS. The 10 most intense precursor ions were submitted to Collision-Induced Dissociation fragmentation using a precursor isolation width set to 1.5 Da and a normalised collision energy of 35. Database search was carried out using MaxQuant (1.6.3.4) against the non-redundant Euglena proteome available at https://jicbio.nbi.ac.uk/euglena/,12 with default parameters and including Deamidation on Asn residues as variable modification for N-glycosylation sites identification.

### Data Protocol
All Total, ConA and WGA samples were normalised with respect to an average of the 165 proteins detected in every sample. The Ext and Total samples were normalised to an average of the 81 proteins detected in both of these samples. Proteins that were differentially detected between the different treatments and the total proteome (P<0.05, Student’s T-test, two tail) were included in further analysis. Using Blast2GO, protein sequences were matched to sequences in the NCBI non-redundant protein sequence database and assigned GO terms based on this.

### Publication Abstract
Protein glycosylation, and in particular N-linked glycans, is a hallmark of eukaryotic cells and has been well-studied in mammalian cells and parasites. However, little research has been conducted to investigate the conservation and variation of protein glycosylation pathways in other eukaryotic organisms. Euglena gracilis is an industrially important microalga, used in the production of biofuels and nutritional supplements. It is evolutionarily highly divergent from green algae and more related to kinetoplastid pathogens. It was recently shown that E. gracilis possesses the machinery for producing a range of protein glycosylations and make simple N-glycans, but the modified proteins were not identified. This study identifies the glycosylated proteins, including transporters, extracellular proteases, and those involved in cell surface signalling. Notably, many of the most highly expressed and glycosylated proteins are not related to any known sequences and are, therefore, likely to be involved in important novel functions in Euglena.

### Keywords
Euglena gracilis, Glycoproteins

### Affiliations
University of Nottingham

### Submitter
Ellis O'Neill

### Lab Head
Dr Ellis C O'Neill
University of Nottingham


