### Accession
PXD015698

### Title
Uniformly 15N-Labeled Recombinant Ricin A-chain as an Internal Retention Time Standard for Increased Confidence in Forensic Identification of Ricin by Untargeted Nanoflow Liquid Chromatog-raphy-Tandem Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Ricin, a toxic protein from the castor plant, is of forensic and biosecurity interest because of its high toxicity and common occurrence in crimes and attempted crimes.  Qualitative methods to detect ricin are therefore needed.  Untargeted liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) proteomics methods are well-suited because of their high speci-ficity. Specificity in LC-MS/MS comes from both the LC and MS components. However, modern untargeted proteomics methods often use nanoflow LC, which has less reproducible retention times than standard-flow LC, making it challenging to use retention time as a point of identification in a forensic assay.    We address this challenge by using retention times rela-tive to a standard, namely uniformly 15N–labeled ricin A-chain produced recombinantly in a bacterial expression system.  This material, added as an internal standard prior to trypsin digestion, produces a stable isotope labeled standard for every ricin tryptic peptide in the sample.    We show that the MS signals for 15N and natural isotopic abundance ricin peptides are distinct, with mass shifts that correspond to the numbers of nitrogen atoms in each peptide or fragment.  We also show that, as expected, labeled and unlabeled peptides coelute, with relative retention time differences of less than 0.2%.

### Sample Protocol
Ricin is toxic and extreme care must be taken to avoid exposure.  We performed all manipulations of active (na-tive) ricin toxin in a biological safety cabinet.  Consult Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laborato-ries (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention) for details in working safely with ricin.  In addition, ricin is listed as a Select Agent and relevant regulations must be observed. Purified ricin was obtained from Vector Labs. 15N ricin A-chain was custom-made for PNNL by ARVYS Proteins Inc. Castor seed samples were prepared as previously described (Merkley et al., 2017, Toxicon, 140, 18-31).  Samples were digested by heating at 100 ºC for 1 h, reduced with dithiothreitol, denatured with 8 M urea (60 min at 37 ºC), alkylated with iodoacetamide (37 ºC, 60 min, in the dark), diluted, and digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin:sample, overnight, 30 ºC).  Samples were desalted by C18 SPE, dried in a SpeedVac, assayed by the BCA assay, and vialed for LC-MS analysis.  For combined samples, 15N ricin was added before the initial heating step. LC separation was done on a Waters NanoAcquity system with a C18 nanocapillary column with a 100 minute gradient in an acetonitrile/water/formic acid solvent system.  Column effluent was introduced to the mass spectrometer via electrospray ionization with an etched silica emitter tip. The mass spectrometer was a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive HF.MS/MS spectra were collected at a resolution of 17,500, in a data-dependent mode.  More method details can be found in (Merkley et al., 2017, Toxicon, 140, 18-31).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were converted to mzML with MSConvert with peak picking enabled.  MS-GF+ was used to search raw files using the castor plant proteome as downloaded from UniProt.  The MS-GF+ options command line call was "C:\Program Files\Java\jre7\bin\java" -Xmx30G -jar C:\MSGFPlus_v20170127\MSGFPlus.jar -s . -d Ri-cin_only_A_B_separated.fasta -t 20ppm -ti 0,1 -ntt 1 –mod Mods_14N.txt -tda 1" where Mods_14N.txt contained fixed carbamidomethylation modification on cysteine res-idues and a variable oxidation modification on methionine residues.  Same parameters were used for 15N searches except for fixed modifications to account for 15N incorporation:  0.99703 Da on all amino acids containing a single nitrogen atom (A, D, C, E, G, I, L, M, F, P, S, T, Y, V), 1.99407 Da on all amino acids with two nitrogen atoms (N, W, K, W), 2.99110 Da on histidine residues (three nitrogen atoms), and 3.98814 Da on arginine residues (four nitrogen atoms).  MS-GF+ identifications were filtered to ±10 ppm precursor mass error and less than 1e-10 SpecEValue.  Since the sample was a single protein digest no FDR analysis was attempted.  MS-GF+ results and .RAW files were loaded into SkyLine for precursor filtering.  All ricin A-chain peptide XICs were examined for correct peak assignments and integration limits, and 14N and 15N peptide retention times were exported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stable isotope labels; nitrogen-15, Ricin; forensics; retention time; standards

### Affiliations
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
Chemical and Biological Signatures Group, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Eric Merkley

### Lab Head
Dr Eric Merkley
Chemical and Biological Signatures Group, Pacific Northwest National Laboratory


