### Accession
PXD029456

### Title
Human HEK293 Proteins that Bind the PTH mRNA

### Description
The mechanisms of chronic kidney disease-associated secondary hyperparathyroidism are partially understood. In this project we aimed to gain new information and propose research hypotheses by MS profiling of the PTH mRNA binding proteins and changes upon Pin1 inhibition (which mimics chronic kidney disease).

### Sample Protocol
To characterize the PTH mRNA 3’-UTR binding proteins and in particular the effect of Pin1 inhibition on protein-RNA binding, we performed RNA pulldowns with extracts from HEK293 cells incubated with forskolin, Sulfopin or vehicle control (DMSO). Proteins were pulled-down using biotinylated in vitro-transcribed PTH mRNA 3’-UTR, immobilized onto streptavidin beads. The transcript-bound proteins were eluted and subjected to tryptic digestion using an S-trap. The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Q Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0, and was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the human proteome database appended with common lab protein contaminants and the following modifications: Fixed modification- cysteine carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and asparagine- or glutamine-deamidation. Data filtration was performed using Perseus v1.6.2.3. Decoy hits, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only were filtered out. The intensity values were log transformed and only proteins that had at least 50% valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. Missing values were imputed, and the two groups were compared. All values (intensities and ratios) were transformed back from their log values.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Parathyroid hormone, Rna binding proteins, Pin1, Chronic kidney disease

### Affiliations
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center Department of Nephrology and Hypertension
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center

### Submitter
Iddo Ben-Dov

### Lab Head
Dr Iddo Zeev Ben-Dov
Hadassah - Hebrew University Medical Center Department of Nephrology and Hypertension


