### Accession
PXD039523

### Title
Deep proteome profiling of white adipose tissue reveals marked conservation and distinct features between different anatomical depots

### Description
The two major mammalian adipose tissue depots are subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT), which is associated with metabolic protection, and abdominal/visceral (VAT), which contributes to metabolic disease. To investigate the molecular underpinnings of these differences, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the proteomes of adipocytes and whole tissue from these different depots across two different diets in male C57Bl/6J mice.

### Sample Protocol
Detailed sample processing protocols provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
etailed sample processing protocols provided in the associated manuscript

### Publication Abstract
White adipose tissue is deposited mainly as subcutaneous adipose tissue (SAT), often associated with metabolic protection, and abdominal/visceral adipose tissue, which contributes to metabolic disease. To investigate the molecular underpinnings of these differences, we conducted comprehensive proteomics profiling of whole tissue and isolated adipocytes from these two depots across two diets from C57Bl/6J mice. The adipocyte proteomes from lean mice were highly conserved between depots, with the major depot-specific differences encoded by just 3% of the proteome. Adipocytes from SAT (SAdi) were enriched in pathways related to mitochondrial complex I and beiging, whereas visceral adipocytes (VAdi) were enriched in&#xa0;structural proteins and positive regulators of mTOR presumably to promote nutrient storage and cellular expansion. This indicates that SAdi are geared toward higher catabolic activity, while VAdi are more suited for lipid storage. By comparing adipocytes from mice fed chow or Western diet (WD), we define a core adaptive proteomics signature consisting of increased extracellular matrix proteins and decreased fatty acid metabolism and mitochondrial Coenzyme Q&#xa0;biosynthesis. Relative to SAdi, VAdi displayed greater changes with WD including a pronounced decrease in mitochondrial proteins concomitant with upregulation of apoptotic signaling and decreased mitophagy, indicating pervasive mitochondrial stress. Furthermore, WD caused a reduction in lipid handling and glucose uptake pathways&#xa0;particularly in VAdi, consistent with adipocyte de-differentiation. By overlaying the proteomics changes with diet in whole adipose tissue and isolated adipocytes, we uncovered concordance between adipocytes and tissue only in the visceral adipose tissue, indicating a unique tissue-specific adaptation to sustained WD in SAT. Finally, an in-depth comparison of isolated adipocytes and 3T3-L1 proteomes revealed a high degree of overlap, supporting the utility of the 3T3-L1 adipocyte model. These deep proteomes provide an invaluable resource highlighting differences between white adipose depots that may fine-tune their unique functions and adaptation to an obesogenic environment.

### Keywords
Visceral fat, Adipose tissue, Mouse, Subcutaneous fat, Adipocytes

### Affiliations
Murdoch Children's Research Institute
The Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia

### Submitter
Sean Humphrey

### Lab Head
Dr David James
The Charles Perkins Centre, University of Sydney, Australia


