### Accession
PXD007756

### Title
The peptide repertoire of HLA-B27 includes ligands with lysine at P2 anchor position

### Description
The HLA-B*27 peptidome has drawn significant attention due to the genetic association between some of the HLA-B*27 alleles and the inflammatory rheumatic disease ankylosing spondylitis (AS). The role of HLA-B*27 in this condition is not known yet. This study aims to expand the known limits of the HLA-B*27 peptidome in order to facilitate selection and testing of new peptides, possibly implicated with the disease. The HLA peptidomes of HeLa and C1R cell lines stably transfected with the AS-associated HLA-B*27:05 allele, the non-associated HLA-B*27:09 allele, or their mutants with Cysteine 67 replaced by Serine (C67S), were analyzed on a very large scale. In addition, the peptidomes of HLA-B*27:05 and HLA-B*27:05-C67S were analyzed from transgenic rats’ spleens. The results indicate that a fraction of HLA-B*27 peptides contain lysine at their second position (P2), in addition to the more commonly found peptides with arginine, or the less common glutamine located at this anchor position. Furthermore, the C67S mutation increases the percentages of peptides with glutamine or lysine at their P2 position, in both HLA-B*27:05 and HLA-B*27:09. Therefore, peptides with P2 lysine should be considered as valid ligands of HLA-B*27 molecules and taken into account while looking for candidate for arithrogenic peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Purification of the HLAs by immunoaffinity and peptide recovery:The frozen spleens were immediately thawed into solubilization buffer and dissociated by passing them through a 100 μm nylon cell strainer (Corning, Corning, NY). Both the spleens and cultured cells were solubilized in solubilization buffer containing, in addition to PBS, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 0.2 mM iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Octyl-β-D glucopyranoside, 1:200 Protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, P8340) and 1 mM PMSF. Solubilization was continued by gentle mixing on ice for 60 minutes. The HLAs from the cultured cells’ pellets and splenic extracts were clarified by centrifugation for 60 min at 4ºC and 48,000g.  For each preparation of soluble HLA molecules, about one liter of growth medium containing the sHLA molecules was clarified by centrifugation for 60 min at 4ºC and 18,000g. HLA molecules were immunoaffinity-purified using either the B1.23.2 mAb covalently linked to Protein A Agarose (Thermo Fisher Scientific) or the ME1 mAb linked to Protein G Agarose (ABT, Madrid, Spain).  The HLA molecules with their bound peptides were eluted from the immunoaffinity columns with 1% TFA. The released peptides were separated from the HLA heavy chain, the β2m, and other co-purified proteins using step elution from reversed-phase MicroTip C18 columns (Harvard Apparatus, Holliston, MA), with 0.1% TFA and 30% acetonitrile to collect the HLA peptides and then with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile to collect the HLA heavy chains and other co-purifying proteins.  LC-MS/MS analysis of the HLA and the tryptic peptides: The recovered HLA heavy chains with their other co-purifying protein fraction were dried and resolved by SDS-PAGE. The proteins were identified after cutting the gel lanes into four gel slices and in-gel proteolysis. The recovered HLA peptides and the tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using capillaries of 0.075 mm ID and about 20 cm long, packed with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 micron beads(Reprosil-C18-Aqua, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Chromatography was performed with the UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano-capillary UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled by electrospray to Q-Exactive-Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer, run with the same parameters. The HLA peptides were eluted with a linear gradient over two hours from 5 to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 0.15 μl/min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent ‘top 10’ method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). The full scan MS spectra were acquired at resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3x106 ions. Ions were accumulated to AGC target value of 105 with maximum injection time of 100 msec. No fragmentation was performed for peptides with unassigned precursor ion charge states or charge states of four and above. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented masses were dynamically excluded from further fragmentation for 20 sec.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identification and bioinformatics data analysis: Peptides were identified and quantified using the MaxQuant software tool version 1.5.0.25 with the Andromeda search engineusing the rat section of the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2014_11, containing 27,311 entries). Peptides were identified in the database search assuming no specific enzyme proteolysis. The peptides precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to eight amino acid residues. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for 0.05 for MHC peptides and 0.01 for the tryptic peptides. The data files of separate sets LC-MS-MS analyses were analyzed independently by the MaxQuant software, in order to reduce misidentifications by the ‘match between runs’ subroutine. Graphical and statistical peptide analyses of the results were performed with Perseus version 1.5.0.31.

### Publication Abstract
The HLA-B*27 peptidome has drawn significant attention due to the genetic association between some of the HLA-B*27 alleles and the inflammatory rheumatic disease ankylosing spondylitis (AS), for which a comprehensive biological explanation is still lacking. This study aims to expand the known limits of the HLA-B*27 peptidome to facilitate selection and testing of new peptides, possibly involved in the disease. The HLA peptidomes of HeLa and C1R cell lines stably transfected with the AS-associated HLA-B*27:05 allele, the nonassociated HLA-B*27:09 allele, or their cysteine 67 to serine mutants (C67S), are analyzed on a very large scale. In addition, the peptidomes of HLA-B*27:05 and HLA-B*27:05-C67S are analyzed from the spleens of rats transgenic for these alleles. The results indicate that C67S mutation increases the percentage of peptides with glutamine or lysine at their P2 position (P2-Lys), in both HLA-B*27:05 and HLA-B*27:09. Furthermore, a small fraction of HLA-B*27 peptides contains lysine at their second position (P2), in addition to the more commonly found peptides with arginine (P2-Arg) or the less common glutamine (P2-Gln) located at this anchor position. Overall these data indicate that peptides with P2-Lys should be considered as real ligands of HLA-B*27 molecules and taken into account while looking for putative peptides implicated in the AS.

### Keywords
Transgenic rats, Immunopeptidome, Human leukocytes antigen, Hla-b*27, Ankylosing spondylitis, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.

### Submitter
Dganit Melamed Kadosh

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Department of Biology, Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel.


