### Accession
PXD000113

### Title
GeLC-MS/MS analysis of cereal aphid saliva

### Description
Saliva was collected from c.40,000 diet reared aphids, pooled and concentrated. Samples were coming from 2 aphid species: Metopolophium dirhodum and Sitobion avenae. Proteins were fractionated using SDS PAGE and visible bands were subjected to in gel digestion. Tryptic peptides were analysised on a Thermo LTQ-FT. Protein identification from the MS/MS data was performed using the TurboSEQUEST algorithm in BioWorks v. 3.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) to correlate the data against ACYPIproteins v2.1, the official protein set of the pea aphid genome assembly (33291 predicted protein models; accessed November 2011) available at http://www.aphidbase.com/aphidbase/downloads.  The following search parameters were used: precursor-ion mass tolerance of 1.5 Da, fragment ion tolerance of 1.0 Da with methionine oxidation and cysteine carboxyamidomethylation specified as differential modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. Two filters were applied: XCorr vs. charge state (1, 2, 3 and 4 = 1.50, 2.00, 2.50 and 3.00 respectively) and peptide probability (p<0.001). Matches with multiple unique peptides and a cumulative XCorr >20 are reported. PLoS One accepted: Proteomic profiling of cereal aphid saliva reveals ubiquitous and adaptative secreted proteins. Rao S.A.K., Carolan, J.C. and Wilkinson, T.L.W.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
The secreted salivary proteins from two cereal aphid species, Sitobion avenae and Metopolophium dirhodum, were collected from artificial diets and analysed by tandem mass spectrometry. Protein identification was performed by searching MS data against the official protein set from the current pea aphid (Acyrthosiphon pisum) genome assembly and revealed 12 and 7 proteins in the saliva of S. avenae and M. dirhodum, respectively. When combined with a comparable dataset from A. pisum, only three individual proteins were common to all the aphid species; two paralogues of the GMC oxidoreductase family (glucose dehydrogenase; GLD) and ACYPI009881, an aphid specific protein previously identified as a putative component of the salivary sheath. Antibodies were designed from translated protein sequences obtained from partial cDNA sequences for ACYPI009881 and both saliva associated GLDs. The antibodies detected all parent proteins in secreted saliva from the three aphid species, but could only detect ACYPI009881, and not saliva associated GLDs, in protein extractions from the salivary glands. This result was confirmed by immunohistochemistry using whole and sectioned salivary glands, and in addition, localised ACYPI009881 to specific cell types within the principal salivary gland. The implications of these findings for the origin of salivary components and the putative role of the proteins identified are discussed in the context of our limited understanding of the functional relationship between aphid saliva and the plants they feed on. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange and can be accessed under the identifier PXD000113.

### Keywords
Metopolophium dirhodum, Ltq-ft, Aphids, Saliva, Sitobion avenae

### Affiliations
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head


