### Accession
PXD021838

### Title
Proteomics of muscle microdialysates identifies potential circulating biomarkers in Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy

### Description
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is caused by a complex epigenetic mechanism finally leading to the misexpression of DUX4, a transcription factor normally silenced in skeletal muscle. Detecting DUX4 in skeletal muscle and quantifying disease progression in FSHD is extremely challenging, thus increasing the need for other surrogate biomarkers. We applied a shotgun proteomic approach with two different setups to analyze the protein repertoire of interstitial fluids obtained from 20 FSHD patients’ muscles in different disease stages classified by Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) and controls. Serum samples from the same subjects were also analyzed. A total of 1156 proteins were identified in the microdialysates by Data Independent Acquisition, 130 of which only found in muscles in active disease stage. Proteomic profiles of interstitial fluids were able to distinguish FSHD patients from controls. Among the upregulated proteins in muscles with active disease, two innate immunity mediators (S100-A8 and A9) and Dermcidin were detected with both proteomic approaches and selectively present in the sera of FSHD patients. Structural muscle proteins were downregulated, consistent with signs of early damage, as well as proteins of the plasminogen pathway. This suggests, together with upstream inhibition in FSHD samples of myogenic factors, defective muscle regeneration and increased fibrosis already in early/active disease.  Conclusions: our MRI targeted exploratory approach provided insights on pathophysiological pathways activated in early disease, confirming that inflammatory response has a prominent role, together with impaired muscle regeneration. We also identified three proteins as tissue and possibly circulating prognostic biomarkers in FSHD.

### Sample Protocol
We collected microdialysis and blood samples from 10 genetically confirmed FSHD patients (5 females and 5 males, mean age 48,5 ± 13, range 23-63), 4 controls (2 males and 2 females, mean age 48 ± 15 years, range 30-65) and one non-penetrant gene carrier (NPGC) (female, age 52). The microdialysates selected for proteomic analysis were obtained at comparable time points between 48 and 56 hours post catheter insertion. This protocol is in agreement with the Declaration of Helsinki, and was approved by the Ethics Committee of our Institution. All involved subjects gave their written informed consent.The label free shotgun proteomic analysis was performed using two different MS experimental setups: Data Independent Acquisition  (DIA) performed  on a Synapt G2-Si Q-TOF mass spectrometer with T Wave cell for ion mobility separation (Waters Corp.). Twenty-five microdialysis samples from 10 FSHD patients (simultaneously obtained from 10 STIR+ and 10 contralateral STIR- muscles), 4 controls and the NPGC were quantified using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay method and had an average protein concentration of approximately 0,5μg/μl. Trying to minimize the problem of the low volume and protein concentration of the samples, we applied the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (10). For the FASP protocol we made use of a microcolumn tip with 10kDa MW cut off. Ten micrograms of protein amount were diluted into a final volume of 100μl in Tris-Urea Buffer (Tris-HCl 100mM pH 7,5; Urea 6M) and applied in the column for further reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion.  Serum was collected from the same subjects. Before proceeding with the digestion protocol the samples were desalted in a spin filter column (Vivaspin 3,000 Da MWCO): 250μl of each serum was added into a spin filter and centrifuged for 60 minutes at 5000 g, the material retained in the filter was used to perform Albumin and IgG/IgM removal (Pierce Albumin/IgG removal Kit, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After the process of desalination and removal of the Albumin and IgG, the leftover proteins were washed, and the two fractions were later submitted to the same digestion protocol already mentioned. The peptides obtained from the tryptic digestion of microdialysates and sera were submitted to a LC-MS analysis, using a High Definition Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system. The separation of tryptic peptides was performed on an ACQUITY MClass System (Waters Corporation). 0.3 μg of each digested samples has been loaded onto a Symmetry C18 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm precolumn (Waters Corp.) used as trapping column and subsequently separated by a 120 min reversed phase gradient at 300 nL/min (linear gradient, 3–55% ACN over 90 min) using a HSS T3 C18 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 150 mm nanoscale and LC column (Waters Corp.) maintained at 40 °C. For the gradient eluition water-Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) has been used as eluent A and Acetonitrile Formic Acid (99.9/0.1, v/v) as eluent B. The Separated peptides have been analysed by High Definition Synapt G2-Si Mass spectrometer directly coupled to the chromatographic system. Differential protein expression has been evaluated with a data-independent acquisition (DIA) of shotgun proteomics analysis by Expression configuration mode (MSe). The mass spectrometer operated in “Expression Mode” switching between low (4 eV) and high (25–60 eV) collision energies on the gas cell, using a scan time of 1.0s per function over 50–2000 m/z. All spectra have been acquired in Ion Mobility Mode by applying a wave velocity for the ion separation of 1.000m/s and a transfer wave velocity of 175m/s. The processing of low and elevated energy, added to the data of the reference lock mass ([Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B Standard, Waters Corp.) provides a time-aligned inventory of accurate mass retention time components for both the low and elevated-energy (EMRT, exact mass retention time) Each sample was run in three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Continuum LC-MS data from three replicate experiments for each sample have been processed for qualitative and quantitative analysis using the software Progenesis (Waters Corp.). The qualitative identification of proteins has been obtained by searching in Homo Sapiens database (UNIPROT Protein reviewed release 2020-04). Search parameters were set as: automatic tolerance for precursor ions and for product ions, minimum 1 fragment ions matched per peptide, minimum 3 fragment ions matched per protein, minimum 1 unique peptide matched per protein, 2 missed cleavage, carbamydomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications, false discovery rate (FDR) of the identification algorithm < 1%.  Label free quantitative analysis was obtained using the relative abundance intensity in integrated in Progenesis software, using all peptides identified for normalization. The expression analysis was performed considering technical replicates available for each experimental condition following the hypothesis that each group is an independent variable. Filtered tables were generated to include proteins found at least in two out of three technical replicates and to exclude proteins showing less than 20% change and those showing no statistical significance according to ANOVA ≥ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is caused by a complex epigenetic mechanism finally leading to the misexpression of <i>DUX4</i> in skeletal muscle. Detecting DUX4 and quantifying disease progression in FSHD is extremely challenging, thus increasing the need for surrogate biomarkers. We applied a shotgun proteomic approach with two different setups to analyze the protein repertoire of interstitial fluids obtained from 20 muscles in different disease stages classified by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and serum samples from 10 FSHD patients. A total of 1156 proteins were identified in the microdialysates by data independent acquisition, 130 of which only found in muscles in active disease stage. Proteomic profiles were able to distinguish FSHD patients from controls. Two innate immunity mediators (S100-A8 and A9) and Dermcidin were upregulated in muscles with active disease and selectively present in the sera of FSHD patients. Structural muscle and plasminogen pathway proteins were downregulated. Together with the upstream inhibition of myogenic factors, this suggests defective muscle regeneration and increased fibrosis in early/active FSHD. Our MRI targeted exploratory approach confirmed that inflammatory response has a prominent role, together with impaired muscle regeneration, before clear muscle wasting occurs. We also identified three proteins as tissue and possibly circulating biomarkers in FSHD.

### Keywords
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Fshd, Inflammatory response

### Affiliations
Post doctor
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore

### Submitter
Victor Corasolla Carregari

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Tasca
Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore


