### Accession
PXD018103

### Title
Genome-wide RNAi Screening Identifies pseudouridine synthase DKC1 promotes CRC proliferation through regulating ribosomal proteins expression

### Description
Colorectal cancer (CRC) with high rate of mortality is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancers in worldwide. Advanced colorectal cancer is often accompanied by malignant proliferation of tumor cells. Further researches on colorectal cancer proliferation to find new targets and develop new therapeutic regimen are an important direction for colorectal cancer treatment. In this study, genome-wide RNAi screening was used to discover the essential genes associated with colorectal cancer cell proliferation. We found DKC1 (dyskerin pseudouridine synthase 1) promoted CRC proliferation through binding and modifying ribosomal proteins (RPL10A, RPL22L1, RPL34, RPS3) mRNA to increase the mRNAs stability and eventually increasing their expression. Besides, DKC1 is highly expressed in colorectal cancer and its aberrantly high expression is associated with poor prognosis of colorectal cancer patients. These results suggest that DKC1 could be a new therapeutic target for colorectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
DKC1 stable knockdown DLD-1 cells and control cells in triplicate were lysed. Centrifuge to collect the supernatant. Protein concentration was determined by BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Next, the reduction reaction were performed for the protein solution with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and then the protein was alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. Afterwards trypsin digestion were carried out. After the trypsin digestion, the obtained peptides were labeled by using TMT kit. The labelled peptides were fractionated by HPLC (Agilent 300Extend C18 column) into 60 fractions. Then, the 60 fractions were combined into 9 fractions.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system coupled to a Q ExactiveTM Plus tandem mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant (v1.5.2.8) and searched against the Human SwissProt (20,387 entries), according to the following setting, (i) cleavage enzyme: Trypsin/P, (ii) missing cleavages: 2,(iii) mass tolerance for precursor ions: 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, (iv) mass tolerance for fragment ions: 0.02 Da, (v) minimum length of peptides: 7aa, (vi) quantitative method: TMT-6plex, (vii) FDR<1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dkc1, Proteomics, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Sun Yat-Sen University Cancer center 
Sun Yat-Sen University cancer center

### Submitter
guangyan kan

### Lab Head
Dr Shuai Chen
Sun Yat-Sen University cancer center


