### Accession
PXD043076

### Title
A protein kinase coordinates cycles of autophagy and glutaminolysis in invasive hyphae of the fungus Magnaporthe oryzae within rice cells

### Description
The devastating blast fungus Magnaporthe oryzae elaborates invasive hyphae (IH) in living rice cells during early infection, separated from host cytoplasm by plant-derived interfacial membranes, but the metabolic strategies underpinning this fundamental intracellular biotrophic growth phase are poorly understood. Eukaryotic cell growth depends on activated target-of-rapamycin (TOR) kinase signaling, which inhibits autophagy. Here, using live-cell imaging coupled with multiomic approaches, we show how the M. oryzae serine/threonine protein kinase Rim15 coordinates cycles of autophagy and glutaminolysis in IH – the latter through phosphorylation of NAD-dependent glutamate dehydrogenase – to reactivate TOR and promote biotrophic growth. Deleting RIM15 attenuated IH growth and triggered plant immunity; these defects were fully remediated by exogenous α-ketoglutarate treatment, but glucose treatment only suppressed host defenses. Our results together suggest that Rim15-dependent cycles of autophagic flux liberate α-ketoglutarate – via glutaminolysis – to reactivate TOR signaling and fuel biotrophic growth while conserving glucose for antioxidation-mediated host innate immunity suppression.

### Sample Protocol
Fungal strains were grown as mycelia in liquid CM for 42 hr before shifting to minimal media with 0.5 mM glutamine as the sole carbon and nitrogen source for 16 hr.  For the proteomics experiments, 0.3 g of wet mycelia per strain (in triplicate) was lysed in 1 mL lysis buffer consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5 mM DTT, 100 mM tris/HCl pH 7.8, and containing 1X complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor and 1X PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor, for 10 min at 20 Hz on a mechanical tissue lyser. Protein was precipitated with acetone and the pellet was washed and redissolved in the lysis buffer containing 2X PhosStop phosphatase inhibitor. The proteins were assayed using the CBX kit (G-Bioscience). An aliquot of proteins was reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide prior to digestion with LysC and then trypsin. Each digest was analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a 2h gradient on a Waters CSH 0.075 mm x 250 mm C18 column feeding into an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer. However, an unknown component interfered with the chromatography and samples were rerun after offline solid-phase C18 clean-up (Waters SepPak, 100mg 1cc syringe cartridges). For phosphoprotein enrichment, of the 1mg of wet mycelia from each strain (in triplicate), 0.95 mg was used for TiO2 phosphopeptide enrichment with lactic acid. Samples were subjected to offline solid-phase C18 clean-up (Waters SepPak, 100 mg 1cc syringe cartridges). Each cleaned sample was then analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using a 2 h gradient on a Waters CSH 0.075 mm x 2 50 mm C18 column feeding into an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Quantification of the proteins and phosphoproteins was performed separately using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo; version 2.4). All MS/MS samples were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.2). Mascot was set up to search the cRAP_20150130.fasta (124 entries); uniprot- refprot_UP000009058_Magnaporthe_oryzae 20210511 (12,791 sequences); assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.06 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. For the proteomics experiment, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and oxidation of methionine were specified in Mascot as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. For the phosphoproteomics experiment, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and acetylation of N-term were specified in Mascot as variable modifications while carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified as fixed modification. Peptides were validated by Percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. The data were searched using a decoy database to set the false discovery rate to 1% (high confidence). Only proteins with a minimum of 2 peptides and 5 PSMs were reported. For phosphoproteins, the minimum was 1 phosphopeptide and 3 PSMs. The localization probability of the phosphorylation sites is calculated using PtmRS (Taus et al. 2011). Probabilities are indicated in parenthesis next to the amino acid residue. If there is no probability indicated, this means that the phosphorylation of the peptide was not confidently localized. The peptides and phosphopeptides were quantified using the precursor abundance based on intensity. Normalized and scaled abundances are reported. The peak abundance was normalized using total peptide amount. The peptide group abundances are summed for each sample and the maximum sum for all files is determined. The normalization factor used is the factor of the sum of the sample and the maximum sum in all files. Then, abundances were scaled so that the average of the abundances is equal to 100 for each sample. The imputation mode was used to fill the gaps from missing values. The protein and phosphoprotein ratios are calculated using summed abundance for each replicate separately and the geometric median of the resulting ratios is used as the protein ratios. The significance of differential expression is tested using a t-test which provides a p-value and an adjusted p-value using the Benjamini-Hochberg method for all the calculated ratios.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant defense suppression, Tor signaling, Biotrophic interface, Α-ketoglutarate, Biotrophy, Magnaporthe oryzae, Glutaminolysis, Antioxidation, Rice blast disease, Autophagy, Rim15

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,NE

### Submitter
Gang Li

### Lab Head
Dr Richard A. Wilson
Department of Plant Pathology, University of Nebraska, Lincoln,NE


