### Accession
PXD033783

### Title
Mechanism of protein corona and surface modification of MSNs affecting the tissue distribution

### Description
Once NPs were administered into the physiological condition, several serum proteins could adsorb rapidly onto the NPs to form a protein layer (also called protein corona). The effect of protein corona surrounding the NPs depends on several parameters such as size, charge and other surface properties of NPs, which could contribute a great deal of influence in determining the NP's fate.

### Sample Protocol
We investigated the in vitro protein corona pattern of MSN, the NPs were incubated in mouse serum and demonstrated that several protein bands retained by SDS-PAGE. The NPs adsorb serum protein were analyzed by SDS-PAGE and the proteins from SDS-PAGE gel were sliced and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion and extraction with 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 50% Acetonitrile (ACN) for shotgun proteomics. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid quadrupole-ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with a NanoSpray ion source. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate system 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Mass spectrometry analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode with Full-MS (externally calibrated to a mass accuracy of <5 ppm, and a resolution of 120,000 at m/z=200, AGC target 5e5, maximum injection time of 50 msec) followed by HCD-MS/MS of the most intense ions in 3 s. High-energy collision activated dissociation (HCD)-MS/MS (resolution of 15,000) was used at a normalized collision energy of 32. AGC target 5e4 was set for MS/MS analysis with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 180 s. Max injection time 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt knowledgebase reviewed (Swiss-prot) mouse protein database (downloaded on Jan 2022) by using the Mascot search algorithm via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) package (version 2.2, Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
The blood-brain barrier (BBB) is a highly selective cellular barrier that tightly controls the microenvironment of the central nervous system to restrict the passage of substances, which is a primary challenge in delivering therapeutic drugs to treat brain diseases. This study aimed to develop simple surface modifications of mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) without external stimuli or receptor protein conjugation, which exhibited a critical surface charge and size allowing them to cross the BBB. A series of MSNs with various charges and two different sizes of 50 and 200&#xa0;nm were synthesized, which showed a uniform mesoporous structure with various surface zeta potentials ranging from +42.3 to -51.6&#xa0;mV. Confocal microscopic results showed that 50&#xa0;nm of strongly negatively charged N4-RMSN<sub>50</sub>@PEG/THPMP (&#x223c;-40&#xa0;mV) could be significantly observed outside blood vessels of the brain in <i>Tg</i>(<i>zfli1</i>:EGFP) transgenic zebrafish embryos superior to the other negatively charged MSNs. However, very few positively charged MSNs were found in the brain, indicating that negatively charged MSNs could successfully penetrate the BBB. The data were confirmed by high-resolution images of 3D deconvoluted confocal microscopy and two-photon microscopy and zebrafish brain tissue sections. In addition, while increasing the size to 200&#xa0;nm but maintaining the similar negative charge (&#x223c;40&#xa0;mV), MSNs could not be detected in the brain of zebrafish, suggesting that transport across the BBB based on MSNs occurred in charge- and size-dependent manners. No obvious cytotoxicity was observed in the CTX-TNA2 astrocyte cell line and U87-MG glioma cell line treated with MSNs. After doxorubicin (Dox) loading, N4-RMSN<sub>50</sub>@PEG/THPMP/Dox enabled drug delivery and pH-responsive release. The toxicity assay showed that N4-RMSN<sub>50</sub>@PEG/THPMP could reduce Dox release, resulting in the increase of the survival rate in zebrafish. Flow cytometry demonstrated N4-RMSN<sub>50</sub>@PEG/THPMP had few cellular uptakes. Protein corona analysis revealed three transporter proteins, such as afamin, apolipoprotein E, and basigin, could contribute to BBB penetration, validating the possible mechanism of N4-RMSN<sub>50</sub>@PEG/THPMP crossing the BBB. With this simple approach, MSNs with critical negative charge and size could overcome the BBB-limiting characteristics of therapeutic drug molecules; furthermore, their use may also cause drug sustained-release in the brain, decreasing peripheral toxicity.

### Keywords
Msn, Murine serun proteins, Protein corona

### Affiliations
Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology,School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology, School of Medicine, College of Medicine,Taipei Medical University, No.250, Wu-Hsing St., Taipei 11031, Taiwan

### Submitter
Chih-Ming Chou

### Lab Head
Dr Chih-Ming Chou
Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences and Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Cell Biology,School of Medicine, College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University,


