### Accession
PXD038235

### Title
Proteomic analysis defines the interactome of telomerase in the protozoan parasite, Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Telomeres are the nucleoprotein structures found at the ends of eukaryotic chromosomes. Conventional DNA polymerases are unable to fully replicate the telomeric end of the chromosome, which leads to a progressive loss of DNA after every cell division. This problem is solved by the ribonucleoprotein enzyme, telomerase. Proper maintenance of the telomeric end is critical for maintaining genome integrity in eukaryotes. The telomerase enzyme has two essential components: the telomerase RNA (TR), which provides the template required for telomeric DNA synthesis; and the catalytic protein telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT) that catalyzes the extension of the telomeric DNA ends using the TR as a template. The action of telomerase prevents the progressive shortening of the telomeres after every cell division. The TR can form a large structural scaffold upon which many accessory proteins can bind to and form the complete telomerase holoenzyme in vivo. These accessory proteins are required for telomerase activity and regulation inside of cells. The interacting partners of the TERT protein have been extensively characterized in yeast, human, and Tetrahymena systems. These interactors have not been extensively studied in lower eukaryotes including clinically relevant human parasites, such as Trypanosoma brucei (T. brucei). To this end, we performed co-immunoprecipitation coupled to LC-MS/MS of TbTERT-FLAG-HA-HA from T. brucei cells using an anti-TbTERT antibody and protein G magnetic beads. An isotype matched IgG control was performed in tandem. Comparisons of enriched proteins in the IP vs. IgG control revealed previously known and novel interactors of TbTERT. These findings suggest potential mechanistic differences in telomere maintenance in T. brucei compared to higher eukaryotes.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of T. brucei telomerase was performed using a custom made anti-TbTERT antibody to purify native telomerase complexes from BF Wild-type (WT) and BF TbTR ∆C/D box cells. Approximately, 5 X 108 cells/300 ml were collected by centrifugation at 1900 RPM for 6 minutes. Following centrifugation, cells were lysed by homogenization in 500 µl of 1X immunopurified (IP) lysis buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MgCl2, 0.5% IGEPAL CA630, 1X protease cocktail inhibitor, and 20 units of Ribolock RNase inhibitor). Lysate was then cleared of cell debris by centrifugation at 3000 RPM for 5 minutes at 4°C. The lysate was then pre-cleared by incubated with 50 µl of pre-washed Dynabeads protein G (10003D) for 1 hr. at 4°C on rotation. Pre-cleared lysates were then incubated overnight at 4°C on rotation with 5 µg of a custom anti-TbTERT antibody and an IgG antibody was added to the control (Dey et al., 2021). The next day, 50 µl of pre-washed Dynabeads protein G was added to the lysate antibody mixture and incubated at 4°C for 2 hrs. on rotation. After incubation, the beads were collected in a magnetic stand and washed twice in 1X IP lysis buffer. After washing, the bound protein was eluted off the beads by boiling in 100 µl of 1X SDS-PAGE dye for 5 minutes at 95°C. Eluted proteins were then stored in -80°C until further use. For MS analysis, Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and Gel segments were cut and subjected to in-gel digestion using trypsin. Peptides were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore). Peptides were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher). Peptides were first trapped using trapping column Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 uM x 2cm, nanoViper 2Pk, C18, 3 µm, 100A), then separated using analytical column Acclaim PepMap RSLC (75um x25cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100A) (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300 nL/min, and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 min and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 min, followed by a short wash at 90% solvent B. For DDA acquisition, the precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to 1600 and the top 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry data was searched using MaxQuant for Label Free Quantification (LFQ) and Protein Prospector for peptide counting. A MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.2.10) search was executed using the default parameters with the following changes: In Group-specific parameters Label-free quantification was enabled with “Fast LFQ” checked. In global parameters “Match between runs” were enabled. Peptides were searched against the Tbrucei TREU927 protein database (Release 32) obtained from TriTrypDB containing a total of 11,202 entries (https://tritrypdb.org/tritrypdb/app/downloads/release-32/TbruceiTREU927/fasta/data/). The proteingroups.txt file output from MaxQuant was analyzed in Perseus (ver. 1.6.15.0). LFQ intensities were imported and filtered with the following features: removing ‘reverse = +’, ‘potential contaminant = +’ and ‘only identified by site = +’. Data was log2 transformed and rows that were not identified in at least two replicates of one sample group were removed. Missing values were imputed from normal distribution (width = 0.3, down shift = 1.8, total matrix mode). A Students t-test was executed to examine protein groups with different intensities between the elute and control groups. The t-test settings were the following: ‘Permutation-based FDR’, ‘FDR=0.05’, ‘Report q-value’, ‘Number of Randomizations=250’ and ‘-log10 p-value’.  Data was searched using Protein Prospector (ver. v 6.2.1). The data was searched against the same database, T brucei TREU927 protein database (Release 32), with random peptides concatenated to calculate FDR. Spectral Counts were used to analyze data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interaction partners, Co-immunoprecipitation, Telomerase rna, Lc-ms/ms, Trypanosoma brucei, Telomerase

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Shouling Xu
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility


