### Accession
PXD034832

### Title
Proteomic analysis of rabbit fresh and cryopreserved semen (spermatozoa)

### Description
Cryoinjury and protein changes are a consequence of cryopreservation and may have a negative impact on sperm quality regarding motility, viability and fertilizing ability. However, potential proteomic changes in rabbit semen throughout the cryopreservation process have never been investigated previously. The aim of the present study was to compare the whole proteome of fresh and cryopreserved rabbit spermatozoa. Comparative analysis and identification of proteins were performed using 2-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis (2D-DIGE) coupled with matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass (MALDI TOF/TOF) spectrometry. We found that 108 proteins differed in abundance in spermatozoa between fresh and frozen semen. Most of these proteins was involved in pathways related to energy metabolism and protein quality control under stress conditions, reproductive processes and mechanisms of cell death/survival regulation, resulting in a significant decrease of motility and viability of post-thawing rabbit sperm and its potential fertilizing ability.

### Sample Protocol
Spermatozoa were sonicated using HD 2070 Sonoplus Ultrasonic Homogenizers (Bandelin electronic GmbH & Co. KG Heinrichstraße, Berlin), set at 30% relative output, for 30s in 100 µl lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 2% [w/v] 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)-dimethylammonio]-1 propanesulfonate [CHAPS]), supplemented with 2% (v/v) ampholytes in the range of pH 3-10 (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, USA) and 4% (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. After sonication extracts were kept on ice for 1 h, centrifuged at 12,800 × g for 20 min at 4°C and proteins were precipitated using the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden). The precipitate was dissolved in labeling buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% w/v CHAPS, 30 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Aliquots of 50 µg of protein from each sample were labelled with CyDye DIGE Fluor minimal dyes (GE Healthcare) at a concentration of 400 pmol dye/50 µg of protein The internal standard was generated by combining equal amounts of each samples within the experiment and was labelled with Cy2. Differentially labelled samples were mixed together loaded onto Immobiline DryStrip gel strips (24 cm, pH 3 to 10 non-linear; GE Healthcare). Isoelectric focusing was performed with an IPGphor isoelectric focusing unit (GE Healthcare), and SDS-PAGE was run using the ETTAN Dalt six electrophoresis unit (GE Healthcare). The CyDye-labelled gels were scanned using Typhoon FLA 9500 instrument (GE Healthcare) and analysed by DeCyder Differential Analysis Software (version 5.0; GE Healthcare). Spots of interests were excised and digested using a trypsin solution (Promega) containing 0.2mg/mL trypsin in 15mM ammonium bicarbonate. The peptide mixtures were desalted using ZipTip C-18 RP tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) and spotted in a matrix of 0.5% cyanhydroxy cinnamic acid on a 96-spot MALDI target. Peptide samples were analyzed on a TOF Autoflex-ToF/ToF mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Spots were identified by MS and MS/MS using a MALDI-TOF autoflex speed TOF/TOF mass spectrometer equipped with a smartbeam II laser (355 nm; Bruker Daltonics). MALDI-TOF mass spectra were acquired in reflectron positive ion mode. TOF/TOF MS fragmentation spectra were acquired for each sample, averaging 4000 laser shots per fragmentation spectrum on each of the 3-10 most abundant ions present in each sample (excluding trypsin autolytic peptides and other known background ions). Operating conditions were as follows: ion source 1 = 19.00 kV, ion source 2 = 16.75 kV, lens voltage = 7.50 kV, reflector voltage = 21.00 kV, optimized pulsed ion extraction time = 120 ns, matrix suppression = 500 Da, and positive reflectron mode. The strongest precursors were selected for MS/MS analysis. Peak lists were generated from MS spectra with flexAnalysis version 3.3 (Bruker Daltonics). Database search: both the resulting peptide mass and the associated fragmentation spectra were submitted to BioTools equipped with MASCOT search engine (version 2.4) to search the Oryctolagus cuniculus database (created on June 09, 2022) using the Mascot Server (Matrix Science, London, UK) database. The database search criteria were as follows: enzyme, trypsin; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation (C); and variable modifications, oxidation (M) peptide mass tolerance of 100 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.7 Da, and 1 missed cleavage allowed. The search results were filtered with a significant threshold of p<0.05 and a Mascot ion score cutoff of ≥30 for at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cryoinjury and protein changes are a consequence of cryopreservation and may have a negative impact on sperm quality regarding motility, viability and fertilizing ability. However, potential proteomic changes in rabbit semen throughout the cryopreservation process have never been previously investigated. The aim of the present study was to compare the whole proteome of fresh and cryopreserved rabbit semen (spermatozoa and extracellular fluid), to examine the effects of freeze-thawing on proteins changes in semen. Comparative analysis and identification of proteins was carried out using 2-dimensional difference in-gel electrophoresis coupled with a matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry. Proteomic raw data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD034832 for spermatozoa and PXD034853 for extracellular fluid. Respectively, 107 and 28 proteins differed in abundance in spermatozoa and extracellular fluid between fresh and frozen groups. Most of these proteins were involved in pathways related to energy metabolism and protein quality control under stress conditions, reproductive processes and mechanisms of cell death/survival regulation, resulting in a significant decrease of motility and viability of post-thawing rabbit sperm and its potential fertilizing ability. These results broaden the understanding of the effects of cryopreservation on rabbit semen and represent a new starting point for the development of improved freezing procedures.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Rabbit, Maldi tof/tof, 2d-dige

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Mariola Słowińska

### Lab Head
Dr Mariola Słowińska
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of Sciences


