### Accession
PXD012961

### Title
Divergent polypharmacology-driven cellular activity of structurally similar multi-kinase inhibitors through cumulative differential effects on individual targets: Drug Pulldowns

### Description
Despite recent successes of precision and immunotherapies there is a persisting need for novel targeted or multi-targeted approaches in complex diseases. Through a systems pharmacology approach including phenotypic screening, chemical and phosphoproteomics and RNA-Seq, we elucidated the targets and mechanisms underlying the differential anticancer activity of two structurally related multi-kinase inhibitors, foretinib and cabozantinib, in lung cancer cells. Biochemical and cellular target validation using probe molecules and RNA interference revealed a polypharmacology mechanism involving MEK1/2, FER and AURKB, which were each more potently inhibited by foretinib than cabozantinib. Based on this, we developed a synergistic combination of foretinib with barasertib, a more potent AURKB inhibitor, for MYC-amplified small cell lung cancer. This systems pharmacology approach showed that small structural changes of drugs can cumulatively, through multiple targets, result in pronounced anticancer activity differences and that detailed mechanistic understanding of polypharmacology can enable repurposing opportunities for cancers with unmet medical need.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed as previously described (Knezevic et al. Cell Chem Biol. 2016, 23(12), 1490-1503). Beads were incubated with 2.5 µl of i-foretinib or i-cabozantinib. Pre-treatment was performed by incubating cell lysates with 20 µM of foretinib and cabozantinib. Experiments were performed in duplicate (H1155) or triplicate (A427) using 5 mg protein per pulldown. SDS-PAGE, in-gel digestion with trypsin and LC-MS/MS analyses were performed as described previously. The samples were analyzed on a QExactive Plus hybrid orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo) coupled to a nanoflow liquid chromatograph (RSLC, Dionex).

### Data Protocol
Data were searched with Mascot (Matrix Science) against the human SwissProt 2015 (Dec.) and SwissProt 2016 (Jul.) database for H1155 and A427, respectively. For both searches, two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. Results were imported to Scaffold 4.0 and data were analyzed setting the minimum number of peptides to 2 and the protein and peptide threshold to 95% confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cabozantinib, Lung cancer, Foretinib, Polypharmacology, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Rix, PhD
Drug Discovery Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


