### Accession
PXD033237

### Title
Perchlorate-Specific Proteomic Stress Responses of Debaryomyces hansenii Could Enable Microbial Survival in Martian Brines

### Description
If life exists on Mars, it would face several challenges including the presence of perchlorates, which destabilize biomacromolecules by inducing chaotropic stress. However, little is known about perchlorate toxicity for microorganism on the cellular level. Here we present a proteomic investigation on the perchlorate-specific stress responses of the halotolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii and compare these to generally known salt stress adaptations. We found that the responses to NaCl and NaClO4-induced stresses share many common metabolic features, e.g., signaling pathways, elevated energy metabolism, or osmolyte biosynthesis. However, several new perchlorate-specific stress responses could be identified, such as protein glycosylation and cell wall remodulations, presumably in order to stabilize protein structures and the cell envelope. These stress responses would also be relevant for life on Mars, which - given the environmental conditions - likely developed chaotropic defense strategies such as stabilized confirmations of biomacromolecules and the formation of cell clusters.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was conducted using the recently developed filter-aided Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (fa-SPEED) protocol (Doellinger et al., 2020). Cells were centrifuged for 3 minutes at 5.000 x g after reaching exponential growth phase which is 1 day for salt-free samples, 3 days for 1.5 m NaClO4 and 2.4 NaCl, 6 days for 2.4 m NaClO4, and 7 days for 3.9 m NaCl.  The cell pellets were washed three times with phosphate buffer saline (PBS) followed by cell lysing with 50 µL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 3 minutes at 70°C. Afterwards, samples were neutralized with 500 µL 2 M tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane (TRIS) solution were added. After adding 55 µL reduction/alkylation buffer (100mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine / 400 mM 2-Chloracetamid), the samples were incubated at 95°C for 5 minutes. Protein concentrations were determined by turbidity measurements at 360 nm. 50 µg proteins were diluted to 40 µL using a 10:1 (v/v) mixture of 2 M TrisBase and TFA, mixed with 160 µL acetone and incubated for 2 min at RT. For samples containing less than 50 µg proteins per 40 µL sample, the volumes of sample and acetone were increased at constant sample/acetone ratio until 50 µg protein/sample were reached. Afterwards, proteins were captured on Ultrafree®-MC (0.5 mL) centrifugal devices, 0.2 µm, PTFE (Merck) at 5000 x g for 2 min. The samples were washed successively with 200 µL 80% acetone, 200 µL 100% acetone and 200 µL n-pentane at 5000 x g for 2 min each.  Subsequently, 40 µL digestion buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) containing trypsin (1:25 (enzyme to protein ratio) Trypsin Gold, Mass Spectrometry Grade (Promega)) was added to the filter containing the proteins followed by incubation at 37 °C for 20 hours. The sample solution containing the digested proteins was centrifuged at 5.000 x g for 2 minutes and the filter is washed subsequently with 40 µL digestion buffer containing 0.1% TFA. Peptides were desalted using the Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were analysed on an EASY-nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive™ HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 1 µg of peptides were separated on a PepSep column  (15cm length, 75 µm i.d., 1.9 µm C18 beads, PepSep, Denmark) using a stepped 30 min gradient of 80 % acetonitrile (solvent B) in 0.1 % formic acid (solvent A) at 300 nL/min flow rate: 5–11 % B in 2:49 min, 11–29 % B in 18:04 min, 29–33 % B in 3:03 min, 33–39 % B in 2:04 min, 39–95 % B in 0:10 min,  95 % B for 2:50 min,  95–0 % B in 0:10 min and 0 % B for 0:50 min. Column temperature was kept at 50°C using a butterfly heater (Phoenix S&T, Chester, PA, USA). The Q Exactive™ HF was operated in a data-independent (DIA) manner in the m/z range of 345–1,650. Full scan spectra were recorded with a resolution of 120,000 using an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 100 ms. The Full scans were followed by 62 DIA scans of dynamic window widths using an overlap of 0.5 Th. DIA spectra were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 using an AGC target value of 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 55 ms and a first fixed mass of 200 Th. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set to 27 % and default charge state was set to 3. Peptides were ionized using electrospray with a stainless-steel emitter, I.D. 30 µm (PepSep, Denmark) at a spray voltage of 2.1 kV and a heated capillary temperature of 275°C.

### Data Protocol
Protein sequences of Debaryomyces hansenii (UP000000599, downloaded 16/10/20), were obtained from UniProt. A spectral library was predicted for all possible peptides with strict trypsin specificity (KR not P) in the m/z range of 350–1,150 with charge states of 2–4 and allowing up to one missed cleavage site using Prosit. Input files for library prediction were generated using EncyclopeDIA (Version 0.9.5). The data were analysed using the predicted library with fixed mass tolerances of 10 ppm for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS² spectra using the “robust LC (high accuracy)” quantification strategy. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for precursor identifications and proteins were grouped according to their respective genes.

### Publication Abstract
If life exists on Mars, it would face several challenges including the presence of perchlorates, which destabilize biomacromolecules by inducing chaotropic stress. However, little is known about perchlorate toxicity for microorganisms on the cellular level. Here, we present the first proteomic investigation on the perchlorate-specific stress responses of the halotolerant yeast Debaryomyces hansenii and compare these to generally known salt stress adaptations. We found that the responses to NaCl and NaClO<sub>4</sub> -induced stresses share many common metabolic features, for example, signalling pathways, elevated energy metabolism, or osmolyte biosynthesis. Nevertheless, several new perchlorate-specific stress responses could be identified, such as protein glycosylation and cell wall remodulations, presumably in order to stabilize protein structures and the cell envelope. These stress responses would also be relevant for putative life on Mars, which-given the environmental conditions-likely developed chaotropic defence strategies such as stabilized confirmations of biomacromolecules or the formation of cell clusters.

### Keywords
Debaryomyces hansenii, Mars, Perchlorate, Martian brines, Astrobiology, Stress response

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany, Berlin

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Lasch
ZBS6, Proteomics and Spectroscopy, Robert Koch-Institute, Germany, Berlin


