### Accession
PXD030445

### Title
Phospho-docking protein 14-3-3 regulates microtubule-associated proteins in oocytes including the chromosomal passenger Borealin.

### Description
Global regulation of spindle-associated proteins is crucial in oocytes due to the absence of centrosomes and their very large cytoplasmic volume, but little is known about how this is achieved beyond involvement of the Ran-importin pathway.  We previously uncovered a novel regulatory mechanism in Drosophila oocytes, in which the phospho-docking protein 14-3-3 suppresses microtubule binding of Kinesin-14/Ncd away from chromosomes.  Here we report systematic identification of microtubule-associated proteins regulated by 14-3-3 from Drosophila oocytes.  Proteins from ovary extract were co-sedimented with microtubules in the presence or absence of a 14-3-3 inhibitor.  Through quantitative mass-spectrometry, we identified proteins or complexes whose ability to binding microtubules is suppressed by 14-3-3, including the chromosomal passenger complex (CPC), the centralspindlin complex and Kinesin-14/Ncd.  We showed that 14-3-3 binds to the disordered region of Borealin, and this binding is regulated differentially by two phosphorylations on Borealin.  Mutations at these two phospho-sites compromised normal Borealin localisation and centromere bi-orientation in oocytes, showing that phospho-regulation of 14-3-3 binding is important for Borealin localisation and function.

### Sample Protocol
Pellets from microtubule cosedimentation were separated using a NuPAGE 12% Bis-Tris gel with MOPS running buffer and stained with Colloidal Blue Staining Kit (Invitrogen).  2 lanes were run for each pellet.  The gel region containing the tubulin band was excised and discarded from both sample and control lanes.  The remaining gel regions were trypsin-digested and reduced/alkylated using standard procedures (Shevchenko et al., 2007).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with an equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as described by Rappsilber et al. (2003).  Peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated 40x by vacuum centrifugation.  Samples were prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting them to 5 μL with 0.1% TFA.  MS-analysis was performed on an Orbitrap™ Fusion™ Lumos™ tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK).  Peptides were separated by a PepMapTM RSLC C18 EasySpray column (2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK), operating at 50°C.  Survey scans were recorded at 120,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 4.0e5, and injection time of 50ms. MS2 was performed in the ion trap at a rapid scan mode, with ion target of 2.0E4 and HCD fragmentation77 with normalized collision energy of 27. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.4 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2. Dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform version 1.5.2.8 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Drosophila melanogaster complete/reference proteome (Uniprot, released in September 2016), using the Andromeda search engine. For the first search, peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine, was set as variable modifications. Label-free quantitation analysis was performed by employing the MaxLFQ algorithm. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
14-3-3, Quantitative proteomics, Drosophila, Microtubule-associated proteins, Borealin., Oocytes, Chromosomal passenger complex

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WCCB,University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Charlotte Repton

### Lab Head
Dr Hiroyuki Ohkura
WCCB,University of Edinburgh


