### Accession
PXD007767

### Title
Novel stool-based protein biomarkers for improved colorectal cancer screening

### Description
Fecal immunochemical tests (FIT) detecting hemoglobin in stool are widely used for non-invasive colorectal cancer (CRC) screening, but their sensitivity leaves room for improvement. Our aim is to identify novel protein biomarkers in stool that outperform or complement hemoglobin in detecting CRCs and advanced adenomas (AAs).  Stool samples (one series of 12 CRCs and 10 controls, and a second series of 81 CRCs, 40 AAs, 43 non-advanced adenomas and 129 controls) were analyzed by mass-spectrometry and searched for human proteins. Classification and regression tree and logistic regression analyses were performed to identify protein combinations that differentiated CRCs and/or AAs from controls. Antibody-based assays for four selected proteins were performed on an independent series of FIT samples (14 CRCs, 16 AAs, 18 non-advanced adenomas and 24 controls) Results: In total, 834 human proteins were identified, of which 29 were significantly enriched in CRCs versus controls in both stool sample series. Combinations of four proteins reached sensitivities of 80% and 45% for detecting CRCs and AAs, at 95% specificity, which was higher than hemoglobin alone.

### Sample Protocol
1D-SDS gel electrophoresis and sample processing for nanoLC-MS/MS proteomics analysis To avoid bias in this label-free proteomics experiment (2), we loaded equal amounts of protein (~30μg) from sample series 1 in an alternating order of control and CRC, and separated on precast 4-12% gradient SDS-PAGE.The samples of sample series 2 were also loaded in an alternating order of control, adenoma, advanced adenoma and CRC on a precast 12% SDS-PAGE gel and ran shortly into the gel until the proteins entered the running gel. For series 1 the gel was cut in 10 bands, while for series 2 the entire unresolved protein band was digested with trypsin. Peptide eluates were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and dissolved in 4% acetonitrile + 0.5% TFA.   LC-MS/MS For both sample series 1 and 2, peptides were separated by an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system (Dionex LC-Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands), equipped with a 20 cm x 75 µm ID fused silica column custom packed with 3 µm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua (Dr Maisch GMBH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After injection, peptides were trapped at 6 μl/min on a 10 mm × 100 μm ID trap column packed with 5 μm 120 Å ReproSil Pur C18 aqua at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water; buffer B: 80% ACN + 0.5% acetic acid in ultrapure water) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 60 min (90 min inject-to-inject) in the 10-gel band for sample series 1 and 90 min (120 min inject-to-inject) in the single-shot for sample series 2. Samples were injected in alternating order of control-CRC for sample series 1 and control-adenoma-advanced adenoma-CRC for sample series 2. In addition, gel bands from sample series 1 were injected by band number, starting at band one containing high molecular weight proteins for all samples. Followed by band 2 for all samples and further to band 10 containing the low molecular weight proteins. Any instrument performance drift is equally distributed over both sample groups, thereby minimizing group bias by experiment design.   For sample series 1, the eluting peptides were ionized at 1.7 kV in a Nanomate Triversa Chip-based nanospray source using a Triversa LC coupler (Advion, Ithaca, NJ) and detected on a LTQ-FT hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 50.000 in the ICR cell using a target value of 1E6 charges. In parallel, following an FT pre-scan, the top-5 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the linear ion trap (3 amu isolation width, 30 ms activation, 35% normalized activation energy, Q value of 0.25 and a threshold of 5000 counts). Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 seconds.   For sample series 2, the eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, Bremen, Germany). Intact masses were measured at resolution 70.000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges. The top 10 peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (4 amu isolation width, 25% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 17.500 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 2E5 charges and an underfill ratio of 0.1% resulting in an intensity threshold of 1.3E3. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot human reference proteome fasta file, release January 2014, no fragments; 61552 entries using MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and methionine oxidation (Met+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm (default MaxQuant settings). Peptide and protein identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. Proteins that could not be differentiated based on MS/MS spectra alone were grouped to protein groups that are referred to as the first protein in that group (default MaxQuant settings). Protein abundance was quantified by label free spectral counting

### Publication Abstract
Screening to detect colorectal cancer (CRC) in an early or premalignant state is an effective method to reduce CRC mortality rates. Current stool-based screening tests, e.g. fecal immunochemical test (FIT), have a suboptimal sensitivity for colorectal adenomas and difficulty distinguishing adenomas at high risk of progressing to cancer from those at lower risk. We aimed to identify stool protein biomarker panels that can be used for the early detection of high-risk adenomas and CRC. Proteomics data (LC-MS/MS) were collected on stool samples from adenoma (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;71) and CRC patients (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;81) as well as controls (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;129). Colorectal adenoma tissue samples were characterized by low-coverage whole-genome sequencing to determine their risk of progression based on specific DNA copy number changes. Proteomics data were used for logistic regression modeling to establish protein biomarker panels. In total, 15 of the adenomas (15.8%) were defined as high risk of progressing to cancer. A protein panel, consisting of haptoglobin (Hp), LAMP1, SYNE2, and ANXA6, was identified for the detection of high-risk adenomas (sensitivity of 53% at specificity of 95%). Two panels, one consisting of Hp and LRG1 and one of Hp, LRG1, RBP4, and FN1, were identified for high-risk adenomas and CRCs detection (sensitivity of 66% and 62%, respectively, at specificity of 95%). Validation of Hp as a biomarker for high-risk adenomas and CRCs was performed using an antibody-based assay in FIT samples from a subset of individuals from the discovery series (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;158) and an independent validation series (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;795). Hp protein was significantly more abundant in high-risk adenoma FIT samples compared to controls in the discovery (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;0.036) and the validation series (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;9e-5). We conclude that Hp, LAMP1, SYNE2, LRG1, RBP4, FN1, and ANXA6 may be of value as stool biomarkers for early detection of high-risk adenomas and CRCs. &#xa9; 2019 Authors. Journal of Pathology published by John Wiley &amp; Sons Ltd on behalf of Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

### Keywords
Human, Screening, Biomarker, Stool, Crc, Colorectal cancer, Label-free

### Affiliations
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
OncoProteomics Laboratory, dept of Medical Oncology, VUmc Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Ramona Jimenez
OncoProteomics Laboratory, Dept of Medical Oncology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


