### Accession
PXD023668

### Title
Yeast response to protein misfolding induced by azetidine-2-carboxylic acid (AZC)

### Description
To identify proteins that interact with the yeast Tsa1 peroxiredoxin, we utilized an N-terminal Myc-tagged version of Tsa1 with a mutation in its resolving cysteineresidue (Tsa1-C171S) to trap and detect redox-dependent interactions. Yeast cells were left untreated, or treated with AZC or hydrogen peroxide prior to immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry used to identify co-immunoprecipitating proteins.

### Sample Protocol
A tsa1 deletion mutant containing Myc-Tsa1-C171S was grown to mid-exponential phase in SD media and treated with hydrogen peroxide or AZC for two hours. A control tsa1 mutant strain containing vector alone was included for comparison. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (100 mM PBS pH 7.4, 1 mM PMSF, containing a protease inhibitors cocktail, Roche). Protein extracts were incubated with EZ red anti-myc affinity beads (Sigma), pre-equilibrated in IPP50 buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 50 mM NaCl), for four hours at 4oC. Beads were washed three times with IPP50 buffer and proteins eluted using 2x BOLT Sample buffer (Thermo Scientific) at 95oC. For protein identification, protein samples were run a short distance into SDS-PAGE gels and stained using colloidal Coomassie blue (Sigma). Total proteins were excised, trypsin digested and identified using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (performed by the Biomolecular Analysis Core Facility, The University of Manchester).

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using a Thermo Scientific Velos Pro Mass Spectrometer. The digestion enzyme was Trypsin (cleaves on R and K with the exception of C-terminal P obstructing it; not independent; not semi-specific (i.e., fully specific)). The Max # accepted missed cleavages: 1. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (+57), Variable modifications: Oxidation (M) (+16), Precursor tolerance: 0.6 Da, Fragmentation tolerance: 0.5 Da. The software generating the peaklist was Thermo’s ExtractMSN (version 5.0) and the search engine was Mascot v2.4.1. The database searched was SGD (version 2015-01-13; 6, 713 entries (or proteins) searched). The estimation of false discovery rate (FDR) for the protein level was 0.1% with an FDR of 8.7% - 10.3% at the peptide level calculated using Protein Prophet and Peptide Prophet. The version of Scaffold used to generate the report was 4.11.0.

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregation is the abnormal association of misfolded proteins into larger, often insoluble structures that can be toxic during aging and in protein aggregation-associated diseases. Previous research has established a role for the cytosolic Tsa1 peroxiredoxin in responding to protein misfolding stress. Tsa1 is also known to downregulate the cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA) pathway as part of the response to hydrogen peroxide stress. However, whether the cAMP/PKA pathway is involved in protein misfolding stress is not known. Using transcriptomics, we examined the response to protein misfolding stress and found upregulation of numerous stress gene functions and downregulation of many genes related to protein synthesis and other growth-related processes consistent with the well-characterized environmental stress response. The scope of the transcriptional response is largely similar in wild-type and tsa1 mutant strains, but the magnitude is dampened in the strain lacking Tsa1. We identified a direct protein interaction between Tsa1 and the Bcy1 regulatory subunit of PKA that is present under normal growth conditions and explains the observed differences in gene expression profiles. This interaction is increased in a redox-dependent manner in response to nascent protein misfolding, via Tsa1-mediated oxidation of Bcy1. Oxidation of Bcy1 causes a reduction in cAMP binding by Bcy1, which dampens PKA pathway activity, leading to a targeted reprogramming of gene expression. Redox regulation of the regulatory subunit of PKA provides a mechanism to mitigate the toxic consequences of protein misfolding stress that is distinct to stress caused by exogenous sources of reactive oxygen species.

### Keywords
Peroxiredoxin, Yeast, Protein misfolding

### Affiliations
University of Manchester

### Submitter
Chris Grant

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Grant
University of Manchester


