### Accession
PXD001994

### Title
miR-126 Governs Human Leukemia Stem Cell Quiescence and Therapeutic Resistance

### Description
In acute myeloid leukemia (AML), leukemia stem cells (LSC) play a central role in disease progression and recurrence due to their intrinsic capacity for self-renewal and chemotherapy resistance. Whereas epigenetic mechanisms balance normal blood stem cell self-renewal and fate decisions, mutation and dysregulation of epigenetic regulators are considered fundamental to leukemia initiation and progression. Alterations in miRNA function represent a non-canonical epigenetic mechanism influencing malignant hematopoiesis, however the function of miRNA in human LSC remains undetermined. Here we show that miRNA profiling of fractionated AML populations defines an LSC-specific signature that is highly prognostic for patient survival. Gain- and loss-of-function analyses demonstrated that miR-126 restrained cell cycle progression, prevented differentiation, and increased self-renewal of human LSC. By targeting the G0 to G1 gatekeeper CDK3, miR-126 preserved LSC quiescence and promoted chemotherapy resistance. Thus, in AML, miRNAs influence patient outcome through post-transcriptional regulation of  stemness programs in LSC.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (500,000 cells per experimental condition, in biological triplicate) were lysed with lysis buffer consisting of 6M Guanidinium Hydrochloride, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH8.5. Samples were boiled at 95C for 5 mins, after which they were sonicated for 3x 10sec in a BioRuptor sonication waterbath system. Samples were diluted 1:3 with digestion buffer (10% Acetonitrile, 25mM Tris pH 8.5), and LysC (MS grade, Wako) was added at 1:50 (protein : enzyme) ratio. Samples were incubated for 4hrs at 37C, after which they were further diluted to 1:10 with digestion buffer. Trypsin (MS grade, Promega) was added at 1:100, and samples were incubated overnight at 37C. Subsequently, samples were diluted 1:2 with 2% TFA and frozen at -80C. Lysates were subjected to SCX fractionation in a StageTip format, where 6 discs of C18 material (3M) were packed into a 200ul tip. Tips were activated with 100ul of 100% Acetonitrile, and then washed with 100ul 0.2% TFA prior to sample loading. Samples were loaded using a centrifuge at 4,000 x rpm, after which the tips were washed 2x with 100ul of 0.2% TFA. 5 fractions were eluted with 80ul of 50, 75, 125, 200 and 300mM Ammonium Acetate in 20% Acetonitrile and 0.5% Formic Acid, and the final 6th fraction was eluted with 80ul 5% (v/v) Ammonium hydroxide, 80% (v/v) Acetronitrile. The fractions were concentrated to dryness in a speedvac, after which they were reconstituted in 1% TFA, 2% Acetonitrile for MS analysis. Each fraction was analyzed in technical duplicate on a 140min gradient using a 50cm EasySpray column, an EasyLC1000 and an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.5.2.8, standard settings  LFQ enabled, 3 unique peptides p. protein Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (protein N-term),Gln->pyro-Glu, Glu->pyro-Glu Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) FDR: 0.01 Match between runs enabled

### Publication Abstract
To investigate miRNA function in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) stem cells (LSC), we generated a prognostic LSC-associated miRNA signature derived from functionally validated subpopulations of AML samples. For one signature miRNA, miR-126, high bioactivity aggregated all in vivo patient sample LSC activity into a single sorted population, tightly coupling miR-126 expression to LSC function. Through functional studies, miR-126 was found to restrain cell cycle progression, prevent differentiation, and increase self-renewal of primary LSC in vivo. Compared with prior results showing miR-126 regulation of normal hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) cycling, these functional stem effects are opposite between LSC and HSC. Combined transcriptome and proteome analysis demonstrates that miR-126 targets the PI3K/AKT/MTOR signaling pathway, preserving LSC quiescence and promoting chemotherapy resistance.

### Keywords
Aml, Stem cells, Scx, Global proteomics, Mir126

### Affiliations
University Health Network, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
University Health Network

### Submitter
Erwin Schoof

### Lab Head
Dr John E. Dick
University Health Network, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre


