### Accession
PXD029230

### Title
APOE4 cell-specific mechanisms underlying cerebrovascular disorder precede neuronal and synaptic dysfunction and cognitive deficits in mice

### Description
Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), the main susceptibly gene for Alzheimer’s disease1–5, exerts cerebrovascular toxicity6 leading to blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown in humans7–9 and  APOE4 transgenic mice10–13. Moreover, an early BBB dysfunction predicts cognitive decline in humans7. However, the comprehensive large-scale analysis of cell-specific mechanisms underlying APOE4 cerebrovascular disorder and how it relates to neuronal disorder is lacking. Using single-nucleus RNA-sequencing, phosphoproteome and proteome analysis14–17 here we show that APOE4 compared to APOE3 leads to early disruption of the BBB transcriptome in 2-3-month old APOE4 knock-in mice18  followed by dysregulation in protein signaling networks. This includes proteins regulating cell junctions, cytoskeleton, clathrin-mediated transport, and translation in brain endothelium, and transcription and RNA-splicing suggestive of DNA damage in pericytes. Changes in the BBB signaling mechanisms paralleled an early, progressive BBB breakdown and loss of pericytes starting at 2-3 months of age. The BBB breakdown preceded loss of neurites, post-synaptic interactome dysregulation, and behavioral deficits that developed 2-5 months later, and was associated with astrocyte and microglia response protecting BBB integrity. Thus, disruption of the BBB cell-specific signaling mechanisms could be an initial central contributor to APOE4-mediated neuronal disorder, and possibly a major target to correct APOE4-related cognitive deficits.

### Sample Protocol
Samples: mouse brain, isolated microvessels from APOE3 (control)/.APOE4 (test)  mutant mice. Samples are 4 replicates labeled using TMT: APOE3: 126, 127N, 127C and 128N, APOE4: 128C, 129N, 129C and 130N The quenched peptide samples were combined then initially fractionated followed by offline Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography with a RP C4 stationary phase chemistry .The original 50 fractionated peptides were orthogonally concatenated to 10 combined fractions. Sample processing include: total protein quantitation (10 fractions), protein phosphorylation quantitation with 10 fractions using Fe-NTA enrichment and 10 fractions using TiO2 enrichemnt. Each TiO2 and Fe-NTA enriched fractions were collected separately for their phosphopeptide content for a total 20 factionLC-MS analysis was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer  LC-MS analysis of native peptide fractions:  LC-MS was carried out on an EASY-nLC 1000 (coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the Byonic search algorithm (Protein Metrics) and Uniprot mouse database.  PD-Byonic search parameters for native peptide fractions were as follows: fully Tryptic peptides with no more than 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 20 ppm, and a maximum of 3 common modifications and 2 rare modifications.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT6plex addition to lysine and peptide N-termini were static modifications.  Methionine oxidation and lysine acetylation were common dynamic modifications (up to 2 each).  Methionine loss on protein N-termini, methionine loss + acetylation on protein N-termini, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine were rare dynamic modifications (only 1 each).  Percolator FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed).  Spectrum file retention time calibration was used with TMT6plex addition to peptide N-termini and lysines as static modifications.  Reporter ion quantification used a co-isolation threshold of 20% and average reporter S/N threshold of 10.  Normalization was performed on total peptide amount and scaling was performed on all average.  Peptide and protein FDRs were set at 0.001 (strict) and 0.01 (relaxed), with peptide confidence at least medium, lower confidence peptides excluded, minimum peptide length set at 6, and apply strict parsimony set to true.

### Publication Abstract
Apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4), the main susceptibility gene for Alzheimer's disease, leads to blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown in humans and mice. Remarkably, BBB dysfunction predicts cognitive decline and precedes synaptic deficits in APOE4 human carriers. How APOE4 affects BBB and synaptic function at a molecular level, however, remains elusive. Using single-nucleus RNA-sequencing and phosphoproteome and proteome analysis, we show that APOE4 compared with APOE3 leads to an early disruption of the BBB transcriptome in 2-3-mo-old APOE4 knock-in mice, followed by dysregulation in protein signaling networks controlling cell junctions, cytoskeleton, clathrin-mediated transport, and translation in brain endothelium, as well as transcription and RNA splicing suggestive of DNA damage in pericytes. Changes in BBB signaling mechanisms paralleled an early, progressive BBB breakdown and loss of pericytes, which preceded postsynaptic interactome disruption and behavioral deficits that developed 2-5 mo later. Thus, dysregulated signaling mechanisms in endothelium and pericytes in APOE4 mice reflect a molecular signature of a progressive BBB failure preceding changes in synaptic function and behavior.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Blood-brain barrier, Interactome, Apoe4, Single cell rna-seq, Bbb breakdown, Phosphoproteome, Signaling networks

### Affiliations
USC
Zilkha Neurogenetic Insitute Deprtment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Department of Physiology and Neuroscience Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California

### Submitter
marcelo coba

### Lab Head
Dr Marcelo P. Coba
Zilkha Neurogenetic Insitute Deprtment of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences Department of Physiology and Neuroscience Keck School of Medicine University of Southern California


