### Accession
PXD033843

### Title
Duplicated ribosomal protein paralogs promote alternative translation and drug resistance

### Description
Ribosomes are often seen as monolithic machines produced from uniformly regulated genes. However, in yeast most ribosomal proteins come from duplicated genes. Here, we demonstrate that gene duplication may serve as a stress-adaptation mechanism modulating the global proteome through the differential expression of ribosomal protein paralogs. Our data indicate that the yeast paralog pair of the ribosomal protein L7/uL30 produces two differentially acetylated proteins. Under normal conditions most ribosomes incorporate the hypo-acetylated major form favoring the translation of genes with short open reading frames. Exposure to drugs, on the other hand, increases the production of ribosomes carrying the hyper-acetylated minor paralog that increases translation of long open reading frames. Many of these paralogs dependent genes encode cell wall proteins that could promote tolerance to drugs as their translation increases after exposure to drugs. Together the data reveal a mechanism of translation control through the differential use of near-identical ribosomal protein isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from total extract or sucrose purifieds fractions from yeast grown in normal conditions (untreated) or in presence of staurosporine (stauro)were purified and prepared for mass spectrometry. Samples containing 50 µg total proteins were treated with 5 mM DTT for 2 minutes at 95°C, cooled down to RT for 30 min then treated with 7.5 mM chloroacetamide at RT for 20 min in the dark. Following dilution with 3 volumes of 50 mM NH4HCO3, samples were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 µg of LysC (Promega) 39. Samples were purified and desalted on 100 µl ZipTips (Pierce), eluted in 1% formic acid / 50% acetonitrile, dried and resuspended in 30 µl of 1% formic acid. Following quantification at 205 nm, 1.5 µg of peptides were separated at the Plateforme de Protéomique (Université de Sherbrooke, Canada) on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system using an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex) followed by an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 µm x 50 cm, Dionex) with a 5%-35% of 90% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid over 240 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. Samples were ionized by an EasySpray source and transferred to an OrbiTrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the column temperature to 40°C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350-1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 25% and resolution 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data files were generated by the Xcalibur (v4.3.73.11) software.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (v2.0.1.0) and Uniprot S. cerevisiae database (31/05/2021, 6079 entries). The settings used were: enzyme: LysC (K not before P); miscleavages: maximum of 4; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation on C; variable modifications: carbamylation on K and N-termini, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation; precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm; PSM FDR, protein FDR and site decoy fraction were set at 0.05. Peptides with the “Reverse” or “Potential contaminant” attributes were removed from the analysis. The intensities of the N-terminal peptides specific for uL30A and uL30B were summed and classified as N-terminal acetylated or not. Percentage of acetylation or paralog ratios were calculated within samples, hence no normalization was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paralogs, Drpg, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Universite de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Mathieu Catala

### Lab Head
Dr Sherif Abou Elela
Universite de Sherbrooke


