### Accession
PXD010304

### Title
Proteome and secretome of HepaRG cells

### Description
Primary human hepatocytes, the gold standard for in vitro studies of liver-related functions, suffer from uncertain availability and high variability in cell activity. Over years, a number of alternative hepatic cell lines have lost major liver-like functions, but not HepaRG cells. Therefore, their increasing use worldwide today arouses the need for establishing a reference functional status of differentiated HepaRG cells known as HPR116, which originate from the initial cell bank. Deep proteome and secretome analyses enabled us to show that they nicely express, at levels generally close to those in primary hepatocytes, master regulators of the hepatic phenotype, structural elements that ensure liver-like polarisation and factors supporting their transdifferentiation properties. Their highly differentiated status, mitochondrial functionality, hepatokine secretion ability and response to insulin was verified. Overall, the HepaRG cell system appears as robust surrogate cell system to primary hepatocytes, versatile enough to study not only xenobiotic detoxification but also the control of hepatic energy metabolism, secretory function and disease-related signalling pathways.

### Sample Protocol
HepaRG cells (HPR116; Biopredic International, France) were cultivated in 6-well plates under serum-free conditions with medium exchange every 2 days. After differentiation, supernatants containing secreted proteins and intracellular protein extracts (on plate extraction using N-lauryl sarcosine) were analysed. Both biological and injection replicates were considered. Intracellular protein extracts were trypsin digested with trypsin-to-protein-ratio of 1:100, either in solution or in-gel (6 protein bands). After concentration using ultrafiltration (MWCO 5 kDa), albumin was removed from secreted protein extracts using antibody-coated sepharose beads (Proteome purify 2; R&D systems, France), and the Albumin-depleted fraction was digested in-solution (trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:90). Intracellular (1µg) and extracellular (500ng) peptide mixtures were analysed on a nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters) coupled to an Impact-HD Q-TOF mass spectrometer equipped with Captive Spray ion-source and nanoBooster (Bruker Daltonics, Germany). The platform was controlled via Hystar (v 3.2) and OtofControl (Rev 3.4; Bruker Daltonics). The solvent system consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Desalting was done using a precolumn (intracellular: Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 µm x 2 cm, 5µm; extracellular: BEH C18, 180 μm x 20 mm, 5 µm; Waters) at 1% of B and a flow rate of 10 (intracellular) or 5 (extracellular) µl/min for 10 (intracellular) or 3 (extracellular) minutes. Separation was performed using a 180 (intracellular) or 60 (extracellular) minutes gradient from 1-43% (intracellular) or 5-35% (extracellular) of B at 450 nL/min using a 50 cm (intracellular: Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm; Thermo Scientific) or 25 cm (BEH C18, 25 cm x 75 µm, 1.7 µm; Waters) column). The mass spectrometer was operating in positive mode: source temperature of 150°C, dry gas flow of 3 L/min and spray voltage of 1300 V. Spectra were acquired by automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes in the 100-2200 m/z range with a fixed cycle time of 3.5 seconds. MS acquisition rate was set to 2.5 Hz and MS/MS acquisition rate ranged from 3 to 30 Hz depending on the precursor intensity. Preferably, ions with a charge of 2 to 5 were selected for CID using nitrogen. Ions were excluded from fragmentation after the acquisition of 1 MS/MS spectrum and exclusion was released after 0.5 minute, but only if precursor intensity did not exceed the value during the first selection by a factor of three. Online correction of TOF calibration was performed using hexakis(2,2,3,3,-tetrafluoropropoxy)phosphazine ([M+H]+ 922.0098 m/z) as lock-mass which was spiked into the dopant solvent and thus continuously delivered together with the nebulizer gas. In a third experiment, proteins were extracted from three different batches of cryopreserved differentiated HepaRG cells, and then separated on a 12% polyacrylamide gel (6 bands). After trypsin digestion, LC-MS analyses were performed using an Agilent 1100 series nanoLC-Chip/MS system (Agilent Technologies, USA) coupled to an amaZon ion trap (Bruker Daltonics). The system was fully controlled by HyStar 3.2 (Bruker Daltonics). The chip contained a Zorbax 300SB-C18 precolumn (43 mm×75 µm, 5 µm particle size) and a Zorbax 300SB-C18 enrichment column (40 nL, 5 µm particle size). The solvent system consisted of 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 2% water, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (solvent B). Samples were loaded onto the enrichment column at a flow rate set to 3.75 µL/min with solvent A. Elution was performed at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a 8–40% linear gradient (solvent B) in 60 min followed by a 4 min stage at 70% of solvent B before reconditioning the column at 8% of solvent B. MS spectra were acquired with the following settings: source temperature was set to 135°C while cone gas flow was at 3 L/min. The nanoelectrospray voltage was optimized to −1850 V. MS spectra were acquired in the positive ion mode on the mass range 250 to 1500 m/z using the standard enhanced resolution at a scan rate of 8100 m/z/s. Ion charge control was fixed at 200000 with a maximum injection time of 200 ms. For tandem MS experiments, the system was operated with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS modes. Fragmentation was performed using argon as the collision gas. The eight most abundant precursors were selected on each MS spectrum for further isolation and fragmentation with a preference for doubly charged ions (absolute threshold of 5000, relative threshold 5%). Ions were excluded after the acquisition of 1 MS/MS spectra and the exclusion was released after 0.3 min. The Smart Parameters Setting option was used for the selected precursor ions. The MS/MS spectra were acquired using a mass range from 100 to 2000 m/z. The Ion Charge Control was fixed at 400000 and 2 scans were averaged to obtain a MS/MS spectrum.

### Data Protocol
Intracellular and extracellular proteome: MS raw data processing was performed in MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) with default parameters if not specified otherwise. Using the Andromeda search engine, peak lists were searched against human protein sequences (Taxonomy ID 9606) downloaded from SwissProt (07-10-2016). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy. The “match between runs” option was enabled in order to transfer identifications from one run to another using a match time window of 0.5 minutes after retention time alignment based on an alignment time window of 10 minutes. Data normalisation and protein quantification was performed using the implemented MaxLFQ algorithm, keeping unmodified counterpart peptides for quantification. For the extracellular proteome (“Secretome”), only proteins identified in at least one of the three injection replicates in all three depletion replicates were kept for further analyses. Our data on HepaRG were then compared to previous proteome data from primary human hepatocytes and HepG2.  Batch-to-batch reproducibility: Peak lists in mascot generic format (.mgf) were generated using Data Analysis (version 4.0; Bruker Daltonics) and searched against a SwissProt-derived combined target-decoy database using Mascot (version 2.4.1; Matrix science, England). During database search, up to one missed cleavage by trypsin and two variable modifications (oxidation of Methionine (+16 Da) and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57 Da) were considered. The search window was set to 0.25 Da for both precursor and fragment ions. Only proteins with an ion score above 25 and an ion minus identity score of at least 2 were accepted resulting in a protein false discovery rate (FDR) below 1 % based on the number of decoy hits (Scaffold 3 software; version 3.6.5; Proteome Software Inc., USA). Only proteins with at least 4 spectra (taking into account only spectra specific for a given protein group) in at least one of the samples were retained.

### Publication Abstract
Of the hepatic cell lines developed for in vitro studies of hepatic functions as alternatives to primary human hepatocytes, many have lost major liver-like functions, but not HepaRG cells. The increasing use of the latter worldwide raises the need for establishing the reference functional status of early biobanked HepaRG cells. Using deep proteome and secretome analyses, the levels of master regulators of the hepatic phenotype and of the structural elements ensuring biliary polarity were found to be close to those in primary hepatocytes. HepaRG cells proved to be highly differentiated, with functional mitochondria, hepatokine secretion abilities, and an adequate response to insulin. Among differences between primary human hepatocytes and HepaRG cells, the factors that possibly support HepaRG transdifferentiation properties are discussed. The HepaRG cell system thus appears as a robust surrogate for primary hepatocytes, which is versatile enough to study not only xenobiotic detoxification, but also the control of hepatic energy metabolism, secretory function and disease-related mechanisms.

### Keywords
Functional assays, Copy numbers, Hpr116, Proteome, Secretome, Surrogate cell system to phh

### Affiliations
CNRS
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France

### Submitter
Fabrice BERTILE

### Lab Head
Dr Sarah Cianférani
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique, Analytical Science department, IPHC, CNRS, Strasbourg University, UMR7178, Strasbourg, France


