### Accession
PXD045842

### Title
Dual agonistic and antagonistic roles of ZC3H18 provides for co-activation of distinct nuclear RNA decay pathways

### Description
The RNA exosome is a versatile ribonuclease. In the nucleoplasm of mammalian cells, it is assisted by its adaptors the Nuclear EXosome Targeting (NEXT) complex and the PolyA eXosome Targeting (PAXT) connection. Via its association with the ARS2 and ZC3H18 proteins, NEXT/exosome is recruited to capped and short unadenylated transcripts. Conversely, PAXT/exosome was considered to target longer and adenylated substrates via their poly(A) tails. Here, mutational analysis of the core PAXT component ZFC3H1 uncovers a separate branch of the PAXT pathway, which targets short adenylated RNAs and relies on a direct ARS2-ZFC3H1 interaction. We further demonstrate that similar acidic-rich short linear motifs of ZFC3H1 and ZC3H18 compete for a common ARS2 epitope. Consequently, while promoting NEXT function, ZC3H18 antagonizes PAXT activity. We suggest that this unprecedented organization of RNA decay complexes provides co-activation of NEXT and PAXT at loci with abundant production of short exosome substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity enrichment experiments. Cells from a confluent 10 cm dish were standardly extracted in HT150 extraction buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150/200 mM NaCl, 0.5% v/v Triton X-100) freshly supplemented with protease inhibitors (Roche). Lysates were sheared by sonication for 3 x 5 s and clarified by centrifugation at 20,000 rcf for 10 min. Cleared lysates were incubated with Pierce anti-c-MYC magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) or ChromoTek GFP-TrapR Magnetic Particles M-270 (Proteintech) overnight at 4°C. Beads were washed 3x with HT150 extraction buffer and transferred 856 to a fresh tube for the final wash.

### Data Protocol
Mass-spectrometry and data processing. Three biological samples were prepared for each sample. After affinity enrichment, eluted proteins were precipitated on MagResyn HILIC beads in 70% acetonitrile, washed in 95% acetonitrile and 70% ethanol to remove detergents (Batth et al., 2019) and digested with trypsin and Lys-C. The resulting peptides were desalted on StageTips and subjected to LCMS analysis on an EASY nano-LC 1200 system (80 min gradient) coupled to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS data were acquired by data-dependent acquisition and subjected to MaxQuant database searches (Cox and Mann, 2008) using a human Uniprot reviewed sequence database (2021), ‘match between runs’, and ‘label-free quantitation’. Processed LFQ intensities of identified proteins were normalized to the LFQ intensity of the bait protein. Subsequently, Student's t-test was performed to obtain differential protein enrichment in Z1 (1-209, WT) relative to Z1 (1-209 (mutant) affinity enrichment experiment.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA exosome is a versatile ribonuclease. In the nucleoplasm of mammalian cells, it is assisted by its adaptors the nuclear exosome targeting (NEXT) complex and the poly(A) exosome targeting (PAXT) connection. Via its association with the ARS2 and ZC3H18 proteins, NEXT/exosome is recruited to capped and short unadenylated transcripts. Conversely, PAXT/exosome is considered to target longer and adenylated substrates via their poly(A) tails. Here, mutational analysis of the core PAXT component ZFC3H1 uncovers a separate branch of the PAXT pathway, which targets short adenylated RNAs and relies on a direct ARS2-ZFC3H1 interaction. We further demonstrate that similar acidic-rich short linear motifs of ZFC3H1 and ZC3H18 compete for a common ARS2 epitope. Consequently, while promoting NEXT function, ZC3H18 antagonizes PAXT activity. We suggest that this organization of RNA decay complexes provides co-activation of NEXT and PAXT at loci with abundant production of short exosome substrates.

### Keywords
Nuclear rna decay, Next, Paxt, Activation, Zc3h18, Inhibition, Ars2

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark
University of Southern Denmark, Department og Biochemistry and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Jens Andersen

### Lab Head
Dr Jens S. Andersen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


