### Accession
PXD020773

### Title
Proteomics analysis of ligated and recombinant human histones H3 and H4

### Description
A library of unmodified and differentially modified human histones H3 and H4 was prepared using native chemical ligation as described previously (Bartke et al., 2010; Nakamura et al., 2019). The modification status of histone H3 and H4 products was confirmed by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
One µg aliquots of the ligated or recombinant histone H3 or H4 proteins were resolved on 4-20% polyacrylamide gel (WedgeWell™ Tris-Glycin-Minigel, Invitrogen) followed by Coomassie staining. Histone protein bands were excised from the gel, destained in a destaining buffer (100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate in 50% acetonitrile) and prepared for LC-MS analysis using the hybrid derivatization method (Maile et al., 2015, Mol Cell Proteomics 14:1148 – PMID:25680960) adopted for in-gel digestion. Specifically, after destaining, protein were reduced and alkylated with DTT and iodoacetamide, respectively, and the gel pieces were dehydrated with 200 μL of 100% acetonitrile for 10 min. at room temperature (RT) after which acetonitrile was discarded. Propionylation solution was prepared by mixing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8.5 (TEAB) and freshly prepared 1% (v/v) propionic anhydride solution in water in 100:1 ratio. Immediately after preparation, 100 µl of propionylation solution was added to the dehydrated gel pieces followed by 10 min. incubation at RT. The propionylation reaction was quenched by the addition of 10 μl of 80 mM hydroxylamine and subsequent incubation for 20 min at RT. The propionylation solution was discarded and gel pieces were dehydrated with 200 μL of 100% acetonitrile for 10 min. at RT. After the acetonitrile solution was discarded and 20 μl of 50 ng/μl trypsin solution in 100 mM TEAB was added. Trypsin digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. The next day, 50 μL of 100 mM TEAB solution was added to each sample followed by 30 min. incubation in a thermo shaker (37 °C, 1500 rpm). A 1% (v/v) solution of phenyl isocyanate (PIC) in acetonitrile was freshly prepared and 15 μl added to each sample and incubated for 60 min. at 37 °C. Samples were acidified by the addition of 24 μl 1% trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were desalted with C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions, dried in a speed-vac, re-suspended in 50 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and subsequently used for LC-MS analysis.  For LC-MS analysis of modified histone proteins the acidified histone peptide digests were analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, U.S.A.) coupled to a nanoEasy LC (Thermo Scientific, Odense, Denmark). Briefly, samples were automatically loaded onto an in-house packed 2 cm 100 µm ID C18 pre-column with buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and then eluted and separated on an in-house packed ReprosilPur C18-AQ (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) analytical column (20 cm x 75 µm ID) using a 35 min linear gradient from 0% to 40% buffer B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 300 to 1000) and MS/MS fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 or 15,000 respectively, with maximum injection times of 50 ms each. Up to twenty most intense ions were selected for HCD fragmentation depending on signal intensity. Dynamic exclusion was disabled.

### Data Protocol
For the quality control of modified histone proteins MS raw data files were manually analyzed using Skyline software (version 20.1.0.31). Briefly, a list of unmodified as well as differentially modified histone H3 and H4 peptides was manually compiled and used to evaluate the modification status of histones in each sample. All lysine residues not bearing acetylation or methylation were considered to be propionylated and all peptide N-termini were considered to be modified with phenyl isocyanate (PIC). MS1 filtering was set to include 3 isotope peaks and the MS1 resolving power was set at 120,000. MS2 resolving power was set at 15,000.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ligated histones, Recombinant histones

### Affiliations
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany

### Submitter
Andrey Tvardovskiy

### Lab Head
Dr Till Bartke
Institute of Functional Epigenetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Neuherberg, Germany


