### Accession
PXD031416

### Title
ZNF524 directly binds telomeres and supports their integrity via TRF2/RAP1

### Description
Telomeres are nucleoprotein structures at the ends of linear chromosomes. In humans, they consist of TTAGGG repeats, which are bound by dedicated proteins such as the shelterin complex. This complex consists of six proteins (TRF1, TRF2, RAP1, POT1, TPP1 and TIN2) and blocks unwanted DNA damage repair at telomeres, e.g. by suppressing non-homologous end joining (NHEJ) through its subunit TRF2. While shelterin does not work autonomously, additional direct telomere binding proteins have been described to function in a supplementary role. We here describe ZNF524, a zinc finger protein that directly binds to telomeric repeats with nanomolar affinity and reveal the base-specific sequence recognition by co-crystallization with telomeric DNA. ZNF524 localizes to telomeres and specifically maintains the presence of the TRF2/RAP1 subcomplex at telomeres without affecting the other shelterin members. Loss of ZNF524 concomitantly results in an increase in DNA damage signaling and recombination events. Overall, we identified ZNF524 as a direct telomere binding protein and propose that ZNF524 is involved in the maintenance of telomere integrity by promoting TRF2/RAP1 subcomplex binding.

### Sample Protocol
In-gel digestion was performed as previously described. Essentially, denatured proteins were separated on a 4-12% Bis-/Tris gel (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific) for 30 min at 180 V in 1x MES buffer (NuPAGE, Thermo Scientific). Proteins were fixed (7% acetic acid, 40% methanol) for 15 min and stained with Coomassie blue (Roth) according to manufacturer’s instructions for 15 min.  The samples were divided into 4 fractions each and  cut individually with a clean scalpel into 1 mm x 1 mm pieces. The gel pieces were destained (50% 50 mM NH4HCO3 (ABC), 50% ethanol) in several rounds, then dehydrated twice in 100% acetonitrile and its remnants removed using a Concentrator Plus (Eppendorf). The gel pieces were incubated with reduction buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 10 mM DTT) for 60 min at 56 °C followed by incubation with alkylation buffer (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 50 mM iodoacetamide) for 45 min at RT in the dark. The gel pieces were washed with 50 mM ABC once. Subsequently, two dehydration steps were performed and the acetonitrile was completely removed. The gel pieces were rehydrated in trypsin solution (50 mM ABC pH 8.0, 1 µg trypsin per sample, Promega) overnight at 37 °C, the supernatant was collected and the digested peptides were extracted by two rounds of incubation with extraction buffer (30% acetonitrile) and two rounds of 100% acetonitrile for 15 min at RT with agitation. In each round, supernatants were recovered and combined. The acetonitrile was evaporated in the Concentrator Plus to reduce the volume to 50-100 µL. StageTip purification of the samples was performed as previously described. Therefore, 2 layers of Empore C18 material (3M) were stacked in a 200 µL pipet tip and the material activated with methanol, equilibrated with mixture B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and then washed with mixture A (0.1% formic acid). After applying the sample, the material was washed with mixture A and the sample eluted in 30 µL mixture B. The excess acetonitrile was evaporated in the Concentrator Plus and final volume adjusted to 14 µL with mixture A. 5 µL of sample was injected. The desalted and eluted peptides were loaded on an in-house packed C18 column (New Objective, 50 cm long, 75 µm inner diameter) for reverse-phase chromatography. The EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific) was mounted to an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) and peptides were eluted from the column in an optimized 90-min gradient of 2-32% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid solution at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was used in a data-dependent acquisition mode with one MS full scan followed by up to 20 MS/MS scans using HCD fragmentation. MS scans were conducted with 60,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 28 ms and MS/MS scans with 15,000 resolution at a maximum injection time of 28 ms.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) and searched against the human Uniprot database (95,934 entries). Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation (Met) and protein N-acetylation were considered as variable modifications. For enzyme specificity, trypsin was selected with a maximum of two miscleavages. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate of 0.01 and for known contaminants, proteins groups only identified by site, and reverse hits of the MaxQuant results. LFQ quantification (without fast LFQ) using at least 2 LFQ ratio counts and the match between run option were activated in the MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


