### Accession
PXD019750

### Title
Coordinate β-adrenergic inhibition of mitochondrial activity and angiogenesis arrest tumor growth

### Description
Mitochondrial metabolism has emerged as a promising target against the mechanisms of tumor growth. Herein, we have screened an FDA-approved library to identify drugs that inhibit mitochondrial respiration. The β1-blocker nebivolol specifically hinders oxidative phosphorylation in cancer cells by concertedly inhibiting Complex I and ATP synthase activities. Complex I inhibition is mediated by interfering the phosphorylation of NDUFS7. Inhibition of the ATP synthase is exerted by the overexpression and binding of the ATPase Inhibitory Factor 1 (IF1) to the enzyme. Remarkably, nebivolol also arrests tumor angiogenesis by arresting endothelial cell proliferation. Altogether, targeting mitochondria and angiogenesis triggers a metabolic and oxidative stress crisis that restricts the growth of colon and breast carcinomas. Nebivolol holds great promise to be repurposed for the treatment of cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondria were isolated from control and nebivolol-treated HCT116 colon cancer cells. Complex I of the electron transport chain was immunocapture and run into a 12% gel. A symmetrical gel was prepared to allocate one part to Coomassie staining and another to western blot. The band revealed by the phosphoserine antibody was used as a reference to locate and cut the gel band to perform the in-gel digestion.After drying, gel band were destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), were reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h at room temperature in darkness) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) and chymotrypsin (Roche). The gel pieces were shrunk by removing all liquid using sufficient ACN. Acetonitrile was pipetted out and the gel pieces were dried in a speedvac. Half of dried gel pieces were re-swollen in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.8 with 12.5 ng/μl trypsin for 1 hr in an ice-bath and the other half in 100 mM Tris HCl, 10 mM CaCl2 pH 8 with 25 ng/ μl for 1 hr in an ice-bath. The digestion buffer was removed and gels were covered again with 50 mM NH4HCO3 (trypsin) or 100 mM Tris HCl, 10 mM CaCl2 (chymotrypsin) and incubated at 37°C for 12 hr for trypsin and at 25ºC for chymotrypsin. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and then desalted onto ZipTip C18 Pipette tips (Millipore) until the mass spectrometric analysis.The desalted protein digest was dried, resuspended in 10 l of 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by RP-LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient from 5 to 25% solvent B in 68 min followed by gradient from 25 to 40% solvent B over 90 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30.000. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan), followed by  twenty data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 20), using an isolation width of 2 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 seconds periods.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using PEAKS Studio 8.5 search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Database search was performed against uniprot-homo sapiens.fasta (decoy-fusion database). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites, and tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys. False  discovery  rates  (FDR)  for  peptide  spectrum  matches  (PSM) was  limited  to  0.01. Only those proteins with at least two distinct peptides being discovered from LC/MS/MS analyses were considered reliably identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Rp-lc-ms/ms, Cells

### Affiliations
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
1 Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM);2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII; 3 Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre; 4 Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados (IMDEA) Food Institute, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049, Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Cristina Nuevo Tapioles

### Lab Head
Dr José M. Cuezva
1 Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM);2 Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras (CIBERER), ISCIII; 3 Instituto de Investigación Hospital 12 de Octubre; 4 Instituto Madrileño de Estudios Avanzados (IMDEA) Food Institute, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, 28049, Madrid, Spain.


