### Accession
PXD017587

### Title
Proteostasis disturbances and endoplasmic reticulum stress contribute to polycystic liver disease: new therapeutic targets.

### Description
Polycystic liver disease (PLD) is a group of genetic disorders characterized by bile duct dilatation and/or progressive development of multiple intrahepatic fluid-filled biliary cysts (>10), which are the main cause of morbidity. Current surgical and/or pharmacological therapies exert short-term and modest benefits, and thus liver transplantation represents the only curative option. Recently, novel PLD-causative genes, encoding for endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-resident proteins involved in protein biogenesis and transport, were identified. Here, we hypothesized that aberrant proteostasis contributes to PLD pathogenesis, representing a potential therapeutic target. In this regard, ER stress was assessed at transcriptional (qPCR), proteomic (mass spectrometry), morphological (transmission electron microscopy; TEM) and functional (20S proteasome activity) levels in different models of PLD (i.e., human and rat). Moreover, PCK rat (animal model of PLD) was employed to determine the effects of ER stress inhibitors [4-phenylbutyric acid (4-PBA)] and/or inducers [tunicamycin (TM)] in hepatic cytogenesis and, consequently, in the progression of the disease. Likewise, the impact of the aforementioned ER stress modulators was also analyzed on the expression of unfolded protein response (UPR) factors, the 20S proteasome activity, the mechanisms involved in the maintenance of ER proteostasis and the cell fate decisions (i.e., survival/apoptosis). Interestingly, the expression levels of the UPR factors were markedly upregulated in liver tissue from PLD patients and PCK rats, as well as in primary cultures of human and rat cystic cholangiocytes, compared to normal controls. Additionally, cystic cholangiocytes showed altered proteomic profiles, mainly related to proteostasis (i.e., synthesis, folding, trafficking and degradation of nascent proteins), marked enlargement of the ER lumen (by TEM), and hyperactivation of the 20S proteasome. Notably, chronic treatment of PCK rats with 4-PBA decreased liver weight, as well as both liver and cystic volumes, of animals under baseline or TM administration compared to control groups. In vitro, 4-PBA downregulated the expression (mRNA) of UPR effectors, normalized, at least in part, proteomic profiles related to protein synthesis, folding, trafficking and degradation, and reduced the proteasome hyperactivity in cystic cholangiocytes, reducing their hyperproliferation and apoptosis. Conclusion: Restoration of proteostasis in cystic cholangiocytes with 4-PBA halts hepatic cystogenesis, emerging as a novel and promising therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from control and 4-PBA-treated primary cultures of both normal and polycystic human and rat cholangiocytes was extracted by incubation in 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS for 30min room temperature under agitation. Protein was digested following the Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol (2) with minor modifications. Trypsin was added to a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:10, and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37ºC, dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ), and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide separation was performed on a nanoElute liquid chromatograph (Bruker) coupled online to a novel hybrid trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) – quadrupole time of flight (TOF) mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro) (Bruker) that uses the parallel accumulation – serial fragmentation (PASEF) acquisition method. An aliquot (200ng) of each sample was directly loaded in a 50ºC heated nanoElute FIFTEEN C18 (75µm x 150mm) analytical column (Bruker) and eluted at 400 nl/min with a 30 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile. Of note, the employed mass spectrometer takes advantage of the novel PASEF scan mode, which multiplies the sequencing speed without any loss in sensitivity,(3) and has been proven to provide outstanding analytical speed and sensibility for proteomics analyses.(4)  Protein identification and quantification in each sample were carried out using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics solutions). Searches were carried out against a database consisting of human or rat entries (Uniprot/Swissprot), with precursor and fragment tolerances of 20ppm and 0.05 Da. Only proteins identified with at least two peptides at false discovery rate (FDR) <1% were considered for further analysis.. Protein abundance was calculated by the PEAKSQ module, and quantitative data was loaded onto Perseus platform (5) and further processed (log2 transformation, imputation). A t-test was applied in order to determine the statistical significance of the differences detected. In addition, heatmaps were generated using this program for data visualization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Perseus., Whole cell extracts, Tims-tof pasef, Proteostasis, Polycystic liver disease (pld), 4-phenylbutyric acid (4-pba), Endoplasmic reticulum stress (er stress), Human and rat cholangiocytes, Peaksq

### Affiliations
CIC bioGUNE Proteomics Service Head
Proteomics Platform

### Submitter
Felix Elortza

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Elortza
CIC bioGUNE Proteomics Service Head


