### Accession
PXD021470

### Title
An engineered promoter-reporter for insoluble protein in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteome response upon expression of 3 proteins (mKate2, mKate2-MBP and mKate2-LipPks1) was studied by shotgun proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Single colonies were inoculated in 2mL SC-TRP medium and grown for 20h. Next day 250mL flasks with 25mL Mineral Medium + URA,HIS,LEU,TRP were inoculated to ~OD 0.1. Cultures were grown to exponential phase for 6h at 30°C, 250 RPM. ~2x10^8 cells from each flask were harvested and frozen at -80 °C. At least three replicates per strain, each one corresponding to a different flask, were used for data dependent proteomics analysis. Yeast cells were resuspended in 75 μl in [6M Guanidinium hydrochloride (GdnHCl), 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), 10 mM chloroacetamide (CAA), 100 mM Tris–HCl pH 8.5] at 95 °C and lysed using a Mixer Mill MM 400 (Retsch) set to 25 Hz for 5min at room temperature, followed by incubation in ThermoMixer (Eppendorff)  at 95°C at 2000RPM. Samples well centrifuged at 15000g for 10mins and 50μl of each sample supernatant were taken and mixed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein concentration was measured with Bradford method and concentration estimated with BSA as standard. A volume containing 100μg protein was used for digestion with 1μg Trypsin. Samples were digested for 8h at 37 °C under constant shaking at 400 RPM. Afterwards 10μl of 10% TFA was added and samples were cleaned and concentrated with Stage Tips using a C18 resin (Empore, 3M, USA). One μg of digested peptides for each sample was injected to a Cap‐LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a 75‐µm × 15 cm 2 µm C18 easy spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Flow rate was set to  1.2 µl/min. Prior to implementing a stepped gradient starting at 4% and ending in 40% acetonitrile in water over 60min, the peptides were trapped on a precolumn (µ-precolumn C18 PepMap 100, 5µm, 100Å). Samples were sprayed into an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF‐X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Parameters used for Mass spectrometry (MS)‐level scans were: Orbitrap resolution 60,000; AGC Target 1.0e6; maximum injection time 50 ms; intensity threshold 5.0e3; dynamic exclusion 25 s. Top 12 mode with HCD collision energy set to 28% (AGC target 1.0e4; maximum injection time, 22 ms) was used for Data‐dependent MS2 selection. Data was analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The following settings were used: Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) and Variable modifications: oxidation of methionine residues. First search mass tolerance 20 ppm and an MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. One missed cleavage was set for Trypsin. False discovery rate was set at 0.1%. S. cerevisiae database retrieved from Uniprot with proteome ID AUP000002311 was used for searching proteins in the samples. Sequences of heterologous proteins were added to this database. Label‐free quantification was used, the abundance of each protein is reported as the relative intensity with respect to total intensity of all identified peptides.

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis was performed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4. (Thermo Fisher Scientific) ANOVA (individual proteins) was done to compare the protein abundances among strains. Adjusted p-values referred in the main text were calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Hierarchical clustering and Principal component analysis were done in ClustVis (Metsalu et al. 2015) Complete-linkage clustering and correlation distance were used for hierarchical clustering of rows and columns.

### Publication Abstract
Protein misfolding and aggregation are linked to neurodegenerative diseases of mammals and suboptimal protein expression within biotechnology. Tools for monitoring protein aggregates are therefore useful for studying disease-related aggregation and for improving soluble protein expression in heterologous hosts for biotechnology purposes. In this work, we developed a promoter-reporter system for aggregated protein on the basis of the yeast native response to misfolded protein. To this end, we first studied the proteome of yeast in response to the expression of folded soluble and aggregation-prone protein baits and identified genes encoding proteins related to protein folding and the response to heat stress as well as the ubiquitin-proteasome system that are over-represented in cells expressing an aggregation-prone protein. From these data, we created and validated promoter-reporter constructs and further engineered the best performing promoters by increasing the copy number of upstream activating sequences and optimization of culture conditions. Our best promoter-reporter has an output dynamic range of approximately 12-fold upon expression of the aggregation-prone protein and responded to increasing levels of aggregated protein. Finally, we demonstrate that the system can discriminate between yeast cells expressing different prion precursor proteins and select the cells expressing folded soluble protein from mixed populations. Our reporter system is thus a simple tool for diagnosing protein aggregates in living cells and should be applicable for the health and biotechnology industries.

### Keywords
Yeast, Cytosolic, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
Technical University of Denmark
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
David Romero-Suarez

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Krogh Jensen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark


