### Accession
PXD003276

### Title
Comparison of the proteome of human adult and cord erythroid cells and changes in the proteome following reticulocyte maturation.

### Description
Cord blood stem cells are an attractive starting source for the production of red blood cells in vitro for therapy because of additional expansion potential compared to adult peripheral blood progenitors, and cord blood banks usually being more representative of national populations than blood donors.  Consequently it is important to establish how similar cord RBCs are to adult cells. In this study we used Multiplex TMTs combined with nanoLC-MS/MS to compare the proteome of adult and cord RBCs and reticulocytes. 2838 unique proteins were identified, providing the most comprehensive compendium of RBC proteins to date. Using stringent criteria 1674 proteins were quantified, and only a small number differed in amount between adult and cord RBC. We focussed on proteins critical for RBC function. Of these only the expected differences in globin subunits, along with higher levels of carbonic anhydrase 1 & 2 and aquaporin-1 in adult RBCs would be expected to have a phenotypic effect since they are associated with the differences in gaseous exchange between adults and neonates. Since the RBC and reticulocyte samples used were autologous, we catalogue the change in proteome following reticulocyte maturation. The majority of proteins (>60% of the 1671 quantified) reduced in abundance between 2 and 100-fold following maturation. However, ~5% were at a higher level in RBCs, localised almost exclusively to cell membranes, in keeping with the known clearance of intracellular recycling pools during reticulocyte maturation.  Overall, these data suggest that with respect to the proteome there is no barrier to the use of cord progenitors for the in vitro generation of RBCs for transfusion to adults other than the expression of fetal not adult haemoglobin.

### Sample Protocol
Adult RBCs and CD34+ cells, and CB RBCs and CD34+ cells were isolated from the same Leukocyte Reduction System cones and cord blood units respectively.  CD34+ cells were differentiated in our three-stage culture system, harvested on day 19 and passed through a PALL WBF leukocyte filter to isolate mature reticulocytes.  The RBCs and reticulocytes were separated into membrane and cytoplasmic fractions to reduce protein complexity for Mass Spectrometry (MS). Cells were washed twice in cold PBS, followed by 2 washes with iso-osmotic buffer (Na2HPO4 103 mM, NaH2PO4 155 mM pH 7.4). The cells were then lysed in a large volume of lysis buffer (1 in 20 dilution of iso-osmotic buffer with water, 1x complete protease inhibitor and 0.5 mM PMSF) followed by centrifugation at 15,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. The first supernatant was collected and kept as a cytoplasmic fraction. The lysis step was repeated until the membrane pellet became white.  For multiplexed comparative proteomics 100 μg of each cell lysate was digested with trypsin and labeled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  After labeling, samples were combined in equal amounts and an 50µg aliquot of this pooled sample evaporated to dryness and resuspended in  Buffer A (10mM KH2PO4, 25%MeCN pH3) prior to fractionation by strong cation exchange using an Ettan LC system (GE Healthcare).  In brief, the sample was loaded onto a PolysulphoethylA column (100 x 2.1mm, 5µm, 200A; PolyLC Inc.) in buffer A and peptides eluted with an increasing gradient of buffer B (10mM KH2PO4, 25%MeCN 1M KCl pH3) from 0-100% over 30 minutes.  The resulting fractions were evaporated to dryness, resuspended in 5% formic acid and then desalted using SepPak cartridges according to the manufacturers instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA)).  Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was again evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer .  Cation exchange fractions were further fractionated using a ThermoScientific Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system in line with an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  In brief, peptides in 1% (vol/vol) formic acid were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 nano-trap column (Thermo Scientific). After washing with 0.5% (vol/vol) acetonitrile 0.1% (vol/vol) formic acid peptides were resolved on a 250 mm × 75 μm Acclaim PepMap C18 reverse phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific) over a 150 min organic gradient, using 7  gradient segments (1-6% solvent B over 1min., 6-15% B over 58min., 15-32%B over 58min., 32-40%B over 5min., 40-90%B over 1min., held at 90%B for 6min and then reduced to 1%B over 1min.) with a flow rate of 300 nl min−1.  Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid and Solvent B was aqueous 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were ionized by nano-electrospray ionization at 2.0kV using a stainless steel emitter with an internal diameter of 30 μm (Thermo Scientific) and a capillary temperature of 250°C. Tandem mass spectra were acquired using an LTQ- Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 2.1 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode.  The Orbitrap was set to analyze the survey scans at 60,000 resolution (at m/z 400) in the mass range m/z 300 to 1800 and the top ten multiply charged ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS fragmentation using higher-energy collisional  dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 45%, activation time of 0.1 ms and at a resolution of 7500 within the Orbitrap.  Charge state filtering, where unassigned precursor ions were not selected for fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion (repeat count, 1; repeat duration, 30s; exclusion list size, 500) were used.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v1.4 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt/SwissProt Human database release version 57.3 (20326 entries) using the SEQUEST (Ver. 28 Rev. 13) algorithm.  Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.8 Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.9949) as a variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of isobaric mass tags (+229.163) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 1 missed cleavage was allowed.  The reverse database search option was enabled and all peptide data was filtered to satisfy false discovery rate (FDR) of 5%. The Proteome Discoverer software generates a reverse “decoy” database from the same protein database and any peptides passing the initial filtering parameters that were derived from this decoy database are defined as false positive identifications. The minimum cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) filter was readjusted for each individual charge state separately to optimally meet the predetermined target FDR of 5% based on the number of random false positive matches from the reverse decoy database. Thus each data set has its own passing parameters.  Quantitation was performed using a peak integration window tolerance of 0.0075 Da with the integration method set as the most confident centroid.  Protein ratios represent the median of the raw measured peptide ratios for each protein. For analysis, only rank 1 peptides were used, and only quantifications obtained using 2 or more unique peptides with high/medium confidence per protein were considered (although for additional information proteins quantified from 1 unique peptide are sometimes included). Proteins recorded as uncharacterized by the software were returned with a gene ID. We selected a comparative protein threshold of 2, such that proteins that differed in level by 2.00 fold or more between adult and cord samples were considered differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Cord blood stem cells are an attractive starting source for the production of red blood cells in vitro for therapy because of additional expansion potential compared with adult peripheral blood progenitors and cord blood banks usually being more representative of national populations than blood donors. Consequently, it is important to establish how similar cord RBCs are to adult cells. In this study, we used multiplex tandem mass tag labeling combined with nano-LC-MS/MS to compare the proteome of adult and cord RBCs and reticulocytes. 2838 unique proteins were identified, providing the most comprehensive compendium of RBC proteins to date. Using stringent criteria, 1674 proteins were quantified, and only a small number differed in amount between adult and cord RBC. We focused on proteins critical for RBC function. Of these, only the expected differences in globin subunits, along with higher levels of carbonic anhydrase 1 and 2 and aquaporin-1 in adult RBCs would be expected to have a phenotypic effect since they are associated with the differences in gaseous exchange between adults and neonates. Since the RBC and reticulocyte samples used were autologous, we catalogue the change in proteome following reticulocyte maturation. The majority of proteins (&gt;60% of the 1671 quantified) reduced in abundance between 2- and 100-fold following maturation. However, &#x223c;5% were at a higher level in RBCs, localized almost exclusively to cell membranes, in keeping with the known clearance of intracellular recycling pools during reticulocyte maturation. Overall, these data suggest that, with respect to the proteome, there is no barrier to the use of cord progenitors for the in vitro generation of RBCs for transfusion to adults other than the expression of fetal, not adult, hemoglobin.

### Keywords
Human, Cord blood, Nanolc-ms/ms, Tmt labelling, Reticulocytes, Erythroid cells

### Affiliations
School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol
University of Bristol

### Submitter
Marieangela Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Frayne
School of Biochemistry, University of Bristol


