### Accession
PXD030458

### Title
Functional effects of sweeteners on ex vivo human gut microbiome

### Description
We  systematically investigated the responses of five human gut microbiomes to 21 common sweeteners, using an approach combining high-throughput ex vivo microbiome culturing and metaproteomics to quantify functional changes in different taxa. Hierarchical clustering based on metaproteomic responses of individual microbiomes resulted in two clusters. The first cluster was composed of non-caloric artificial sweeteners (NAS) and two sugar alcohols with shorter carbon backbones (4-5 carbon atoms), and the second cluster was composed of sugar alcohols with longer carbon backbones. The metaproteomic functional responses of the second cluster were similar to the prebiotic fructooligosaccharides and kestose, indicating that these sugar alcohol-type sweeteners have potential prebiotic functions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from bacterial pellets using 4% SDS buffer. Proteins from each sample were precipitated and were washed with ice-cold acetone before being dissolved in 6 M urea and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0).50 ug protein aliquots were reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 56 °C. Protein alkylation was then performed at 20 mM iodoacetamide Samples were diluted 10-fold with 50 mM ABC (pH 8.0) before being digested by Trypsin. Desalting was performed on in-house made 96-channel filter tip plates packed with 5 mg 10-μm C18 resin. An Eksigent nano-LC system (nano2D ultra) coupled with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) was used for analysis. 1 μg of peptides were loaded. The column used for peptide separation was of 75 μm inner diameter and 15 cm long, packed with reverse phase C18 resin (1.9μm/120 Å ReproSil-Pur C18 resin, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). A 90-min gradient was used with acetonitrile changing from 5% to 30% (v/v) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, solvent B was composed of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and 80% v/v acetonitrile. Full MS scans were performed from 300 to 1800 m/z, data-dependent MS/MS scans were performed for the 12 most intense ions. MS and MS/MS scans were performed with resolutions of 70000 and 17500, respectively.

### Data Protocol
The Metalab software (version 1.2.0) was used for peptide/protein identification and quantification, peptide taxonomy assignment, and protein functional annotation24. The searches were performed against a database based on the integrated gene catalog (IGC) which included close-to-complete sets of genes for most gut microbes. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, and protein N-terminal acetylation (protein N-term) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
The composition and function of the human gut microbiome are often associated with health and disease status. Sugar substitute sweeteners are widely used food additives, although many studies using animal models have linked sweetener consumption to gut microbial changes and health issues. Whether sugar substitute sweeteners directly change the human gut microbiome functionality remains largely unknown. In this study, we systematically investigated the responses of five human gut microbiomes to 21 common sugar substitute sweeteners, using an approach combining high-throughput <i>in vitro</i> microbiome culturing and metaproteomic analyses to quantify functional changes in different taxa. Hierarchical clustering based on metaproteomic responses of individual microbiomes resulted in two clusters. The noncaloric artificial sweetener (NAS) cluster was composed of NASs and two sugar alcohols with shorter carbon backbones (4 or 5 carbon atoms), and the carbohydrate (CHO) cluster was composed of the remaining sugar alcohols. The metaproteomic functional responses of the CHO cluster were clustered with those of the prebiotics fructooligosaccharides and kestose. The sugar substitute sweeteners in the CHO cluster showed the ability to modulate the metabolism of <i>Clostridia</i>. This study provides a comprehensive evaluation of the direct effects of commonly used sugar substitute sweeteners on the functions of the human gut microbiome using a functional metaproteomic approach, improving our understanding of the roles of sugar substitute sweeteners on microbiome-associated human health and disease issues. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> The human gut microbiome is closely related to human health. Sugar substitute sweeteners as commonly used food additives are increasingly consumed and have potential impacts on microbiome functionality. Although many studies have evaluated the effects of a few sweeteners on gut microbiomes using animal models, the direct effect of sugar substitute sweeteners on the human gut microbiome remains largely unknown. Our results revealed that the sweetener-induced metaproteomic responses of individual microbiomes had two major patterns, which were associated with the chemical properties of the sweeteners. This study provided a comprehensive evaluation of the effects of commonly used sugar substitute sweeteners on the human gut microbiome.

### Keywords
Artificial sweetener; microbiome; metaproteomics

### Affiliations
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa
Universtiy of Ottawa

### Submitter
Leyuan Li

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa


