### Accession
PXD011092

### Title
Crosslinking Mapping of yeast Komagataella phaffii TFIID complex

### Description
Transcription preinitiation complex assembly on the promoters of protein encoding genes is nucleated in vivo by TFIID composed of the TATA-box Binding Protein (TBP) and 13 TBP-associate factors (Tafs) providing regulatory and chromatin binding functions. We used CXMS to study the organization and structure of the purified TFIID complex from  Komagataella phaffii. Together with Cryo-EM, We confirm the unique subunit stoichiometry prevailing in TFIID and uncover a hexameric arrangement of Tafs containing a HF domain. Interaction with promoter DNA highlights two non-selective binding sites consistent with a DNA scanning mode.

### Sample Protocol
50 µg of purified TFIID was cross-linked by 3 mM BS3 (Thermo-Scientific) for 2h at 25°C. We then followed the sample preparation protocol using SP3 beads described by Hughes et al., 2014 (PMID: 25358341): 10uL of SP3 beads (10ug/uL ) and an equal volume of acetonitrile were added to the crosslinked samples and incubated at 60º C for 30 minutes with shaking. Then the beads were concentrated with a magnet and washed with 70% ethanol and 100% acetonitrile. The beads were then suspended in 100 uL 8M Urea in 1 M ammonium bicarbonate and treated with TECP/IAA for 2 hrs at 37º C in the dark. Then the samples were diluted 10 times with water and digested by addition of trypsin (20:1, protein:trypsin) overnight at 37º C.   All peptide samples were desalted by passage over C18 cartridges (The Nest group, Southborough, MA),  and dried by Speed-Vac. The peptides were resuspended in 50 uL Buffer A (25 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, pH 2.8). 1 ug of each sample was reserved for direct MS analysis and the remaining sample was fractionated using an in-house prepared microcapillary strong cation exchange column (200 mm X 20 cm; 5 um, 200 Å partisphere SCX, Whatman or Proteomix SCX 3um, Sepax Technologies). We used a binary HPLC pump with split flow with microcapillary flowrate at 2-3 uL/min.  Peptides were loaded onto the microcapillary column equilibrated in Buffer A and washed with Buffer A. Bound peptides were eluted with 20 μl of Buffer A containing 30%, 50%, 70%, 85% and 100% Buffer B (800 mM ammonium formate, 20% acetonitrile, pH 2.8), followed by 50 μl elutions with Buffer B containing 5%, or 10% Buffer D (0.5 M ammonium acetate, 30% acetonitrile),or just 20 μl of Buffer D. All fractions were dried in a Speed-vac, and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by MS (Orbitrap Fusion).

### Data Protocol
The crosslinked peptides were identified by searching the MS data against a database composed of K.p. TFIID subunit sequences using two different algorithms: pLink and in-house designed Nexus. After performing the pLink and Nexus analyses, the search results were combined and each spectrum was manually evaluated for the quality of the match to each peptide using the COMET/Lorikeet Spectrum Viewer (TPP). Crosslinked peptides are considered confidently identified if at least 4 consecutive b or y ions for each peptide are observed and the majority of the observed ions are accounted for. Search results that did not meet these criteria were removed. Intralinks involving a crosslink between identical residues were only kept if the spectral evidence strongly supported the identification; that is, the major fragment ions correspond to the intralinked peptide sequence and no/few other fragment ions were observed.

### Publication Abstract
Accurate chromosome segregation relies on microtubule end conversion, the ill-understood ability of kinetochores to transit from lateral microtubule attachment to durable association with dynamic microtubule plus-ends. The molecular requirements for this conversion and the underlying biophysical mechanisms are elusive. We reconstituted end conversion in vitro using two kinetochore components: the plus end-directed kinesin CENP-E and microtubule-binding Ndc80 complex, combined on the surface of a microbead. The primary role of CENP-E is to ensure close proximity between Ndc80 complexes and the microtubule plus-end, whereas Ndc80 complexes provide lasting microtubule association by diffusing on the microtubule wall near its tip. Together, these proteins mediate robust plus-end coupling during several rounds of microtubule dynamics, in the absence of any specialized tip-binding or regulatory proteins. Using a Brownian dynamics model, we show that end conversion is an emergent property of multimolecular ensembles of microtubule wall-binding proteins with finely tuned force-dependent motility characteristics.

### Keywords
K. phaffii tfiid cxms bs3

### Affiliations
Institute for Systems Biology
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109

### Submitter
Jie Luo

### Lab Head
Dr Jeff Ranish
Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA 98109


