### Accession
PXD012840

### Title
Turnover under stress -  Impact of oxidative stress on the function, abundance and turnover of the Arabidopsis 80S cytosolic ribosome

### Description
Most proteins are synthesised by cytosolic ribosomes and degraded by the proteasome. The ribosome is large protein complexes in the cytosol that perform potein synthesis.Understanding this machines could help to define the steady-state proteome of the cell and how it changes with environmental stress.

### Sample Protocol
Heavy nitrogen was used for identiifying the new synthesised protein

### Data Protocol
raw QTOF data were identified using Tair10 and mascot serch engine followed by TPP to covert files into xml files

### Publication Abstract
Abiotic stress in plants causes accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) leading to the need for new protein synthesis to defend against ROS and to replace existing proteins that are damaged by oxidation. Functional plant ribosomes are critical for these activities, however we know little about the impact of oxidative stress on plant ribosome abundance, turnover, and function. Using Arabidopsis cell culture as a model system, we induced oxidative stress using 1&#xa0;&#xb5;m of H<sub>2</sub> O<sub>2</sub> or 5&#xa0;&#xb5;m menadione to more than halve cell growth rate and limit total protein content. We show that ribosome content on a total cell protein basis decreased in oxidatively stressed cells. However, overall protein synthesis rates on a ribosome abundance basis showed the resident ribosomes retained their function in oxidatively stressed cells. <sup>15</sup> N progressive labelling was used to calculate the rate of ribosome synthesis and degradation to track the fate of 62 r-proteins. The degradation rates and the synthesis rates of most r-proteins slowed following oxidative stress leading to an ageing population of ribosomes in stressed cells. However, there were exceptions to this trend; r-protein RPS14C doubled its degradation rate in both oxidative treatments. Overall, we show that ribosome abundance decreases and their age increases with oxidative stress in line with loss of cell growth rate and total cellular protein amount, but ribosome function of the ageing ribosomes appeared to be maintained concomittently with differences in the turnover rate and abundance of specific ribosomal proteins. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD012840.

### Keywords
Protein synthesis / degradation, Ribosome isolation, 15n labelling, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Director of ARC center in PlantEnergy Bilology at School of Molcular Science at Univerity of Western Australia
UWA

### Submitter
Karzan Salih

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
Director of ARC center in PlantEnergy Bilology at School of Molcular Science at Univerity of Western Australia


