### Accession
PXD011665

### Title
Suspension trapping (S-trap) is compatible with typical protein extraction buffers and detergents for bottom up proteomics

### Description
Analysis of cells and tissue by bottom up proteomics starts with lysis, followed by in-solution digestion. Lysis buffers commonly used include detergents and other reagents for efficient solubility of the proteins. However these reagents are, for the most part, incompatible with downstream analytical instrumentation. One method for in-solution digestion and cleanup, termed Suspension Trapping (S-Trap), has been recently introduced. We present evaluation of the compatibility of commonly used lysis buffers with S-trap: SDS, urea, NP-40, RIPA and SDS with DTT (SDT). We show that S-trap is compatible with all the tested buffers, with SDS and SDT performing the best. Based on this data, we anticipate that the method will transform experimental planning for mass spectrometry based proteomics, making it far more flexible and tolerable of various lysis buffers.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were grown in DMEM medium, harvested and washed twice with PBS. Identical pellets, of 106 cells, were lysed with the following buffers: 8M urea, 1% NP-40, 5% SDS in 50mM Tris-HCl, 4% SDS and 0.1M dithiothreitol (SDT) and Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) comprised of 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, in 50 mM TRIS pH 8. Lysates with SDS, SDT, RIPA and NP-40 were incubated at 96°C for 5min followed by 6 cycles of 30 sec sonication (Bioruptor® Pico, diagenode). Lysates with urea were incubated for 10 min at room temperature followed by sonication. Protein concentration was measured using a BCA assay (Thermo Scientific). 50 μg total protein was reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide in the dark. Each sample was loaded onto S-trap micro columns (Protifi, USA) according to the manufacturer instructions. Breifly, after loading the samples they were washed with 90:10% methanol: 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Samples were then incubated with trypsin (1:50 trypsin:protein) for 1.5 hr at 47°C. The digested peptides were eluted using 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin was added to this fraction and incubated overnight at 37°C. Two more elutions were made using 0.2% formic acid and 0.2% formic acid in 50% acetonitrile. The three elutions were pooled together and vacuume centifuged to dry. Samples were kept in -80°C unitl analysis. Immobilized metal affinity chromatography After analysis of the 15 samples (five lysis buffers in triplicates), the replicates were pooled and approximately 150µg from each sample was subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. It was performed on a Bravo robot (Agilent Technologies) using AssayMAP Fe(III)-NTA, 5 µL cartridges (Agilent Technologies), according to the manufacturer instructions. Briefly cartridges were primed and equilibrated with 50 µL buffer A (99.9% ACN: 0.1% TFA) and 100 µL buffer C (80% ACN: 19.9% H2O: 0.1% TFA), followed by sample loading in 100 µl buffer C, at 5 µL/min. Phosphopeptides were eluted with 120 µL buffer B (99 % H2O:1% NH3) at 5 µL/min. 3 µL formic acid was added to each sample for acidification. Prior to LC-MS analysis, all samples were dried down to the volume of 15 µL. Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry ULC/MS grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10 kpsi nanoAcquity ; Waters, USA). The mobile phase was: A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm internal diameter, 20 mm length, 5 µm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a HSS T3 nano-column (75 µm internal diameter, 250 mm length, 1.8 µm particle size; Waters) at 0.35 µL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 20%B in 155  min, 20% to 90%B in 5 min, maintained at 90% for 5 min and then back to initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10 μm tip; New Objective; Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF, Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Thermo Scientific).  Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 45sec and maximum injection time of 60msec. Only charge states 2 to 8 were allowed for MS/MS triggering.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using the MaxQuant software suite 1.6.0.16 (www.maxquant.org) with the Andromeda search engine (ref). The HCD MS/MS spectra were searched against an in silico tryptic digest of homo sapiens proteins from the UniProt/Swiss-Prot sequence database (v. March 2018) containing 20,547 sequences, including common contaminant proteins. All MS/MS spectra were searched with the following MaxQuant parameters: acetyl (protein N-terminus) and methionine oxidation as variable modifications; cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification; max 2 missed cleavages; and precursors were initially matched to 4.5 ppm tolerance and 20 ppm for fragment spectra. Peptide spectrum matches and proteins were automatically filtered to a 1% false discovery rate based on Andromeda score, peptide length, and individual peptide mass errors. Processing was conducted without match between runs. Proteins were identified and quantified based on at least two unique peptides and based on the LFQ values reported by MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The analysis of cells and tissue by bottom-up proteomics starts with lysis, followed by in-solution digestion. Lysis buffers commonly used include detergents and other reagents for achieving efficient protein solubility. However, these reagents are, for the most part, incompatible with downstream analytical instrumentation. One method for in-solution digestion and cleanup, termed suspension trapping (S-Trap), has been recently introduced. We present an evaluation of the compatibility of commonly used lysis buffers with S-Trap: SDS, urea, NP-40, RIPA, and SDS with DTT (SDT). We show that S-Trap is compatible with all of the tested buffers, with SDS and SDT performing the best. On the basis of these data, we anticipate that the method will transform experimental planning for mass-spectrometry-based proteomics, making it far more flexible and tolerable of various lysis buffers. The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository with the data set identifier PXD011665.

### Keywords
Hela, S-trap, Lysis, Proteomics, Q eaxctive hf

### Affiliations
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalised Medicine Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Yishai Levin
The Nancy and Stephen Grand Israel National Center for Personalised Medicine Weizmann Institute of Science


