### Accession
PXD025817

### Title
CryoEM and AI reveal a structure of SARS-CoV-2 Nsp2, a multifunctional protein involved in key host processes

### Description
Using structural analysis together with affinity tagged purification mass spectrometry experiments, we identify Nsp2 mutants that are unable to interact with key host proteins and processes.

### Sample Protocol
Data-dependent acquisition analysis of affinity purifications: For each affinity purification (wild-type and mutant nsp2 and controls, empty vector and EGFP), 7.5 million HEK293T cells were plated per 15-cm dish and allowed to recover for 20-24 hours prior to transfection.  After 40 hours, cells were dissociated at room temperature using 10 ml Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline without calcium and magnesium (D-PBS) supplemented with 10 mM EDTA for at least 5 minutes and subsequently washed with 10 ml D-PBS. Cell pellets were frozen on dry ice and stored at - 80°C. At least three biological replicates were independently prepared for affinity purification. After reserving 50 μl lysate, samples were arrayed into a 96-well Deepwell plate for affinity purification on the KingFisher Flex Purification System (Thermo Scientific). Samples were re-suspended in 4% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile solution, and separated by a reversed-phase gradient over a nanoflow C18 column (Dr. Maisch). Each sample was directly injected via a Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) into a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and analyzed with a 75 min acquisition, with all MS1 and MS2 spectra collected in the orbitrap; data were acquired using the Thermo software Xcalibur (4.2.47) and Tune (2.11 QF1 Build 3006).   Scheduled parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) analysis of Nsp2 interactors: Peptides for targeted MS were selected after importing the msms.txt file derived from the previously described MaxQuant search into Skyline (v20.2.0.343). Proteotypic peptides passing an Andromeda score of 0.95 were selected and manually inspected to choose precursors suitable for targeted proteomics. In total 4 peptides per protein were selected for targeted analysis. The samples from AP-MS were acquired in Partial Reaction Monitoring mode (PRM) on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher) connected to a nanoLC easy 1200 (Thermo Fisher). Peptides for the scheduled analysis were separated in 75 minutes using the same chromatographic gradient and source parameter to the DDA samples. Precursor ion scans were recorded in the Orbitrap at 70’000 resolution (at 400 m/z) for 100 ms or until the ion population reached an AGC value of 1e6. Peptides in the inclusion list were fragmented using HCD with a normalized collisional energy of 27, an isolation window of 2 Da and a scheduled retention time window of 7 minutes. Fragments were acquired in the Orbitrap at 17’500 resolution (at 400 m/z) for 100 ms or until reaching an AGC of 2e5. Loop count was set to 20.

### Data Protocol
Detected peptides and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rate in MaxQuant. Identified proteins were then subjected to protein-protein interaction scoring with both SAINTexpress (version 3.6.3)56 and MiST (https://github.com/kroganlab/mist). For data analysis of the PRM, the data was searched with MaxQuant using a FASTA file containing only the target proteins and default settings. The msms.txt was imported into Skyline using the ‘import peptide search’ option and setting the search type to targeted. To import the files, the following transition settings were used: The MS1 filter was disabled, ion types were set to y and b and MS/MS settings were set to Orbitrap as mass analyzer, type as targeted and resolution of 17500 (at 400 m/z). Peptides with poor coeluting fragments (dotp lower than 0.9) were removed. WASHC4 peptides did not pass this quality control criterion and thus WASHC4 was not considered for further analysis. After import, peak boundaries were manually corrected and noisy transitions were removed. The resulting data was exported at the transition level and transitions missing in more than half of the samples were removed to ensure robust quantitation. The resulting transitions were summed up per peptide and then the experiment was mean centered using the average peptide level for the bait protein (using SARS-Cov-2 Nsp2 quantity for SARS-CoV-2 mutants). Normalized peptide-level abundances were averaged to reach protein level and log2 transformed. The fold change and BH-adjusted p-values for condition were calculated against the wild-type Nsp2.

### Publication Abstract
The SARS-CoV-2 protein Nsp2 has been implicated in a wide range of viral processes, but its exact functions, and the structural basis of those functions, remain unknown. Here, we report an atomic model for full-length Nsp2 obtained by combining cryo-electron microscopy with deep learning-based structure prediction from AlphaFold2. The resulting structure reveals a highly-conserved zinc ion-binding site, suggesting a role for Nsp2 in RNA binding. Mapping emerging mutations from variants of SARS-CoV-2 on the resulting structure shows potential host-Nsp2 interaction regions. Using structural analysis together with affinity tagged purification mass spectrometry experiments, we identify Nsp2 mutants that are unable to interact with the actin-nucleation-promoting WASH protein complex or with GIGYF2, an inhibitor of translation initiation and modulator of ribosome-associated quality control. Our work suggests a potential role of Nsp2 in linking viral transcription within the viral replication-transcription complexes (RTC) to the translation initiation of the viral message. Collectively, the structure reported here, combined with mutant interaction mapping, provides a foundation for functional studies of this evolutionary conserved coronavirus protein and may assist future drug design.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Nsp2, Apms, Artificial intelligence, Protein-protein interactions, Cryoem

### Affiliations
UCSF
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA 94158 USA

### Submitter
Mehdi Bouhaddou

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan J Krogan
Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology University of California San Francisco (UCSF) San Francisco, CA 94158 USA


