### Accession
PXD027031

### Title
Wild type enrichment of a 25-phospho-steroid kinase involved in anaerobic steroid degradation

### Description
The anaerobic degradation of cholesterol fundamentally differs from the cytochrome P450 monooxygenase dependent activation of the isoprenoid side chain at C26 in aerobes. In the denitrifying β-proteobacterium Sterolibacterium denitrificans, activation of primary C26 proceeds via a three-step cascade involving (i) a water-dependent hydroxylation at tertiary C25, (ii) an ATP-dependent dehydration to an alkene, and (iii) a water-dependent hydroxylation at primary C26 to an allylic alcohol. Here, we enriched a 25-hydroxy-steroid kinase (25-HSK) from Sterolibacterium denitrificans that catalyses the ATP-dependent transformation of 25-OH-cholest-1,4-diene-3-one (25-OH-CDO) to 25-phospho-CDO.

### Sample Protocol
The sample preparation was performed as follows: The gel bands of interest were incubated with 80 µL 10 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 min at room temperature. The supernatant was removed and the samples were incubated with a 5 mM NH4HCO3/EtOH solution (v/v) for 10 min. This step was repeated three times. Afterwards 80 µL 10 mM DTT solved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 were added and incubated for 30 min at 56 °C. The supernatant was removed and the samples were incubated with 50 mM Iodacetamid solved in 10 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min at room temperature. The supernatant was removed and samples were incubated alternately with 80 µL 10 mM NH4HCO3 or 100% EtOH for three times.  The gel bands were dried for 1 hour at 40 °C in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. 20 µL Trypsin solution were added to the dried products. The tryptic digestion was performed over night at 37 °C. Afterwards,  75 µL 0.05% TFA solved in 50% Acetonitrile/H2O (v/v) were added and the mixture was sonicated for 10 min (on ice). The supernatant was transferred into new tubes and dried for 2 hours at 45 °C in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator. The dried proteins were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% TFA, sonicated for 3 min and transferred to LC-MS vials for measurement.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra were analysed with ProteinLynx Global ServerTM 3.0.3 (Waters) by matching with the UniProt database of S. denitirificans.

### Publication Abstract
The degradation of cholesterol and related steroids by microbes follows fundamentally different strategies in aerobic and anaerobic environments. In anaerobic bacteria, the primary C26 of the isoprenoid side chain is hydroxylated without oxygen via a three-step cascade: (i) water-dependent hydroxylation at the tertiary C25, (ii) ATP-dependent dehydration to form a subterminal alkene, and (iii) water-dependent hydroxylation at the primary C26 to form an allylic alcohol. However, the enzymes involved in the ATP-dependent dehydration have remained unknown. Here, we isolated an ATP-dependent 25-hydroxy-steroid kinase (25-HSK) from the anaerobic bacterium Sterolibacterium denitrificans. This highly active enzyme preferentially phosphorylated the tertiary C25 of steroid alcohols, including metabolites of cholesterol and sitosterol degradation or 25-OH-vitamin D<sub>3</sub>. Kinetic data were in agreement with a sequential mechanism via a ternary complex. Remarkably, 25-HSK readily catalyzed the formation of &#x3b3;-(<sup>18</sup>O)<sub>2</sub>-ATP from ADP and the C25-(<sup>18</sup>O)<sub>2</sub>-phosphoester. The observed full reversibility of 25-HSK with an equilibrium constant below one can be rationalized by an unusual high phosphoryl transfer potential of tertiary steroid C25-phosphoesters, which is &#x2248;20&#xa0;kJ&#xa0;mol<sup>-1</sup> higher than that of standard sugar phosphoesters and even slightly greater than the &#x3b2;,&#x3b3;-phosphoanhydride of ATP. In summary, 25-HSK plays an essential role in anaerobic bacterial degradation of zoo- and phytosterols and shows only little similarity to known phosphotransferases.

### Keywords
Kinase, Steroid degradation, Cholesterol

### Affiliations
University of Freiburg
Institute of Biology II, Microbiology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

### Submitter
Christian Jacoby

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Boll
Institute of Biology II, Microbiology, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.


