### Accession
PXD001740

### Title
Discovering new pneumococcal diagnostic tools protein-based

### Description
Thanks to surface digestion protocol above pneumococcal pediatric strains and in silico selection,  we selected 94 pneumococcal proteins according to their surface-exposed domains and/or interactions with  surface environment. Then, that proteins were cloned as recombinant form in Escherichia coli and face off to  pediatric sera from control and pneumococcal patients.

### Sample Protocol
Bacteria were growth in a chemically defined medium, submitted to surface digestion protocol and generated  peptides were cleaned using OASIS columns according to manufacture's instructions and analyzed by LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
LC-MSMS data were face off to in home database with all pneumococcal databases available in UniprotKb and  results were normalized using a local proteinblast. Array data generated after immunoreactive reactions using  pediatric pneumococcal patients and controls were normalized using Excel software and statistical analysis was  carried out using MedCalc y MeV4 softwares.

### Publication Abstract
Pneumonia is one of the most common and severe diseases associated with Streptococcus pneumoniae infections in children and adults. Etiological diagnosis of pneumococcal pneumonia in children is generally challenging because of limitations of diagnostic tests and interference with nasopharyngeal colonizing strains. Serological assays have recently gained interest to overcome some problems found with current diagnostic tests in pediatric pneumococcal pneumonia. To provide insight into this field, we have developed a protein array to screen the antibody response to many antigens simultaneously. Proteins were selected by experimental identification from a collection of 24 highly prevalent pediatric clinical isolates in Spain, using a proteomics approach consisting of "shaving" the cell surface with proteases and further LC/MS/MS analysis. Ninety-five proteins were recombinantly produced and printed on an array. We probed it with a collection of sera from children with pneumococcal pneumonia. From the set of the most seroprevalent antigens, we obtained a clear discriminant response for a group of three proteins (PblB, PulA, and PrtA) in children under 4 years old. We validated the results by ELISA and an immunostrip assay showed the translation to easy-to-use, affordable tests. Thus, the protein array here developed presents a tool for broad use in serodiagnostics.

### Keywords
Pneumococcal protien diagnostic

### Affiliations
University of Córdoba
University of Cordoba

### Submitter
Alfonso Olaya Abril

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel José Rodríguez Ortega
University of Córdoba


