### Accession
PXD022004

### Title
The role of the periplasmic chaperones SurA, Skp and DegP for fitness, outer membrane integrity, antibiotic susceptibility and virulence of Acinetobacter baumannii AB5075: same-same, but different?

### Description
The outer membrane (OM) of Gram-negative bacteria efficiently protects from harmful environmental stresses such as antibiotics, disinfectants or dryness. Main constituents of the OM are integral OM β-barrel proteins (OMPs). In Gram-negative bacteria such as Escherichia coli (Ec), Yersinia enterocolitica (Ye) and Pseudomonas aeruginosa (Pa), the insertion of OMPs depends on a sophisticated biogenesis pathway. This comprises the SecYEG translocon, which enables inner membrane (IM) passage, the chaperones SurA, Skp and DegP, which facilitate the passage of β-barrel OMPs through the periplasm, and the β-barrel assembly machinery (BAM) which facilitates insertion into the OM. In Ec, Ye and Pa the deletion of SurA is particularly detrimental and leads to a loss of OM integrity, sensitization to antibiotics, and hypovirulence. In search of targets that could be exploited to develop compounds that interfere with OM integrity in Acinetobacter baumannii (Ab), we employed the multidrug-resistant strain AB5075 to generate single gene knockout strains lacking individual periplasmic chaperones. In contrast to Ec, Ye and Pa, AB5075 tolerates the lack of SurA, Skp or DegP with only weak mutant phenotypes. While the double knockout strains surAskp and surAdegP are conditionally lethal in Ec, all double deletions were well tolerated by AB5075. Strikingly, even a triple knockout strain of AB5075, lacking surA, skp and degP, was viable. Our findings underline the extreme adaptibility of Ab and suggest the existence of mechanisms bypassing or acting redundantly to the known OMP biogenesis pathway comprising SurA, Skp and DegP.

### Sample Protocol
For the mass spectrometric analysis whole cell lysates (WCL) were generated. Additionally membrane fractions were prepared for a more precise proteomic analysis. For each strain overnight cultures were prepared at room temperature (RT) without shaking. Cells were pelleted by centrifugation. After one single washing step with sterile PBS, cells were resuspended in 500 µl resuspending buffer (0.2 M Tris, 1 M Sucrose and 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.4). Additionally 1 mg/ml Lysozyme and a protease inhibitor tablet was added. The suspension was incubated for 10 min at RT, whereby after 5 min 3.2 ml distilled water was added. By centrifugation for 45 min at 16.000 x g and 4°C, the membrane fraction was separated from other remaining components of the cell. The  harvested membrane pellet was resuspended in 2.5 ml lysis buffer (10 mM Tris, 1 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EDTA and 0.2 mM DTT, pH 7,5) and lysed using a french press. Unlysed cells were removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 5.000 x g at 4°C. By another centrifugation step at 290.000 x g for 60 min at 4°C the membrane fraction was pelletized and separated from the cytosolic fraction. The pellet was resuspended in 2 ml extraction buffer (50 mM Tris, 10 mM MgCl2, 2% TritonX-100) and incubated for 30 min at 4°C. Then, the suspension was centrifuged for 40 min at 84.000 x g at 4°C, followed by 3 washing steps with water and centrifugation for 20 min at 84.000 x g. The final pellet containing the membrane fraction was resuspended in 100µl water and prepared for MS analysis. For this, the samples were boiled at 95°C for 5 min. 13 µg protein per lane were loaded on a 10% Mini-PROTEAN® TGX™ Precast Protein Gel and stained with Roti®-Blue Colloidal Coomassie Staining solution containing 20% methanol. Proteins were in-gel digestion with trypsin, and extracted and desalted peptides were separated on an Easy nLC 1200 system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer using either a 57 minute or 127 minute segmented gradient of 10–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). The 7 or 12 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105 charges and 3x106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed with MaxQuant software package version 1.6.7.0 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Database search was performed against a target-decoy Acinetobacter baumannii database obtained from Uniprot, containing 3,839 protein entries and 286 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and to 20 ppm at the MS/MS level. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The iBAQ (Intensity Based Absolute Quantification) and LFQ (Label-Free Quantification) algorithms were enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acinetobacter baumannii, Ab5075, Outer membrane protein biogenesis, Sura, Outer membrane, Skp, Degp

### Affiliations
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Monika Schütz
Institut für Medizinische Mikrobiologie und Hygiene Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 6 72076 Tübingen Germany


