### Accession
PXD017729

### Title
Drosophila SWR1 and NuA4 complexes are defined by DOMINO isoform

### Description
Histone acetylation and deposition of H2A.Z variant are integral aspects of active transcrip-tion. In Drosophila, the single DOMINO chromatin regulator complex is thought to combine both activities via an unknown mechanism. Here we show that alternative isoforms of the DOMINO nucleosome remodeling ATPase, DOM-A and DOM-B, directly specify two distinct multi-subunit complexes. Both complexes are necessary for transcriptional regulation but through different mechanisms. The DOM-B complex incorporates H2A.V (the fly ortholog of H2A.Z) genome-wide in an ATP-dependent manner, like the yeast SWR1 complex. The DOM-A complex, instead, functions as an ATP-independent histone acetyltransferase com-plex similar to the yeast NuA4, targeting lysine 12 of histone H4. Our work provides an in-structive example of how different evolutionary strategies lead to similar functional separation. In yeast and humans, nucleosome remodeling and histone acetyltransferase complexes orig-inate from gene duplication and paralog specification. Drosophila generates the same diversi-ty by alternative splicing of a single gene.

### Sample Protocol
Kc167 cells were treated with dsRNAs in 6-well plates as described before. Cells were counted, pelleted and snap-frozen in liquid N2. For histone acid extraction, pellets from 4-12 million cells were resuspended in 500 µL of ice-cold 0.2M H2SO4 and histone were extracted by rotating overnight at 4°C. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C. Histone were precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid to reach 26% final con-centration. Tubes were mixed and incubated at 4°C for 2 h and spun at 16,000 g for 45 min. Pellets were washed twice with ice-cold 100% acetone (5 min rotation at 4°C, 10 min of 16,000 g spin at 4°C between washes), dried for 30 min at room temperature and  resus-pended in 10 µL of 2.5x Laemmli sample buffer for every initial cell million and boiled at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were stored at -20°C until further use. The histones corresponding to 10 million cells were separated onto 4-20% pre-cast polyacrylamide gels (Serva, Cat. No 43277.01). Gels were briefly stained with Coomassie (Serva, Cat. No 17524.01) and stored in water at 4°C. For targeted mass-spectrometry analysis, histones were excised, washed once with water and de-stained twice by incubating 30 min at 37°C with 200 µL of 50% ace-tonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Gel pieces were then washed twice with 200 µL water and twice with 200 µL of 100% ACN to dehydrate them, followed by 5 min of speed-vac to remove residual ACN. Histones were in-gel acylated by adding 10 µL of deuterated acetic anhydride (Sigma-Aldrich, Cat. No 175641) and 20 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3. After 1 min, 70 µL of 1 M NH4HCO3 were slowly added to the reaction. Samples were incubated at 37°C for 45 min with vigorous shaking. Samples were washed 5 times with 200 µL of 100 mM NH4HCO3, 5 times with 200 µL of water and twice with 200 µL of 100% ACN, followed by 3 min of speed-vac. Gel pieces were rehydrated in 20 µL of trypsin solution (25 ng/ µL trypsin in 100 mM NH4HCO3) (Promega, Cat. No V5111) and incubated at 4°C for 20 min. After the addition of 100 µL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, histones were in-gel digested overnight at 37°C. Pep-tides were sequentially extracted by incubating 10 minutes at room temperature twice with 60 µL of 50% ACN 0.25% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and twice 40 µL of 100% ACN. The total volume (around 250 µL) was evaporated in a centrifugal evaporator and the dried peptides were stored at -20°C until resuspension in 100 µL of 0.1% TFA. Peptides were loaed in a C18 Stagetip (pre-washed with ACN and conditioned with 0.1% TFA), washed 3 times with 20 µL of 0.1% TFA and peptides were eluted 3 times with 20 µL of 80% ACN 0.25% TFA. Eluted peptides were evaporated in a centrifugal evaporator, resuspended in 15 µl of 0.1% TFA and stored at -20°C.

### Data Protocol
Desalted peptides were injected in an RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and sep-arated in a 15-cm analytical column (75 µm ID home-packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 2.4 μm from Dr. Maisch) with a 50-min gradient from 4 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl/min flowrate. The effluent from the HPLC was electrosprayed into Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS instrument was programmed to tar-get several ions as described before (Feller et al., 2015) except for the MS3 fragmentation. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 270-730) were acquired with resolution R=60,000 at m/z 400 (AGC target of 3x106). Targeted ions were isolated with an isolation window of 0.7 m/z to a target value of 2x105 and fragmented at 27% normalized collision energy. Typical mass spectrometric conditions were: spray voltage, 1.5 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 250°C. Peak integration was performed using Skyline (https://skyline.ms/project/home/software/Skyline/begin.view). Quantified data was further analyzed in R according to the formulas described in (Feller et al., 2015).

### Publication Abstract
Histone acetylation and deposition of H2A.Z variant are integral aspects of active transcription. In <i>Drosophila</i>, the single DOMINO chromatin regulator complex is thought to combine both activities <i>via</i> an unknown mechanism. Here we show that alternative isoforms of the DOMINO nucleosome remodeling ATPase, DOM-A and DOM-B, directly specify two distinct multi-subunit complexes. Both complexes are necessary for transcriptional regulation but through different mechanisms. The DOM-B complex incorporates H2A.V (the fly ortholog of H2A.Z) genome-wide in an ATP-dependent manner, like the yeast SWR1 complex. The DOM-A complex, instead, functions as an ATP-independent histone acetyltransferase complex similar to the yeast NuA4, targeting lysine 12 of histone H4. Our work provides an instructive example of how different evolutionary strategies lead to similar functional separation. In yeast and humans, nucleosome remodeling and histone acetyltransferase complexes originate from gene duplication and paralog specification. <i>Drosophila</i> generates the same diversity by alternative splicing of a single gene.

### Keywords
Domino, Swr1, Drosophila, H3ac, Nua4, H4ac

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich
Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Alessandro Scacchetti

### Lab Head
Dr Peter B. Becker
Molecular Biology Division, Biomedical Center, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany


