### Accession
PXD014257

### Title
Microtubules methylation LC-MSMS

### Description
Microtubules are critical for mitosis, cell motility, and protein and organelle transport, and are a validated target for anticancer drugs. However, tubulin regulation and recruitment in these cellular processes is less understood. Post-translational modifications of tubulin are proposed to regulate microtubule functions and dynamics. Although many such modifications have been investigated, tubulin methylations and enzymes responsible for methylation have only recently begun to be described. Here we report that N-lysine methyl transferase KMT5A (SET8/PR‑Set7), which methylates histone H4K20, also methylates α‑tubulin. Furthermore, the transcription factor LSF binds both tubulin and SET8, and enhances α-tubulin methylation in vitro, countered by FQI1, a specific small molecule inhibitor of LSF. Thus, the three SET8, LSF, and tubulin, all essential for mitotic progression, interact with each other. Overall, these results point to dual functions for both SET8 and LSF not only in chromatin regulation, but also for cytoskeletal modification.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of tubulin modifications, purified tubulin (MP-Bio, #0877115) was incubated with nonradioactive AdoMet, with or without recombinant GST-SET8, overnight at room temperature and the samples were separated by electrophoresis through a 10% Tris-glycine gel. Excised gel bands were digested with either subtilisin or trypsin in 0.01% ProteaseMax in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 1 hr at 50°C. Digestion was quenched with trifluoroacetic acid and samples were dried. Each digest was individually reconstituted and analyzed by direct injection onto an analytical column 25 cm 100 µm ID Aqua 3 µm with Easy n1000 nLC-QExactive at 300 nL/min.

### Data Protocol
Acquired HCD spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 and SWISSPROT June 2015 database using nonspecific cleavage and Cys = 57.02146 static modification. Dynamic modifications were set for Met = 15.99492. Searches were semi-specific with K= 14.016 dynamic modification. Results were filtered with Percolator for high confidence spectrum matches.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tubulin, Monomethylation

### Affiliations
New England Biolabs, Inc

### Submitter
HANG GYEONG CHIN

### Lab Head
Dr Sriharsa Pradhan
New England Biolabs, Inc


