### Accession
PXD027355

### Title
Proteomes of chromatin fractions derived from SU-DHL-5 cells

### Description
SU-DHL-5 cells display limited expression of the SUMO isopeptidase SENP6. In this experiment, the chromatin associated fraction of SU-DHL-5 cells was analysed by mass spectrometry. SU-DHL-5 cells were either stably transfected with an empty vector or with a SENP6 expression construct. Changes in protein levels were compared between these two cell lines in triplicate experiments.

### Sample Protocol
Chromatin fractions were isolated from SU-DHL-5 control cells and from SU-DHL-5 cells that were stably transfected with a SENP6 expression plasmid. Proteomic analysis was performed in triplicate experiments using these chromatin fractions. More Details can be found in the associated publication: Schick et al.: Actionable genetic alterations of the SUMO isopeptidase SENP6 drive lymphomagenesis and genetic instability in diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (2021) Nat. Commun.

### Data Protocol
All acquired raw files of mass spectra were analysed using MaxQuant Software (version 1.6.17.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the implemented Andromeda database search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Fragmentation spectra were correlated with the Uniprot human database (v.2015/2017). To perform searches, tryptic digestion and default settings for mass tolerances of MS and MS/MS spectra were applied. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1%, minimal LFQ ratio count was set to 2 and FastLFQ option was enabled for relative label-free quantification of proteins. For the analysis, the match between run feature was used.

### Publication Abstract
SUMOylation is a post-translational modification of proteins that regulates these proteins' localization, turnover or function. Aberrant SUMOylation is frequently found in cancers but its origin remains elusive. Using a genome-wide transposon mutagenesis screen in a MYC-driven B-cell lymphoma model, we here identify the SUMO isopeptidase (or deconjugase) SENP6 as a tumor suppressor that links unrestricted SUMOylation to tumor development and progression. Notably, SENP6 is recurrently deleted in human lymphomas and SENP6 deficiency results in unrestricted SUMOylation. Mechanistically, SENP6 loss triggers release of DNA repair- and genome maintenance-associated protein complexes from chromatin thereby impairing DNA repair in response to DNA damages and ultimately promoting genomic instability. In line with this hypothesis, SENP6 deficiency drives synthetic lethality to Poly-ADP-Ribose-Polymerase (PARP) inhibition. Together, our results link SENP6 loss to defective genome maintenance and reveal the potential therapeutic application of PARP inhibitors in B-cell lymphoma.

### Keywords
Su-dhl-5 cells (b-cell lymphoma)

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)

Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Sandhofstrasse 2-4 60528 Frankfurt am Main Germany

### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
Institute of Biochemistry II University Hospital Building 75 Sandhofstrasse 2-4 60528 Frankfurt am Main Germany


