### Accession
PXD019289

### Title
Quantitative Proteomics comparison of total expressed proteomes of Anisakis simplex sensu stricto, A. pegreffii and their hybrid genotype

### Description
The total proteomes of Anisakis simplex s.s., A. pegreffii and their hybrid genotype have been compared by quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ approach), which considers the level of expressed proteins. A total of 1,976 proteins have been identified using public databases. One hundred ninety six proteins were found significantly differentially expressed; results of pairwise Log2 ratio comparisons among them were statistically treated and supported in order to convert them into discrete character states. This comparison selected thirty six proteins as discriminant biomarkers among A. simplex, A. pegreffii and their hybrid genotype; eighteen of these biomarkers, encoded by nine loci, are specific allergens of Anisakis (Ani s7, Ani s8, Ani s12 and Ani s14) and other (Ancylostoma secreted) is a common nematodes venom allergen.

### Sample Protocol
2.2 Extraction of nematodes proteins Samples were crushed by hand with a pestle in a 1.5 ml. Eppendorf tube on ice to prevent protein degradation. The crushed extract was suspended immediately in 200 μ1 of lysis buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 2% (v/v) triton-100, IPG buffer pH 3-11 2% (v/v), 40mM DTT with protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Total proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform [36]. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 7 M Urea/2M Thiourea/100mM TEAB, pH 7.5. Protein concentration was estimated using the RC DC Protein Assay kit (BIO-RAD).    2.3 Protein digestion and tagging with iTRAQ-4-plex® reagent  For digestion, 40 ug of protein from each condition/population was reduced with 2 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 37°C for 60 min and followed by 2 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 1M Urea concentration with 25mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio of 1:20 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness. Digested samples were labelled at room temperature for 2 hours with iTRAQ Reagent Multi-plex kit (SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The iTRAQ labelling was performed separately in parallel in two 4-plex designs using tags 114, 115, 116 and 117 (Labelling Scheme, Table 1S). To reinforce the criteria of independent comparison, in both labelling (iTRAQ2 and iTRAQ3), tags were used for A. simplex-1, A. pegreffii, A. simplex-2 and Hybrid genotype respectively. After labelling, the samples were pooled, dried and desalted using a SEP-PAK C18 Cartridge (Waters). Finally, the cleaned tryptic peptides were evaporated to dryness and stored at -20°C until analysis.    2.4 Liquid chromatography and mass spectrometer analysis  A 1 µg aliquot of labelled mixture was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column used was a silica-based reversed phase Acquity UPLC M-Class Peptide BEH C18 Column, 75 µm × 150 mm, 1.7 µm particle size and 130 Å pore size (Waters). The trap column was a C18 Acclaim PepMapTM 100 (Thermo Scientific), 100 µm × 2 cm, 5 µm particle diameter, 100 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 2 µl/min. The nano-pump provided a flow-rate of 250 nl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Injection volume was 5 µl.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). Data was acquired using an ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 2300 V, curtain gas (CUR) 35, interface heater temperature (IHT) 150, ion source gas 1 (GS1) 25, declustering potential (DP) 150 V. All data was acquired using information-dependent acquisition (IDA) mode with Analyst TF 1.7 software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA). For IDA parameters, 0.25 s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 Da were followed by 30 MS/MS scans of 150ms in the mass range of 100–1800. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used for automatically controlling the CE.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data obtained for pooled samples were processed using PeakView® 1.5.1 Software (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) and exported as mgf files which were searched against a combined protein database that included A. simplex, A. pegreffii and A. simplex x A. pegreffii (hybrid) protein sequences from Anisakis DB [www.anisakis.mncn.csic.es] (containing 252.756 protein coding genes included their corresponding reversed entries), using the Mascot Server v. 2.5.1 (Matrix Science). The search parameters were: enzyme, trypsin; allowed missed cleavages, 2; fixed modifications, iTRAQ4plex (N-term and K) and beta-methylthiolation of cysteine; variable modifications, oxidation of methionine, acetyl (Protein N-term), pyrrolidone from E and pyrrolidone from Q.  Peptide mass tolerance was set at ± 25 ppm for precursors and 0.05 Da for fragment masses. The confidence interval for protein identification was set to ≥95% (p<0.05); only peptides with an individual ion score above the 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold were considered correctly identified. Only proteins with at least two quantified peptides were considered in quantitation statistical model. A 5% quantitation FDR threshold was used to consider proteins differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
The total proteomes of <i>Anisakis simplex</i> s.s., <i>A. pegreffii</i> and their hybrid genotype have been compared by quantitative proteomics (iTRAQ approach), which considers the level of expressed proteins. Comparison was made by means of two independent experiments considering four biological replicates of <i>A. simplex</i> and two each for <i>A. pegreffii</i> and hybrid between both species. A total of 1811 and 1976 proteins have been respectively identified in the experiments using public databases. One hundred ninety-six proteins were found significantly differentially expressed, and their relationships with the nematodes' biological replicates were estimated by a multidimensional statistical approach. Results of pairwise Log<sub>2</sub> ratio comparisons among them were statistically treated and supported in order to convert them into discrete character states. Principal component analysis (PCA) confirms the validity of the method. This comparison selected thirty seven proteins as discriminant taxonomic biomarkers among <i>A. simplex</i>, <i>A. pegreffii</i> and their hybrid genotype; 19 of these biomarkers, encoded by ten loci, are specific allergens of <i>Anisakis</i> (Ani s7, Ani s8, Ani s12, and Ani s14) and other (Ancylostoma secreted) is a common nematodes venom allergen. The rest of the markers comprise four unknown or non-characterized proteins; five different proteins (leucine) related to innate immunity, four proteolytic proteins (metalloendopeptidases), a lipase, a mitochondrial translocase protein, a neurotransmitter, a thyroxine transporter, and a structural collagen protein. The proposed methodology (proteomics and statistical) solidly characterize a set of proteins that are susceptible to take advantage of the new targeted proteomics.

### Keywords
Allergens, Excretion, Secretion, Proteomics, Anisakis simplex, Oesphageal glands

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Dpto Biodiversidad y Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC)

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Alfonso Navas
Museo Nacional de Ciencias Naturales. Dpto Biodiversidad y Biologia Evolutiva (CSIC)


