### Accession
PXD038856

### Title
Functional nanovesicles from human trophectodermal cells for embryo implantation

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are important mediators of embryo attachment and outgrowth critical for successful implantation. While EVs have garnered immense interest in their therapeutic potential in assisted reproductive technology by improving implantation success, their large-scale generation remains a major challenge. Here, we report a rapid and scalable production of nanovesicles (NVs) from human trophectoderm cells (hTSCs) via membrane extrusion; these NVs can be generated in approximately 6 hours with a 20-fold higher yield than EVs isolated from the same number of cells. NVs display similar biophysical traits (morphologically intact, spherical, 90-130 nm) to EVs, and are laden with hallmark players of implantation (ITGA2/V, ITGB1, PRDX1, SOD2, and MFGE8) that include cell-matrix adhesion and extracellular matrix organisation proteins. Functionally, NVs are readily taken up by low-receptive endometrial HEC1A cells and reprogram their proteome towards a receptive phenotype that support hTSC spheroid attachment. Moreover, a single dose treatment of NVs significantly enhanced adhesion and spreading of mouse embryo trophoblast on fibronectin matrix. We show functional potential of NVs in enhancing embryo implantation and highlight their rapid and scalable generation, amenable to clinical utility.

### Sample Protocol
NVs, EVs, and WCL (n=4), and HEC1A cells following NV, EV, or PBS treatment (n=4) were lysed in 1% v/v sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS), 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), pH 8.0, incubated at 95 °C for 5 mins and quantified by microBCA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described64. Proteomic sample preparation was performed from 10 µg of protein extract as previously described24 using single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3)65. Briefly, samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at RT for 1 h (350 rpm), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) (Sigma-Aldrich) for 20 min at RT (light protected), and immediately quenched with 10 mM DTT, and digested overnight with trypsin (1:50 trypsin: protein ratio; Promega, V5111) at 37 °C, 1000 rpm. Peptides were analysed on a Dionex UltiMate NCS-3500RS nanoUHPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive HF-X hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray ion source in positive, data-dependent acquisition mode

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification and quantification were performed as described previously31,66 using MaxQuant (v1.6.14) with its built-in search engine Andromeda67. Tandem mass spectra were searched against Homo sapiens (human) reference proteome (74,811 entries, downloaded 12-2019) supplemented with common contaminants. Search parameters included carbamidomethylated cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modifications. Data was processed using trypsin/P as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavage sites allowed. The search tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 7 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively, at less than 1% false discovery rate on peptide spectrum match (PSM) level employing a target-decoy approach at peptide and protein levels. Label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant was used to obtain quantification intensity values and processed using Perseus as described.68 For GO annotation protein accession IDs were submitted to g:Profiler.69 Hierarchical clustering was performed in Perseus using Euclidian distance and average linkage clustering. Proteins upregulated in HEC1A cells treated with NVs or EVs include those that were identified in at least 80% of replicates, either uniquely or which fold change (log2) ≥0.1 compared to HEC1A cells treated with PBS (control). Functional enrichment analyses (Gene Ontology (GO), KEGGs) were performed using g:Profiler69. Pathway EnrichmentMap analysis was performed using Cytoscape (v3.7.1)70.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo implantation, Nanovesicles, Endometrial receptivity, Proteomics, Extracellular vesicles, Extrusion

### Affiliations
Baker Heart and Diabetes Inst.
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.

### Submitter
david greening

### Lab Head
Dr David Greening
Baker Heart & Diabetes Inst.


