### Accession
PXD020471

### Title
Proteomic comparison of HliD and Ycf39 protein abundances in FLAG-tagged chlorophyll synthase co-immunoprecipitation assays of control and CrtR/CruF (carotenoid biosynthesis) knockout strains of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803.

### Description
Chlorophyll a synthase (ChlG) is the enzyme responsible for attaching either a geranygeranyl or phytyl group to the chlorophyllide macrocycle during chlorophyll biosynthesis. Previous co-immunoprecipitation assays using FLAG-tagged ChlG identified the high light inducible protein HliD and the photosystem II assembly factor Ycf39 among the interaction partners. Non-protein components of this complex are the carotenoids zeaxanthin and myxoxanthophyll. To elucidate the function of these carotenoids in the association of ChlG/HliD/Ycf39, knockout strains of Synechocystis were produced to disrupt carotenoid biosynthesis. The abundances of HliD and Ycf39 relative to FLAG-tagged ChlG were compared in the different strains by proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoid membranes, prepared by differential centrifugation of cell lysate, were solubilized in 25 mM sodium phosphate pH 7.4, 10 mm MgCl2 and 50 mm NaCl, 10% glycerol (binding buffer) containing 1.5% n‐dodecyl‐β‐D‐maltoside (β‐DDM, Anatrace) and applied to an anti‐FLAG‐M2 agarose column (Sigma-Aldrich). After washing the column with binding buffer containing 0.04% (w/v) β‐DDM, FLAG-ChlG and associated proteins were eluted with the same buffer containing 187.5 μg/mL 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteins were extracted from the FLAG eluate by precipitation using a 2-D clean-up kit (GE Healthcare) and the resultant pellets dissolved at 5 µg/µL in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5. The proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at 37 C for 30 min and S-alkylated with 10 mM MMTS at RT for 10 min. Protein digestion was performed with (1:25 w/w) endoproteinase Lys-C/trypsin mixture (Promega) for 2 h at 37 C. After 8.5-fold dilution with 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10 mM CaCl2 the digestion was continued overnight at 37 C. Proteolysis was stopped by the addition of 0.5% TFA and the resultant peptides were desalted using C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) then dried in a vacuum centrifuge. For analysis by nanoLC-MS/MS the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA, 3% ACN and 400 ng injected onto a Q Exactive HF quadrupole-Orbitrap system coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano LC (Thermo Scientific) delivering the following gradient profile: 97% solvent A ((0.1% FA) to 10% solvent B (0.08% FA, 80% ACN) over 5 min, 10% to 50% solvent B over 75 min at 300 nL/min. The MS was programmed for data-dependent acquisition with profile full-scan MS (120 000 resolution) and up to 10 centroid product ion scans (30 000 resolution) per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 proteome database (http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase/) using MaxQuant v.1.5.3.30, selecting default parameters but with ‘match between runs’ enabled. Comparative quantification of ChlG, HliD and Ycf39 was via their intensity values recorded in the MaxQuant output.

### Publication Abstract
Chlorophyll synthase (ChlG) catalyses a terminal reaction in the chlorophyll biosynthesis pathway, attachment of phytol or geranylgeraniol to the C17 propionate of chlorophyllide. Cyanobacterial ChlG forms a stable complex with high light-inducible protein D (HliD), a small single-helix protein homologous to the third transmembrane helix of plant light-harvesting complexes (LHCs). The ChlG-HliD assembly binds chlorophyll, &#x3b2;-carotene, zeaxanthin and myxoxanthophyll and associates with the YidC insertase, most likely to facilitate incorporation of chlorophyll into translated photosystem apoproteins. HliD independently coordinates chlorophyll and &#x3b2;-carotene but the role of the xanthophylls, which appear to be exclusive to the core ChlG-HliD assembly, is unclear. Here we generated mutants of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 lacking specific combinations of carotenoids or HliD in a background with FLAG- or His-tagged ChlG. Immunoprecipitation experiments and analysis of isolated membranes demonstrate that the absence of zeaxanthin and myxoxanthophyll significantly weakens the interaction between HliD and ChlG. ChlG alone does not bind carotenoids and accumulation of the chlorophyllide substrate in the absence of xanthophylls indicates that activity/stability of the 'naked' enzyme is perturbed. In contrast, the interaction of HliD with a second partner, the photosystem II assembly factor Ycf39, is preserved in the absence of xanthophylls. We propose that xanthophylls are required for the stable association of ChlG and HliD, acting as a 'molecular glue' at the lateral transmembrane interface between these proteins; roles for zeaxanthin and myxoxanthophyll in ChlG-HliD complexation are discussed, as well as the possible presence of similar complexes between LHC-like proteins and chlorophyll biosynthesis enzymes in plants.

### Keywords
Zeaxanthin, Flag-tag, Myxoxanthophyll, Synechocystis sp. pcc 6803, Ycf39, Chlorophyll a synthase, Cruf., Hlid, Crtr

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, UK.
School of Biosciences, University of Sheffield

### Submitter
Philip Jackson

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Hitchcock
Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, The University of Sheffield, UK.


