### Accession
PXD014119

### Title
Sir4 H-BRCT domain interacts with multiple phospho-proteins to regulate heterochromatic repression

### Description
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the Silent Information Regulator (SIR) proteins Sir2/3/4 form a complex suppressing transcription of genes at subtelomeric regions and the homothallic mating type (HM) loci. Here we identify a non-canonical BRCA1 C-terminal domain (H-BRCT) in Sir4 which is responsible for tethering telomeres to the nuclear periphery. We show that Sir4 H-BRCT and the closely related Dbf4 H-BRCT serve as selective phospho-epitope recognition domains that bind to a variety of phosphorylated target peptides. We present detailed structural information about the binding mode of established Sir4 interactors (Esc1, Ty5, Ubp10) and identify several novel interactors of Sir4 H-BRCT, including the E3 ubiquitin ligase Tom1. Based on these findings, we propose a phospho-peptide consensus motif for interaction with Sir4 H-BRCT and Dbf4 H-BRCT. Ablation of the Sir4 H-BRCT phospho-peptide interaction disrupts SIR-mediated repression and perinuclear localization. In conclusion, the Sir4 H-BRCT domain serves as a hub for recruitment of phosphorylated target proteins to heterochromatin to properly regulate silencing and nuclear order.

### Sample Protocol
50 ml of log-phase yeast cultures (OD600 = 0.5) were harvested and pellets were washed once with ice-cold phosphate buffered saline in the presence of Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail PhosSTOP (Roche). Cells were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Thawed pellets were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, Complete Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Roche), Phosphatase inhibitor cocktail PhosSTOP (Roche)), by bead-beating with Zirconia beads. Lysate was spun at 14,000 rpm, 10 min, 4oC and the supernatant was filtered through a 0.45 micron centrifugal filter. The cleared lysate was incubated with 8 ul of Myc-Trap_MA beads (ChromTek) at 4oC for 4 h. Beads were washed with lysis buffer lacking NP-40 and protease inhibitor cocktail. The enriched proteins were digested directly on the Myc-Trap_MA beads (ChromTek) with 0.2 g Lys-C in 5 l digestion buffer (3 M guanidium chloride, 20 mM EPPS pH 8.5, 10 mM CAA, 5 mM TCEP) for 2 hrs at RT. Next, samples were diluted with 50 mM HEPES pH 8.5 and digested with 0.2 g trypsin ON at 37°C. The next day, 0.2 g fresh trypsin was added, and samples were incubated for an additional 5 hrs at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification of the proteins was done with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using Andromeda as search engine (Cox, Neuhauser et al., 2011) and label free quantification (LFQ) (Cox, Hein et al., 2014) as described in (Hubner, Bird et al., 2010). The Saccharomyces cerevisiae subset of the UniProt version 2017_04 combined with the contaminant DB from MaxQuant was searched with carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification on cysteine and variable modification oxidation on methionine, protein N-terminus acetylation, and phosphorylation on serine, and threonine. The protein and peptide FDR were set to 0.01. All MaxQuant parameters can be found in the uploaded parameter file: mqpar.xml.

### Publication Abstract
In Saccharomyces cerevisiae, the silent information regulator (SIR) proteins Sir2/3/4 form a complex that suppresses transcription in subtelomeric regions and at the homothallic mating-type (HM) loci. Here, we identify a non-canonical BRCA1 C-terminal domain (H-BRCT) in Sir4, which is responsible for tethering telomeres to the nuclear periphery. We show that Sir4 H-BRCT and the closely related Dbf4 H-BRCT serve as selective phospho-epitope recognition domains that bind to a variety of phosphorylated target peptides. We present detailed structural information about the binding mode of established Sir4 interactors (Esc1, Ty5, Ubp10) and identify several novel interactors of Sir4 H-BRCT, including the E3 ubiquitin ligase Tom1. Based on these findings, we propose a phospho-peptide consensus motif for interaction with Sir4 H-BRCT and Dbf4 H-BRCT. Ablation of the Sir4 H-BRCT phospho-peptide interaction disrupts SIR-mediated repression and perinuclear localization. In conclusion, the Sir4 H-BRCT domain serves as a hub for recruitment of phosphorylated target proteins to heterochromatin to properly regulate silencing and nuclear order.

### Keywords
Heterochromatin, Sir complex, Tom1, Dbf4, Brct

### Affiliations
Head of Protein Structure facility, Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research
Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Vytautas Iesmantavicius

### Lab Head
Dr Heinz Gut
Head of Protein Structure facility, Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research


