### Accession
PXD020748

### Title
Label-free quantification (LFQ) analysis of the AtACINUS interactome

### Description
AtACINUS protein is involved in regulation of alternative transcription and splicing(AS). Identifying interaction partners and protein complex compositions for AtACINUS can produce valuable information on the mechanisms by which they regulate transcription and AS, as well as post-translational modifications on AtACINUS. A homozygous 35S::AtACINUS-GFP/acinus-2 plant was selected for similar protein expression level to the endogenous AtACINUS protein of wild-type plants using a native α-AtACINUS antibody. We isolated putative AtACINUS interaction partners from young Arabidopsis seedlings using a modified LaG16LaG2 nanobody. Plants expressing TAP-GFP under 35S promoter were used as controls.

### Sample Protocol
The AtACINUS-GFP/acinus-2 and TAP-GFP seedlings (Shen et al., 2008) were grown for 7 days at 21°C with 24 hours light on ½ MS medium. Tissues were harvested, ground in liquid nitrogen and stored in -80°C.   Immunoprecipitation was performed as described previously with slight modifications (Ni et al., 2013). Briefly, proteins were extracted in MOPS buffer (100 mmol/L MOPS, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 1% (v/v) TritonX-100, 1 mmol/L phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride (PMSF), 2X Complete protease inhibitor cocktail, and PhosStop cocktail (Roche) and 20 µmol/L PUGNAc inhibitor (Sigma), centrifuged, and ﬁltered through two layers of Miracloth, then incubated with a modified version of LaG16-LaG2 anti-GFP nanobody (Fridy et al., 2014) conjugated to dynabeads (Invitrogen), for 3 hr at 4°C, followed by four 2-min washes with immunoprecipitation buffer and eluted with 2% (w/v) SDS buffer containing 10 mmol/L tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mmol/L chloroacetamide at 95°C  for 5 mins. The eluted proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE. After Colloidal blue staining, the whole lane of protein samples was excised in two segments and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin.  Three biological experiments were performed.   The peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 ZipTips (Millipore) and analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with an Easy LC 1200 UPLC liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher).  Peptides were separated using analytical column ES803 (Thermo Fisher). The flow rate was 300nL/min and a 120-min gradient was used. Peptides were eluted by a gradient from 3 to 28% solvent B (80% (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 100 mins and from 28 to 44% solvent B over 20 mins, followed by short wash at 90% solvent B. Precursor scan was from mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) 375 to1600 and top 20 most intense multiply charged precursor were selection for fragmentation. Peptides were fragmented with higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy (NCE) 27.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed by MaxQuant using most of preconfigured settings (Cox and Mann, 2008). The search was against the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR10) database, to which reverse sequence versions were concatenated (a total of 35,386 entries) to allow estimation of a false discovery rate (FDR).. Carbamidomethylcysteine was searched as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Data were searched with a 4.5ppm tolerance for precursor ion and 20 ppm for fragment ions. The second peptide feature was enabled. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Peptide and protein FDRs were set as 0.01. Minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids.  Multiplicity was set to 1. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was enabled.  The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and alignment time window as 20 mins. Quantification was done on unique and razor peptides and a minimum ratio count was set to 2.   The proteinGroups.txt generated by MaxQuant were loaded to Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). The results were filtered by removing identified proteins by only modified sites, or hits to reverse database and contaminants. LFQ intensity values were logarithmized. The pull-downs were divided to AtACINUS-GFP and TAP-GFP control. Samples were grouped in triplicates and identifications were filtered for proteins having at least three values in at least one replicate group. Signals that were originally zero were imputed with random numbers from a normal distribution (width 0.3, shift =1.8). Volcano plot was performed with x axis representing the logarithmic ratios of protein intensities between AtACINUS-GFP and TAP-GFP. The hyperbolic curve that separates AtACINUS specific interactor from background was drawn using threshold value FDR 0.01 and curve bend S0 value 2.   LFQ data and SILIA data were combined and filtered to get a high-confidence list: 1) Significant enrichment in LFQ three biological replicates (FDR=0.01, S0=2); 2) Enrichment of over 2 folds in both SILIA biological experiment; or over 2 folds in one SILIA experiment, but not identified and quantified in second SILIA experiment. If the proteins are only identified and quantified by LFQ three biological replicates, then cut off ( log 2 fold > 4, t test >4).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Atacinus, Plant, Seedling, Co-immunoprecipitation, Ip-ms, Label-free quantification analysis, Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Acinus

### Affiliations
Carnegie Institution at Stanford
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility

### Submitter
Shouling Xu

### Lab Head
Dr SHOULING XU
Carnegie Mass Spectrometry Facility


