### Accession
PXD008407

### Title
LC-MSMS analysis of human urine to identify early diagnostic biomarkers for prostate cancer

### Description
In order to detect proteins sensitive and specific enough to detect early stages of PCa, we performed a complex comparative proteomic study analyzing urine as a source for non-invasive biomarkers. We compared urine samples from patients with early PCa stages and Gleason score between 6 and 7 with samples from patients with BPH and other urological cancers, namely bladder and renal. The main goal of this study was to discover a diagnostic biomarker or set of biomarkers in urine, sufficiently sensitive to detect PCa in its early stages and specific enough to separate the disease from BPH or other urological cancers.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed 32 urine samples from patients with prostate cancer (PCa), benign prostate hyperplasia (BPH), bladder cancer (BC) and renal cancer (RC). The first morning urine (3–10) ml was collected from the patients prior to clinical intervention and stored on ice for short period (<1 h). Samples were centrifuged at 1000 g, for 10 min to remove cell debris, aliquoted in 1.5 ml tubes and stored at −80°C until use.LC-MS/MS analysis: The starting amount of urine per isolation was 1 ml.  Total urine proteome was precipitated using a methanol/chloroform extraction in ratio 1 : 1.5 : 0.4 (urine : methanol : chloroform), washed with 1 volume of methanol and then dissolved in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 1mg/ml RapiGestTM detergent (Waters Corp.). Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to 5 mM final concentration and the solution was sonicated and boiled for 5 minutes. Protein concentration were adjusted to 0.6 µg/µl in RapiGest buffer using starting amount of 20 µg protein per sample. The samples were reduced with DTT to 5 mM final concentration for 30 min. at 60oC, alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) to 15 mM final concentration for 30 min. in dark, at room temperature, and digested with 0.05 µg/µl trypsin sequencing grade (Roche) in trypsin : protein ratio of 1 : 100. To the prepared sample containing 200 ng/µl protein, yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH, UniProt P00330) digest (MassPREP ADH Digestion Standard, Waters) was added as an internal control to 25 fmol/µl final concentration.

### Data Protocol
A label-free LC-MS/MS protein profiling was performed using a nano liquid chromatograph ACQUITY UPLC M-Class coupled with Synapt G2Si HDMS QTOF mass spectrometer (Waters Corp) using MSE data-independent scanning. Two 120 min LC-MS runs were carried out for each sample using the optimal loading of 250 ng per sample/run, providing a total of 40 chromatograms (10 per group) in resolution mode.  Spectra were analyzed with PLGS. Peak processing settings were low energy threshold of 300 counts and elevated energy threshold of 40 counts. Data was searched against the UniProtKB database of manually annotated and reviewed human sequences containing 20139 proteins (August 2016) to which yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (UniProt P00330) sequences were added. Search settings included up to one missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl cysteine as a fixed modification and the methionine oxidation as variable modification. A minimum of 2 fragment ion matches were required per peptide identification and 5 fragment ion matches per protein identification with at least 2 peptide matches per protein identification. The false discovery rate was set to 4%.  Matching of peptides by accurate mass and retention time across multiple LC/MS/MS chromatograms and statistical analyses were performed with Progenesis QI for Proteomics (V 3.0) (Nonlinear dynamics, Waters Corporation). Search parameter settings and the database were the same as in PLGS. The protein abundances in individual runs were normalized using the run that is least different from all other runs. Normalization to all proteins was selected. Quantification was done by Hi-N, using 3 most abundant peptides per protein. Positive identification was based on 2 or more peptide matches per identification. Proteins with differential abundance among the 4 groups were considered with fold change ≥ 1.5 and Anova ≤ 0.05. P-values between groups were calculated using t-test (independent, 2-tailed, unequal variance) and subsequently false discovery rate (FDR) correction for multiple testing was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Detecting prostate cancer (PCa) using non-invasive diagnostic markers still remains a challenge. The aim of this study was the identification of urine proteins that are sufficiently sensitive and specific to detect PCa in the early stages. Comparative proteomics profiling of urine from patients with PCa, benign prostate hyperplasia, bladder cancer, and renal cancer, coupled with bioinformatics analysis, were performed. Statistically significant difference in abundance showed 20 and 85 proteins in the 2-D DIGE/MS and label-free LC-MS/MS experiments, respectively. In silico analysis indicated activation, binding, and cell movement of subset of immune cells as the top affected cellular functions in PCa, together with the down-regulation of Acute Phase Response Signaling and Liver X Receptor/ Retinoid X Receptor (LXR/RXR) activation pathways. The most promising biomarkers were 35, altered in PCa when compared to more than one group. Half of these have confirmed localization in normal or PCa tissues. Twenty proteins (CD14, AHSG, ENO1, ANXA1, CLU, COL6A1, C3, FGA, FGG, HPX, PTGDS, S100A9, LMAN2, ITIH4, ACTA2, GRN, HBB, PEBP1, CTSB, SPP1) are oncogenes, tumor suppressors, and multifunctional proteins with highly confirmed involvement in PCa, while 9 (AZU1, IGHG1, RNASE2, PZP, REG1A, AMY1A, AMY2A, ACTG2, COL18A1) have been associated with different cancers, but not with PCa so far, and may represent novel findings. LC-MS/MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD008407.

### Keywords
Human, Urine, Lc-msms, Diagnostic biomarkers, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Department of Proteomics, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje

### Submitter
Katarina Davalieva

### Lab Head
Dr Katarina Davalieva
Research Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology “Georgi D Efremov”, Department of Proteomics, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Skopje, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia


