### Accession
PXD007633

### Title
Renal oncocytoma characterized by the defective complex I of the respiratory chain  boosts the synthesis of the ROS scavenger glutathione

### Description
Renal oncocytomas are rare benign tumors of the kidney and are characterized by a deficient complex I (CI) enzyme activity of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system caused by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations. Yet, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms and alterations of metabolic pathways in this tumor. We compared renal oncocytomas with adjacent matched normal kidney tissues on a global scale by multi-omics approaches, including whole exome sequencing (WES), proteomics, metabolomics, and metabolic pathway simulation. The abundance of proteins localized to mitochondria increased more than 2-fold, the only exception was a strong decrease in the abundance for CI subunits that revealed multiple pathogenic heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations by WES. We also observed renal oncocytomas to dysregulate main metabolic pathways, shunting away from gluconeogenesis and lipid metabolism. Nevertheless, the abundance of energy carrier molecules such as of NAD+, NADH, NADP, ATP and ADP were significantly higher in renal oncocytoma. Finally, a tremendous 5000-fold increase of the reactive oxygen species (ROS) scavenger glutathione (GSH) can be regarded as a new hallmark of renal oncocytoma. Our findings demonstrate that renal oncocytomas undergo a metabolic switch to eliminate ATP consuming processes to ensure a sufficient energy supply for the tumor.

### Sample Protocol
About 10 mg frozen tissue per sample was homogenized under denaturing conditions with a FastPrep (three times for 60 s, 6.5 m x s-1) in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris pH 7.8, followed by sonication for 10 min, boiled at 95°C for 5 min and precipitated with acetone at -20°C overnight. Lyophilized proteins were dissolved in 6 M GdmCL, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, and 100 mM Tris pH 8.5. Samples were boiled for 5 min at 95 ◦C and sonicated for 15 min in a water sonicator. The lysates were diluted 1:10 with nine times volume of 10% ACN and 25 mM Tris, 8.5 pH, followed by a trypsin digestion (1:100) at 37 ◦C overnight. Subsequent, the peptides were purified with C18 columns and further fractionated by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Five µg of each SCX fraction and a non-fractioned sample were used for proteome profiling and analyzed by MaxQuant (v1.5.3.30).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.3.30) (Cox and Mann 2008) with the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al. 2011) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 70,228 entries released in 02/2016. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions were required. A minimum Andromeda score of 0 and 40 (delta score 0 and 9) for unmodified peptides and modified peptides was applied, respectively. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, acetylation of lysine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The two PTM’s were only used for the according enriched fractions. The label-free software MaxLFQ (Cox et al. 2014), which is integrated into MaxQuant, was used for quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Renal oncocytomas are rare benign tumors of the kidney and characterized by a deficient complex I (CI) enzyme activity of the oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) system caused by mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations. Yet, little is known about the underlying molecular mechanisms and alterations of metabolic pathways in this tumor. We compared renal oncocytomas with adjacent matched normal kidney tissues on a global scale by multi-omics approaches, including whole exome sequencing (WES), proteomics, metabolomics, and metabolic pathway simulation. The abundance of proteins localized to mitochondria increased more than 2-fold, the only exception was a strong decrease in the abundance for CI subunits that revealed several pathogenic heteroplasmic mtDNA mutations by WES. We also observed renal oncocytomas to dysregulate main metabolic pathways, shunting away from gluconeogenesis and lipid metabolism. Nevertheless, the abundance of energy carrier molecules such as NAD<sup>+</sup>, NADH, NADP, ATP, and ADP were significantly higher in renal oncocytomas. Finally, a substantial 5000-fold increase of the reactive oxygen species scavenger glutathione can be regarded as a new hallmark of renal oncocytoma. Our findings demonstrate that renal oncocytomas undergo a metabolic switch to eliminate ATP consuming processes to ensure a sufficient energy supply for the tumor.

### Keywords
Renal oncocytoma - complex i deficiency - glutathione metabolism - mtdna mutation

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
David Meierhofer, MS facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin-Dahlem, Germany ( lab head )

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
David Meierhofer, MS facility, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin-Dahlem, Germany ( lab head )


