### Accession
PXD006455

### Title
HLA-C*05:01 and HLA-C*07:02 from 721.221 cells

### Description
HLA-C expresion varies widely across the different HLA-C alleles. MicroRNA binding can partly explain the differences in HLA-C allele expression however other contributing factors still remain undetermined. Here we use two common HLA-C alleles, HLA-C*05:01 and HLA-C*07:02, to explore differences in expression levels. Using functional, structural and peptide repertoire comparisons we demonstrate that HLA-C expression levels are not only modulated at the RNA level but also at the protein level. This dataset contains RAW data and database search results for HLA-C*05:01 and HLA-C*07:02 from the 721.221 cell line.

### Sample Protocol
HLA Class I deficient 721.221 transfected to express either HLA-C*05:01 or HLA-C*07:02 were lysed by using detergent (IGEPAL). HLA were purified by W6/32 antibody affinity followed and peptides seperated by reversed-phase HPLC. Fractipons were pooled and analysed with a a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw output files were converted to mgf using msconvert (ProteoWizard) and peptides searched with ProteinPilot V5.0 (SCIEX) with the the human UniProtKB/SwissProt database (Feb2016).

### Publication Abstract
Expression of HLA-C varies widely across individuals in an allele-specific manner. This variation in expression can influence efficacy of the immune response, as shown for infectious and autoimmune diseases. MicroRNA binding partially influences differential HLA-C expression, but the additional contributing factors have remained undetermined. Here we use functional and structural analyses to demonstrate that HLA-C expression is modulated not just at the RNA level, but also at the protein level. Specifically, we show that variation in exons 2 and 3, which encode the &#x3b1;1/&#x3b1;2 domains, drives differential expression of HLA-C allomorphs at the cell surface by influencing the structure of the peptide-binding cleft and the diversity of peptides bound by the HLA-C molecules. Together with a phylogenetic analysis, these results highlight the diversity and long-term balancing selection of regulatory factors that modulate HLA-C expression.

### Keywords
Human, Hla-c, Hla class i

### Affiliations
Monash University
Professor Anthony W Purcell Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Jesse Mobbs

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W Purcell
Professor Anthony W Purcell Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


