### Accession
PXD042808

### Title
Trypanosoma brucei Replication Protein A LC-MS/MS

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei Replication Protein A (RPA) complex was purified using Ni-NTA purification where only the RPA1 subunit was tagged with 6x histidine. The purified TbRPA complex was run on SDS-PAGE and all three sub-units were gel sliced, processed and subjected to LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples (gel bands) were in-gel digested with sequencing grade trypsin (ThermoFisher) using standard protocol and analyzed by nano-LC-MS/MS. Samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RLSCnano System (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded on to a fused silica trap column Acclaim PepMap 100, 75umx2cm (ThermoFisher). After washing for 5 min at 5 µl/min with 0.1% TFA, the trap column was brought in-line with an analytical column (Nanoease MZ peptide BEH C18, 130A, 1.7um, 75umx250mm, Waters) for LC-MS/MS.  Peptides were eluted using a segmented linear gradient from 4 to 90% B (A: 0.2% formic acid, B: 0.08% formic acid, 80% ACN): 4–15% B in 5min, 15-50% B in 50 min, and 50-90% B in 15 min.  Mass spectrometry data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition procedure with a cyclic series of a full scan from 250-2000 with resolution of 120,000 followed by MS/MS (HCD, relative collision energy 27%) of the 20 most intense ions (charge +1 to +6) and a dynamic exclusion duration of 20 sec. Major peptides were manually confirmed.

### Data Protocol
The peak list of the LC-MSMS were generated by Thermo Proteomoe Discoverer (v. 2.1) into MASCOT Generic Format (MGF) and searched against custom supplied sequences, E. Coli plus a database composed of common lab contaminants using in house version of X!Tandem (GPM Furry, Craig and Beavis, 20041). Search parameters are as follows:  fragment mass error: 20 ppm, parent mass error: +/- 7 ppm; fixed modification: none; flexible modifications: Oxidation on Methionine for the primary search and dioxidation of methionine and glutamine to pyro-glutamine at the refinement stage, protease specificity: tryptic allowing 2 miss-cut for the primary search and semi-tryptic allowing 5 miss-cut at the refinement stage. Only spectra with loge <-2 were included in the final report. Peptides belonging to target proteins were manually inspected to determine exact processed sequences.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tbrpa

### Affiliations
Public Health Research Institute, Rutgers University
Rutgers University

### Submitter
Aditi Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr Hee-Sook Kim
Public Health Research Institute, Rutgers University


