### Accession
PXD024229

### Title
Associations between cellular energy and pediatric inflammatory bowel disease patient response to treatment

### Description
Crohn’s disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis are chronic inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) of which the etiology and pathogenesis are not completely understood. In paediatric patients, the disease tends to be more severe and aggressive then in adults. Here, we perform a proteomic approach on ascending colon biopsies from 119 pediatric patients to characterize disease pathogenesis and the impacts of treatment. Consistent with previous findings, we report an altered proteome in IBD patients that indicates impaired mitochondrial function. Gene ontology revealed that proteins downregulated in inflammation are associated with metabolism, whereas upregulated proteins contribute to protein processing. A comparison of proteomes from CD patients before and after therapeutic intervention identified over 100 proteins that are significantly different between patients that responded and those that did not respond to therapy; creatine kinase B was elevated before treatment in patients with mucosal healing after treatment, whereas basigin increased after treatment in responsive patients.

### Sample Protocol
Biopsy samples from macroscopically affected (CoA) or non-affected (CoN) areas of the ascending colon were acquired from pediatric patients during colonoscopy after mucosal wash of the colon with sterile water. A subset of biopsy samples were transferred directly into formalin for fixation prior to transfer to the CHEO pathology department for paraffin embedding and sectioning. Mounted sections were provided upon request from CHEO pathology for immunohistochemistry. Separately, biopsy samples for protein analysis were flash frozen on dry ice in the procedure room prior to storage at -80°C and processed for protein and MS analysis as previously described24. Briefly, biopsies were mechanically homogenized in lysis buffer (4% SDS, complete protease inhibitor (Roche), 50mM Tris, pH 8.0), sonicated, and proteins isolated by centrifugation. Isolated protein samples were stored at -80°C for immunoblot and ELISA analysis. For proteomic analysis, isolated protein was combined with an equal amount of SILAC reference protein lysate prior to tryptic digestion by filter-aided sample preparation. Following peptide fractionation by SCX resin (Agilent Technologies, CA, USA), samples were desalted with 10 µm AQUA-C18 resin (Dr Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany) and dried by speed-vac for -80°C storage. LC MS/MS was performed sequentially on all samples, randomized by patient (Random.org), on an LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite MS (ThermoFisher Scientific), as previously described.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were identified with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification; variable modifications were set for methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation; additional parameters included a minimum peptide length of seven amino acids, ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Protein group output files were imported into Perseus (Cox and Mann, 2012) (version 1.3.0.4) for data filtering, transformation and statistical analysis (ANOVA, T-test, Pearson correlation, hierarchical clustering) of the normalized ratios. Differentially expressed genes were determined by ANOVA with an FDR of <0.01. STRING (Szklarczyk, et al., 2017) was utilized to perform Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) functional annotation and enrichment analysis against the Q0 proteome, and to identify interactions. Interactions identified in STRING were visualized with Cytoscape (version 3.4.0). The Q75 proteome was segregated in Excel (Microsoft), and included proteins that were identified in > 75% of all samples within a sample type (e.g., Control, CD CoN, CD CoA…) or within all samples evaluated. When necessary, data was imputed by K-nearest neighbor with Matlab. Principle component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLSDA), and area under the curve receiver operator characteristic (AUROC) analysis were performed in MetaboAnalyst (Xia and Wishart, 2016). For multivariate AUROC, classification was PLSDA classification and feature ranking was by univariate AUROC, previously determined to provide consistent results with an independent cohort19. Complementary statistics and data graphing were performed using GraphPad Prism (v 8.0.1; GraphPad, San Diego, CA).

### Publication Abstract
Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), including Crohn's disease (CD) and ulcerative colitis, are chronic diseases of the gastrointestinal tract, with an unknown etiology, that affect over 6.8 million people worldwide. To characterize disease pathogenesis, proteomic and bioinformatic analyses were performed on colon biopsies collected during diagnostic endoscopy from 119 treatment-na&#xef;ve pediatric patients, including from 78 IBD patients and 41 non-IBD patients who served as controls. Due to the presence of noninflamed and/or inflamed regions in IBD patients, up to two biopsies were obtained from IBD patients as compared to a single noninflamed biopsy from non-IBD pediatric control patients. Additional biopsies were obtained and analyzed from 33 of the IBD patients after IBD-directed therapeutic intervention for comparison of pre- and post-treatment proteomes. SuperSILAC was utilized to perform quantitative analysis of homogenized tissues, which were processed by filter-aided sample preparation. Hierarchical clustering and principal component analyses revealed proteomic patterns that distinguished inflamed from noninflamed tissues independent of therapy. Gene ontology revealed that proteins downregulated in inflammation are associated with metabolism, whereas upregulated proteins contribute to protein processing. A comparison of pre- and post-treatment proteomes from CD patients identified over 100 proteins that are significantly different between patients who responded and those who did not respond to therapy, including creatine kinase B and basigin.

### Keywords
Inflammatory bowel disease, Proteomics, Pediatric

### Affiliations
research associate
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.

### Submitter
Zhibin Ning

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Ottawa Institute of Systems Biology and Department of Biochemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.


