### Accession
PXD003585

### Title
O. volvulus and Wolbachia Stage-specifc proteomes

### Description
Stage-specific proteomes of Onchocerca volvulus and its endosymbiont Wolbachia

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins from all the stages were extracted using the UPX universal protein extraction kit. Extracted protein samples were prepared for digestion using the filter-assisted sample preparation (FASP), buffer exchanged with 1% SDC, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6, then alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide. The SDC concentration was reduced to 0.1%. Samples were digested using trypsin at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:100, overnight, at 37°C in a Thermo-Mixer at 1000 RPM. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation. A portion of the digested peptides, about 20 micrograms, were desalted using reversed phase stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) tips. Peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile, 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid and lyophilized in a SpeedVac (Thermo Savant) to near dryness, approximately 1 h. LC was performed on Easy-nLC 1000 UHPLC system (Thermo). Mobile phase A was 97.5% MilliQ water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. Mobile phase B was 99.5% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid. The 240 min LC gradient ran from 0% B to 35% B over 210 min, then to 80% B for the remaining 30 min. Samples were loaded directly to the column. The column was 50 cm x 75 um I.D. and packed with 2 micron C18 media (Thermo Easy Spray PepMap). The LC was interfaced to a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo) via nano-electrospray ionization using a source with an integrated column heater (Thermo Easy Spray source). The column was heated to 50°C. An electrospray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire, by data-dependent acquisition, tandem mass spectra from the top 20 ions in the full scan from 400 - 1200 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15s, singly-charged ions were excluded, isolation width was set to 1.6 Da, full MS resolution to 70,000 and MS/MS resolution to 17,500. Normalized collision energy was set to 25, automatic gain control to 2e5, max fill MS to 20 ms, max fill MS/MS to 60 ms and the underfill ratio to 0.1%.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometer RAW data files were converted to mzML format using msconvert. MGF files were generated from mzML using the Peak Picker HiRes tool, part of the OpenMS framework All searches were performed on Amazon Web Services-based cluster compute instances using the Proteome Cluster interface. Detailed search parameters are printed in the search output XML files. Briefly, all searches required 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, strict tryptic cleavage, up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine alkylation, variable modification of methionine oxidation and protein expectation value scores of 0.0001 or lower. Proteome Cluster builds species- and genus-specific protein sequence libraries monthly from the most current UniProtKB distribution. MGF files were searched using the most recent protein sequence libraries available from UniProtKB or using the FASTA libraries of O. volvulus (ver 245) and its endosymbiont Wolbachia (wOv). MGF files were searched using X!!Tandem using both the native and k-score scoring algorithms and by OMSSA. XML output files were parsed and non-redundant protein sets determined using Proteome Cluster. MS1-based istopoic features were detected and peptide peak areas were calculated using the FeatureFinderCentroid tool, part of the OpenMS framework. Proteins were required to have 1 or more unique peptides across the analyzed samples with E-value scores of 0.0001 or less.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Onchocerca volvulus

### Affiliations
NIH
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892

### Submitter
Sasisekhar Bennuru

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas B Nutman
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892


