### Accession
PXD024691

### Title
Protein content of extracellular vesicles from human brain microvascular endothelial cells treated by paraquat

### Description
Since the last decade, the field of extracellular vesicles (EVs) has increasingly grown. These “intracellular messengers” became interesting as biomarker source in the SNC research, because of their content, which may reflect the physiological state of their donor cells in a context of an external stimuli. However, still little is known about EVs released from cell types constituting the blood-brain barrier (BBB), especially on the human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs). The current study aimed to isolate and characterize EVs from HBMECs and to analyze the EVs proteome modulation after an external stimulate such as the Paraquat (PQ), a neurotoxicant. Size distribution, quantity and presence of EV markers were assessed. Identification and quantification of EVs proteins was conducted by data-independent acquisition mass-spectrometry (DIA-MS). Signature pathway of PQ-treated EVs were analyzed by gene ontology terms and pathway enrichment. Results present evidence that PQ-treated HBMECs and EVs are sharing proteins belonging to the ubiquinone metabolism and to the transcription HIF-1 targets pathways with a highly significant p-values, suggesting that those pathways may be a potential EVs signature of the PQ-induced toxicity in the BBB.

### Sample Protocol
For each sample, 5g proteins was reduced using TCEP (final concentration 5mM, 30min, 37°C) (Sigma Aldrich), alkylated using iodoacetamide (final concentration 15mM, 60min, RT, in dark condition) (Sigma Aldrich) and digested by an overnight tryptic digestion (w/w ration 1:50) (Promega). The RapiGest surfactant was cleaved by incubating samples with 0.5% trifluoacetic acid (Sigma Aldrich) (45min, 37°C). Samples were then desalted on a C18 reverse phase columns (Harvard Apparatus), peptides were dried under vaccum and subsequently resuspended in 5% ACN 0.1% FA (peptides final concentration of 0.5g/L and spiked with iRT peptide (Biognosys) (1:20). For each sample (cells and EVs), the equivalent of 2g of peptides were analyzed using Liquid Chromatography-Electrospray ionization-MS/MS (LC-ESI-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) equipped with an EASY nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 precolumn packed with 3 μm particles and 100 Å pore size. Separation was performed using a 50 cm × 75 μm i.d. PepMap C18 column packed with 2 μm and 100 Å particles and heated at 50 °C. Peptides were separated using a 125-min segmented gradient of 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and 80% acteonitril 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) (Additional file 1), at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data-Independant Acquisition (DIA) was performed with MS1 full scan at a resolution of 60,000 (FWHM) followed by 30 DIA MS2 scan with variable windows. MS1 was performed in the Orbitrap with an AGC target of 1 x 106, a maximum injection time of 50 ms and a scan range from 400 to 1240 m/z. DIA MS2 was performed in the Orbitrap using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30%. Isolation windows was set to 28 m/z with an AGC target of 1 x 106 and a maximum injection time of 54 ms. The raw DIA MS data were matched against the spectral library.

### Data Protocol
For the analysis of cells and EVs, protein abundances were exported from Spectronaut™, and selected proteins were tested for significance using Student’s two-tailed t test. We also used peptides intensities which were exported and analyzed using mapDIA. No further normalization was applied. The following parameters were used : min peptides = 2, max peptides = 10, min correl = − 1. Min_DE = 0.01, max_DE = 0.99, and experimental_design = replicate design. Proteins were considered to have significantly changed in abundance with a LFDR < 0.05 and an absolute fold change (|FC|) > 1.2.

### Publication Abstract
Over the last decade, the knowledge in extracellular vesicles (EVs) biogenesis and modulation has increasingly grown. As their content reflects the physiological state of their donor cells, these "intercellular messengers" progressively became a potential source of biomarker reflecting the host cell state. However, little is known about EVs released from the human brain microvascular endothelial cells (HBMECs). The current study aimed to isolate and characterize EVs from HBMECs and to analyze their EVs proteome modulation after paraquat (PQ) stimulation, a widely used herbicide known for its neurotoxic effect. Size distribution, concentration and presence of well-known EV markers were assessed. Identification and quantification of PQ-exposed EV proteins was conducted by data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). Signature pathways of PQ-treated EVs were analyzed by gene ontology terms and pathway enrichment. Results highlighted that EVs exposed to PQ have modulated pathways, namely the ubiquinone metabolism and the transcription HIF-1 targets. These pathways may be potential molecular signatures of the PQ-induced toxicity carried by EVs that are reflecting their cell of origin by transporting with them irreversible functional changes.

### Keywords
Ubiquinone metabolism, Bbb, Proteomics, Endothelia cells, Extracellular vesicles, Paraquat, Cns, Dia-ms, Hif-1

### Affiliations
Department of Medicine, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Tatjana Vujic

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Charles Sanchez
Translational Biomarker Group, University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland


