### Accession
PXD007871

### Title
Proteomic analysis of human PARK2 knockout iPSC-derived neurons

### Description
Mitochondrial dysfunction plays a major role in the pathogenesis of sporadic Parkinson’s disease (PD) and familial PD caused by mutations in the PARK2 gene. The protein, parkin, is vital for mitochondrial function, but the lack of key PD phenotypes in PARK2 knockout (KO) rodent models has hindered investigations into parkin’s role in PD pathogenesis. Human isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines with and without PARK2 KO enable studies of the effect of parkin dysfunction in dopaminergic neuronal cultures.

### Sample Protocol
Reduction, alkylation, Trypsin digestion, TMT6-plex labeling, enrichment of phosphopeptides and cysteine-modified peptides (using a CysTag), HILIC and high pH fractionation, nano-LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processes using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, ThermoFisher) and searched against the Swissprot human database using an in-house Mascot server (v2.3, Matrix Science Ltd.) and the Sequest HT search engine. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (HCD fragmentation), TMT 6-plex (Lys and N-terminal) as fixed modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin. Variable modifications were NEM on Cys, N-terminal acetylation along with phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr and N-Succinimidyl iodoacetate on Cys for the phosphorylated and CysPAT-modified groups, respectively. Only peptides with up to a q-value of 0.01 (Percolator), Mascot rank 1 and cut-off value of Mascot score > 15 were considered for further analysis. Only proteins with more than one unique peptide were considered for further analysis in the non-modified group.  The pathway analysis was performed using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, QIAGEN) on the three datasets; the differentially regulated non-modified-, phosphorylated and cysteine-modified proteins. Direct and indirect relationships, either experimentally observed or highly predicted based on data from CNS tissue or cell lines, were included. The IPA comparison analysis was used to combine results from all three datasets and rank the most significantly enriched pathways according to the IPA calculated p-value or z-score.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in parkin, encoded by the PARK2 gene, causes early-onset familial Parkinson's disease (PD), but dysfunctional parkin has also been implicated in sporadic PD. By combining human isogenic induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) with and without PARK2 knockout (KO) and a novel large-scale mass spectrometry based proteomics and post-translational modification (PTM)-omics approach, we have mapped changes in protein profiles and PTMs caused by parkin deficiency in neurons. Our study identifies changes to several proteins previously shown to be dysregulated in brains of sporadic PD patients. Pathway analysis and subsequent in vitro assays reveal perturbations in migration and neurite outgrowth in the PARK2 KO neurons. We confirm the neurite defects using long-term engraftment of neurons in the striatum of immunosuppressed hemiparkinsonian adult rats. The GTP-binding protein RhoA was identified as a key upstream regulator, and RhoA activity was significantly increased in PARK2 KO neurons. By inhibiting RhoA signalling the migration and neurite outgrowth phenotypes could be rescued. Our study provides new insight into the pathogenesis of PD and demonstrates the broadly applicable potential of proteomics and PTMomics for elucidating the role of disease-causing mutations.

### Keywords
Parkinson's disease, Lc-msms, Human ips cells, Qexactive-hf

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research group, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Pia Jensen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Røssel Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research group, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


