### Accession
PXD010688

### Title
ABLE-SWATH -  A Case Study and Methodology for OpenSWATH Parameter Optimization Using the ProCan90 Data Set and 45,810 Computational Analysis Runs

### Description
Proteomic methods typically involve lengthy, multi-step sample preparation protocols (14-16 hrs), especially for the lysis and digestion of solid tissue samples or cells.  We developed a streamlined proteomic sample preparation protocol termed Accelerated Barocycler Lysis and Extraction (ABLE), that substantially reduces the time and cost of tissue sample processing.  ABLE is based on pressure cycling technology (PCT) for rapid tissue solubilisation and reliable, controlled proteolytic digestion.  Here, the previously reported PCT protocol was optimised using 1-4 mg biopsy punches from rat kidney.  The tissue denaturant urea was substituted with a combination of sodium deoxycholate (SDC) and N-propanol.  ABLE produced comparable numbers of protein identifications in half the sample preparation time and with reduced cost, being ready for MS injection in 3 hrs (vs the conventional urea PCT method of 6 hrs).  To validate the method, it was applied across a diverse range of rat tissues (kidney, lung, muscle, brain, testis), human HEK 293 cells and ovarian tumours by coupling PCT with SWATH-mass spectrometry (SWATH-MS).  There were similar numbers of quantified proteins between ABLE-SWATH and PCT-SWATH methods, with greater than 70% overlap for all sample types, except muscle with 58% overlap.  The ABLE tissue processing protocol offers a standardised, high-throughput, efficient and reproducible proteomic preparation method, accelerating sample throughput for any type of MS analysis.  Coupled with SWATH-MS, ABLE has the potential to accelerate proteomics analysis towards a clinically relevant turn-around-time.

### Sample Protocol
Conventional PCT Method Tissue lysis, reduction and alkylation was carried out simultaneously using 30 µL of 6 M Urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM iodoacetamide (IOA) in a Barocycler 2320EXT (Pressure Biosciences) at 45 kpsi, for 60 cycles (50 s high pressure, 10 s atmospheric pressure).  Following this, 5 µg of Lys-C endopeptidase (Novachem, Heidelberg West, VIC, Australia) was added to each sample tube and digestion was carried out in the Barocycler using 45 cycles of 50 s at 20 kpsi and 10 s at atmospheric pressure.  After LysC digestion the urea concentration was diluted to 1.1 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and trypsin digestion was performed in the Barocycler for 90 cycles (50 s at 20 kpsi, 10 s at atmospheric pressure).  All Barocycler steps were performed at 35⁰C.  Following digestion samples were desalted via C18 SPE columns (Empore SPE 4 mm/1 mL C18-SD) and the elute dried.  Samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and concentration was determined using A280 nm with a nanophotometer N60 (Implen).  Optimised ABLE Method Tissue lysis, reduction and alkylation were carried out simultaneously using 30 µL of 1% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 5% (v/v) N-propanol, 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 40 mM iodoacetamide (IOA in a Barocycler 2320EXT at 45 kpsi, for 60 cycles (50 s high pressure, 10 s atmospheric pressure), at 56⁰C.  Following this, 120 µL of rapid digestion buffer (Promega) was added to each sample and 1 µg of rapid trypsin/Lys-C (Promega).  Digestion was carried out in the Barocycler using 30 cycles of 50 s at 45 kpsi and 10 s at atmospheric pressure, at 70⁰C.  Samples were acidified with formic acid to precipitate the SDC, then centrifuged (15 min 18,000 xg).  The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and evaporated to dryness.  Samples were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and the concentration determined using A280 nm with a Implen nanophotometer N60 (LabGear, Brisbane, QLD, Australia).  IDA Acquisition An Eksigent nanoLC 425 HPLC operating in microflow mode, coupled online to a 6600 Triple TOF (SCIEX) was used for the analyses.  The peptide digests (2 µg) were spiked with retention time standards and injected onto a C18 trap column (SGE TRAPCOL C18 G203 300 µm x 100 mm) and desalted for 5 min at 10 µL/min with solvent A (0.1% [v/v] formic acid).  The trap column was switched in-line with a reversed-phase capillary column (SGE C18 G203 250 mm × 300 µm ID 3 µm 200 Å), maintained at a temperature of 40⁰C.  The flow rate was 5 µL/min.  The gradient started at 2 % solvent B (99.9% [v/v] acetonitrile, 0.1% [v/v] formic acid) and increased to 10% over 5 min.  This was followed by an increase of solvent B to 25% over 60 min, then a further increase to 40% for 5 min.  The column was washed with a 4 min linear gradient to 95% solvent B held for 5 min, followed by a 9 min column equilibration step with 98% solvent A.  The LC eluent was analysed using the Triple TOF 6600 system (SCIEX) equipped with a DuoSpray source and 50 µm internal diameter electrode and controlled by Analyst 1.7.1 software.  The following parameters were used: 5500 V ion spray voltage; 25 nitrogen curtain gas; 100°C TEM, 20 source gas 1, 20 source gas 2.  The 90 min information dependent acquisition (IDA), consisted of a survey scan of 200 ms (TOF-MS) in the range 350–1250 m/z to collect the MS1 spectra and the top 40 precursor ions with charge states from +2 to +5 were selected for subsequent fragmentation with an accumulation time of 50 ms per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 2.3 s and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the range 100–2000 m/z. SWATH Acquisition For the SWATH acquisition peptide spectra were acquired with the LC MS/MS method as described for IDA acquisition, using 100 variable windows, as per SCIEX technical notes (available at https://sciex.com/community/Asset/00001409/vw100_ces_5_10.txt).  The parameters were set as follows: lower m/z limit 350; upper m/z limit 1250; window overlap (Da) 1.0; CES was set at 5 for the smaller windows, then 8 for larger windows; and 10 for the largest windows.  MS2 spectra were collected in the range of m/z 100 to 2000 for 30 ms in high resolution mode and the resulting total cycle time was 3.2 s. Spectral Reference Library Generation To produce three SRLs a pool of digested rat tissues and a pool of HEK293T cells or ovarian tumour were each pre-fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions.  The fractions were analysed by LC-MS/MS in IDA mode as described above.  The rat tissue library was generated by combining samples of multiple tissue types, that were fractionated using high pH, and running ten fractions using 90 min IDA runs.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing IDA spectra were searched using Protein Pilot v5.0 (SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm with the following parameters: Sample Type: Identification; Cys Alkylation: Iodoacetamide; Digestion: Trypsin; Instrument: TripleTOF 6600; Database: Uniprot Rat (37,596 entries) for all rat tissues, Uniprot Human (178,750 entries) for HEK293T and ovarian samples.  Both databases contained sequences for internal retention time calibration standards.  Thorough ID and False Discovery Rate (FDR) Analysis were selected, and the FDR was set at 1%. The SWATH files and ion library files were uploaded to BaseSpace (Illumina, San Diego, CA, USA) via CloudConnect Software v1.0 (SCIEX) on PeakView v2.2 (SCIEX).  Samples were processed using the OneOmics package, starting with the Protein Expression Extractor application v1.0.0 (SCIEX), with the following parameters:  Number of peptides per protein: 6; Number of transitions per peptide: 6; XIC extraction window (in minutes): 5; XIC extraction widths: 40; XIC extraction widths unit: ppm.  Results were further processed using the Protein Expression Workflow application v1.1.0 Beta (SCIEX), and exported via the Analytics tab. Calculation of peptide physicochemical properties was performed with R using the 'Peptides' package23.  See supplementary methods for coding details. The Data (significantly impacted pathways, biological processes, molecular interactions, miRNAs, SNPs, etc.) were analysed using Advaita Bio’s iPathwayGuide (http://www.advaitabio.com/ipathwayguide).  The fold change output from OneOmics was uploaded to iPathway Guide and differentially expressed protein thresholds with a log fold-change of at least 0.6 and p-value ≤ 0.05 were used.  Elim pruning was used to correct p-values for gene ontology (GO) terms and false discovery rate (FDR) was used for pathway analysis correction.  Spectral Reference Library  The spectra were combined and searched using Protein Pilot as described below.  The resultant rat tissue library contained 4,457 proteins at 1% FDR.  The HEK293T library and ovarian tumour library were produced in a similar manner and contained 4,692 and 5,404 proteins at 1% FDR, respectively.  Protein pilot group files were converted to spectral library text files using PeakView software (SCIEX) v2.2.  Retention time standards were selected within PeakView before the data was analysed on OneOmics (SCIEX).

### Publication Abstract
In the current study, we show how ProCan90, a curated data set of HEK293 technical replicates, can be used to optimize the configuration options for algorithms in the OpenSWATH pipeline. Furthermore, we use this case study as a proof of concept for horizontal scaling of such a pipeline to allow 45&#x202f;810 computational analysis runs of OpenSWATH to be completed within four and a half days on a budget of US $10&#x202f;000. Through the use of Amazon Web Services (AWS), we have successfully processed each of the ProCan 90 files with 506 combinations of input parameters. In total, the project consumed more than 340&#x202f;000 core hours of compute and generated in excess of 26 TB of data. Using the resulting data and a set of quantitative metrics, we show an analysis pathway that allows the calculation of two optimal parameter sets, one for a compute rich environment (where run time is not a constraint), and another for a compute poor environment (where run time is optimized). For the same input files and the compute rich parameter set, we show a 29.8% improvement in the number of quality protein (&gt;2 peptide) identifications found compared to the current OpenSWATH defaults, with negligible adverse effects on quantification reproducibility or drop in identification confidence, and a median run time of 75 min (103% increase). For the compute poor parameter set, we find a 55% improvement in the run time from the default parameter set, at the expense of a 3.4% decrease in the number of quality protein identifications, and an intensity CV decrease from 14.0% to 13.7%.

### Keywords
Pct, Urea, Sample preparation, Sdc, Barocycler, Swath, Clinical proteomics

### Affiliations
Head of Cell Signalling Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney Co-Director of ProCan - The ACRF International Centre for the Proteome of Human Cancer Co-Director of ACRF Centre for Kinomics
CMRI

### Submitter
Natasha Lucas

### Lab Head
Dr Phillip J Robinson
Head of Cell Signalling Unit, Children's Medical Research Institute, The University of Sydney Co-Director of ProCan - The ACRF International Centre for the Proteome of Human Cancer Co-Director of ACRF Centre for Kinomics


