### Accession
PXD028824

### Title
DOT1L regulates pericentromeric heterochromatin

### Description
Many repetitive DNA elements are packaged in heterochromatin, but depend on occasional transcription to maintain long-term silencing. The factors that promote transcription of repeat elements in heterochromatin are largely unknown. Here, we show that DOT1L, a histone methyltransferase that modifies lysine 79 of histone H3 (H3K79), is required for transcription of major satellite repeats to maintain pericentromeric heterochromatin (PCH), and that this function is essential for preimplantation development. DOT1L is a transcriptional activator at single-copy genes but does not have a known role in repeat element transcription. We show that H3K79me3 is specifically enriched at repetitive elements, that loss of DOT1L compromises pericentromeric major satellite transcription, and that this function depends on interaction between DOT1L and the chromatin remodeler SMARCA5. DOT1L inhibition causes chromosome breaks and cell cycle defects, and leads to embryonic lethality.  Together, our findings uncover a vital new role for DOT1L in transcriptional activation of heterochromatic repeats.

### Sample Protocol
Excised 1D SDS polyacrylamide gel band/plug corresponding to co-IP eluted proteins were subjected to in situ enzymatic digestion.  The gels are washed with 250l 50% acetonitrile/50% water for 5 minutes followed by 250l of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/50% water for 30 minutes.  One final wash is done using 10mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/50% water for 30 minutes.  After washing, the gel plugs are dried in a Speedvac and rehydrated with 0.1g of either modified trypsin (Promega), per (approximately) 15mm3 of gel in 15 l 10mM ammonium bicarbonate.  Samples are digested at 37 C for 16 hours (overnight).  Digest is then centrifuge at supernatant/solution is transferred to injection vial to be injected onto a Waters NanoACQUITY UPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.  The Waters nanoACQUITY UPLC system uses a Waters Symmetry® C18 180µm x 20mm trap column and a 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm nanoAcquity™ UPLC™ column (35ºC) for peptide separation.  Trapping is done at 5µl/min, 99% Buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) for 3 min.  Peptide separation is performed at 300 nl/min with Buffer A: 100% water , 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B: 100% CH3CN, 0.075% formic acid. For the MS and MS/MS Q-Exactive Plus data collection, High-energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) MS/MS spectra filtered by dynamic exclusion was acquired over a 3 second duty cycle for charge states 2-8 with m/z isolation window of 1.6.  All MS (Profile) and MS/MS (centroid) peaks were detected in the Orbitrap.  Trapping was carried out for 3 min at 5 µl/min in 97% Buffer A (0.1% FA in water) and 3% Buffer B [(0.075% FA in acetonitrile (ACN)] prior to eluting with linear gradients that will reach 5% B at 1 min, 255% B at 90 min, and 50% B at 110 min, and 90% B at 115 min for 5 min; then dropdown to 3% B at 125 min for 5 min.

### Data Protocol
LC MS/MS data were analyzed utilizing Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot search engine (v. 2.7 Matrix Science LLC.).  Resulting PD analyses were imported into Scaffold (v. 4.0, Proteome Software) for further interrogation.  Positive protein identification were based on hits with two or more unique peptides per protein, and peptides were considered significant if the Mascot Score is better than the 95% confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Embryo, Chromatin, Dot1l, Mescs, Pericentromere, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Yale University
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry

### Submitter
TuKiet Lam

### Lab Head
Dr TuKiet Lam
Yale University Department of Molecular Biophysics and Biochemistry


