### Accession
PXD039281

### Title
Elevated PAF1-RAD52 Axis Confers Chemoresistance to Human Cancers

### Description
To identify a common protein that interacts with PAF1 in ovarian cancer, lung Cancer, and pancreatic cancer to mediate chemoresistance.

### Sample Protocol
Protein fractions were excised from SDS-PAGE gel, destained, reduced with tris-carboxyethylphosphine, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were eluted from the gel and concentrated to 20 µl by vacuum centrifugation and analyzed using a high-resolution mass spectrometry nano-LC-MS/MS Tribrid system, Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ coupled with UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Scientific). 500 ng of peptides were run by the pre-column (Acclaim PepMap™ 100, 75µm × 2cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific) and the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap™ RSCL, 75 µm × 50 cm, nanoViper, Thermo Scientific). The samples were eluted using a 120-min linear gradient of ACN (5-45%) in 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
: All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Sciences, London, UK, version 2.6.). Mascot was set up to search the SwissProt database (selected for Homo sapiens, 2018_06, 20361 entries), assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Parameters on MASCOT were set as follows: Enzyme: trypsin, Max missed cleavage: 1, Peptide charge: 1+, 2+, and 3+, Peptide tolerance: ± 0.8 Da, Fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C), Variable modifications: oxidation (M), MS/MS tolerance: ± 0.6 Da with error tolerant search, Instrument: ESI-TRAP. MASCOT results for different gel cuts of the same sample were combined and analyzed using Scaffold, which allows multiple search results to be condensed into a single result file.  Scaffold (version 4.8.7, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm14 with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm15. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Cisplatin- and gemcitabine-based chemotherapeutics represent a mainstay of cancer therapy for most solid tumors; however, resistance limits their curative potential. Here, we identify RNA polymerase II-associated factor 1 (PAF1) as a common driver of cisplatin and gemcitabine resistance in human cancers (ovarian, lung, and pancreas). Mechanistically, cisplatin- and gemcitabine-resistant cells show enhanced DNA repair, which is inhibited by PAF1 silencing. We demonstrate an increased interaction of PAF1 with RAD52 in resistant cells. Targeting the PAF1 and RAD52 axis combined with cisplatin or gemcitabine strongly diminishes the survival potential of resistant cells. Overall, this study shows clinical evidence that the expression of PAF1 contributes to chemotherapy resistance and worse clinical outcome for lethal cancers.

### Keywords
Rad52, Pancreatic cancer, Lung cancer, Paf1, Ovarian cancer

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Moorthy Ponnusamy

### Lab Head
Dr Moorthy P. Ponnusamy
University of Nebraska Medical Center


