### Accession
PXD014438

### Title
Novel Protein Pathways in Development and Progression of Pulmonary Sarcoidosis.

### Description
Sarcoidosis is a disease that affects multiple organ systems, with lung disease seen commonly and is the most frequent cause of sarcoidosis-related mortality.  We investigated to compare protein expression in the lung from both bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BAL) cells and fluid (BALF) in newly diagnosed patients with sarcoidosis. Mass spectral data acquisition was conducted on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument in data-dependent mode using either label-free (BALF) or label-based (intracellular) approach.   We identified 4,306 high confidence intracellular proteins (probability >99%) with 272 differentially expressed proteins controlling for an FDR  5%. The protein map to several known canonical pathways including phagosome maturation, clathrin-mediated endocytic signaling,                  NRF-2 mediated oxidant stress response, The examination of BALF identified 1,192 proteins, xxx and xxx protein with differential expression between controls vs.  sarcoidosis and progressive vs. non-progressive sarcoidosis respectively.  Several of the proteins identified mapping to the differentially expressed proteins were also detected in the BALF.

### Sample Protocol
BALF was kept on ice and centrifuged at 500g to separate the cell pellet.  The cell-free BALF was sonicated, centrifuged on sterile filtered to remove any particulates followed by concentrating with 3KD molecular weight centrifugal filters and depletion of 14 high abundance proteins with Seppro IgY14 (Sigma) depletion spin columns.  To obtain Intracellular proteins, BAL cells  were lysed with a hypotonic lysis buffer with protease inhibitors along with sequential cell disruption techniques of freeze-thaw, boiling, sonication and finally a urea and thiourea solution to solubilize proteins.  BALF and intracellular proteins were processed by in-gel clean-up and trypsin digestion. Next, the samples were cleaned up with an MCX stage tip,  followed by TMT labeling for intracellular proteins and  labeled with TMT-10Plex isobaric labels, cleaned up with an MCX and SPE columns. Multiplexed intracellular proteins were fractionated on Shimadzu Prominence with Xbridge column (waters). Fractions were collected every 2 minutes and fractions 7-38 were concatenated for subsequent HPLC MS/MS.  Multiplexed and fractionated intracellular and BALF peptides were analyzed using an Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC in tandem with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) MS.

### Data Protocol
BALF proteins: Spectral dataset was searched against the target-decoy version of the Human Uniprot database along with the contaminant sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). The analysis to identify differentially expressed proteins were completed using PECA procedure controlling for an FDR of  5%.     Intracellular proteins: Spectral dataset was searched against the target-decoy version of the Human Uniprot database along with the contaminant sequences from the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP, http://www.thegpm.org/crap/).  Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search the databases, and Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to perform TMT-based peptide quantitation and statistics using the Protein Prophet algorithm. Peptide identifications were accepted if were established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 0.5% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least one peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Pulmonary involvement occurs in up to 95% of sarcoidosis cases. In this pilot study, we examine lung compartment-specific protein expression to identify pathways linked to development and progression of pulmonary sarcoidosis. We characterized bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) cells and fluid (BALF) proteins in recently diagnosed sarcoidosis cases. We identified 4,306 proteins in BAL cells, of which 272 proteins were differentially expressed in sarcoidosis compared to controls. These proteins map to novel pathways such as integrin-linked kinase and IL-8 signaling and previously implicated pathways in sarcoidosis, including phagosome maturation, clathrin-mediated endocytic signaling and redox balance. In the BALF, the differentially expressed proteins map to several pathways identified in the BAL cells. The differentially expressed BALF proteins also map to aryl hydrocarbon signaling, communication between innate and adaptive immune response, integrin, PTEN and phospholipase C signaling, serotonin and tryptophan metabolism, autophagy, and B cell receptor signaling. Additional pathways that were different between progressive and non-progressive sarcoidosis in the BALF included CD28 signaling and PFKFB4 signaling. Our studies demonstrate the power of contemporary proteomics to reveal novel mechanisms operational in sarcoidosis. Application of our workflows in well-phenotyped large cohorts maybe beneficial to identify biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis and therapeutically tenable molecular mechanisms.

### Keywords
Sarcoidosis proteomics protein networks novel mechanism biomarkers balf intracellular proteins

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota
University of Minnesota, Medical School, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine

### Submitter
Kevin Viken

### Lab Head
Dr Maneesh Bhargava
University of Minnesota, Medical School, Associate Professor of Medicine, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine


