### Accession
PXD038317

### Title
Attachment of the RNA degradosome to the inner cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia coli prevents wasteful degradation of rRNA intermediates in ribosome assembly.

### Description
RNase E, an essential endoribonuclease in Escherichia coli, is the key component of the multienzyme RNA degradosome, which is localized to the inner cytoplasmic membrane. Until now, the reason for membrane localization of RNase E was not known. We have analyzed ribosome assembly in the rneΔMTS strain, which expresses a cytoplasmic variant of RNase E (cRNase E) resulting in a cytoplasmic RNA degradosome. In this mutant strain, there is a mild slowdown in the rates of growth and mRNA degradation. Here we document the striking accumulation of intermediates in ribosome assembly in the rneΔMTS strain in which precursors of 16S and 23S rRNA are cleaved by cRNase E. In vitro, we show that ribosomes partially unfolded in low ionic strength buffer are cleaved by RNase E. Mapping of in vivo and in vitro cleavage sites shows that they overlap and that their consensus sequence matches previously mapped RNase E cleavage sites. In vivo, fragments of 16S and 23S rRNA as well as a precursor of 5S rRNA are degraded in a pathway involving polyadenylation and 3’ exonucleases. Since the pathway for rRNA degradation is the same as the pathway for mRNA degradation, the slowdown of mRNA degradation in the rneΔMTS strain could be due to competition by rRNA degradation. Our results strongly suggest that the RNA degradosome participates in the quality control of ribosome assembly and that localization on the inner cytoplasmic membrane protects newly synthesized intermediates from wasteful degradation. Ribosome synthesis is costly. Since growth rate correlates with ribosome synthesis rate, slow growth rate of the rneΔMTS strain is due to the degradation of a proportion of newly synthesized ribosomes. Avoiding wasteful degradation of intermediates in ribosome assembly likely explains why localization of RNase E homologues to the inner cytoplasmic membrane is conserved throughout the γ-Proteobacteria.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, proteins from the different ribosomal particles were prepared in triple biological replicates for each strain. Proteins were extracted from the ribosomal particles after separation on sucrose gradient by adding 18% of cold acetic acid. Protein pellets were resuspended in 25µl of cold 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5. Protein samples were reduced for 30 min with shacking at 56°C in 2X protein loading buffer (80 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 4% SDS, 20% glycerol, 0.16% BBP, 49.2 mM DTT) and then alkylated in 66 mM iodoacetamide (SIGMA) for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. Equal volumes of the obtained samples were loaded onto 4-12% Bis-Tris Nu-PAGE gel (Thermofisher). For one-shot analysis of the entire mixture, no fractionation was performed, and the electrophoretic migration was stopped as soon as the protein sample migrated for 0.5cm. The gel was briefly stained using then InstantBlue (Expedeon Protein Solutions) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each single slice containing the whole sample was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion using modified porcine trypsin (Promega, France) at 10 ng/μl as previously described (Shevchenko A et al, 2001). The dried peptide extracts obtained were dissolved in 12 μl of 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid in 2% acetonitrile and analyzed by online nanoLC using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano LC system (Thermo Scientific Dionex) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for data-dependent CID fragmentation experiments. 5μl of each peptide extracts were loaded in two or three injection replicates onto 300μm ID x 5mm PepMap C18 precolumn (ThermoFisher, Dionex) at 20 μl/min in 2% acetonitrile, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. After 5 minutes of desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 μm ID x 50 cm C18 column (in-house packed with Reprosil C18-AQ Pur 3 μm resin, Dr. Maisch ; Proxeon Biosystems, Odense,  Denmark), equilibrated in 95% of buffer A (0.2% formic acid), with a gradient of 5 to 25% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) for 80min then 25% to 50% for 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the XCalibur software (version 2.0 SR2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scan MS was performed in the Orbitrap on the 350–1,800 m/z mass range with the resolution set to a value of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions per survey scan were selected with an isolation width of 2 m/z for subsequent data-dependent CID fragmentation and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the linear trap (LTQ). The normalized collision energy was set to 30%. To prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide, the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. For internal calibration the ion at 445.120025 m/z was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.1.0) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and for quantitative analysis. Data were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database released 2018_04 with Escherichia coli (K12 strain) (5,979 sequences) supplemented with a list of frequently observed contaminant sequences provided in MaxQuant. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main Andromeda database search, and the mass tolerance in MS/MS mode was set to 0.8Da. The required minimum peptide length was seven amino acids, and the minimum number of unique peptides was set to one. Andromeda results were validated by the target-decoy approach using a reverse database and the false discovery rates at the peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level were set to 1%. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was enabled with a time window of 2 min, to allow cross-assignment of MS features detected in the different runs after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20 min. Protein quantification was based on razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for label-free quantification calculation, and computation of the intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) metric was also enabled. To perform relative quantification between all identified proteins we used the normalized “ LFQ intensity” metric from the MaxQuant “proteinGroups.txt” output. Protein groups with negativeidentification scores were filtered, as well as proteins identified as contaminants. After log2-transformation of LFQ intensities, log transformed protein intensities corresponding to different technical LC-MS replicate runs were averaged and missing values were replaced to a mean LFQ intensity value was computed from technical LC-MS replicate runs by a noise value randomly drawn using the Perseus software (version 1.5.3.0). For each pairwise comparison of protein content of the subparticles 20S and 40S with their parental 30S and 50S from rneΔMTS and with the 30S and 50S from rne+, an unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test was performed based on the protein intensities. Proteins were considered significantly enriched when their absolute log2-transformed fold change was higher than 1 and their p-value lower than 0.05. To eliminate false-positive hits from quantitation of low intensity signals, two additional criteria were applied: only the proteins identified with a total number of averaged peptide spectrum match (PSM) counts>4 and quantified in a minimum of two biological replicates, before missing value replacement, for at least one of the two compared conditions were selected. Volcano plots were drawn to visualize significant protein abundance variations between the compared ribosomal particles. They represent -log10 (p-value) according to the log2 ratio.

### Publication Abstract
RNA processing and degradation shape the transcriptome by generating stable molecules that are necessary for translation (rRNA and tRNA) and by facilitating the turnover of mRNA, which is necessary for the posttranscriptional control of gene expression. In bacteria and the plant chloroplast, RNA degradosomes are multienzyme complexes that process and degrade RNA. In many bacterial species, the endoribonuclease RNase E is the central component of the RNA degradosome. RNase E-based RNA degradosomes are inner membrane proteins in a large family of gram-negative bacteria (&#x3b2;- and &#x3b3;-Proteobacteria). Until now, the reason for membrane localization was not understood. Here, we show that a mutant strain of Escherichia coli, in which the RNA degradosome is localized to the interior of the cell, has high levels of 20S and 40S particles that are defective intermediates in ribosome assembly. These particles have aberrant protein composition and contain rRNA precursors that have been cleaved by RNase E. After RNase E cleavage, rRNA fragments are degraded to nucleotides by exoribonucleases. In vitro, rRNA in intact ribosomes is resistant to RNase E cleavage, whereas protein-free rRNA is readily degraded. We conclude that RNA degradosomes in the nucleoid of the mutant strain interfere with cotranscriptional ribosome assembly. We propose that membrane-attached RNA degradosomes in wild-type cells control the quality of ribosome assembly after intermediates are released from the nucleoid. That is, the compact structure of mature ribosomes protects rRNA against cleavage by RNase E. Turnover of a proportion of intermediates in ribosome assembly explains slow growth of the mutant strain. Competition between mRNA and rRNA degradation could be the cause of slower mRNA degradation in the mutant strain. We conclude that attachment of the RNA degradosome to the bacterial inner cytoplasmic membrane prevents wasteful degradation of rRNA precursors, thus explaining the reason for conservation of membrane-attached RNA degradosomes throughout the &#x3b2;- and &#x3b3;-Proteobacteria.

### Keywords
Ribosome assembly, Label-free quantitative proteomics, Nanolc-ms/ms, Rna degradosome, Rnase e

### Affiliations
LMGM, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, CBI, Toulouse, France; TBI, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, INSA, Toulouse, France
IPBS-CNRS

### Submitter
Carine Froment

### Lab Head
Dr Agamemnon J. Carpousis
LMGM, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, UPS, CBI, Toulouse, France; TBI, Université de Toulouse, CNRS, INRAE, INSA, Toulouse, France


