### Accession
PXD036367

### Title
Understanding the role of yeast Yme1 in mitochondrial finction using biochemical and proteomics analysis

### Description
Mitochondrial proteome comparison between S. cerevisiae BY4741 WT and Yme1 deletion mutant. Mitochondria were isolated by fractionation as described by Titorenko et al. (2009). Briefly, cells were grown in YPGal and harvested at later exponential phases of OD ~1.5. After pre- treatment with DTT buffer (100 mM Tris-H 2 SO 4 pH 9.4, 10 mM DTT) at 30°C for 20 minutes, the cell wall was digested with zymolyase 20T (Seikagaku Corporation, Japan) in zymolyase buffer (20mM potassium phosphate buffer pH 7.4, 1.2M sorbitol) for 1 hour at 30˚ with shaking at 70 rpm. The resulting spheroblasts were checked under a light microscope to confirm cell wall digestion. Then, the spheroblasts were lysed in homogenization buffer (20mM HEPES-KOH pH7.4, 0.6M sorbitol, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF)) on- ice using a glass Teflon homogenizer. The resulting spheroblasts were subjected to two centrifugation steps at 1500 ×g to remove the cell debris and nuclei. Crude mitochondrial materials were isolated from the supernatant by centrifugation at 12,000 ×g at 4˚C for 10 minutes, then resuspended in SEM buffer (250mM sucrose, 0.6M Sorbitol, 20mM HEPES- KOH pH7.4). Protein concentration were checked by measuring absorbance at 280 nm, assuming an absorbance value of A280=0.21 would equate to 10 mg/ml of crude mitochondrial extract. After adjusting to final concentration of 10 mg/ml the crude mitochondria were then flash frozen and stored at −80°C.

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry proteomics analysis, the freshly prepared crude mitochondria were further purified using sucrose gradient centrifugation. Sucrose gradient was prepared in a Beckman Ultra-Clear centrifuge tube as follow: 1.5 ml of ice-cold 60% (w/v) sucrose in homogenization buffer, 4 ml of 32% sucrose in homogenization buffer, 1.5 ml of 23% (w/v) sucrose in homogenization buffer and 1.5 ml of 15% (w/v) sucrose in homogenization buffer. 3ml of crude mitochondrial extract was layered on top of the 15% (w/v) sucrose and centrifuged in a SW41 Ti swinging-bucket rotor (Beckman Coulter) for 1 hour at 134,000 xg at 4 °C. The sucrose gradient purified mitochondria were collected at the interface between 60% and 32% sucrose and washed with SBB7.4 buffer prior storage at -80°C. Four samples of the WT and yme1 mutant mitochondria were prepared for proteomics analysis. For the mass spectrometry analysis, a standard protocol from the mass spectrometry facility in the Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health of the University of Manchester was used. Briefly, samples 200μg of purified mitochondrial extract were first incubated with sample buffer (5 mM DTT, 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5, 5% SDS) for 10 minutes at 60˚C, followed by alkylation by addition of 15 mM IAM and incubated in the dark, at room temperature for 30 minutes. Then, 5mM of DTT were added to quench the alkylation reaction. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000xg for 10 minutes, and the resulting pellets were collected as protein lysate. Afterwards, the lysates were mixed with 1.2% aqueous phosphoric acid, followed by S-trap binding buffer (100 mM TEAB (pH7.1) in 90% methanol), then loaded onto a 96-well S-Trap plate (ProtiFi). Samples were digested by incubation with trypsin in digestion buffer (50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate) at a ratio of 1:10 (enzyme:protein) for 1 hour at 47 °C. Digested peptides were eluted by 5% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% aqueous formic acid. To desalt eluted peptides, samples were loaded onto FiltrEX desalt filter plate (Corning) containing POROS R3 beads and washed with 0.1% aqueous formic acid twice. Samples were then eluted with 0.1% aqueous formic acid containing 30% acetonitrile. Collected elusions were dried to completeness in a Heto vacuum centrifuge then stored at 4 °C.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from mass spectrometry was processed with MaxQuant 1.6.5.0[ (Tyanova, Temu et al. 2016)]. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm was used for the first search, 4.5 ppm for the main search, and 0.5 Da for the MS/MS fragment ions. The peak list was searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae database using the built-in Andromeda search engine. The false discovery rate (FDR) for accepted peptide spectrum matches and protein matches was set to 1%. Proteins that were significantly changed (FC>1.5, adj p<0.05) were identified using MSstat package in R [ (Choi, Chang et al. 2014) ]. Proteins displaying significant changes in the mutant strain were investigated for significant functional enrichment using the SGD gene ontology knowledgebase.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial i-AAA proteinase Yme1 is a multifunctional protein that plays important roles in maintaining mitochondrial protein homeostasis and regulating biogenesis and function of mitochondrial proteins. However, due to the complex interplay of mitochondria and the multifunctional nature of Yme1, how Yme1 affects mitochondrial function and protein homeostasis is still poorly understood. In this study, we investigated how <i>YME1</i> deletion affects yeast <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> growth, chronological life span, mitochondrial protein homeostasis and function, with a focus on the mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS) complexes. Our results show that whilst the <i>YME1</i> deleted cells grow poorly under respiratory conditions, they grow similar to wild-type yeast under fermentative conditions. However, the chronological life span is impaired, indicating that Yme1 plays a key role in longevity. Using highly enriched mitochondrial extract and proteomic analysis, we show that the abundances of many mitochondrial proteins are altered by <i>YME1</i> deletion. Several components of the respiratory chain complexes II, III, IV and V were significantly decreased, suggesting that Yme1 plays an important role in maintaining the level and function of complexes II-V. This result was confirmed using blue native-PAGE and in-solution-based enzyme activity assays. Taken together, this study shows that Yme1 plays an important role in the chronological life span and mitochondrial protein homeostasis and has deciphered its function in maintaining the activity of mitochondrial OXPHOS complexes.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Yeast, Ls/msms

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
School of Biological Sciences; Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health; The University of Manchester

### Submitter
Kwan Ting Kan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Hui Lu
School of Biological Sciences; Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health; The University of Manchester


