### Accession
PXD030644

### Title
Deubiquitinating enzymes and the proteasome regulate unique sets of ubiquitin substrates.

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Using UbiSite technology and inhibitors, we have compared the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the ubiquitinome. We uncovered large differential dynamic Ub signalling networks with substrates and sites uniquely regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitin signalling. DUBs regulate substrates via nearly 40,000 unique sites. Moreover, we found that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a unidirectional proteasomal degradation signal with strikingly rapid kinetics compared to ubiquitin polymers only. We found that PARP1, is hyper ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, increasing its enzymatic activity. Our findings highlight the key regulatory roles of DUBs on ubiquitin dynamics.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS cells were treated with either DMSO, 10µM MG132 or 20µM PR619 for 3h then washed twice with ice-cold PBS, scraped and lysed. Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (8M guanidine-HCL, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC), pH 8.5), sonicated and centrifuged for 30min at 15,000rcf. 50mg of protein per sample (measured by BCA) was reduced with 2mM DTT for 30min at RT and alkylated with 11mM CAA for 30min at RT. Samples were diluted with 25mM ABC to 2M guanidine-HCL and cleared through a 0.45µm PVDF filter (Millipore, Cat: SLHV033RS). Lys-C was added at a 1:100 enzyme to protein ratio and incubated o/n at RT. Digested peptides were purified by C18 cartridges (Waters, Cat: WAT051910) and lyophilized. Peptides were then dissolved in IP buffer (50mM MOPS pH 7.5, 10mM sodium phosphate, 50mM NaCl) with 0.1% Triton X-100. UbiSite antibody conjugated and crosslinked to Protein G beads were added to dissolved peptides and incubated for 5h at 4°C (~100µg UbiSite antibody for every 10mg starting material). Beads were washed three times with IP buffer without detergent and subsequently three times with 150mM NaCl. Purified peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA three times 5min incubations. Peptides were neutralized with 1M ABC, then diluted to 25mM ABC and subjected to trypsin digestion o/n at 37°C. Each sample was purified using Stage Tips, dried in speedVAC, supplemented with iRT standard peptides (Biognosys AG, Switzerland) and injected to on a 24-cm fused silica column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed in house with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Cat: r119.aq) by reverse-phase chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-pressure system (ThermoFisher Scientific) connected to a Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). the silica column was heated to 50 °C with a homemade device. Peptides were loaded in solvent A (0.5% acetic acid) and eluted by applying a step gradient of solvent B (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid) from 7% to 10% solvent B over 8min, from 10% to 33% over 90min, followed by increasing solvent B to 45% for 10min and finished by a run with 98% for 6min at 250nl/min. Acquisition time of the samples was 120 minutes. We used DIA method with the following settings: MS1 scan with mass range 350-1400 m/z had a normalized AGC target set to 300% with resolution 120,000 and injection time 45 ms. For DIA scans acquisition AGC target value was set at 1000%, R=30,000 and IT to 54 ms. 49 windows of 13 Da with an overlap of 1 Da were used. Normalized collision energy was set at 28%. Data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by Spectronaut (version 15.2.210819.50606) with the Direct DIA search option using in-build search engine Pulsar and default settings. Reviewed UniProt database (Homo Sapiens, 10/2019, SwissProt) containing 20,351 entries was used for the search. Acetyl (Protein N-term), GlyGly (K), Oxidation (M) were set as variable and Carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications. Normalization Strategy was set to Global Normalization with Median and Data filtering set to Q-value.

### Publication Abstract
The ubiquitin-proteasome axis has been extensively explored at a system-wide level, but the impact of deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs) on the ubiquitinome remains largely unknown. Here, we compare the contributions of the proteasome and DUBs on the global ubiquitinome, using UbiSite technology, inhibitors and mass spectrometry. We uncover large dynamic ubiquitin signalling networks with substrates and sites preferentially regulated by DUBs or by the proteasome, highlighting the role of DUBs in degradation-independent ubiquitination. DUBs regulate substrates via at least 40,000 unique sites. Regulated networks of ubiquitin substrates are involved in autophagy, apoptosis, genome integrity, telomere integrity, cell cycle progression, mitochondrial function, vesicle transport, signal transduction, transcription, pre-mRNA splicing and many other cellular processes. Moreover, we show that ubiquitin conjugated to SUMO2/3 forms a strong proteasomal degradation signal. Interestingly, PARP1 is hyper-ubiquitinated in response to DUB inhibition, which increases its enzymatic activity. Our study uncovers key regulatory roles of DUBs and provides a resource of endogenous ubiquitination sites to aid the analysis of substrate specific ubiquitin signalling.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, The ubiquitin-proteasome system, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
Center for Experimental BioInformatics, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark

### Submitter
Vyacheslav Akimov

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Prof. Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


