### Accession
PXD011007

### Title
Proteomics exploration of the Atp7b-/- mouse plasma proteome: translational relevance for the diagnosis of Wilson’s disease

### Description
Wilson’s disease (WD) is a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene. These mutations impact the expression and/or function of the copper-transporting ATP7B protein, leading to massive toxic accumulation of copper in the liver and brain. Due to its low incidence and highly variable clinical presentations, WD is challenging to diagnose. Here, we explored the plasma proteome of the Atp7b-/- mouse, a genetic and phenotypic model of WD, to provide new insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of WD and discover potential biomarkers for WD diagnosis. A mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow combining unbiased discovery analysis followed by targeted quantification was developed. Analysis of two independent groups of samples (discovery and validation cohorts) highlighted seven plasma proteins for which abundance was significantly modified (more than 2-fold) between Atp7b-/- mice and wild-type littermates. To assess the clinical significance and specificity of these seven proteins as potential biomarkers for WD, we adapted our targeted proteomics assay to allow the quantification of human orthologues in plasma from WD patients (treated with copper chelators), non-alcoholic steatohepatitis patients (disease-control group), and healthy donors. The plasma proteome changes observed in the Atp7b-/- mouse were not confirmed in treated WD patients, with the exception of alpha-1 antichymotrypsin, levels of which were decreased in WD patients compared to healthy individuals. Plasma ceruloplasmin was investigated in both the Atp7b-/- mouse model and human patients, and was found to be significantly decreased in the human form of WD only.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were prepared based on an adaptation of the MED-FASP (multiple enzyme digestion – filter aided sample preparation) protocol. For each sample, 3 µL of plasma were loaded on a 10 kDa cut-off ultrafiltration device (Amicon). Plasma proteins were denatured and reduced on the device in 4 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 10 mM TCEP. Each sample was washed twice with 4 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate before alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 4 M urea, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate. After two additional washing steps, the sample volume was reduced to 25 μL and proteins were digested for 3 h at 37°C using trypsin/LysC mix (Promega) at a protein/enzyme ratio of 1:20 (w/w). The urea concentration was reduced to 1 M by dilution and digestion was allowed to proceed for 3 h at 37°C. Proteolytic peptides were recovered by adding 50 µL of NaCl 0.5 M to the filter and centrifuging for 40 min at 14,000 g at room temperature. For targeted proteomic analyses specifically, defined concentration of isotope-labeled peptides were spiked into the digested samples at this stage of the protocol. All peptide digests were purified on Macrospin C18 columns (Harvard apparatus) according to the manufacturer’s recommendation before drying by vacuum centrifugation. Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoLC-MS/MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific) using a 120-min gradient. For this, peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm C18 column (PepMap, Thermo Scientific). MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). For targeted analyses, LC-SRM analyses were performed on a 6500 QTrap hybrid triple quadrupole/linear ion trap mass spectrometer (AB sciex) with a TuboV electrospray ion source and data were processed with analyst software (version 1.6, AB sciex). The mass spectrometer was coupled to an ultimate 3000 LC-chromatography system (Thermo scientific) and peptides were separated on a 60-min gradient using a Kinetex C18 column (2.1mm x 100mm, Core-shell 2.6µm, 100Ǻ, Phenomenex). The analyses combined in the same run: (1) a precursor ion scan between 400 and 1000 m/z as a survey scan for Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA), (2) an Enhanced Product Ion (EPI) scan with a scan speed of 1000 amu/sec and a dynamic fill time for optimal MS/MS analysis, (3) an SRM acquisition with Q1 and Q3 quadrupoles operating at unit resolution. Acquisition time window for scheduled SRM analyses was set to 120 s and the target scan time was set to 1.5 s. We considered that with a mean base width of 20 s, 13 points were acquired per LC peak.

### Data Protocol
Discovery Proteomics: Peptides and proteins were identified and quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3) through concomitant searches against Uniprot database (Mus musculus taxonomy) and and the frequently observed contaminant database embedded in MaxQuant. Trypsin/LysC was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor mass error tolerances were set at 20ppm and 4.5 ppm for first and main searches respectively. Peptides modifications allowed during the search were: carbamidomethylation (C, fixed), acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and oxidation (M, variable). Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids. Minimum number of peptides, razor + unique peptides and unique peptides were all set to 1. Maximum false discovery rates (FDR) – calculated by employing a reverse database - were set to 0.01 at peptide and protein levels.  Targeted Proteomics: LC-SRM data analysis was performed using Skyline software. Peak picking was performed using the mProphet algorithm and the “second best peak” model. A Q-value of 0.01 (i.e. 1% FDR) was set as the cut-off for peptide signal analysis. In addition to peptide signal scoring, all transitions were individually visually inspected and excluded if they were unsuitable for quantification (low signal-to-noise ratio, obvious interference).

### Publication Abstract
Wilson's disease (WD), a rare genetic disease caused by mutations in the ATP7B gene, is associated with altered expression and/or function of the copper-transporting ATP7B protein, leading to massive toxic accumulation of copper in the liver and brain. The Atp7b<sup>-/-</sup> mouse, a genetic and phenotypic model of WD, was developed to provide new insights into the pathogenic mechanisms of WD. Many plasma proteins are secreted by the liver, and impairment of liver function can trigger changes to the plasma proteome. High standard proteomics workflows can identify such changes. Here, we explored the plasma proteome of the Atp7b<sup>-/-</sup> mouse using a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow combining unbiased discovery analysis followed by targeted quantification. Among the 367 unique plasma proteins identified, 7 proteins were confirmed as differentially abundant between Atp7b<sup>-/-</sup> mice and wild-type littermates, and were directly linked to WD pathophysiology (regeneration of liver parenchyma, plasma iron depletion, etc.). We then adapted our targeted proteomics assay to quantify human orthologues of these proteins in plasma from copper-chelator-treated WD patients. The plasma proteome changes observed in the Atp7b<sup>-/-</sup> mouse were not confirmed in these samples, except for alpha-1 antichymotrypsin, levels of which were decreased in WD patients compared to healthy individuals. Plasma ceruloplasmin was investigated in both the Atp7b<sup>-/-</sup> mouse model and human patients; it was significantly decreased in the human form of WD only. In conclusion, MS-based proteomics is a method of choice to identify proteome changes in murine models of disrupted metal homeostasis, and allows their validation in human cohorts.

### Keywords
Lc-srm, Nanolc-ms/ms, Liver, Biomarkers, Wilson's disease

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


