### Accession
PXD006925

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles from a Plasmodium falciparum Kenyan clinical isolate defines a core parasite secretome

### Description
In this study, we isolated secreted extracellular vesicles (EVs) from a Kenyan P. falciparum clinical isolate (referred to as 9605) adapted to in vitro culture for a short period and characterized their protein content by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The density gradient ultracentrifugation purified P. falciparum extracellular vesicles (PfEVs) were reduced with TCEP, and alkylated with iodoacetamide, then separated on gel and followed by in-gel digestion.  The extracted peptides were analysed on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher) hybrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray source, coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. Samples were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 trap (0.1 mm id x 20 mm, 5µm) at 10 µL/min for 15 min, then peptides were separated on a 75 µm id x 25 cm PepMap column (3 µm) at a flow rate at 300 nl/min over a 90 min linear gradient of 4–32% CH3CN/0.1% FA, 130 min /cycle. All instrument and columns were from Thermo Fisher Scientific.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos was operated in the “Top 15” data-dependant acquisition mode.  The 15 most abundant and multiply-charged precursor ions in the MS survey scan in the Orbitrap (m/z 380 – 1600, with the lock mass at 445.120025) were dynamically selected for CID fragmentation (MS/MS) in the LTQ Velos ion trap. The ions must have a minimal signal above 3000 counts. The preview mode of FT master scan was disabled. The Orbitrap resolution was set at 30,000 at m/z 400 with one microscans. The isolation width for the precursor ion was set at 2 Th. The normalized collision energy was set at 35% with activation Q at 0.250 and activation time for 10 msec. The dynamic exclusion mass width was set at ±10 ppm and exclusion duration for 60 seconds.  To achieve high mass accuracy, the AGC (Automatic Gain Control) were set at 1x106 for the full MS survey in the Orbitrap with a maximum injection time at 150 msec, and 5000 for the MS/MS in the LTQ Velos with a maximum injection time at 100 msec.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed in MaxQuant (Version 1.5.3.30, www.MaxQuant.org), and searched against the protein databases of Plasmodium falciparum 3D7 (downloaded from PlasmoDB V26, October 2015, http://plasmodb.org), the Kenyan P. falciparum isolate 9605 (built in house), human (from UniprotKB, October 2014, www.uniprot.org), and contaminate database supplied by MaxQuant. Parameters used were mainly in default values with some modifications: trypsin with maximum 2 missed cleavages sites; peptide mass tolerance at first search was set at 20 ppm and main search was at 4.5 ppm; MS/MS fragment mass tolerance at 0.50 Da, and top 8 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were required. Fixed modification for Carbamidomethyl and variable modification for Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ) and Oxidation (M) were used. False discovery rates (FDR) were estimated based on matches to reversed sequences in the concatenated target-decoy database. The maximum FDR at 1% was allowed for both proteins and PSMs. Peptides were assigned to protein groups, a cluster of a leading protein(s) plus additional proteins matching to a subset of the same peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Lc-msms, Malaria

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


