### Accession
PXD044294

### Title
A simple method for developing lysine targeted covalent protein reagents

### Description
In this project we developed phosphopeptides functionalized with methacrylate ester warheads installed on a cysteine residue, which bind covalently to the protein 14-3-3 sigma. We characterized the binding of these peptides to 14-3-3 proteins in A549 lysates as well as off-targets. We prepared biotinylated forms of the 14-3-3 binding peptides and incubated A549 lysates with these peptides, followed by Streptavidin pull down, trypsin digestion and LCMSMS. All isoforms of 14-3-3 were pull downed as well as multiple proteins with phosphate-containing substrates such as NAD-dependent enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
For experiments in lysates, A549 cells were grown in DMEM + FBS. The cells were washed with PBS, scraped from the plate and centrifuged 200 g for 5 minutes. The cells were lysed in HEPES 50 mM pH = 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% IGEPAL with the addition of a protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche 11836170001) and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosStop from Roche, 1X). Cells were incubated in the lysis buffer and centrifuged at 21000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C. The protein concentration was estimated using BCA, and the lysate was diluted to 1.9 mg/ml in the lysis buffer. The peptides were diluted to 20 µM in 20% DMSO / lysis buffer. 142.5 µl of lysate were mixed with 7.5 µl of 20 µM peptide stock and the samples were incubated at 25°C for 22 hours. The proteins were precipitated by addition of 450 µl water, 600 µl HPLC grade methanol and 150 µl HPLC grade chloroform, followed by vortexing and centrifugation for 10 minutes at 21000 × g at 4°C. The top layer was aspirated, and 600 µl methanol was added and the sample was vortexed and centrifuged again, followed by aspiration of the supernatant. The pellet was air dried and kept at -80°C. The pellet was dissolved in 200 µl of 2.5% SDS in PBS with heating to 60°C and shaking at 1150 rpm for 30 minutes. After dissolution, the sample was diluted 20-fold in PBS and incubated with 10 µl of streptavidin agarose beads (Thermo) with tumbling for three hours at room temperature.   The beads were then filtered through spin columns in a vacuum manifold. The beads were washed twice with 1% SDS/PBS (300 µl), dispersed in 300 µl 1% SDS/PBS and 3 µl of 1 M DTT were added with 30 minute incubation at room temperature. Then, 15 µl of freshly dissolved 0.8 M iodoacetamide were added followed by 30 minute incubation at room temperature in the dark. The solution was then removed and the beads were washed three times with 350 µl of freshly dissolved 6 M urea in PBS, three times with 400 µl of 20% methanol in PBS, once with PBS and twice with water. The beads were then transferred to tubes using 100 µl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and the bound proteins were digested with 0.5 µg of trypsin (promega) at 37°C with shaking at 1200 rpm for 6 hours.    The beads were centrifuged and the supernatant was mixed 1:1 with 0.2% TFA in water. The peptides were desalted using Oasis desalting columns (Waters) and dried under vacuum. The dry peptides were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid (25 µl) and 2 µl were injected. Samples were analyzed using EASY-nLC 1200 nano-flow UPLC system, using PepMap RSLC C18 column (2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm diameter × 50 cm length), mounted using an EASY-Spray source onto an Exploris 240 mass spectrometer. uLC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps at 300 nL/min. The mobile phase was: (A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and (B) 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 1–40% B in 160 min, 40–100% B in 5 min, maintained at 100% for 20 min, 100 to 1% in 10 min, and finally 1% for 5 min. Ionization was achieved using a 2100 V spray voltage with an ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C. Initially, data were acquired in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200 m/z), a mass range of 375–1650 m/z, normalized AGC of 300%, and the maximum injection time was set to 20 ms. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.4 m/z, normalized AGC of 50%, automatic maximum injection time, and HCD collision energy at 30%. 4 samples were analyzed per condition.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using Fragpipe (version 19.1) using Msfragger search engine (version 3.8), IonQuant 1.8.10 and Philosopher 4.8.1. Analysis was performed using a human proteome database from December 2022 (Uniprot) with contaminants added and with Streptavidin added manually as a contaminant. Msfragger analysis was performed using Trypsin as the enzyme that cuts after Arg and Lys, with up to 2 missed cleavages, peptide length 7-50 and the N terminal methionine removed. N terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were defined as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl was defined as a fixed modification. False discovery rate of 0.01 was used both at the peptide and the protein level. Label-Free Quantification was performed using IonQuant, with Match Between Runs enabled with a tolerance of 1 minute. After analysis, the combined protein file was analyzed using Perseus. Intensities were converted to Log2 values, the quadruplicates of each type were grouped, and all proteins for which there were at least 3 valid values in one of the groups were kept in the analysis. Missing values were replaced by imputation from a normal distribution (downshift 1.8, width 0.3), and differences and P-values were calculated using student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
Peptide-based covalent probes can target shallow protein surfaces not typically addressable using small molecules, yet there is a need for versatile approaches to convert native peptide sequences into covalent binders that can target a broad range of residues. Here we report protein-based thio-methacrylate esters-electrophiles that can be installed easily on unprotected peptides and proteins via cysteine side chains, and react efficiently and selectively with cysteine and lysine side chains on the target. Methacrylate phosphopeptides derived from 14-3-3-binding proteins irreversibly label 14-3-3&#x3c3; via either lysine or cysteine residues, depending on the position of the electrophile. Methacrylate peptides targeting a conserved lysine residue exhibit pan-isoform binding of 14-3-3 proteins both in lysates and in extracellular media. Finally, we apply this approach to develop protein-based covalent binders. A methacrylate-modified variant of the colicin E9 immunity protein irreversibly binds to the E9 DNAse, resulting in significantly higher thermal stability relative to the non-covalent complex. Our approach offers a simple and versatile route to convert peptides and proteins into potent covalent binders.

### Keywords
Peptides, Covalent probes

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Ronen Gabizon

### Lab Head
Dr Nir London
Department of Chemical and Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute, Rehovot, Israel


