### Accession
PXD035812

### Title
Detection of Early Prognostic Biomarkers for Metastasis of Ewing’s Sarcoma in Pediatric Patients

### Description
Ewing’s sarcoma (ES) is a highly aggressive bone tumor, and the second most prevalent pediatric bone malignancy. The presence of metastasis at diagnosis decreases the three-year survival rate to 20% and contributes to diminished prognosis. Researches are indispensable for the early characterization of the disease and prediction of metastatic-prone patients, through biomarkers identification. Moreover, there is currently no available data on ES utilizing non-biopsy samples, such as plasma. This study utilizes a proteomic analysis of Ewing's sarcoma patient’s plasma samples and biopsies. Initially, the ES group was compared with the control counterpart. In a next step, the ES arm was further stratified into either initially metastatic and non-metastatic, or poor and good chemotherapy responder groups to identify protein expression profiles that can predict metastatic proneness and chemotherapy response, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples were obtained retrospectively from the biorepository at the Children’s Cancer Hospital 57357 Egypt following approval by the Institutional Research Board. Twenty-one patients initially diagnosed with Ewing’s Sarcoma before starting any treatment were selected in this cohort. Among them, 9 were initially metastatic at diagnosis, and 12 were non-metastatic. Plasma samples were depleted from abundant albumin protein. Total protein concentration wasquantified by Bradford assay. Thirty µg of each quantified depleted plasma sample was subjected to in-gel digestion. The gels were excised into ten pieces per lane. Moreover, 30 µg of 16 quantified depleted plasma samples (8 ES diseased and 8 control) was subjected to in-solutiondigestion followed by multiplex peptide dimethyl stable. Labelled peptides were desalted using MonoSpin C18 column. Purified peptides were quantified using Pierce BCA Peptide Assay Kit. Each intermediate labelled sample was pooled with a light labelled sample in a 1:1 ratio for a total of 1.5 µg peptides, generating eight multiplexed labelled samples. Nano-LC MS/MS analysis was carried out using TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, USA) coupled with Eksigent nanoLC-400 autosampler and Ekspert nanoLC 425 pump at the front end. A total volume of 10µl of the peptide solution was injected into the trap and elute mode. Samples were subsequently eluted on a linear gradient 3-40% solution of 80% ACN and 0.2% formic acid for 55 minutes for label-free samples and 120 minutes for dimethyl labelled samples. Labelled samples were injected as three technical replicates.

### Data Protocol
Regarding the label-free samples, a total of 300 wiff raw files were generated from LCMS/MS representing the 300 injected slices, where each 10 represented one sample (lane). Raw files were converted into mascot generic format (mgf) files using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (Beta1.3) provided by AB SCIEX. MS/MS spectra were searched independently in Peptide shaker (version 1.16.38), using X! Tandem Vengeance algorithm (2015.12.15.2), against Homo sapiens UniProtKB (Swiss-Prot and TrEMBL) database (210,396 entries) with reversed decoy sequences.The 300 proteins lists generated from the independent searches were exported from the search database and pre-processed using in-house software "ProteoCompanion", followed by "ProteoSelector" (https://www.57357.org/en/department/proteomics-unit-dept/in-house-bioinformatics-tools/) to merge the normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) into a single CSV file. After removing decoy hits, data were normalized using probabilistic quotient normalization (PQN), log-transformed and auto-scaled. Statistical analysis was then performed using R coding, including protein filtering, by removing hits missed in >50% per group. Data were subjected to either unpaired t-test or ANOVA with Tukey's HSD post hoc test. P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg method (FDR method) (Benjamini & Hochberg, 1995), and the significant output was only considered when p-value ˂ 0.05, and FDR-adjusted p-value ˂ 0.1. For dimethyl labeled samples, the 8 wiff files generated from the LC-MS/MS data were searched independently against the above mentioned Homo sapiens UniProtKB using Paragon search algorithm on ProteinPilot™ Software (version 5.0.1).For the dimethyl labelled quantification analysis, the 8 proteins lists generated from the independent searches, were exported from the search and pre-processed using in-house software "Di-Prot" (https://www.57357.org/en/department/proteomics-unit-dept/in-house-bioinformatics-tools/) for combining group files into a single CSV file for the two labelled groups, ES and control. The mean fold change ratio (intermediate: light, denoted as H:L in the CSV file) and the p-value were calculated for each labelled protein. The selection of labelled proteins for analysis was approved if fold-change ratio was equal or more than 1.5 or equal or less than 0.5, and p-value ≤0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pediatric cancer, Proteomics, Biomarkers, Mass spectrometry, Ewing's sarcoma

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research Department, Children’s Cancer Hospital, (CCHE-57357), Cairo 57357, Egypt
Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research department, Children's Cancer Hospital 57357, Ciro, Egypt.

### Submitter
Sameh Magdeldin

### Lab Head
Dr Sameh Magdeldin
Head of Proteomics and Metabolomics Research Program, Basic Research department, Children's Cancer Hospital 57357, Ciro, Egypt.


