### Accession
PXD034160

### Title
Heightened Procoagulation After Post-operative Thromboprophylaxis Completion in Colorectal Cancer Patients with Metastatic Bone Disease

### Description
Platelets play a pivotal role in venous thromboembolism (VTE) and in mediating colorectal cancer (CRC) progression. Still, platelets’ role in the hypercoagulability after surgical intervention for metastatic bone diseases (MBD) is ill-defined. Here, we utilised a high-resolution imaging approach to temporally examine platelet procoagulant membrane dynamics (PMD) in four CRC patients with MBD (CRC/MBD), before and after surgical intervention, over a 6-month period. We coupled this investigation with thrombelastography, quantitative plasma shot-gun proteomics and biochemical analysis. The plasma of CRC/MBD patients was enriched in ADAM1a, ADAMTS7 and physiological ligands for platelet glycoprotein-VI (GPVI/Syk) activation. Thromboprophylaxis attenuated procoagulation from post-operative day-1 (POD1), however, all patients experienced rebound procoagulation on POD3 or POD5, which was associated with a VTE event in two patients. Plasma levels of DNA-histone complexes increased steadily after surgery and throughout the study period. Also, we increasingly sighted both homotypic and heterotypic platelet microaggregates after surgery in CRC/MBD but not healthy control participants plasma. Together, our data elucidates the cell biology of a prothrombo-inflammatory state caused by disease and vascular injury, and recalcitrant to thromboprophylaxis. New mechanistic insights into hypercoagulability in CRC/MBD patients may identify novel drug targets for effective thromboprophylaxis type and duration after orthopaedic surgery.

### Sample Protocol
Sample were prepared by the FASP method. Briefly 100 ug of total protein was precipitated by adding TCA to a final concentration of 50% followed by incubation on ice. Samples were centrifuged at 14 000 xg for 15 minutes at 4 °C. Samples were washed 3X in 100X ice cold acetone and stored at -20 °C. Samples were resuspended in 8M tris urea solution by shaking for 20 minutes. 10 mM of DTT was added at 37 °C for 30 minutes to reduce disulfide bonds. Carbamidomethyl modification of the cystines was completed by adding 50 mM of IAA at room temp in the dark. Samples were moved to the top of a 30 kDa filter (sigma catalog no: MRCF0R030). Samples were washed by adding 100 ul of wash solution to the top of the filter followed by centrifugation at 14 000 xg for 15 minutes. Samples were washed 3x with 8M tris -urea, followed by 3x with 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. Samples were trypsinized at 37 °C overnight at a ratio of 1:10 trypsin: total protein. Samples were eluted off the filter membrane by washing with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate. Samples were then subjected to c18 clean up with waters SPE column (Catalog: WAT020525) according to manufactures directions before injection on the orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were matched to peptide sequences in the human UniProt protein database using the Andromeda algorithm as implemented in the MaxQuant software package v.1.6.0.1, at a peptide-spectrum match false discovery rate (FDR) of <0.01. First search peptide tolerance was set to 10, mininum peptide length to 5, max peptide mass [Da] to 6600, and minimum score for modified peptides set to 20. Requantify and Match Between Runs were enabled. It was addded carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.021464 Da), variable N-terminal modification by acetylation (+42.010565 Da), and variable methionine oxidation (+15.994915 Da). Label-free quantification via LFQ. The cleavage site specificity was set to Trypsin/P, with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Significant outlier cutoff values were determined after log(2) transformation by box-and-whisker analysis using the BoxPlotR tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Colorectal cancer, Proteomics, Serum, Platelets, Blood

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada

### Submitter
Luiz Gustavo de Almeida

### Lab Head
Dr Antoine Dufour
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; The Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada; McCaig Institute for Bone and Joint Health, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada


