### Accession
PXD027361

### Title
Compositional analysis of venom in three species of Indian cobra (Naja) and their cross-reactivity with Indian polyvalent Antivenom

### Description
The study represents genus-wide proteomics analysis of venom composition across Naja (N. naja, N. oxiana and N. kaouthia) found in mainland India. Venoms from Naja species were fractionated using RP-HPLC and subjected to MS/MS analysis. Indian polyvalent antivenom immunoprofiling was performed against different venoms by identifying unbound toxins using MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
RP-HPLC fractions and non-retained fractions were prepared for analysis by performing in-solution trypsin digestion following protocols adapted from Kintin and Sherman 2005. They were reconstituted in 10µl 6M Urea, 50mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, reduced with 0.5µl 200mM DTT and alkylated with 2µl 200mM Iodoacetamide dissolved in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Samples were then diluted with 77.5 µl Tris-HCl, pH 8.0 to reduce the concentration of Urea to 0.6 M. Subsequently, 100 ng Trypsin (Roche Diagnostics) was added to each sample and incubated at 37°C for 12 hrs. Formic acid was added to stop the reaction and adjust sample pH to between 3 and 4. Samples were desalted using C-18 Ziptips (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and digested peptides were eluted in 70% ACN, 0.1% TFA. The digested peptides were loaded on a Nanospray capillary column (PepMapTM RSLC C18, ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and subjected to sequencing by MS/MS in Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
The spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2) against the NCBI Taxonomy database from Elapidae (Taxonomy ID: 8602). MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine and deamidation of Arginine and Glutamine were set as variable modifications. Double and triple charge peptides were selected and matched proteins were filtered for at least 2 unique peptides. The list of proteins for all the samples were exported in MS Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Snake envenoming is caused by many biological species, rather than a single infectious agent, each with a multiplicity of toxins in their venom. Hence, developing effective treatments is challenging, especially in biodiverse and biogeographically complex countries such as India. The present study represents the first genus-wide proteomics analysis of venom composition across <i>Naja</i> species (<i>N. naja</i>, <i>N. oxiana</i>, and <i>N. kaouthia</i>) found in mainland India. Venom proteomes were consistent between individuals from the same localities in terms of the toxin families present, but not in the relative abundance of those in the venom. There appears to be more compositional variation among <i>N. naja</i> from different locations than among <i>N. kaouthia</i>. Immunoblotting and in vitro neutralization assays indicated cross-reactivity with Indian polyvalent antivenom, in which antibodies raised against <i>N. naja</i> are present. However, we observed ineffective neutralization of PLA<sub>2</sub> activities of <i>N. naja</i> venoms from locations distant from the source of immunizing venoms. Antivenom immunoprofiling by antivenomics revealed differential antigenicity of venoms from <i>N. kaouthia</i> and <i>N. oxiana</i>, and poor reactivity towards 3FTxs and PLA<sub>2</sub>s. Moreover, there was considerable variation between antivenoms from different manufacturers. These data indicate that improvements to antivenom manufacturing in India are highly desirable.

### Keywords
Venomics, Antivenomics, Naja kaouthia, Venom variation, Thermofisher  qexactive hf, Naja naja, Naja oxiana, Polyvalent antivenom, Snakebites

### Affiliations
Reader in Zoology (Molecular Ecology)
Centre for cellular and molecular biology

### Submitter
siddharth bhatia

### Lab Head
Dr Anita malhotra
Reader in Zoology (Molecular Ecology)


