### Accession
PXD034169

### Title
Proteomic analysis of the mechanism of  recombinant actifensin and defensin-d2 against multidrug-resistant Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Candida albicans

### Description
In this study, we evaluated the protein expression changes in multidrug-resistant P. aeruginosa and C. albicans treated with recombinant defensin-d2 and actifensin from spinach and Actinomyces ruminicola, respectively, for 1 h.  The proteome changes in the test organisms were analyzed by LC-MS/MS ESI using label-free data-dependent acquisition (DDA) quantitative proteomics technique. A total of 28 and 9 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified in the treated P. aeruginosa and C. albicans, respectively, with a 2-fold change threshold and p-value < 0.05. The GO and KEGG enrichment analysis found that DEPs related to binding, catalytic activity, cellular component organization and biogenesis, structural molecule activity and response to stimulus were significantly expressed in actifensin and defensin-treated P. aeruginosa, and the DEPs were mainly involved in DNA replication and repair, translation, membrane transport, energy metabolism, environmental adaptation, and signal transduction.  DEPs in actifensin and defensin-treated C. albicans were related to cell growth and death, translation, lipid metabolism and energy metabolism were significantly expressed, and these DEPs mainly involved oxidative phosphorylation, RNA degradation, carbohydrate metabolism, and cell cycle pathways. We also established evidently through the different pathways affected, that the recombinant peptides exerted multiple mechanisms of action against the test organisms, sequentially or simultaneously.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh colonies of P. aeruginosa and C. albicans grown on Tryptic Soy agar and Saborauds Dextrose agar, respectively, were sub-cultured in 5-ml of Mueller Hinton broth (MHB). Inoculated MHB tubes were incubated at 37 °C until OD600 reached 0.1. Then, defensin-d2 and actifensin were added to the cultures to a final concentration equal to their respective MICs, for treatment and further incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. After the incubation period, the cells were harvested using a centrifuge (Sorvall ST 16R, Thermo scientific) pre-cooled to 4 °C at 5,000 rpm for 10 mins. Cell pellets were washed with prechilled 1 × PBS (pH 7.2) to remove all residual media. and resuspended in 600 µL of chilled Trizol for 5 mins at room temperature to lyse the cells and dissolve cell components. After, 600 µL of absolute ethanol was added to the suspension and thoroughly mixed to precipitate DNA. The mixture was loaded onto Zymo-Spin II-CR column (Zymo research, USA) and centrifuged at 11,000 × g for 30 seconds to remove RNA from the lysate. The flow-through obtained was transferred on ice, and 1 ml of ice-cold acetone was added to 250 µL of the flow-through and thoroughly mixed to precipitate the proteins in the mixture. The tubes were incubated on ice for 30 mins and then centrifuged at 16,000 × g for 10 mins. The supernatant was discarded, and the protein pellets obtained were washed with 400 µL of absolute ethanol by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 1 min to remove residual solvent and contaminants. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellets were air-dried at room temperature. The air-dried pellets were resuspended in 8M Urea and stored at -80 °C. The concentrations of the proteins were determined by Bradford assay.  Then, 50 μg of each protein sample was diluted with 0.5 M Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to a final concentration of 1 M Urea. After, trypsin was added to the protein samples in a 1:20 (w/w) ratio. The mixture was vortexed briefly, centrifuged at 650 rpm for 1 min, and incubated at 37 °C for 4 h. The digested peptides were freeze-dried using a lyophilizer. The dried peptide samples were reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid), centrifuged at 20,000 × g for 10 mins, and the supernatant was taken for injection. Separation was performed by Thermo UltiMate 3000 UHPLC. The sample was first enriched in trap column and desalted, and then entered a self-packed C18 column (75μm internal diameter, 3 μM column size, 25 cm column length) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The peptides separated by liquid phase chromatography were ionized by a nanoESI source and then passed to a tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) for Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode detection. The main parameters were set as: ion source voltage was set to 1.9kV, MS5 scanning range was 350~1,500m/z; resolution was set to 60,000; MS6 starting m/z was fixed at 100; resolution was 15,000. The ion screening conditions for MS6 fragmentation: charge 2+ to 6+, and the top 30 parent ions with the peak intensity exceeding 10,000. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap. The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 seconds. The AGC was set to: MS5 3E6, MS6 1E5.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was identified using the integrated Andromeda engine of MaxQuant v 1.5.3.30. Further, MaxQuant was used to perform quantitative analysis based on the peak intensity, peak area, and LC retention time of the peptides related to the first-order mass spectrometry. At the spectrum level, filtering was performed with PSM-level FDR ≤ 1%, and at the protein level, further filtering was performed with Protein-level FDR ≤ 1% to obtain significant identification result. Parameters set in MaxQuant were: fixed modifications, carbamidomethyl; variable modifications, Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidated (NQ), Gln->pyro-Glu; peptide mass tolerance, 4.5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance, 20 ppm; minimal peptide length, 7. The Uniprot database was used as the protein reference database for the analysis of both P. aeruginosa and C. albicans samples  The multiples of differences in the proteins in each comparison group (untreated vs treated) were calculated using Welch's t-test. Furthermore, screening to determine differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) between the comparison groups was performed by setting fold change in the multiple of difference to > 2. Cluster analysis was performed using Euclidean distance and Hierarchical Clustering Algorithms. Pathway enrichment analyses were performed to compare the abundance of the specific terms or classification in the comparison groups with the natural abundance in the reference organism. Significant enrichment was set at p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Candida albicans, Actifensin, Antimicrobial mechanism, Proteomics, Antimicrobial peptides, Spinach defensin, Pseudomonas aeruginosa

### Affiliations
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Pan African University, Institute for Basic Sciences, Technology and Innovation P.O. Box 62000 - 00200 Nairobi, Kenya
Pan African University Institute of Basic Sciences, Technology and Innovation

### Submitter
Ifeoluwa Gbala

### Lab Head
Dr IFEOLUWA DEBORAH GBALA
Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Pan African University, Institute for Basic Sciences, Technology and Innovation P.O. Box 62000 - 00200 Nairobi, Kenya


