### Accession
PXD034037

### Title
The Yin and Yang of GDF15: a secreted biomarker of eribulin response in breast cancer cells, yet required for survival of drug tolerant persister (DTP) cells

### Description
Drug tolerant persister (DTP) cells enter into a reversible slow-cycling state after cancer drug treatment. These cells are the living proof of response to a drug, and an interesting experimental subject for biomarker discovery. Here, we performed proteomic characterization of the breast cancer (BC) DTP cell secretome after eribulin treatment. First, we showed that eribulin induces a specific secretome in DTP cells as compared to other microtubule targeting agents. Then, we selected and functionally validated growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) as a protein significantly over-secreted upon eribulin treatment. Interestingly, GDF15 expression is low/absent in cells that are sensitive to eribulin, strongly upregulated during the response to the drug, and downregulated when stable resistance is ultimately established. Proteomic results were confirmed in 3D-cell culture models using BC cells lines and PDXs, as well as in a TNBC in vivo model. Unexpectedly, despite its biomarker potential for eribulin response, we found that GDF15 is also paradoxically required for survival of DTP cells, although once full resistance to eribulin is established, GDF15 expression largely disappears. Direct participation of GDF15 and its receptor GFRAL in eribulin-induction of DTPs was established by the enhanced cell killing of DTPs by eribulin seen under GDF15 and GFRAL loss of function conditions. These results pointed to a potential benefit of simultaneous targeting of GDF15/GFRAL and eribulin, and indeed we showed that combination therapy of eribulin plus an anti-GDF15 antibody kills BC-DTP cells. Our results suggest that targeting GDF15 may help eradicate DTP cells and block the onset of acquired eribulin resistance, and possibly other cytotoxic drugs. Overall, the combination of cytotoxic agents with targeted agents aimed specifically at DTP cells could be an effective therapeutic approach for metastatic breast cancer patients.

### Sample Protocol
Secretome collection  2D and 3D secretomes were prepared using a modified protocol of the previously described protocol developed in our laboratory [30].  2D-secretomes. Briefly, 4 × 106 cells in exponential phase were seeded in 150 cc tissue culture plates and allowed to grow for 48 hours. After that, media was aspirated, and cells were washed 5 times, 2 times with PBS and the last 3 with serum-free media. Then, cells were maintained for 8 hours in the presence of serum-free media before collecting the conditioned media (secretome).   3D-secretome. 3D-organoids were set up as explained in the 3D cell culture organoids section. For the secretome collection, cells were collected after 8 hours of incubation in serum-free media. First Matrigel matrix was disaggregated with incubation for 1 hour in ice with Corning Cell Recovery Solution (Cultek). Then 3D-organoids were plated as 50μl droplets in a 24-well plate using a solution of: Collagen I - Rat Tail (Life Technologies) + serum-free media + NaOH for titration. The 3D-organoids drops were incubated for 30 min at 37°C and then serum-free media was carefully added in each well.  The conditioned media of both 2D and 3D cell cultures was spun down at 200 g for 5 minutes, and the supernatants were collected and filtered through a Millex-GP 0.22 μm pore syringe-driven filter (Millipore). Then, secretomes were concentrated using a 10,000 MWCO Millipore Amicon Ultra (Millipore). Protein concentration was determined with a Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific).  Concentrated secretome samples (15 mg of total protein) were taken to 40mL of 6M Urea, 50mM ammonium bicarbonate for tryptic digestion. Samples were first reduced with DTT to a final concentration of 10mM, for 1h at RT, and then alkylated with 20mM of iodoacetamide for 30min at RT in the dark. Carbamidomethylation reaction was quenched by addition of N-acetyl-L-cysteine to final concentration of 35mM followed by incubation for 15min at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 1M Urea, modified porcine trypsin (Promega Gold) was added in a ratio of 1:10 (w/w), and the mixture was incubated overnight at 37°C. The reaction was stopped with formic acid (FA) at a final concentration of 0.5%. The digests were then purified using SCX micro columns (PolyLC, Columbia, MD). Purified samples were evaporated to dryness, dissolved in 5% acetonitrile-0.1% formic acid, and kept frozen at -20ºC until analyzed.    Liquid chromatography-Mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS) and Protein identification  Tryptic digests were analyzed using a linear ion trap Velos-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Instrument control was performed using Xcalibur software package, version 2.2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide mixtures were fractionated by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using an EASY-nLC 1000 system (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a two-linear-column system. Samples were first loaded onto a trapping guard column (Acclaim PepMap 100 nanoviper, 2 cm long, ID 75 μm and packed with C18, 3 μm particle size from Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4uL/min. Then, samples were separated on the analytical column (Dr Maisch, 25 cm long, ID 75 μm, packed with Reprosil Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm particle size). Elution was performed using 0.1% formic acid in water (mobile phase A) and acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (mobile phase B), with a linear gradient from 0 to 35% of mobile phase B for 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Ions were generated applying a voltage of 1.9 kV to a stainless-steel nano-bore emitter (Proxeon, Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to end of the analytical column, on a Proxeon nano-spray flex ion source.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode. A scan cycle was initiated with a full-scan MS spectrum (from m/z 300 to 1600) acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000. The 20 most abundant ions were selected for collision-induced dissociation fragmentation in the linear ion trap when their intensity exceeded a minimum threshold of 1000 counts, excluding singly charged ions. Accumulation of ions for both MS and MS/MS scans was performed in the linear ion trap, and the AGC target values were set to 1 × 106 ions for survey MS and 5000 ions for MS/MS experiments. The maximum ion accumulation time was 500 and 200 ms in the MS and MS/MS modes, respectively. The normalized collision energy was set to 35%, and one microscan was acquired per spectrum. Ions subjected to MS/MS with a relative mass window of 10 ppm were excluded from further sequencing for 20 s. For all precursor masses a window of 20 ppm and isolation width of 2 Da was defined. Orbitrap measurements were performed enabling the lock mass option (m/z 445.120024) for survey scans to improve mass accuracy.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitative differential analysis.  LC-MS/MS data were analyzed using the Proteome Discoverer v. 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteins were identified using Mascot v. 2.5 (Matrix Science, London UK) to search the SwissProt database (2018_11, taxonomy restricted to human proteins, 20,413 sequences). MS/MS spectra were searched with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment tolerance of 0.7 Da, trypsin specificity with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modification.   Files generated from Mascot (.DAT files) were loaded into Scaffold (version 3.00.07; Proteome software, Inc., Portland, OR), resulting in a no redundant list of identified proteins per sample. Peptide identification was given as valid as long as a PeptideProphet probability greater than 95% was determined. Those proteins whose identification could be established with a probability higher than 95% and contained at least two identified spectra were accepted. Using these filters, a false protein discovery rate (FDR) below 1.0%, as estimated by a database search, was achieved. The generated "scaffold" files containing all the "spectral counts" (SpC) for each sample and their replicates were exported to the POMAcounts 1.1.0 software for normalization and statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Drug tolerant persister (DTP) cells enter into a reversible slow-cycling state after drug treatment. We performed proteomic characterization of the breast cancer (BC) DTP cell secretome after eribulin treatment. We showed that the growth differentiation factor 15 (GDF15) is a protein significantly over-secreted upon eribulin treatment. The biomarker potential of GDF15 was confirmed in 3D-cell culture models using BC cells lines and PDXs, as well as in a TNBC in vivo model. We also found that GDF15 is required for survival of DTP cells. Direct participation of GDF15 and its receptor GFRAL in eribulin-induction of DTPs was established by the enhanced cell killing of DTPs by eribulin seen under GDF15 and GFRAL loss of function assays. Finally, we showed that combination therapy of eribulin plus an anti-GDF15 antibody kills BC-DTP cells. Our results suggest that targeting GDF15 may help eradicate DTP cells and block the onset of acquired resistance.

### Keywords
Eribulin, Drug tolerance, Breast cancer (bc), Growth differentiation factor (gdf15), Drug tolerant persister (dtp), Secretome.

### Affiliations
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain
Vall Hebron Institute of Oncology

### Submitter
Francesc Canals

### Lab Head
Dr Josep Villanueva
Vall d'Hebron Institute of Oncology (VHIO), Barcelona, Spain


