### Accession
PXD004521

### Title
Label-free quantitative phosphoproteomic profiling of cellular response induced by an insect cytokine paralytic peptide

### Description
Paralytic peptide (PP) participates in diverse physiological processions as an insect cytokine, such as immunity controls, paralysis induction, regulation of cell morphology and proliferation. To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying those physiological activities, we systematically investigated the global phosphorylation events in fat body of silkworm larvae induced by PP through label-free quantitative phosphoproteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Ten larvae (day 3 of 5th instar) per group were injected with 10 µl of PP (5 ng/µl) or phosphate buffered saline (PBS), followed by incubation at 27 °C for 30 min. Fat body tissues were dissected and homogenized in the lysis buffer (Beyotime) described in previous report.Phosphopeptides were enriched by titanium dioxide (TiO2) pipette tip (GL Sciences) as previously described. Enriched phosphopeptides samples were separated on a Thermo Fisher Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 system using a Thermo EASY column SC200 150μm*100mm (RP-C18) with mobile phases A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN) and B (0.1% FA in 84% ACN) over 120 min at a ﬂow rate of 400 nl/min, using the following gradient: 0-45% mobile phase B from 0-100 min, 45-100% mobile phase B from 100-108 min, and 100% mobile phase B from 108-120 min. The separated peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Q-Exactive mass spectrometer operating in data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.1) and searched against an integrated silkworm proteome database, containing 22117 protein sequences extracted from NCBI and SilkDB (downloaded on March, 2014) using the Andromeda search engine with the initial precursor and fragment mass tolerances set to 6 and 20 ppm, respectively.n this study, MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.1) was used to calculate PTM scores and PTM localization probabilities. Potential phosphorylation sites were identified as highly confident depending on their PTM localization probabilities (localization probability, P≥0.75). A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0% was used for phosphorylation sites identification.Label-free quantification (LFQ) values were generated within MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lcmsms, Bombyx mori, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Southwest university
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University

### Submitter
Liang Song

### Lab Head
Dr Qingyou Xia
State Key Laboratory of Silkworm Genome Biology, Southwest University


