### Accession
PXD043070

### Title
Dynamic-network-guided CRISPRi screen identifies CTCF loop-constrained 1 nonlinear enhancer-gene regulatory activity in cell state transitions

### Description
Enhancers play key roles in gene regulation. However, comprehensive enhancer discovery is challenging because most enhancers, especially those affected in complex diseases, have weak effects on gene expression. Through gene regulatory network modeling, we identified that dynamic cell state transitions, a critical missing component in prevalent enhancer discovery strategies, can be utilized to improve the cells’ sensitivity to enhancer perturbation. Guided by the modeling results, we performed a mid-transition CRISPRi-based enhancer screen utilizing human embryonic stem cell definitive endoderm differentiation as a dynamic transition system. The screen discovered a comprehensive set of enhancers (4 to 9 per locus) for each of the core lineage-specifying transcription factors (TFs), including many enhancers with weak to moderate effects. Integrating the screening results with enhancer activity measurements (ATAC-seq, H3K27ac ChIP-seq) and three-dimensional enhancer-promoter interaction information (CTCF looping, Hi-C), we were able to develop a CTCF loop-constrained Interaction Activity (CIA) model that can better predict functional enhancers compared to models that rely on Hi-C-based enhancer-promoter contact frequency. Together, our dynamic network-guided enhancer screen and the CIA enhancer prediction model provide generalizable strategies for sensitive and more comprehensive enhancer discovery in both normal and pathological cell state transitions.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were eluted from the immunoprecipitation using a buffer containing 5% SDS, 5 mM DTT and 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8), and left on the bench for about 1 hour for disulfide bond reduction. Samples were then alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 minutes. Afterward, phosphoric acid was added to the sample at a final concentration of 1.2%. Samples were diluted in six volumes of binding buffer (90% methanol and 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0). After gentle mixing, the protein solution was loaded to an S-trap filter (Protifi) and spun at 500 g for 30 sec. The sample was washed twice with binding buffer. Finally, 1 µg of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega), diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, was added into the S-trap filter and samples were digested at 37oC for 18 h. Peptides were eluted in three steps: (i) 40 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, (ii) 40 µl of 0.1% TFA and (iii) 40 µl of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA. The peptide solution was pooled, spun at 1,000 g for 30 sec and dried in a vacuum centrifuge.   Sample desalting Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, samples were desalted using a 96-well plate filter (Orochem) packed with 1 mg of Oasis HLB C-18 resin (Waters). Briefly, the samples were resuspended in 100 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto the HLB resin, which was previously equilibrated using 100 µl of the same buffer. After washing with 100 µl of 0.1% TFA, the samples were eluted with a buffer containing 70 µl of 60% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and then dried in a vacuum centrifuge.

### Data Protocol
Samples were resuspended in 10 µl of 0.1% TFA and loaded onto a Dionex RSLC Ultimate 300 (Thermo Scientific), coupled online with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation was performed with a two-column system, consisting of a C-18 trap cartridge (300 µm ID, 5 mm length) and a picofrit analytical column (75 µm ID, 25 cm length) packed in-house with reversed-phase Repro-Sil Pur C18-AQ 3 µm resin. To analyze the proteome, peptides were separated using a 60 min gradient from 4-30% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire spectra in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Briefly, the full MS scan was set to 300-1200 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x10e5. MS/MS was performed in the ion trap using the top speed mode (2 secs), an AGC target of 1x10e4 and an HCD collision energy of 35. To analyze the histones, peptides were separated using a 30 min gradient from 1-30% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was set to acquire spectra in a data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. Briefly, the full MS scan was set to 300-1100 m/z in the orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) and an AGC target of 5x10e5. MS/MS was performed in the orbitrap with sequential isolation windows of 50 m/z with an AGC target of 2x10e5 and an HCD collision energy of 30. Proteome raw files were searched using Proteome Discoverer software (v2.4, Thermo Scientific) using SEQUEST search engine and the SwissProt human database (updated February 2020). The search for total proteome included variable modification of N-terminal acetylation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Trypsin was specified as the digestive enzyme with up to 2 missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerance was set to 10 pm for precursor ions and 0.2 Da for product ions. Peptide and protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Proteins were log2 transformed, normalized by the average value of each sample and missing values were imputed using a normal distribution 2 standard deviations lower than the mean. Statistical regulation was assessed using heteroscedastic T-test (if p-value < 0.05).  Data distribution was assumed to be normal but this was not formally tested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chip-ms, Ctcf, Cell state

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA
Albert Einstein College of Medicine

### Submitter
Simone Sidoli

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Sidoli
Department of Biochemistry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA


