### Accession
PXD012014

### Title
A Novel Nutrient Deprivation-Induced Neonicotinoid Insecticide Acetamiprid Degradation by Ensifer adhaerens CGMCC 6315

### Description
Proteomic Analysis. The proteomic expression of CGMCC 6315 under different nutrient concentration conditions was investigated by isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based quantitative proteomics. The CGMCC 6315 was cultured in LB broth and 1/15LB broth as described above, after which the strains were collected by centrifugation at 10,000× g for 10 min at 4°C. Protein extraction, digestion, iTRAQ labeling and peptide fractionation were performed using the protocol described by Jin et al. 29. Protein identification was conducted using a LC-20AD nano-HPLC instrument (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a Q EXACTIVE tandem mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data-dependent acquisition detection by nano-electrospray ionization. The raw MS/MS data were converted into MGF format by the thermo scientific tool Proteome Discoverer, and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot (version 2.3.02) against the selected database containing 7546 CGMCC 6315 coding genes. The IQuant software was used for quantitative analysis of the labeled peptides with isobaric tags. Fold changes of >1.7 with p-values <0.05 were used as a cut off for differentially regulated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample was “equalized” using the ProteoMiner Protein Enrichment Kit (Bio-rad laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each was loaded with 900 μL of 0.22 μm- filtered sample, for 2 hours at room temperature, and with 100μL of 1M sodium citrate, and 20mM of HEPES, at pH 7.4. No bead agglomeration was observed. The proteins were desorbed using a two-step elution. The first beads were incubated twice with 100 μL of the kit elution reagent (4 M urea, 1% (w/v) CHAPS, 5% (v/v) acetic acid) for 15 minutes. Then, 100 μL of 6 M guanidine-HCl, at pH 6.0, were added twice for 15 minutes. For each column, the four elution fractions were pooled and stored at −80℃, until they were needed for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data is converted into MGF format by the corresponding tool, and the exported MGF files are searched by the local Mascot server against the database described above. In addition, quality control (QC) is performed to determine if a reanalysis step is needed. An automated software, named IQuant [1], was applied to the quantification of proteins. All the proteins with a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% will proceed with downstream analysis including GO, COG/KOG and Pathway. Further, we also can perform deep analysis based on differentially expressed proteins, including Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, COG/KOG function annotation, cluster analysis, protein interaction analysis and subcellular localization analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Biodegradation of pesticide pollution is often restricted by environmental pressures, such as nutrient deprivation. Ensifer adhaerens CGMCC 6315 could overcome this issue and degrade neonicotinoid acetamiprid (ACE) efficiently under low nutrient stimuli. The ACE degradation rate improved by 33.1-fold when the lysogeny broth content for cell culture was decreased to 1/15-fold. Resting cells of CGMCC 6315 degraded 94.4% of 200 mg/L ACE in 12 h and quickly eliminated 87.8% of 5 mg/kg of residual soil ACE within 2 d. ACE degradation by CGMCC 6315 was via a nitrile hydratase (NHase) pathway. Genome sequencing showed that CGMCC 6315 had two NHase genes ( cnhA and pnhA). PnhA had the highest reported activity of 28.8 U/mg for ACE. QPCR and proteomic analysis showed that the improved ACE degradation ability was attributed to the up-regulated expression of PnhA. This biodegradation system of CGMCC 6315 has great potential for use in pesticide pollution remediation.

### Keywords
Itraq

### Affiliations
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, Jiangsu Engineering and Technology Research Center for Industrialization of Microbial Resources, College of Life Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, People’s Republic of China.
Nanjing normal university

### Submitter
sun Shi-Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Shi-Lei Sun
Jiangsu Key Laboratory for Microbes and Functional Genomics, Jiangsu Engineering and Technology Research Center for Industrialization of Microbial Resources, College of Life Science, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing 210023, People’s Republic of China.


