### Accession
PXD007699

### Title
An antibacterial β-lactone kills Mycobacterium tuberculosis by infiltrating mycolic acid biosynthesis

### Description
The spread of antibiotic resistance is a major challenge for treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infection. In addition, efficacy of drugs is often limited by the restricted permeability of the mycomembrane. Frontline antibiotics inhibit mycomembrane biosynthesis leading to rapid cell death. Inspired by this mechanism we exploit β-lactones as putative mycolic acid mimics to block serine hydrolases involved in their biosynthesis. Among a collection of β-lactones we found one hit with potent anti-mycobacterial and bactericidal activity. Chemical proteomics using an alkynylated probe identified Pks13 and Ag85 serine hydrolases as major targets. Validation via enzyme assays and customized 13C metabolite profiling showed that both targets are functionally impaired by the β-lactone. Co-administration with front-line antibiotics enhanced the potency against M. tuberculosis by more than 100-fold demonstrating a therapeutic potential of targeting mycomembrane biosynthesis serine hydrolases.

### Sample Protocol
500 mL of 7H9 media were inoculated with of an overnight culture of the desired bacterial strain and grown to mid-exponential phase in roller bottles at 37°C. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (10 min, 4 °C, 6000 rpm), washed with 20 mL PBS and resuspended in PBS to a theoretical OD600 of 40. 1000 µL of the bacterial suspension were then incubated with 10 µL of EZ120P in DMSO for 90 min at room temperature. After centrifugation (10 min, 4 °C, 6000 rpm), the bacterial cells were washed with 5 mL PBS and lysed by beat beating three times for 30 sec. and chilled on ice for 5 min. between runs. Soluble and insoluble fractions were separated by centrifugation (30 min, 13.000 rpm, 4 °C) and the insoluble fraction was washed additionally with 2 mL PBS. For Click reaction a bifunctional Biotin-PEG-N3 linker was used as well as 1 x TBTA ligand and TCEP solution. After gently vortexing the samples, the cycloaddition reaction was initiated by adding 10 µL CuSO4 solution (50 mM). The reaction was incubated for 1 h at room temperature after which the proteins were precipitated over night at -20 °C by adding 4 mL chilled acetone and pelletized by centrifugation (10 min, 8000 rpm, 4 °C). The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed two times with 500 µL chilled MeOH (resuspension by sonication, 1 x 10 sec, 10% max. intensity). After centrifugation (10 min, 13000 rpm, 4 °C), the pellet was resuspended in 1 mL 0.4% SDS by sonication (4 x 10 sec, 10% max. intensity) and incubated under gentle mixing with 50 µL pre washed avidin-agarose beads (3 x 1 mL 0.4% SDS solution, centrifugation was performed at 2500 rpm and RT for 5 min) for 1 h at room temperature. The beads were washed three times with 1 mL 0.4% SDS, twice with 1 mL 6 M urea and again three times with 1 mL PBS. After the last washing step, the supernatant was completely removed, digestion buffer (200 µL) was added to the beads and the proteins were reduced by adding DTT solution (1 M, 0.2 µL, 45 min, 450 rpm, RT). After alkylation with IAA solution (550 mM, 2 µL, 30 min in the dark, 450 rpm, RT), the reaction was quenched with DTT solution (1 M, 0.8 µL, 30 min, 450 rpm, RT) and the proteins were digested by adding LysC (0.5 µg/µL, 1 µL, 2 h, 450 rpm, RT). The samples were diluted with TEAB solution (600 µL) and further digested with Trypsin (0.5 µg/µL, 1.5 µL, overnight, 450 rpm, 37°C). To finally quench the reaction, FA (10 µL) was added to the samples which were further desalted using 50 mg Sep-Pak C18 Vac Cartridges (Waters). Columns were washed twice with 1 ml MeCN and equilibrated with 1 ml 0.1% TFA for three times. Samples were loaded onto the columns and columns subsequently washed with 1 ml 0.1% TFA for three times and once with 500 µl 0.5% FA. Peptides were eluted in LoBind Eppendorf tubes with 250 µl 80% MeCN, 0.5% FA in three steps, dried under vacuum and stored at -80°C. Lyophilized peptide samples were filtrated through centrifugal filters (VWR Centrifugal Filters, modified Nylon, 0.45 µm, low protein binding), which had to be pre-rinsed before usage: ddH2O (2 × 500 µL, 13000 rpm, 1 min, RT), aq. 0.05 M NaOH (2 × 500 µL, 13000 rpm, 1 min, RT) and 1% FA (2 × 500 µL, 13000 rpm, 1 min, RT). The peptides were dissolved in 1% FA (40 µL, 15 min sonication, RT) and then added to the pre-equilibrated filters (13000 rpm, 4 min, RT). The filtrate was transferred into a PP screw top vial and stored at -20 °C until the measurements were performed. Nano flow LC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an UltiMate 3000 Nano HPLC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) or an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim C18 PepMap100 75 µm ID x 2 cm) and washed for 10 min with 0.1% FA (5 µL/min flow rate), then transferred to an analytical column (Acclaim C18 PepMap RSLC, 75 µM ID x 15 cm).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.1.2) with Andromeda as search engine. The search included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with N-terminal cleavage to proline and two missed cleavages allowed. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm (main search) and fragment mass tolerance to 0.5 Da. Searches were performed against the Uniprot database of Mycobacterium tuberculosis or Mycobacterium smegmatis mc(2) 155. The second peptide identification option was enabled. False discovery rate determination was carried out using a decoy database and thresholds were set to 1% both at peptide-spectrum match and at protein levels. “I = L”, “requantification” and “match between runs” (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time windows) options were enabled. Label-free quantification was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2. Statistical analysis of gel-free target identification was performed with Perseus 1.6.0.0. MaxQuant result table proteingroups.txt was used for further analysis. Putative contaminants, reverse hits and proteins, that were identified by site only, were removed. LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and proteins filtered for 6 valid values out of 9 EZ120P samples for the analysis of Mycobacterium tuberculosis soluble fraction and Mycobacterium smegmatis insoluble fraction, and for 5 valid values out of 8 EZ120P samples for the analysis of the Mycobacterium smegmatis soluble fraction. Missing values were replaced from a normal distribution over the whole matrix (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). The enrichment of protein hits were visualized in volcano plots based on two-sample t-tests. According to the overall distribution of proteins cut-offs were set to a log2 fold enrichment of 2 and a p-value of 0.05 for Mycobacterium tuberculosis soluble fraction, and a log2 fold enrichment of 3 and a p-value of 0.05 for Mycobacterium smegmatis insoluble fraction and soluble fraction.

### Publication Abstract
The spread of antibiotic resistance is a major challenge for the treatment of Mycobacterium tuberculosis infections. In addition, the efficacy of drugs is often limited by the restricted permeability of the mycomembrane. Frontline antibiotics inhibit mycomembrane biosynthesis, leading to rapid cell death. Inspired by this mechanism, we exploited &#x3b2;-lactones as putative mycolic acid mimics to block serine hydrolases involved in their biosynthesis. Among a collection of &#x3b2;-lactones, we found one hit with potent anti-mycobacterial and bactericidal activity. Chemical proteomics using an alkynylated probe identified Pks13 and Ag85 serine hydrolases as major targets. Validation through enzyme assays and customized <sup>13</sup> C metabolite profiling showed that both targets are functionally impaired by the &#x3b2;-lactone. Co-administration with front-line antibiotics enhanced the potency against M. tuberculosis by more than 100-fold, thus demonstrating the therapeutic potential of targeting mycomembrane biosynthesis serine hydrolases.

### Keywords
Antibiotics, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Lipidomics, Activity-based protein profiling

### Affiliations
TU München
TU München Institut für Chemie Organische Chemie II Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Stephan A. Sieber
TU München Institut für Chemie Organische Chemie II Lichtenbergstr. 4 85747 Garching


