### Accession
PXD011148

### Title
Shotgun proteomic profiling of skin mucus common carp (Cyprinus carpio)

### Description
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis is a ciliated protozoan parasite recognized as one of the most pathogenic diseases of wild and cultured freshwater fish. Fish skin mucus plays a significant role against invading pathogens. However, the protein-based modulation against infection with I. multifiliis, of host fish at this barrier is unknown. The aim of this study was to investigate the modulation of the skin mucus after infection with I. multifiliis using quantitative proteomics to provide insights into the post-transcriptional and post-translational regulation of skin mucus proteins. Thus, we investigated the skin mucus proteome of common carp (Cyprinus carpio) using a shotgun proteomic approach at days 1 and 9 after I. multifiliis exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Fish mucus was solubilized using denaturing lysis buffer containing mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail. Fish mucus suspensions were disrupted by sonication and then centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 30 min at 4 °C and the supernatants were collected. The protein samples were subjected to electrophoresis. After electrophoresis, the gels were stained with silver staining. Protein bands were excised manually from silver-stained one-dimensional gels. After washing and destaining, bands were reduced with dithiothreitol and alkylated with iodoacetamide. In-gel digestion was carried out using trypsin with a final trypsin concentration of 20 ng/µL in 50 mM aqueous ammonium bicarbonate and 5 mM CaCl2. In-gel digestion was performed for 8 h at 37 °C using trypsin. Subsequently, peptides were extracted and were dried down in a vacuum concentrator, and then re-dissolved in 0.1% aqueous trifluoroacetic (TFA) before liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry injection. Peptides were separated on a nano-HPLC Ultimate 3000 RSLC system. The samples were pre-concentrated and desalted. For sample loading and desalting, 2% ACN in ultra-pure H2O with 0.05% TFA was used as a mobile phase with a flow rate of 5 µL/min. Peptides were separated on a 25-cm Acclaim PepMap C18 column with a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The gradient started with 4% B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) and increased to 35% B in 120 min. A washing step with 90% B was then performed. Mobile phase A contained ultra-pure H2O with 0.1% formic acid. For mass spectrometric analysis, the LC was coupled to a high-resolution quadrupole time of flight mass spectrometer (Triple TOF 5600+, Sciex). Data-independent Sequential Window Acquisition of all Theoretical spectra (SWATH runs) technology based on MS2 quantification was used for quantitative measurements. Peptides were fragmented in 35 fixed fragmentation windows of 20 Da in the range of 400–1100 Da with an accumulation time of 50 min in TOF-MS and 80 min in product ion mode. The nano-HPLC system was operated by Chromeleon 6.8 (Dionex) and the MS by Analyst Software 1.6 (Sciex).

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data were assessed using ProteinPilot software version 5.0 (Sciex) for re-calibration and database searches using NCBI entries of Cyprinus (taxonomy id: 7961) and Ichthyophthirius multifiliis (taxonomy id: 5932) [Released 2017_02] as well as cRAP. Mass tolerance in MS mode was set with 0.05 and 0.1 Da in MSMS mode for the rapid re-calibration search, and 0.0011 Da in MS and 0.01 Da in MSMS mode for the final search. The following sample parameters were used trypsin digestion, cysteine alkylation set to iodoacetamide, and the processing parameter was set to a rapid ID search effort. False discovery rate analysis (FDR) was evaluated using the integrated tools in ProteinPilot and was set to <1% at the protein level. The results of Information Dependent Acquisition (IDA) identification were used to create the SWATH ion library with the MS/MS (ALL) with SWATH Acquisition MicroApp 2.0 in PeakView 2.2 (both Sciex). Peptides were chosen based on an FDR rate <1%, excluding shared and modified peptides. Up to six peptides per protein and up to six transitions per peptide were used. MarkerView 1.2.1 (Sciex) was used for the calculation of peak areas of SWATH samples after retention time alignment and normalization using total area sums.  To determine differentially expressed proteins, statistical evaluation was performed in R programming language. The differential expression of proteins was evaluated using one-way analysis of variance for each protein. For multiple testing, the method of Benjamini and Hochberg (1995) was used to control the FDR. The differences were considered significant if adjusted p values were smaller than the significance level of α = 0.01. For such proteins, the honest significant difference method of Tukey was applied as post hoc test to assess the significance of the pairwise comparisons. Protein expression was considered differential if the adjusted p-value was below α and the absolute fold change was at least three (fold change <−3 or >+3).

### Publication Abstract
Ichthyophthirius multifiliis is a ciliated protozoan parasite recognized as one of the most pathogenic diseases of wild and cultured freshwater fish. Fish skin mucus plays a significant role against invading pathogens. However, the protein-based modulation against infection with I. multifiliis, of host fish at this barrier is unknown. Thus, we investigated the skin mucus proteome of common carp using a shotgun proteomic approach at days 1 and 9 after I. multifiliis exposure. We identified 25 differentially expressed proteins in infected carp skin mucus. Upregulated proteins were mainly involved in metabolism, whereas downregulated proteins were mainly structural. This is the first proteomic analysis of infected common carp skin mucus, and it provides novel information about proteome alteration caused by I. multifiliis. Furthermore, we identified novel proteins with yet unknown function in common carp following penetrating injuries such as olfactomedin 4, lumican, dermatopontin, papilin and I cytoskeletal 18. This analysis, therefore, represents a key for the search for potential biomarkers, which can help in a better understanding and monitoring of interactions between carp and I. multifiliis. This proteomic study not only provides information on the protein-level pathways involved in fish-ciliate interactions but also could represent a complementary system for studying tissue repair.

### Keywords
Common carp, Ichthyophthirius multifiliis, Lc ms-ms, Mucus proteome profile, Protozoan parasite

### Affiliations
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria
University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna

### Submitter
Gokhlesh Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Mona Saleh
Clinical Division of Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine, Vienna, Austria


