### Accession
PXD030441

### Title
Cycloastragenol inhibit experimental abdominal aortic aneurysm progression

### Description
Abstract: The pathogenesis of AAA involves vascular inflammation and oxidative stress. Astragali Radix contains cycloastragenol (CAG) known to have anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidative properties. We hypothesized that CAG supplement impairs AAA progression.  AAA was induced in male rats by intraluminal elastase infusion in the infrarenal aorta and treated daily with CAG (125 mg/kg/day). Aortic expansion was followed weekly by ultrasound, with euthanization at day 28. Changes in AAA wall composition were analyzed at mRNA levels, histology, zymography and explorative proteomic analyses. At day 28, mean AAA diameter was 37% lower in CAG group (p<0.0001). In aneurysm cross sections, elastin content was insignificantly higher in CAG group (10.5% ± 5.9% vs 19.9% ± 16.8%, p=0.20) with more preserved elastin lamellae structures (p=0.0003) and with no microcalcifications. Aneurysmal matrix metalloprotease-2 activity was reduced by CAG treatment (p=0.022), and mRNA levels of inflammatory- and antioxidative markers showed no difference between groups. Explorative proteomic analysis showed no difference in protein levels when adjustment for multiple testing. Amongst unadjusted affected proteins were fibulin-5 (p=0.02), aquaporin-1 (p=0.02) and prostacyclin synthase (p=0.006). CAG impairs experimental AAA progression by reduction of elastin degradation through decreased MMP-2 activity, thus CAG could be considered tested in AAA patients.

### Sample Protocol
Snap frozen tissue was homogenized in a lysis buffer, then denatured, alkylated, and digested with trypsin overnight. Tryptic peptides were purified on custom-made Poros R2/R3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) columns, and peptide concentration was normalized across samples. Samples (4 μg tryptic peptides per sample) were randomly labelled with 10-plex tandem mass tags (TMT, Thermo Scientific), mass tag 126 was a pool of all AAA samples and served as internal control. Proteome data are protein abunances relative to the internal control. (a pool of all AAA samples was included for normalization). Mixed peptide samples were, high-pH fractionated, and analyzed by nano-LC–MS/MS.)

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest search engine integrated with Proteome Discoverer was used to search the data with the following criteria—protein database: Uniprot rat database. Fixed search parameters included trypsin, one missed cleavage allowed, carbamidomethylation at cysteines and 10-plex TMT at lysine and N-terminal amines, while methionine oxidation and deamidation were set as dynamic. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 8 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.05 Da. Percolater node was used to filter out non-confident peptides and false discovery rate (fdr) was calculated using a decoy database search and only high confidence peptide identifications (False discovery rate < 1%) were included.

### Publication Abstract
The pathogenesis of abdominal aortic aneurysm involves vascular inflammation and elastin degradation. <i>Astragalus</i><i>radix</i> contains cycloastragenol, which is known to be anti-inflammatory and to protect against elastin degradation. We hypothesized that cycloastragenol supplementation inhibits abdominal aortic aneurysm progression. Abdominal aortic aneurysm was induced in male rats by intraluminal elastase infusion in the infrarenal aorta and treated daily with cycloastragenol (125 mg/kg/day). Aortic expansion was followed weekly by ultrasound for 28 days. Changes in aneurysmal wall composition were analyzed by mRNA levels, histology, zymography and explorative proteomic analyses. At day 28, mean aneurysm diameter was 37% lower in the cycloastragenol group (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.0001). In aneurysm cross sections, elastin content was insignificantly higher in the cycloastragenol group (10.5% &#xb1; 5.9% vs. 19.9% &#xb1; 16.8%, <i>p</i> = 0.20), with more preserved elastin lamellae structures (<i>p</i> = 0.0003) and without microcalcifications. Aneurysmal matrix metalloprotease-2 activity was reduced by the treatment (<i>p</i> = 0.022). Messenger RNA levels of inflammatory- and anti-oxidative markers did not differ between groups. Explorative proteomic analysis showed no difference in protein levels when adjusting for multiple testing. Among proteins displaying nominal regulation were fibulin-5 (<i>p</i> = 0.02), aquaporin-1 (<i>p</i> = 0.02) and prostacyclin synthase (<i>p</i> = 0.007). Cycloastragenol inhibits experimental abdominal aortic aneurysm progression. The suggested underlying mechanisms involve decreased matrix metalloprotease-2 activity and preservation of elastin and reduced calcification, thus, cycloastragenol could be considered for trial in abdominal aortic aneurysm patients.

### Keywords
Aortic aneurysm; pathogenesis; pharmacological therapy; experimental model; drug delivery

### Affiliations
Odense University Hospital/University of Southern Denmark
University of Southren Denmark 

### Submitter
Lasse  Steffensen

### Lab Head
Dr Hans C Beck
Odense University Hospital/University of Southern Denmark


