### Accession
PXD017336

### Title
Consequences of Cyp2c44 deletion in the polyoma middle T (PyMT) breast cancer tumor proteome

### Description
Comparison of the proteome of intact primary breast cancer  tumors from PyMT mice versus PyMTxCyp2c44-/- mice.

### Sample Protocol
Primary tumors were solubilized in 10% SDS (w/v), 150 mmol/L NaCl, 100 mmol/L HEPES pH 7.8. Samples were sonicated for 5 seconds, heated for 5 minutes at 95°C and centrifuged to remove insoluble material. Total protein amount of 100 μg of each sample was diluted in (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mmol/L HEPES, pH 7.6, 150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1 M DTT, mixed with 200 μL 8 mol/L urea, 50 mmol/L Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 and loaded to spin filters with a 30 kDa cut off (Microcon, Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The filter aided sample preparation protocol (FASP) was followed as described (8). Proteins were digested overnight with trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Acidified peptides (final concentration 0.1% v/v trifluoroacetic acid) were fractionated on multi-stop-and-go tips (StageTips) containing C18 and strong cation exchange (SCX) tips (Empore, St. Paul, USA), as outlined (9), The C18 translution fraction was combined with the first SXC fraction. All six fractions of each sample were eluted in wells of microtiter plates. Peptides were dried and resolved in 1% acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. Liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive Plus equipped with an ultra-high performance liquid chromatography unit (Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000) and a Nanospray Flex Ion-Source (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase precolumn (Thermo Scientific) followed by separation on a 2.4 μm Reprosil C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) in-house packed picotip emitter tip (diameter 100 μm, 30 cm long from New Objectives) using a gradient from mobile phase A (4% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to 30 % mobile phase B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) for 100 minutes following a second gradient to 60% B for another 45 minutes with a flow rate of 200 nl/minute. MS data were recorded by data dependent acquisition method selecting ten most abundant precursor ions in positive mode for HCD fragmentation. Lock mass option [Olsen et al., 2005 ], was enabled to ensure high mass accuracy during many following runs. The Full MS scan range was 300 to 2000 m/z with resolution of 70000, and an automatic gain control (AGC) value of 3xE6 total ion counts with a maximal ion injection time of 160 ms. Higher charged ions (2+) were selected for MS/MS scans with a resolution of 17500, an isolation window of 2 m/z and an automatic gain control value set to E5 ions with a maximal ion injection time of 150 ms. Selected ions for MS/MS were excluded in a time frame of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
X calibur Raw files were analyzed by proteomics software Max Quant (1.5.3.30) [Cox et al, 2008]. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, missed cleavages were limited to 2. Acetylation of Nterminus (+42.01), deamidation on N and Q, and oxidation of methionine (+15.99) were selected for variable modification, carbamidomethylation (+57.02) on cysteines was set as fixed modification. The mouse proteome set from Uniprot (Download February 2016, 79950 entries) was used to identify peptides and proteins with a false discovery rate of 1%. Label free quantification values were obtained from at least one identified peptide.   Olsen JV, et al. (2005) Parts per million mass accuracy on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer via lock mass injection into a C-trap. Mol Cell Proteomics 4:2010- 2021. Cox J, Mann M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol. 26:1367-72.

### Publication Abstract
Arachidonic acid epoxides generated by cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes have been linked to increased tumor growth and metastasis, largely on the basis of overexpression studies and the application of exogenous epoxides. Here we studied tumor growth and metastasis in Cyp2c44<sup>-/-</sup> mice crossed onto the polyoma middle T oncogene (PyMT) background. The resulting PyMT<sup>2c44</sup> mice developed more primary tumors earlier than PyMT mice, with increased lymph and lung metastasis. Primary tumors from Cyp2c44-deficient mice contained higher numbers of tumor-associated macrophages, as well as more lymphatic endothelial cells than tumors from PyMT mice. While epoxide and diol levels were comparable in tumors from both genotypes, prostaglandin (PG) levels were higher in the PyMT<sup>&#x394;2c44</sup> tumors. This could be accounted for by the finding that Cyp2c44 metabolized the PG precursor, PGH<sub>2</sub> to 12(S)-hydroxyheptadeca-5Z,8E,10E-trienoic acid (12-HHT), thus effectively reducing levels of effector PGs (including PGE<sub>2</sub>). Next, proteomic analyses revealed an up-regulation of WD repeating domain FYVE1 (WDFY1) in tumors from PyMT<sup>&#x394;2c44</sup> mice, a phenomenon that was reproduced in Cyp2c44-deficient macrophages as well as by PGE<sub>2</sub> Mechanistically, WDFY1 was involved in Toll-like receptor signaling, and its down-regulation in human monocytes attenuated the LPS-induced phosphorylation of IFN regulatory factor 3 and nuclear factor-&#x3ba;B. Taken together, our results indicate that Cyp2c44 protects against tumor growth and metastasis by preventing the synthesis of PGE<sub>2</sub> The latter eicosanoid influenced macrophages at least in part by enhancing Toll-like receptor signaling via the up-regulation of WDFY1.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Wdfy1, Breast cancer, Metastasis, Lymphangiogenesis, Macrophage

### Affiliations
Functional Proteomics, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main , Germany
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
Ilka Wittig

### Lab Head
Dr Ingrid Fleming
Institute for Vascular Signalling, Centre for Molecular Medicine, Goethe-Universität, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


