### Accession
PXD002773

### Title
Oryza sativa Lysine Acetylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine acetylome analysis was performed in oryza sativa. Altogether, 1,003 lysine acetylation sites in 692 proteins were identified.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37 °C and alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion.  HPLC Fractionation The sample was then fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 10 over 80 min into 80 fractions, Then, the peptides were combined into 8 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. Affinity Enrichment To enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Biolabs) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% TFA. The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against UniProt_Oryza sativa (63,195 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on lysine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation is a recently identified protein post-translational modification that is known to affect the association between histone and DNA. However, non-histone protein lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation remains largely unexplored. Utilizing antibody-based affinity enrichment and nano-HPLC/MS/MS analyses of 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation peptides, we efficaciously identified 9,916 2-hydroxyisobutyryl lysine sites on 2,512 proteins in developing rice seeds, representing the first lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome dataset in plants. Functional annotation analyses indicated that a wide variety of vital biological processes were preferably targeted by lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, including glycolysis/gluconeogenesis, TCA cycle, starch biosynthesis, lipid metabolism, protein biosynthesis and processing. Our finding showed that 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated histone sites were conserved across plants, human, and mouse. A number of 2-hydroxyisobutyryl sites were shared with other lysine acylations in both histone and non-histone proteins. Comprehensive analysis of the lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation sites illustrated that the modification sites were highly sequence specific with distinct motifs, and they had less surface accessibility than other lysine residues in the protein. Overall, our study provides the first systematic analysis of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation proteome in plants, and it serves as an important resource for future investigations of the regulatory mechanisms and functions of lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Lc-ms/ms, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
PH.D student
University of Mississippi , Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
jun zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaohua Peng
University of Mississippi , Department of Biochemistry


