### Accession
PXD031438

### Title
HPV16 and HPV42 E6 and E7 proximal interactomics

### Description
This project identifies molecular mechanisms underlying HPV42-driven transformation.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, Flp-In™ T-REx™ HEK293 cells were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Sigma-Aldrich), GlutaMAX™ and Penicillin-Streptomycin (1x). Using the Flp-In system (Invitrogen), Flp-In™ T-REx™ HEK293 stably expressing BirA* alone (for control samples), or N- and C-terminally tagged HPV16 and 42 E6 and E7 viral proteins were generated co-transfecting pOG44 with each pcDNA5 FRT/TO BirA*Flag-viral bait protein sequence plasmid. After selection (DMEM + 10% FBS + P/S + 200 μg/ml hygromycin B), three independent replicates of two 150 cm2 plates of sub-confluent (60%) cells were incubated for 24 hrs in complete media supplemented with 1 µg/ml tetracycline (Sigma), 50 µM biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Cells were collected and pelleted (2,000 rpm, 3 min), washed twice with PBS, and dried pellets were snap frozen. Each cell pellet was resuspended in 5 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS, 1:500 protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1:1,000 Turbonuclease (Accelagen) and incubated on an end-over-end rotator at 4°C for 1 hour, briefly sonicated to disrupt any visible aggregates, then centrifuged at 45,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatant was transferred to a fresh 15 mL conical tube. 25 μl of packed, pre-equilibrated Streptavidin Ultralink Resin (Pierce) were added and the mixture incubated for 3 hours at 4°C with end-over-end rotation. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation at 2,000 rpm for 2 min and transferred with 1 mL of lysis buffer to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Beads were washed once with 1 mL lysis buffer and twice with 1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH=8.3), then transferred in ammonium bicarbonate to a fresh centrifuge tube and washed two more times with 1 ml ammonium bicarbonate buffer. Tryptic digestion was performed by incubating the beads with 1 µg MS-grade TPCK trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) dissolved in 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.3) overnight at 37°C. The following morning, 0.5 μg MS-grade TPCK trypsin was added to the beads and incubated 2 additional hours at 37°C. Following centrifugation at 2,000 x g for 2 min, the supernatant was collected and transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube. Two additional washes were performed with 150 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and pooled with the first eluate. The sample was lyophilized and resuspended in buffer A (2% ACN 0.1% formic acid). 1/3rd of each sample was analyzed per mass spectrometer run. BioID data acquisition. Samples were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC1000 system equipped with a Proxeon trap column (75 μm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, Thermo Scientific,) and a C18 packed-tip column (Acclaim PepMap, 75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2 µm, Thermo Scientific). The digested peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid from 2 to 30% for 2 hours at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. A voltage of 2.4 kV was applied by the liquid junction to electrospray the eluent using the nanospray source. A high-resolution mass spectrometer Q-ExactiveTM Thermo ScientificTM was coupled to the chromatography system to acquire the 10 most intense ions of MS1 analysis (Top 10) in data dependent mode. The MS analyses were performed in positive mode at resolving power of 70,000 FWHM, using an automatic gain control target of 3e6, the default charge state was set at 2 and a maximum injection time at 120 ms. For full scan MS, the scan range was set between m/z 300 to 1600. For ddMS², the scan range was between m/z 200 to 2000, 1 microscan was acquired at 17,500 FWHM, an AGC was set at 5e4 ions and an isolation window of m/z 4,0 was used.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the Homo sapiens proteome database (Uniprot, release April 2021, Reviewed, comprising 20,360 entries + viral bait protein sequences added manually), using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3. The digestion parameters were defined using trypsin with 2 maximum missed cleavages. The oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications. The Label-free quantification (LFQ) was done keeping the default parameters of the software. As for initial mass tolerance, 6 ppm was selected for MS mode, and 20 ppm was set for fragmentation data to match MS/MS tolerance. The identification parameters of the proteins and peptides were performed with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, and a minimum of 2 unique peptides per protein. The LFQ values from the 20 control runs (BirA* alone samples from stable cell lines) were collapsed to the three highest values for each given ID. These three values were defined as the control group for comparison with viral bait proteins triplicates. The statistical analysis was done by Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). Briefly, the LFQ intensity of each sample were downloaded in Perseus and the data matrix was filtered by removing the potential contaminants, reverse and only identified by site. The data were then transformed using the log2(x) function. Before statistical analysis, 8 (4 viral bait proteins, N-ter, C-ter BirA* tag for each) were defined with 3 replicates per group. Only preys with detected values in all three replicates of a given viral bait protein were kept for further analysis. Missing values were then replaced from normal distribution separately for each column. Two-sample Student’s T-test was then performed comparing all three biological replicates of each bait and condition against the three controls runs. High confidence proximal interactors were defined by permutation-based FDR with a cut-off of 0.01. Perseus output with all experimental values is reported in Supplemental Table. The matrix (Supplemental Table) shows the average log2 fold change against control and the corresponding q-values for each bait and condition.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bioid, Human, Lc-ms/ms, Hpv

### Affiliations
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France

### Submitter
Etienne Coyaud

### Lab Head
Dr Etienne COYAUD
Univ. Lille, Inserm, CHU Lille, U1192 - Protéomique Réponse Inflammatoire Spectrométrie de Masse - PRISM, F-59000 Lille, France


