### Accession
PXD034791

### Title
Streamlined TMT labeling workflow for proteomics and metaproteomics

### Description
This study established a streamlined TMT labeling workflow that is readily compatible with high throughput proteomics and metaproteomics sample preparation. The method was then evaluated using two different sample types, microbiome and intestinal Caco-2 cell line, with TMT11plex mix reagents.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction was performed using 4%SDS 8M urea in 50mM Tris-HCl buffer with ultrasonication. SDS were removed using acetone preciptation and the precipitated proteins were resuspended in 50mM ABC buffer for in-solution trypsin digestion. Protein digests were desalted using C18 column and the desalted peptides were labeled using a mix of 11 TMT11plex reagents.

### Data Protocol
Microbial protein and peptide identification was performed using MetaLab with an integrated human gut microbial gene catalog (IGC) as database. Database search of Caco-2 cell samples were performed using Maxquant and Proteome Discoverer with a human proteome database (downloaded from UniProt).

### Publication Abstract
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics using tandem mass tag (TMT) is increasingly used in -omic study of complex samples. While TMT-based proteomics has the advantages of the higher quantitative accuracy, fewer missing values, and reduced instrument analysis time, it is limited by the additional reagent cost. In addition, current TMT labeling workflows involve repeated small volume pipetting of reagents in volatile solvents, which may increase the sample-to-sample variations and is not readily suitable for high throughput applications. In this study, we demonstrated that the TMT labeling procedures could be streamlined by using pre-aliquoted dry TMT reagents in a 96 well plate or 12-tube strip. As little as 50&#xa0;&#x3bc;g dry TMT per channel was used to label 6-12&#xa0;&#x3bc;g peptides, yielding high TMT labeling efficiency (&#x223c;99%) in both microbiome and mammalian cell line samples. We applied this workflow to analyze 97 samples in a study to evaluate whether ice recrystallization inhibitors improve the cultivability and activity of frozen microbiota. The results demonstrated tight sample clustering corresponding to groups and consistent microbiome responses to prebiotic treatments. This study supports the use of TMT reagents that are pre-aliquoted, dried, and stored for robust quantitative proteomics and metaproteomics in high throughput applications.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Proteomics, Tmt, Microbiome

### Affiliations
Regulatory research division, Health Canada
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Xu Zhang
Regulatory research division, Health Canada


