### Accession
PXD035252

### Title
Interaction of Arabidopsis Cryptochrome 2 with PRR9 transmits blue light intensity fluctuation to circadian clock

### Description
Circadian pace is modulated by light intensity, known as the Aschoff’s rule, with largely unrevealed mechanisms. Here we report that photoreceptor CRY2 mediates blue light input to circadian clock by directly interacting with clock core component PRR9 in blue light dependent manner. This physical interaction dually blocks the accessibility of PRR9 protein to its co-repressor TPL/TPRs and the resulting kinase PPKs. Notably, phosphorylation of PRR9 by PPKs is critical for its DNA binding and repressive activity, hence to ensure proper circadian speed. Given the labile nature of CRY2 in strong blue light, our findings provide a mechanistic explanation for Aschoff’s rule in plants, i.e., blue light triggers CRY2 turnover in proportional to its intensity, which accordingly releasing PRR9 to fine tune circadian speed. Our findings not only reveal a novel network mediating light input into circadian clock, but also unmask a mechanism by which Arabidopsis circadian clock sensing light intensity.

### Sample Protocol
Two-week-old PRR9:PRR9-GFP transgenic seedlings previously reported 25 grown on MS medium containing 3% sucrose in LD cycles (12 h light/12 h dark) were transferred at ZT0 and exposure to 40 μmol m-2 s-1 blue light for 5 hours. Plant tissues (3 g) were harvested, ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 3 ml clod IP buffer. The protein lysates were vortexed violently and filtered by 4 layers of 0.2 μm Miracloth (EMD Millipore Corp) through centrifuge at 13,000 rpm for 10 min at 4oC. The supernatant were added with precleared GFP Trap beads (30 μl beads slurry every sample) and incubated at 4oC with gentle agitation for 1 h. Then, protein-beads complex were washed with 1 ml washing buffer 1 (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 8.0; 150 Mm NaCl; 0.5 mM EDTA; 0.5% NP-40) for 4 times and 1 ml washing buffer 2 (10 mM Tris/Cl pH 8.0, 150 Mm NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA) for 2 times and 1 ml 50% acetonitrile for 4 times by using magnetic stander. Finally, the protein-beads complex were resuspended and digest by elution buffer 1 (50 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 2 M urea; 5 μg/ml sequencing grade modified trypsin; 1 mM DTT) at 30oC for 30 min. After centrifuging at 4oC, 3000 rpm for 2 min, the supernatant were transferred to new vial. The remaining beads were further resuspended by elution buffer 2 (50 mM Tris/Cl pH 7.5; 2 M urea; 5 mM iodoacetamide) for 2 times. The total supernatant from three times of elution were kept at 30oC overnight to digest. The digested samples (1-2 μg protein) were submitted to Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled with chromatography system, namely 20 cm EASY-Spray C18 LC column (1.9 μm particle size) with a 2-40% acetonitrile gradient over 75 min at a flowrate of 500 nL/min to separate peptides.

### Data Protocol
Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid platform was used for further peptide analysis. Briefly, typical analysis at 120,000 resolving power survey scan, AGC 4e5 followed by MS/MS analysis at 1.6 m/z isolation with the quadrupole, HCD 32% collision energy, then fragment ions analysis in the orbitrap analyzer with resolution 15,000. For MS/MS analysis, the maximum injection time was appointed as 72 ms with AGC target of 1e4, and charge states 1, or >7 were excluded. Thermo Scientific™ Proteome Discoverer™ 2.4 software was used for data analysis. Precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance was set as 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) was used as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation (+15.996 Da), phosphorylation (+79.966 Da, T, Y, S) and acetylation on protein N-terminal (+170 Da) were set as variable modifications. Data was searched against a Uniprot-Arabidopsis thaliana database with a 1% FDR criteria to filter the results.

### Publication Abstract
Circadian pace is modulated by light intensity, known as the Aschoff's rule, with largely unrevealed mechanisms. Here we report that photoreceptor CRY2 mediates blue light input to the circadian clock by directly interacting with clock core component PRR9 in blue light dependent manner. This physical interaction dually blocks the accessibility of PRR9 protein to its co-repressor TPL/TPRs and the resulting kinase PPKs. Notably, phosphorylation of PRR9 by PPKs is critical for its DNA binding and repressive activity, hence to ensure proper circadian speed. Given the labile nature of CRY2 in strong blue light, our findings provide a mechanistic explanation for Aschoff's rule in plants, i.e., blue light triggers CRY2 turnover in proportional to its intensity, which accordingly releasing PRR9 to fine tune circadian speed. Our findings not only reveal a network mediating light input into the circadian clock, but also unmask a mechanism by which the Arabidopsis circadian clock senses light intensity.

### Keywords
Aschoff’s rule; circadian clock; light intensity; cry2; prr9

### Affiliations
Insititute of botany, the Chinese academy of science 
Key laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 10093, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
He yuqing

### Lab Head
Dr Wang Lei
Key laboratory of Plant Molecular Physiology, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Botany, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 10093, People’s Republic of China


