### Accession
PXD012305

### Title
NPM and NPM-MLF1 interact with chromatin remodeling complexes and influence their recruitment to specific genes

### Description
Nucleophosmin (NPM1) is either frequently mutated or subjected to chromosomal translocation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). NPM protein is primarily located in the nucleus, but the recurrent NPMc+ mutation is characterized by cytoplasmic localization and leukemogenic properties. Similarly, the NPM-MLF1 translocation product favors the partial cytoplasmic retention of NPM. Regardless of their common cellular distribution, NPM-MLF1 malignancies engender different effects on hematopoiesis compared to NPMc+ counterparts, highlighting possible aberrant nuclear function(s) of NPM in NPMc+ and NPM-MLF1 AML. We performed a proteomics analysis and found that NPM and NPM-MLF1 interact with chromatin remodeling complexes of the ISWI family, as well as with NuRD and P/BAF complexes. Accordingly, NPM and NPM-MLF1 are recruited to transcriptionally active or repressed genes along with NuRD and P/BAF elements. Although the overall gene expression program in NPM knockdown cells is similar to that resulting from NPMc+ and is consistent with loss of nuclear function of NPM, NPM-MLF1 expression differentially altered gene transcription regulated by NPM. The abnormal gene regulation imposed by NPM-MLF1 is characterized by enhanced recruitment of NuRD to gene regulatory regions. Thus, different mechanisms orchestrate the deregulation of NPM function in NPMc+ -versus NPM1-MLF1- associated leukemia.

### Sample Protocol
K562 leukemic cells were infected with empty pOZN-Flag-HA-IRES-IL2R (pOZN) vector or expressing NPM or NPM-MLF1. Flag-HA sequential immunoaffinity purification was carried out from 20mg of K562 MOCK, NPM, NPM-MLF1 nuclear extract, as previously described on Nakatani, et al., Methods Enzymol, 2003. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted from Flag or HA beads with poly-peptides and concentrated with 15% TCA. Samples were loaded on gel SDS-page, strips were cut for each samples and were sent do the Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility - Harvard University, Boston for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility Methods: Excised gel bands were cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces.  Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Gel pieces were washed and dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min. followed by removal of acetonitrile. Pieces were then completely dried in a speed-vac. Rehydration of the gel pieces was with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 4ºC. After 45 min., the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to just cover the gel pieces. Samples were then placed in a 37ºC room overnight. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid.The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr). The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis.   On the day of analysis the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (2). After equilibrating the column each sample was loaded via a Famos auto sampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column. A gradient was formed and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  Samples References: 18023 - Mock1 – strip 250-50kd 18024 - Mock2 – strip 50-10kd 18025 - NPM1 – strip 250-50kd 18026 - NPM2 – strip 50-37kd 18027 - NPM3 – strip 37-10kd 18028 - NPM-MLF1 1 – strip 250-75kd 18029 - NPM-MLF1 2 – strip 75-50kd 18030 - NPM-MLF1 3 – strip 50-25kd 18031 - NPM-MLF1 4 – strip 25-10kd

### Data Protocol
As peptides eluted they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide. Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences and the data was filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Nucleophosmin (NPM1) is frequently mutated or subjected to chromosomal translocation in acute myeloid leukemia (AML). NPM protein is primarily located in the nucleus, but the recurrent NPMc+ mutation, which creates a nuclear export signal, is characterized by cytoplasmic localization and leukemogenic properties. Similarly, the NPM-MLF1 translocation product favors the partial cytoplasmic retention of NPM. Regardless of their common cellular distribution, NPM-MLF1 malignancies engender different effects on hematopoiesis compared to NPMc+ counterparts, highlighting possible aberrant nuclear function(s) of NPM in NPMc+ and NPM-MLF1 AML. We performed a proteomic analysis and found that NPM and NPM-MLF1 interact with various nuclear proteins including subunits of the chromatin remodeling complexes ISWI, NuRD and P/BAF. Accordingly, NPM and NPM-MLF1 are recruited to transcriptionally active or repressed genes along with NuRD subunits. Although the overall gene expression program in NPM knockdown cells is similar to that resulting from NPMc+, NPM-MLF1 expression differentially altered gene transcription regulated by NPM. The abnormal gene regulation imposed by NPM-MLF1 can be characterized by the enhanced recruitment of NuRD to gene regulatory regions. Thus, different mechanisms would orchestrate the dysregulation of NPM function in NPMc+- versus NPM1-MLF1-associated leukemia.

### Keywords
Leukemia, Proteomic, Npm, Epigenetic, Chromatin remodeling complexes, Npm-mlf1

### Affiliations
Université de Montréal
(1) Maisonneuve Rosemont Hospital Research Center, CIUSSS Est de l’Île de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada (2) Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montréal, QC, Canada

### Submitter
Eric Milot

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Milot Eric
(1) Maisonneuve Rosemont Hospital Research Center, CIUSSS Est de l’Île de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada (2) Department of Medicine, University of Montreal, Montréal, QC, Canada


