### Accession
PXD025807

### Title
Stallion sperm proteins in 10 stallions with different motility

### Description
Using a split sample design 30 ejaculates from 10 different stallions were analyzed as fresh spermatozoa, and another aliquot from the same ejaculate was analyzed as a frozen thawed sample. The proteome was studied under both conditions using UHPLC/MS/MS and bioinformatic analysis conducted to identify discriminant variables between both conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Please provide a short description on the sample preparation steps, separation, enrichment strategies and mass spectrometry protocols includedSeparation and analysis of the samples were performed with a UHPLC/MS system consisting of an Agilent 1290 Infinity II Series UHPLC (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with an automated multisampler module and a High Speed Binary Pump, coupled to an Agilent 6550 Q-TOF Mass Spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA) using an Agilent Jet Stream Dual electrospray (AJS-Dual ESI) interface. The HPLC and Q-TOF were controlled using MassHunter Workstation Data Acquisition software (Agilent Technologies, Rev. B.06.01). The sample was injected onto an Agilent AdvanceBio Peptide Mapping HPLC column (2.7 m, 150  2.1 mm, Agilent technologies), thermostatted at 55 C, at a flow rate of 0.4 ml/min. This column is suitable for peptide separation and analysis. The gradient program started with 2% of  B (buffer B: water/acetonitrile/formic acid, 10:89.9:0.1) that remained in isocratic mode for 5 min and then increased linearly up to 45 % B over 40 min, further increasing up to 95 % B over 15 min and remaining constant for 5 min. After this 65 min run, 5 min of post-time followed using the initial condition for the conditioning of the column for the next run. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive mode. The nebulizer gas pressure was set to 35 psi, whereas the drying gas flow was set to 10 l/min at a temperature of 250 C, and the sheath gas flow was set to 12l/min at a temperature of 300 ºC. The capillary spray, fragmentor and octopole RF Vpp voltages were 3500 V, 340 V and 750 V respectively. Profile data were acquired for both MS and MS/MS scans in extended dynamic range mode. MS and MS/MS mass range were 50-1700 m/z and scan rates were 8 spectra/sec for MS and 3 spectra/sec for MS/MS. Auto MS/MS mode was used with precursor selection by abundance and a maximum of 20 precursors selected per cycle. A ramped collision energy was used with a slope of 3.6 and an offset of -4.8. The same ion was rejected after two consecutive scans.

### Data Protocol
Please provide a couple of sentences on the bioinformatics pipeline used, main search parameters, quantitative analysis, software tools and versions included. Think something similar in scope to the Data Analysis section ofData processing and analysis was performed using Spectrum Mill MS Proteomics Workbench (Rev B.04.01, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). Briefly, raw data were extracted under default conditions as follows: non fixed or variable modifications were selected; [MH]+ 50–10000 m/z; maximum precursor charge +5; retention time and m/z tolerance ± 60 seconds; minimum signal-to-noise MS (S/N) 25; finding 12C signals.  The MS/MS search against the appropriate and updated protein database (in this case: Uniprot/Horse) was performed with the following criteria: non fixed modifications were selected and as variable modifications: carbamidomethylated cysteines and tryptic digestion with 5 maximum missed cleavages were selected; ESI-Q-TOF instrument, minimum matched peak intensity 50%, maximum ambiguous precursor charge +5, monoisotopic masses, peptide precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm, product ion mass tolerance 50 ppm, and calculation of reversed database scores. Validation of peptide and protein data was performed using the auto-validation algorithm which is totally automated and used to validate the highest-scoring results; those which do not require manual review and are considered high-quality results. The auto-validation strategy used was auto-threshold, in which the peptide score is automatically optimized for a target % FDR (1.2%). Protein polishing validation was then performed in order to increase the sequence coverage of validated results with the restriction of a new maximum target protein FDR (0 %).    your manuscript

### Publication Abstract
Even in stallions with sperm quality within normal reference ranges at ejaculation, subtle differences in sperm quality exist that in many cases lead to reduced time frames for conservation of the ejaculate and/or reduced fertility. The spermatozoon is a cell highly suitable for proteomics studies, and the use of this technique is allowing rapid advances in the understanding of sperm biology. The aim of the present study was to investigate differences among stallions of variable sperm quality (based on motility and sperm velocities), although all horses had sperm characteristics within normal ranges. The proteome was studied using UHPLC/MS/MS and posterior bioinformatic and enrichment analysis; data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD025807. Sperm motility, linear motility and circular, straight line and average velocities (VCL, VSL, VAP) were measured using computer assisted sperm analysis (CASA). In stallions showing better percentages of motility, circular and average velocity predominated mitochondrial proteins with roles in the Citric acid cycle, pyruvate metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. Interestingly, in stallions with better percentages of total motility, sperm proteins were also enriched in proteins within the gene ontology (G0) terms, single fertilization (G0: 0007338), fertilization (G0: 0009566), and zona pellucida receptor complex (GO:0002199). The enrichment of this proteins in samples with better percentages of total motility may offer a molecular explanation for the link between this parameter and fertility. SIGNIFICANCE: Proteomic analysis identified a high degree of specificity of stallion sperm proteins with discriminant power for motility, linear motility, and sperm velocities (VCL, VAP and VSL). These findings may represent an interesting outcome in relation to the molecular biology regulating the movement of the spermatozoa, and the biological meaning of the measurements that computer assisted sperm analysis (CASA) provide. Of a total of 903 proteins identified in stallion spermatozoa, 24 were related to the percentage of total motility in the sample; interestingly, gene ontology (G0) analysis revealed that these proteins were enriched in terms like single fertilization and fertilization, providing a molecular link between motility and fertility. Field studies indicate that the percentage of total motility is the CASA derived parameter with the best correlation with fertility in stallions.

### Keywords
Spermatozoa, Cryopreservation, Horse

### Affiliations
UNIVERSIDAD DE EXTREMADURA
Departamento de Medicina Animal, Hospital Clínico Veterinario Universidad de Extremadura Avd de la Universidad s/n 10003 Cáceres SPAIN

### Submitter
FERNANDO JUAN  PEÑA VEGA 

### Lab Head
Dr FERNANDO JUAN PEÑA VEGA
Departamento de Medicina Animal, Hospital Clínico Veterinario Universidad de Extremadura Avd de la Universidad s/n 10003 Cáceres SPAIN


