### Accession
PXD017242

### Title
Functionalized Peptidisc Scaffolds Enable Affinity Purification of the Membrane Proteome

### Description
We reconstituted the total E. coli membrane proteome into His-tagged peptidiscs. We then performed an affinity purification to enrich the bona fide membrane proteome away from soluble contaminants which co-sediment with cellular membranes after cell lysis. As a case study, we employ this method to survey changes to the membrane proteome caused by altered gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli membranes were collected by ultracentrifugation after cell lysis and solubilized briefly in mild detergent (DDM). After solubilization, the membrane proteome was reconstituted into His-tagged peptidisc and purified over Ni-NTA affinity resin. Aliquots of the starting library and the Ni-NTA purified library were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometry data output was searched using MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of the integral membrane proteome by mass spectrometry (MS) remains challenging due its high complexity and inherent insolubility. In a typical experiment, the cellular membranes are isolated, the proteins are solubilized and fractionated, and the detergent micelles are removed before MS analysis. Detergents are not compatible with mass spectrometry, however, and their removal from biological samples often results in reduced protein identification. As an alternative to detergents, we recently developed the peptidisc membrane mimetic, which allows entrapment of the cell envelope proteome into water-soluble particles, termed a "peptidisc library". Here, we employ a His-tagged version of the peptidisc peptide scaffold to enrich the reconstituted membrane proteome by affinity chromatography. This purification step reduces the sample complexity by depleting ribosomal and soluble proteins that often cosediment with cellular membranes. As a result, the peptidisc library is enriched in low-abundance membrane proteins. We apply this method to survey changes in the membrane proteome upon depletion of the SecDFyajC complex, the ancillary subunit of the Sec translocon. In the depleted strain, we detect increased membrane localization of the motor ATPase SecA, along with increased levels of an unannotated inner membrane protein, YibN. Together,&#xa0;these results demonstrate the utility of the peptidisc for global purification of membrane proteins and for monitoring change in the membrane proteome.

### Keywords
Membrane interactome, Peptidisc, Membrane protein reconstitution, E. coli

### Affiliations
University of British Columbia
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada.

### Submitter
David Rattray

### Lab Head
Dr Franck Van Hoa Duong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of British Columbia, Canada.


