### Accession
PXD019359

### Title
cGAS Senses Translation Stress Through Direct Binding to Ribosomes

### Description
The cGAS-STING pathway, a central component of the innate immune system, senses cytosolic DNA and induces interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) to mediate inflammation. Here we report the unexpected discovery that cGAS senses dysfunctional protein production. Purified ribosomes interact with and stimulate the catalytic activity of recombinant cGAS in vitro. Disruption of the ribosome-associated protein quality control pathway, which detects and resolves ribosome collisions, results in cGAS- and STING-dependent ISG expression, and causes the re-localization of cGAS from the nucleus to the cytosol. Indeed, cGAS preferentially binds collided ribosomes in vitro, and other orthogonal perturbations that lead to elevated levels of collided ribosomes cause re-localization of cGAS as well. Thus, the cGAS-STING pathway senses and responds to translation stress. These findings have implications for the inflammatory responses to viral infection and tumorigenesis, both of which substantially reprogram cellular protein synthesis.

### Sample Protocol
For ASCC interactomes, HEK293 Fip-In T-Rex parental cells, or HEK293 Fip-In T-Rex HEK293 cell lines expressing Flag-HA-tagged ASCC1, ASCC2, or ASCC3 were cultured in SILAC light or heavy media for 2 weeks. Cells were grown in eight 150mm dishes in light or heavy media. Cells were harvested, re-suspended in 8 ml buffer A (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% (v/v) NP-40, 250U/ml Benzonase, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, PhosSTOP and Protease Inhibitor Cocktail then incubated in cold room for 1 hour, followed by centrifugation at 20000g for 20 minutes at 4 °C. Insoluble fractions were re-suspended in 600 µl buffer B (as buffer A but 500 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT) and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. The salt concentration was diluted to 150 mM with 1.4ml buffer C (as buffer B but no MgCl2) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. Supernatant was collected as chromatin fraction and pooled with soluble fraction as whole cell extract (total 10 ml). Whole cell extract was divided into two equal portions and incubated with 100 µl Protein G Agarose or ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel at 4°C for 4 hours. Beads were washed with 3 ml buffer A at 4°C for 10 minutes three times then eluted with 100µl buffer A containing 1 µg/ul 3x FLAG peptides at 4°C for 1 hour. For mass spectrometry (MS), light isotope-labelled and heavy isotope-labelled samples were mixed prior to SDS-PAGE separation. For example, light-labelled ASCC1 samples purified by Protein G resins were mixed with heavy-labelled ASCC1 samples purified by ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel; heavy-labelled ASCC1 samples purified by Protein G resins were mixed with light-labelled ASCC1 samples purified by ANTI-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel. Mixed samples were run 10mm into a 10% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel and stained with Instant Blue. Gel bands were excised, de-stained and then reduced (10 mM dithiothreitol) and alkylated (55 mM iodoacetamide) prior to overnight trypsin digest (100 ng, Pierce). Peptides were extracted using 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid. Peptide samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation then re-solubilised in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid prior to MS analysis. For cGAS interactome, Fip-In T-Rex U2OS cGAS KO cell lines expressing GFP-vector or GFP-tagged cGAS were cultured in SILAC light media or heavy media for 2 weeks. 98% efficiency of isotope incorporation was confirmed by MS. Six 150mm dishes of cells grown in light or heavy media were used for each sample. Cell pellets were re-suspended in 5 ml buffer A and incubated in cold room for 0.5 hour then centrifuged at 20000g for 8 minutes at 4 °C. Soluble fractions were kept and insoluble fractions were re-suspended in 600 µl buffer B and incubated on ice for 20 minutes. Before centrifugation at 20000g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, the salt concentration was diluted to 150 mM with 1.4ml buffer C. Supernatant was collected as chromatin fraction after centrifugation and pooled with soluble fraction as whole cell extract (total 7 ml). Whole cell extract was incubated with 125 µl GFP-Trap magnetic Agarose beads for 3 hours at 4°C. Beads were washed with 3ml buffer A twice and eluted with 30 µl SDS sample buffer twice at 95°C for 10 minutes. For MS, light isotope-labelled and heavy isotope-labelled samples were mixed before loading on SDS-PAGE gel. For example, light labelled GFP-vector samples were mixed with heavy-labelled GFP-tagged cGAS samples; heavy-labelled GFP-vector samples was mixed with light -labelled GFP-tagged cGAS samples. The rest of steps were performed in a similar way to ASCC interactomes analysis. A Thermo Fisher Scientific UltiMate 3000 UHPLC instrument loaded peptide samples onto a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18, 75µm ID, 2cm length, 3µm particle size) for desalting. Peptides were transferred to an EASY-Spray analytical column (PepMap C18, 50µm ID, 15cm length, 2µm particle size, 100Å pore size) and separated using a 80 minute gradient of increasing organic solvent (80% acetonitrile, 5% dimethyl sulfoxide) from 8 to 32%. An orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionisation mode to acquire data. Instrument settings were: MS1 data were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 120k, 4E6 AGC target, 50 ms maximum injection time, dynamic exclusion of +/- 10ppm and 60 seconds, a mass range of 300-1500m/z and profile mode data capture. MS2 data were acquired in the ion trap using a 1.2m/z isolation window, 2E4 AGC target, 300 ms maximum injection time (inject ions for all available parallelisable time “Universal Method”), CID of 35% collision energy, 10 ms activation time and centroid mode data capture.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw files were analysed in MaxQuant v1.6.0.13. SILAC quantification on light labels (K0 and R0) and heavy labels (K8 and R10) using multiplicity 2 setting was performed. The SwissProt Homo sapiens protein database (downloaded July 2017; 20,226 protein entries) was searched. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-term were permitted as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification. 1 % false discovery rate at the protein and peptide level was selected. The proteinGroups text file was opened in Perseus v1.4.0.2 to permit further data analyses.

### Publication Abstract
The cyclic GMP-AMP synthase-stimulator of interferon genes (cGAS-STING) pathway senses cytosolic DNA and induces interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) to activate the innate immune system. Here, we report the unexpected discovery that cGAS also senses dysfunctional protein production. Purified ribosomes interact directly with cGAS and stimulate its DNA-dependent activity in&#xa0;vitro. Disruption of the ribosome-associated protein quality control (RQC) pathway, which detects and resolves ribosome collision during translation, results in cGAS-dependent ISG expression and causes re-localization of cGAS from the nucleus to the cytosol. Indeed, cGAS preferentially binds collided ribosomes in&#xa0;vitro, and orthogonal perturbations that result in elevated levels of collided ribosomes and RQC activation cause sub-cellular re-localization of cGAS and ribosome binding in&#xa0;vivo as well. Thus, translation stress potently increases DNA-dependent cGAS activation. These findings have implications for the inflammatory response to viral infection and tumorigenesis, both of which substantially reprogram cellular protein synthesis.

### Keywords
Human, Cgas, Ribosomes, Ascc

### Affiliations
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform
The Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Peter Faull

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Head of the Crick Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Platform


