### Accession
PXD029429

### Title
TREM2 interacts with TDP-43 and mediates microglial neuroprotection against TDP-43-related neurodegeneration

### Description
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cell 2 (TREM2) is linked to neurodegenerative disease risk. However, the function of TREM in neurodegeneration is still unclear. Here we investigated the role of microglial TREM2 in TAR-DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43)-related neurodegeneration using viral-mediated and transgenic mouse models. We found that TREM2 deficiency impaired phagocytic clearance of pathological TDP-43 by microglia, and enhanced neuronal damage and motor impairments. Mass cytometry analysis revealed that hTDP-43 induced a TREM2-dependent subpopulation of microglia with high CD11c expression and phagocytic ability. Using mass spectrometry and surface plasmon resonance analysis, we further demonstrated an interaction between TDP-43 and TREM2 in vitro and in vivo as well as in ALS patient tissues. We computationally identified the region within hTDP-43 that interacts with TREM2. Our data highlights that TDP-43 is a possible ligand for microglial TREM2 and that this interaction mediates neuroprotection effects of microglia in TDP-43-related neurodegeneration.

### Sample Protocol
To detect interacting proteins of TREM2, HEK 293 cells or rNLS mice brains were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, protease inhibitors cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific), phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and 0.002% zwittergent 3-16) and kept on ice for additional 30 mins. After centrifugation, the supernatant were incubated with rabbit anti-human TREM2 antibody (Cell Signaling, 91068) or anti-mouse TREM2 antibody on a rotator, respectively. After 3 washes, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by boiling in Lammaeli buffer for immunoblotting. Alternatively, immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted by boiling in 1% SDS, resolved by non-reducing gel and subjected to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion using an in-gel digestion protocol. The extracted tryptic peptides were dried in a speed vac. The dried peptides were reconstituted in sample loading buffer (0.2% formic acid, 0.1% TFA , 0.002% zwittergent 3-16) and analyzed by nano-ESI-LC/MS/MS with a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a dionex nano-LC system (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA) with a 32 cm, 100/15 um, Acclaim 2.2 um column. The LC system used a gradient with solvent A (2% ACN, 0.2% formic acid, in water) and solvent B (80% ACN, 10% IPA, 0.2% formic acid, in water) with a 400 nL/min flow rate as follows: 4-5 min 5% B; 5- 95 min 5-45 % linear gradient; 95-98 min 45-95% linear gradient; 98-102 min 95% B; 102-104 min 95-10% B linear gradient; 104-107 min 10% B; 107-115 min 10-95% B; 115-118min 95% B; 118-121 min 95-5% B linear gradient; 121-127 min 5% B. Mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with a MS survey scan (350-1800 m/z) in Orbitrap (70,000 resolution 200 m/z, 3 × 106 AGC target and 100 ms maximal ion time) and 20 MS/MS fragments scans (17,500 resolution, 2 × 105 AGC target, 50 ms maximal ion time, 28 normalized collision energy, 2.5 m/z isolation window) with a dynamic range set to 25 seconds. Stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC)was also employed to identify human TREM2 interacting proteins. Two sets of HEK293T cells were cultured in DMEM containing “light” (12C6-arginine and 12C6-lysine) or “heavy” (13C6-arginine and 13C6-lysine) amino acid supplemented with FBS, penicillin and streptomycin, separately. The cells gown in light medium were transfected with empty vector while the cells grown in heavy medium were transfected with hTREM2 plasmid. Forty-eight hours after transfection, both sets of cells were lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% n-Octylglucoside) in the presence of cocktail protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The protein concentration of the lysates from light and heavy cells were measured by BCA method. Equal amounts of light and heavy lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation by anti-hTREM2 antibody. After washing, the immunoprecipitates from light and heavy lysates were mixed and subjected to a trypsin digestion protocol on S-Trap according to the manufacturer’s instruction (ProtiFi). The resulting peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a high-resolution orbitrap-equipped mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired mass spectra from non-SILAC experiments were searched using the Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) against a Uniprot database (human 2021_02 release supplemented with human myc-tagged TREM2 protein sequence for 293T CoIP and mouse 2021_02 release supplemented with human TDP-43 protein sequence for mouse CoIP) for peptide and protein identification. The search parameters included a maximum of two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation at cysteine as a fixed modification; N-terminal acetylation, deamidation at asparagine and glutamine, oxidation at methionine as variable modifications. The monoisotopic peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the first search and main search for MS/MS were set to 20 and 4.5 ppm, respectively. The maximum modifications per peptide was set to 5 and the maximum charge was set at 7. The revert type of the target-decoy analysis was chosen. The peptide-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR), protein FDR, and the site decoy fraction were set to 0.01. The minimum peptide length was set to 7. The minimal scores for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 40, respectively. The minimal delta score for unmodified and modified peptides were 0 and 17, respectively. The minimum unique and razor peptides for identification was set to 1. The acquired mass spectra from the SILAC experiment were also searched using the Andromeda search engine of MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) against a Uniprot database (human 2021_02 release supplemented with human myc-tagged TREM2 protein sequence) for peptide and protein identification. The search parameters were the same as non-SILAC experiments described before, except that two SILAC states with Arg6 (13C6-Arginine) and Lys6 (13C6-Lysine) was selected. The intensities of light and heavy proteins were calculated by MaxQuant by summing intensities of paired SILAC peaks of each identified peptide. The lack of light peptide in the mass spectrum will indicate a true TREM2 interacting protein.

### Publication Abstract
Triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cell 2 (TREM2) is linked to risk of neurodegenerative disease. However, the function of TREM2 in neurodegeneration is still not fully understood. Here, we investigated the role of microglial TREM2 in TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43)-related neurodegeneration using virus-mediated and transgenic mouse models. We found that TREM2 deficiency impaired phagocytic clearance of pathological TDP-43 by microglia and enhanced neuronal damage and motor impairments. Mass cytometry analysis revealed that human TDP-43 (hTDP-43) induced a TREM2-dependent subpopulation of microglia with high CD11c expression and phagocytic ability. Using mass spectrometry (MS) and surface plasmon resonance (SPR) analysis, we further demonstrated an interaction between TDP-43 and TREM2 in vitro and in vivo as well as in human tissues from individuals with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We computationally identified regions within hTDP-43 that interact with TREM2. Our data highlight that TDP-43 is a possible ligand for microglial TREM2 and that this interaction mediates neuroprotection of microglia in TDP-43-related neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Mayo Clinic
Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA

### Submitter
Long-Jun  Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Long-Jun Wu
Departments of Neurology and Neuroscience Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA


