### Accession
PXD003769

### Title
Grape berry development -  System-Level and Granger Network Analysis of Integrated Proteomic and Metabolomic Dynamics Identifies Key Points of Grape Berry Development at the Interface of Primary and Secondary Metabolism

### Description
Grapevine is a popular fruit crop worldwide with essential economic importance. The grape berry undergoes complex biochemical changes from fruit set until ripening. To better understand this dynamic process, we applied mass spectrometry based platforms to analysis the metabolome and proteome of grape berries at 12 developmental stages covering the whole developmental process of grape berries. Primary metabolites involved in central carbon metabolism such as sugars, organic acids and amino acids metabolism together with various bioactive secondary metabolites like flavonols, flavan-3-ols and anthocyanins were annotated and quantified. At the same time, the proteomic analysis revealed the protein dynamics of the developing grape berries. Multivariate statistical analysis of the metabolomic and proteomic data revealed growing trajectories with minor difference indicating that grape berry development is a sequential process resulting in changes in all examined processes. The incorporation of the metabolomic and proteomic results allowed us to schematize representative metabolome and proteome candidates on sugar, glycolysis, TCA cycle, amino acid, phenylpropanoid, flavonoid biosynthetic pathways. The overview of the metabolism dynamics on both protein and metabolite level unveiled the metabolism switch and adjustments during grape berry development.

### Sample Protocol
The harvested grape berries were ground to powder. Metabolites were extracted with methol-water-formic acid solution.  Proteins were extracted from the residue pellets according to a previous protocol (Noah et al., 2013).Protein concentration was determined by the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976) with a BSA standard curve. 100 µg of protein were firstly reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, 5 mM, 37°C, 45 min); then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, 10 mM, 23°C, dark, 60 min) and finally added with addition of 5 mM of DTT (23°C, dark, 15 min). Endoproteinase LysC and trypsin were applied for digestion based on a previous protocol (Hoehenwarter et al., 2008). After digestion, samples were desalted with C18-SPEC-96 well plate (15 mg, Agilent, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. The eluted peptides were dried under vacuum.

### Data Protocol
The obtained raw files that containing peptide information were searched against a grape fasta file including 65448 protein sequences from UniProt with the SEQUEST algorithm in Proteome Discoverer (v 1.3, Thermo Scientific). Searching parameter were set as below: maximum two missed cleavage sites, acetylation for N-terminal modification, oxidation of methionine for dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteine for static modification were allowed. Mass tolerance for precursors was set to 10 ppm and for fragment masses to 0.8 Da. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Protein candidates were defined by at least two peptides with high confidence. NSAFs were calculated (Zybailov et al., 2006)6) for relative quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Grapevine is a fruit crop with worldwide economic importance. The grape berry undergoes complex biochemical changes from fruit set until ripening. This ripening process and production processes define the wine quality. Thus, a thorough understanding of berry ripening is crucial for the prediction of wine quality. For a systemic analysis of grape berry development we applied mass spectrometry based platforms to analyse the metabolome and proteome of Early Campbell at 12 stages covering major developmental phases. Primary metabolites involved in central carbon metabolism, such as sugars, organic acids and amino acids together with various bioactive secondary metabolites like flavonols, flavan-3-ols and anthocyanins were annotated and quantified. At the same time, the proteomic analysis revealed the protein dynamics of the developing grape berries. Multivariate statistical analysis of the integrated metabolomic and proteomic dataset revealed the growth trajectory and corresponding metabolites and proteins contributing most to the specific developmental process. K-means clustering analysis revealed 12 highly specific clusters of co-regulated metabolites and proteins. Granger causality network analysis allowed for the identification of time-shift correlations between metabolite-metabolite, protein- protein and protein-metabolite pairs which is especially interesting for the understanding of developmental processes. The integration of metabolite and protein dynamics with their corresponding biochemical pathways revealed an energy-linked metabolism before veraison with high abundances of amino acids and accumulation of organic acids, followed by protein and secondary metabolite synthesis. Anthocyanins were strongly accumulated after veraison whereas other flavonoids were in higher abundance at early developmental stages and decreased during the grape berry developmental processes. A comparison of the anthocyanin profile of Early Campbell to other cultivars revealed similarities to Concord grape and indicates the strong effect of genetic background on metabolic partitioning in primary and secondary metabolism.

### Keywords
Grape berry, Lc-esi-orbitrap-ms, Vitis vinifera

### Affiliations
MOSYS, University of Vienna
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology; University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Lei Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfram Weckwerth
Department of Ecogenomics and Systems Biology; University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.


