### Accession
PXD019848

### Title
Integration of FAIMS on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer

### Description
High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry (FAIMS) has gained popularity in the proteomics field for its capability to improve mass spectrometry sensitivity and to decrease peptide co-fragmentation. The recent implementation of FAIMS on Tribrid Orbitrap instruments enhanced proteome coverage and increased the precision of quantitative measurements. However, the FAIMS interface has not been available on older generation Orbitrap mass spectrometers such as the Q-Exactive. Here, we report the integration of the FAIMS-Pro device with embedded electrical and gas connections to  a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer. Proteomic experiments performed on HeLa tryptic digests with the modified mass spectrometer improved signal to noise and reduced interfering ions resulting in an increase of 42% in peptide identification. FAIMS was also combined with segmented ion fractionation where 150 m/z windows were analyzed in turn to further increase the depth of proteome analysis by reducing the proportion of chimeric MS/MS spectra from 50% to 27%. We also demonstrate the application of FAIMS to improve quantitative measurements when using isobaric peptide labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Saccharomyces cerevisiae and human embryonic kidney 293 (HEK293) cells were twice washed with cold Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) (Fisher Scientific, BP399-1) and pelleted by centrifugation (1000 rpm, 5min). Lysis buffer containing 8M Urea (Fisher Scientific, BP169), 50mM HEPES (Bio Basic Inc., HB0264) and 75mM sodium chloride (Fisher Scientific, BP358), pH 8.2 was added to the cell pellets. Yeast cells were mechanically lysed with 10 min bead beating, HEK293 cells were mechanically lysed with 2x 10s sonication bursts. Lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10min, and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay. Proteins were precipitated using methanol/chloroform (Lysate/methanol/chloroform/water 1:4:1:3). Samples were vortexed and centrifuged for 5min at 14,000 g. The precipitated protein layer was washed twice with four parts of methanol and air-dried. For tryptic digestion, proteins were dissolved in 200mM HEPES, pH 8.2 and reduced, alkylated and trypsinized (enzyme/protein ratio 1:50) overnight at 37˚C. The protein digest was desalted on an Oasis HLB extraction cartridge (Waters, WAT094225). Samples were reconstituted in 0.2% aqueous FA.

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched with PEAKS engine (Bioinformatics Solutions, Inc., Version 10). All MS/MS spectra were searched against the Uniprot Human database . Maximal tolerances for precursor and fragments were 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Search parameters included trypsin with a maximum of three missed cleavages per peptide. A maximum of 3 variable modifications was allowed per peptide, and included oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), carbamidometyhlation (C) and phosphorylation (STY). For quantitative analyses, TMT was selected as a fixed modification and raw files were searched against a concatenated Uniprot human and yeast database. The parent ion fraction (PIF) values for HeLa benchmark experiments were obtained from MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide spectrum matches. Data were visualized with R studio version 3.5.2 (https://www.rstudio.com/). MS/MS spectra that were unassigned or matched the decoy database were eliminated from further consideration. A minimum of two peptides was required for protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Tandem mass tags (tmt), Mass spectrometry, High field asymmetric waveform ion mobility (faims), Gas-phase fractionation

### Affiliations
IRIC-Université de Montréal
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Pierre Thibault
IRIC-Université de Montréal


