### Accession
PXD018511

### Title
Proteomic profiling of Emiliania huxleyi

### Description
Proteomic profiling of Emiliania huxleyi was performed using a 3D-LC method.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: FASP Fractionation: SCX, high pH RPLC Analysis: LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data search: TPP (Comet, PeptidePropphet, ProteinProphet) Bioinformatics: ClueGO

### Publication Abstract
<i>Emiliania huxleyi</i> is one of the most abundant marine planktons, and it has a crucial feature in the carbon cycle. However, proteomic analyses of <i>Emiliania huxleyi</i> have not been done extensively. In this study, a three-dimensional liquid chromatography (3D-LC) system consisting of strong cation exchange, high- and low-pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography was established for in-depth proteomic profiling of <i>Emiliania huxleyi</i>. From tryptic proteome digest, 70 fractions were generated and analyzed using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. In total, more than 84,000 unique peptides and 10,000 proteins groups were identified with a false discovery rate of &#x2264;0.01. The physicochemical properties of the identified peptides were evaluated. Using ClueGO, approximately 700 gene ontology terms and 15 pathways were defined from the identified protein groups with <i>p</i>-value &#x2264;0.05, covering a wide range of biological processes, cellular components, and molecular functions. Many biological processes associated with CO<sub>2</sub> fixation, photosynthesis, biosynthesis, and metabolic process were identified. Various molecular functions relating to protein binding and enzyme activities were also found. The 3D-LC strategy is a powerful approach for comparative proteomic studies on <i>Emiliania huxleyi</i> to reveal changes in its protein level and related mechanism.

### Keywords
Emiliania huxleyi, Rplc, Q exactive, Proteomic profiling, Scx

### Affiliations
College of Pharmacy, Gachon University
Gachon University

### Submitter
Van-An Duong

### Lab Head
Dr Jong-Moon Park
Gachon University


