### Accession
PXD005263

### Title
Novel diagnostic biomarkers in serum identify patients with OSCC

### Description
Purpose No blood biomarkers to detect early OSCC without clinical signs exist - diagnosis is solely based on histology of a visible tumor. Most OSCC patients are diagnosed at advanced stage, which leads to significant morbidity and poor survival. If high-risk patients were identified with blood-based biomarkers before clear clinical manifestations, tumors could be detected and treated at earlier stage.  Patients and Methods Serum samples were collected from patients with OSCC at the Department of Otorhinolaryngology – Head and Neck Surgery, Helsinki University Hospital (Finland). Age and gender matched healthy individuals served as controls. Quantitative proteomic analysis with mass spectrometry was performed. Results We quantified 388 proteins in the serum samples. A complete separation between cases and controls was seen based on the protein expression profiles. With statistical analyses, we identified a set of eight proteins that most reliably separated OSCC patients from healthy individuals. Although the tumor stages varied from I to IVa, this set of proteins was able to identify all OSCCs and thus is sensitive for detecting even early tumors.  Conclusion We are the first to suggest a set of serum biomarkers to be evaluated further as a diagnostic panel to detect preclinical OSCC in risk patients.

### Sample Protocol
3.3 Plasma treatment and protein digestion The workflow as well as serum treatment and protein digestion are described in detail by Kontro et al. 12. Briefly, after thawing of samples albumin was depleted by Pierce SwellGel Blue Albumin removal discs according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Albumin depleted plasma was assayed by BCA assay kit (Pierce, Thermo Scientific, Rockform, IL, USA) for the total protein concentration. Albumin-depleted serum corresponding to 350 µg of protein was dried in speed vacuum system (Savant, Thermofisher). After dissolving the dried pellets in 6 M urea and 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, reduction and alkylation were performed by incubating samples first in 10 mM of DTT for 60 minutes at room temperature (RT) followed by incubation in 30 mM iodoacetamide for 60 minutes in the dark at RT. Finally, after consumption of excess of iodoacetamide with 30 mM DTT (60 minutes at RT) samples were diluted 1:10 with MQ water and digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin to protein) for 18 hours at +37ºC. Samples were cleaned by Pierce C18 columns according to the manufactures protocol. For LC-MS-analysis 30µg of peptides were first dried in SpeedVac, dissolved in 0.1% formic acid containing 12.5 femtomole Hi3 peptide mixture (Waters) per µL and finally stored at -20ºC until analyzed.  The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR to less than 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. These are default parameters in the software.  The identified proteins are grouped as one according to parsimony principle and also peptides unique to the protein are reported. Parsimony principle states that protein hits are reported as the minimum set that accounts for all observable peptides. Progenesis QI for proteomics does not take a strict parsimonious approach because of over-stringency as has been pointed out before 13. However, for resolution of conflicts, if two proteins contain some common peptides, protein with fewer peptides is subsumed into the protein with higher number of peptides which are a superset of the subsumed protein’s peptides. All relevant proteins are listed as a group under the lead protein with greatest coverage or the highest score when the coverages of two or more proteins are equal. Quantitation is performed using the lead identity peptide data. More details about this approach can be accessed on the software website (www.nonlinear.com). The proteins were considered different if they have a fold change 2 or more and an Anova p-value 0.05 or less. The Anova calculation assumes that the conditions are independent and applies the statistical test that assumes the means of the conditions are equal. The label-free protein quantitation was done with Hi-N method 10. In every injection the sample contained also 50 fmol of six CLPB_ECOLI (P63285, ClpB protein) peptides (Hi3 E. coli Standard, Waters). Hi3 peptides are used for normalizing the peptide abundancies and relative quantitation was based on all the non-conflicting peptides found. The peptide ranking is done across all the runs. The abundancies of the peptides are averaged to provide a signal to the protein. Workings of the Progenesis softwares have been described in details on the software website (www.nonlinear.com) and also in published literature 14. Differences between controls and cases were evaluated with Anova on a protein-to-protein basis. Principle component analysis was done with Progenesis QI for proteomics. EZinfo 3.0 (Release date Dec 02, 2014, Umetrics, Sweden) is a separate statistical package that can be used with Progenesis QI for proteomics. The data was imported into the EZinfo and supervised OPLS-DA modeling was performed which gave us the variance vs correlation plot (S-Plot). Default parameters were used. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis was also performed on some of the significantly different proteins predicted by S-Plot. Analyse-It program which works with Microsoft Excel was used for making ROC curves with all the default parameters.

### Data Protocol
3.5 Proteomics in cases and controls In this protein analysis we identified 669 proteins with 66 153 peptides (see Supplementary Table 1 and Fig. 1). Of these, only 388 proteins with two or more unique peptides were taken into further analyses for quantification. Fold change ranged from 9.4 to 1. All protein abundancies in cases and controls were compared by Anova and the p-value ranged from 2,2 x 10 -13 to 0.99. Altogether 189 proteins with two or more unique peptides had Anova p-value less than 0.05. (Supplementary Table 2 showing the protein list with two or more unique peptides and Anova p-value <0.05). Thirty most up or downregulated proteins in cases and controls with Anova p-value less than 0.05 are presented in Table 2. Anova was considered the main criterion for establishing reliable differences in protein abundancies between groups.   3.6 Principal component analysis (PCA)   The Principal component analysis (PCA) done in Progenesis QI proteomics was used to determine and visualize the principal axes of protein abundance variation in cases and controls. PCA was done first on all proteins with two or more unique peptides and it showed a partial tendency to separate cases and controls (Fig. 2a). When PCA was done on proteins with two or more unique peptides and Anova less than .05, the separation of the cases and controls was complete (Fig. 2b). The six blue dots on the left represent two cases (Patient 2 and 4, Table 1). Both have stage IV tumors, but based on the clinical information, we do not know why they differ from other cases.  3.7 Orthogonal Projections to Latent Structures Discriminant Analysis (OPLS-DA)  OPLS-DA was used to model the differences between two groups and proteins that pass the cut-off value of  ± 0.7 for p(corr) values, were considered significantly different between the two groups. An S-plot was generated from the data (Fig. 3).   The proteins obtained from S-plot generated by OPLS-DA (Table 3) modeling were further analyzed by ROC curve analysis. Analyse-it software (3.75,Analyse-it Software, Ltd.) was used to calculate the area under the curve (AUC) values, with 95% confidence intervals (Supplementary Table 4). Five out of the ten proteins had the AUC value of more than 0.9, considered excellent and and two of 0.80 to 0.89, considered good.    3.8 Clustering of the samples   Hierarchical clustering can be used to group similar objects into clusters - serving as an alternative technique to analyse the difference between cases and controls. The results of hierarchical clustering of the differentially abundant proteins of cases and controls are shown in the Figures 4 and 5.   3.9 Pathway analysis  Two different tools were used for pathway analysis: Integrated Molecular Pathway Level Analysis (IMPaLA) 11 and Ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA) (Fig. 6). Pathway overrepresentation analysis was performed using IMPaLA and the results are summarized in Supplementary table 3. Additionally, we created a Venn diagram showing the putative overlap of the enriched pathways among the proteins of highest means in cases and highest means in controls (Fig. 7). The protein lists were chosen by using Anova p-value <0.05. The Venn diagram shows that about a half of the pahtways were unique to the controls, about one fourth was common between cases and controls and another fourth unique to the cases.   The other pathway analysis tool included in the analyses was IPA, which showed numerous canonical pathways enriched in the data set. Only the top pathways are shown (Fig. 4). In addition to Acute phase response signaling, Coagulation system and Complement system, all tightly linked with tumorigenesis, LXR and FXR activation systems regulating lipid and cholesterol metabolism, Clathrin-mediated endocytosis singnaling and MSP-RON signaling pathways were among the enriched pahtways.    

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multivariate analyses, Serum proteomics, Oscc

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Suvi Renkonen
Department of Otorhinolaryngology - Head and Neck Surgery, University of Helsinki and Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland


