### Accession
PXD034788

### Title
Large-Scale Immuno-Peptidome Analysis Reveals Recurrent Post-Translational Splicing of Cancer and Immune-Associated Genes

### Description
Post translational spliced peptides bound to the HLA are unique type of peptides, shown in cancer, for HLA-class-I. Thus far, no consensus has been reached on the extent to which post-translational spliced peptides (PTSPs) occur, stirring significant debate. Furthermore, the role of the HLA-class-II pathway has been studied only in diabetes. Here, we exploit our large-scale cancer peptidomics database and devise a pipeline to filter spliced peptide predictions, to identify recurring spliced peptides, both for HLA-class-I and -II. Our results indicate that HLA-Class-I spliced peptides account for a low percentage (4.4%) of the immunopeptidome, yet are larger in number relative to other types of identified aberrant peptides. Therefore, spliced peptides contribute significantly to the repertoire of presented peptides in cancer cells. In addition, HLA-class-II bound spliced peptides were identified as well, but to a lower extent (0.6%).

### Sample Protocol
The HLA peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, re-solubilized with 0.1% formic acid and resolved on capillary reversed-phase chromatography on 075 × 300 mm laser-pulled capillaries, self-packed with C18 reversed-phase 3.5 μm beads. Chromatography was performed with the UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano-capillary UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled by electrospray to tandem mass spectrometry on Q-Exactive-Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The HLA peptides were eluted with a linear gradient over 2 h from 5 to 28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 0.15 µl/min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent “top 10” method, fragmenting the peptides by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD). Full scan MS spectra was acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with a target value of 3 × 106 ions. Ions were accumulated to an AGC target value of 105 with a maximum injection time of generally 100 msec. The peptide match option was set to Preferred. Normalized collision energy was set to 25% and MS/MS resolution was 17,500 at 200 m/z. Fragmented m/z values were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Neo-Fusion v0.1.3 was utilized for detection of spliced peptides using as an input the Uniprot human WT proteome and the MS raw files. The MS files were run against spliced peptides identified by Neo-Fusion,and WT. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications.The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific for peptidomics analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Posttranslational spliced peptides (PTSPs) are a unique class of peptides that have been found to be presented by HLA class-I molecules in cancer. Thus far, no consensus has been reached on the proportion of PTSPs in the immunopeptidome, with estimates ranging from 2% to as high as 45% and stirring significant debate. Furthermore, the role of the HLA class-II pathway in PTSP presentation has been studied only in diabetes. Here, we exploit our large-scale cancer peptidomics database and our newly devised pipeline for filtering spliced peptide predictions to identify recurring spliced peptides, both for HLA class-I and class-II complexes. Our results indicate that HLA class-I-spliced peptides account for a low percentage of the immunopeptidome (less than 3.1%) yet are larger in number relative to other types of identified aberrant peptides. Therefore, spliced peptides significantly contribute to the repertoire of presented peptides in cancer cells. In addition, we identified HLA class-II-bound spliced peptides, but to a lower extent (less than 0.5%). The identified spliced peptides include cancer- and immune-associated genes, such as the MITF oncogene, DAPK1 tumor suppressor, and HLA-E, which were validated using synthetic peptides. The potential immunogenicity of the DAPK1- and HLA-E-derived PTSPs was also confirmed. In addition, a reanalysis of our published mouse single-cell clone immunopeptidome dataset showed that most of the spliced peptides were found repeatedly in a large number of the single-cell clones. Establishing a novel search-scheme for the discovery and evaluation of recurring PTSPs among cancer patients may assist in identifying potential novel targets for immunotherapy.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-msms, Melanoma

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Cell Biology The Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel
Weizmann institue

### Submitter
Ronen Levy

### Lab Head
Dr Yardena Samuels
Department of Molecular Cell Biology The Weizmann Institute of Science Rehovot, Israel


