### Accession
PXD007838

### Title
Label Free proteomics on NSCLC isogenic cell lines

### Description
Since  both KRAS mutations  and LKB1 inactivating  alterations  affect  cellular  metabolism,  it  seems propitious to discern metabolic effects induced by the single oncogenic events from those elicited by their  co-occurrence,  with  the  ultimate  aim  to  potentially  exploit  metabolic  dependencies  for  novel therapeutic modalities. With these considerations in mind, we knocked-out the LKB1 gene in well-characterized  NSCLC  cell  clones  harboring  KRAS  WT or  mutant  G12C  proteins  (13,30).  We obtained an isogenic system in which KRAS mutation and LKB1 inactivation were individually or concomitantly present. The effects of the genetic lesions individually or together on cell metabolism were  investigated  in  these  isogenic  NSCLC  cells  by means  of  an  integrated  survey  of proteomics, stable and dynamic metabolomics and functional in-vitro strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell proteomics sample preparation and Data analysis Total cell proteins were extracted from four isogenic cell clones (three biological replicates/clone) using RIPA buffer (150 mM NaCl, 1.0% Triton, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0) and equal amount of proteins (30 μg) for each sample was submitted to in-solution digestion. Briefly, proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiotreitol (DTT) at 56 °C for 1h and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 50 min at room temperature. Proteins were then digested overnight with trypsin at a concentration of 1:50 (w/w). After digestion, peptides were loaded on SampliQ C18 ODS cartridge (Agilent technologies) and eluted following manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides were separated on a Thermo Scientific Biobasic 18 column (150 × 0.18 mm ID, particle size 5 µm) coupled online to a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific) via a DESI Omni Spray (Prosolia) used in nanospray mode. Peptides were eluted with a 240 min gradient of 5%–60% buffer B (80% ACN) at a flow rate of 2 μL/min. The LTQ Orbitrap XL was operated in a data dependent mode with a survey scan range of 400-2000 m/z and a resolution of 60’00 in parallel with low-resolution MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant precursor ions with a charge ≥ 2. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 30 s to reduce the number of repeated sequences.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) was used to analyze MS raw files (1). MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (Version 2016) and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (2). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was applied as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was required for peptides and proteins. Peptide identification was performed with an allowed initial precursor mass deviation of up to 7 ppm and an allowed fragment mass deviation of 20 ppm. Protein identification required at least 1 razor peptide. A minimum ratio count of 1 was required for valid quantification events via MaxQuant’s Label Free Quantification algorithm (MaxLFQ) (1). In total, our analysis resulted in 5470 unique peptides corresponding to 1349 distinct proteins at a peptide and protein false-discovery rate (FDR) of less than 1%. Data were filtered for common contaminants and peptides only identified by side modification were excluded from further analysis. In addition, it was required to have a minimum of two valid quantifications values in at least one group of replicates. Bioinformatic analysis was performed in the Perseus software environment. Statistical analysis of protein changes was performed on log2 transformed intensities for those values that were found to be quantified in out of two biological replicates/clone applying univariate pairwise comparison Mann-Whitney-Wilcoxon Test selecting cut off p<0.05 (JMP v 12).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protepmics kras mutation lkb1 deletion

### Affiliations
IRCCS Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri
IRCCS-Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri

### Submitter
Laura Brunelli

### Lab Head
Dr Roberta Pastorelli
IRCCS-Istituto Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri


