### Accession
PXD014855

### Title
Identifying alterations post ILK inhibition in Meningioma cell lines

### Description
The current study reports alterations in PI3-Akt and Focal adhesion pathway post ILK inhibition in meningioma cell lines. The inhibition is done using a pyrazole that specifically inhibits Integrin Link Kinase. The global proteomic profile was analysed post treatment (24 hours) in treated vs untreated cell line replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation was done using the Urea Lysis buffer. The cells were treated with  the inhibitor for 24 hrs. and control and treated cell lines were pelleted down and washed in 1X PBS buffer post that the cells were lysed in lysis buffer. Global proteomic alterations were examined using LFQ proteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data as procured from the mass spectrometer was used for analysis using Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The three control and treated triplicates were analysed simultaneously using a combined workflow. The FDR was kept at 1 %. Database against which it was searched is Human database from SEQUEST and MASSCOT

### Publication Abstract
Meningiomas are one of the most prevalent primary brain tumors. Our study aims to obtain mechanistic insights of meningioma pathobiology using mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteome analysis to identifying druggable targets and perturbed pathways for therapeutic intervention. Label-free based proteomics study was done from peptide samples of 21 patients and 8 non-tumor controls which were followed up with Phosphoproteomics to identify the kinases and phosphorylated components of the perturbed pathways. <i>In silico</i> approaches revealed perturbations in extracellular matrix remodeling and associated cascades. To assess the extent of influence of Integrin and PI3K-Akt pathways, we used an Integrin Linked Kinase inhibitor on patient-derived meningioma cell line and performed a transcriptomic analysis of the components. Furthermore, we designed a Targeted proteomics assay which to the best of our knowledge for very first-time enables identification of peptides from 54 meningioma patients via SRM assay to validate the key proteins emerging from our study. This resulted in the identification of peptides from CLIC1, ES8L2, and AHNK many of which are receptors and kinases and are difficult to be characterized using conventional approaches. Furthermore, we were also able to monitor transitions for proteins like NEK9 and CKAP4 which have been reported to be associated with meningioma pathobiology. We believe, this study can aid in designing peptide-based validation assays for meningioma patients as well as IHC studies for clinical applications.

### Keywords
Human ben-men1 meningioma ilk cpd22

### Affiliations
Lund University
PROFESSOR, PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR, PROTEOMICS LAB, DEPARTMENT OF BIOSCIENCES AND BIOENGINEERING, IIT BOMBAY

### Submitter
Shuvolina Mukherjee

### Lab Head
Dr SANJEEVA SRIVASTAVA
PROFESSOR, PRINCIPLE INVESTIGATOR, PROTEOMICS LAB, DEPARTMENT OF BIOSCIENCES AND BIOENGINEERING, IIT BOMBAY


