### Accession
PXD002064

### Title
Sinorhizobium meliloti Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome

### Description
Sinorhizobium meliloti, a facultative microsymbiont of alfalfa, should fine-tune its cellular processes to live saprophytically in soils characterized with limited nutrients and diverse stresses. In this study, TiO2 enrichment and LC-MS/MS were used to uncover the site-specific Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome of S. meliloti in minimum medium at stationary phase. There are a total of 96 unique phosphorylated sites, with a Ser/Thr/Tyr distribution of 65:32:5, in 78 proteins. Phosphoproteins identified in S. meliloti showed a wide distribution pattern regarding to functional categories, such as replication, transcription, translation, posttranslational modification, transport and metabolism of amino acids, carbohydrate, inorganic ion, succinoglycan etc. Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphosites identified within the conserved motif in proteins of key cellular function indicate a crucial role of phosphorylation in modulating cellular physiology. Moreover, phosphorylation events potentially involved in rhizobial adaptation to diverse stresses were also discussed, such as those identified in SMa0114 and PhaP2 (polyhydroxybutyrate synthesis), ActR (pH stress and microaerobic adaption), SupA (potassium stress), chaperonin GroEL2 (viability and potentially symbiosis), and ExoP (succinoglycan synthesis and secretion). These Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphosites identified herein would be helpful for our further investigation and understanding of the role of phosphorylation in rhizobial physiology.

### Sample Protocol
was grown in TY medium. Cell pellets were washed twice with sterilized distilled water and cultured in MM at an initial OD600 of 0.1 at 28℃. Two biological replicates were performed in this work. Stationary phase cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 30 min at 4℃ and washed twice in sterilized distilled water. The cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5 mL ice-cold L3 lysis buffer (Urea 210 g, Thiourea 76 g, SDS 1 g, Tris 1.2 g, 1mM PMSF (Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride), 2mM EDTA, 50mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 50 mM β-sodium glycerophosphate, 10 mM Na4P2O7.10H2O, in 500 mL, pH 8.0), and 10 mM DTT was added 5 min later. Cell wall and membranes were disrupted by sonication (2 s on, 2 s off, electric power at 450 w for 15 min) on ice. The extracts were centrifuged for 15 min (4℃) at 30000 g, and the supernatant was incubated in 56℃ water bath with 10 mM DTT added. Then, the sample was treated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in darkness for 45 min. The protein extracts were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone for 2 h. The sample was air-dried after it was centrifuged for 15 min (4℃) at 25000 g. The air-dry sample was dissolved in 200 μL 0.5M TEAB buffer and sonicated (2 s on, 2 s off, 450 w) for 15 min. The residual cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (30000 g, 4℃, 15 min).  was grown in TY medium. Cell pellets were washed twice with sterilized distilled water and cultured in MM at an initial OD600 of 0.1 at 28℃. Two biological replicates were performed in this work. Stationary phase cells were collected by centrifugation at 4000 rpm for 30 min at 4℃ and washed twice in sterilized distilled water. The cell pellets were resuspended in 1.5 mL ice-cold L3 lysis buffer (Urea 210 g, Thiourea 76 g, SDS 1 g, Tris 1.2 g, 1mM PMSF (Phenylmethanesulfonyl fluoride), 2mM EDTA, 50mM NaF, 1mM Na3VO4, 50 mM β-sodium glycerophosphate, 10 mM Na4P2O7.10H2O, in 500 mL, pH 8.0), and 10 mM DTT was added 5 min later. Cell wall and membranes were disrupted by sonication (2 s on, 2 s off, electric power at 450 w for 15 min) on ice. The extracts were centrifuged for 15 min (4℃) at 30000 g, and the supernatant was incubated in 56℃ water bath with 10 mM DTT added. Then, the sample was treated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in darkness for 45 min. The protein extracts were precipitated with 5 volumes of acetone for 2 h. The sample was air-dried after it was centrifuged for 15 min (4℃) at 25000 g. The air-dry sample was dissolved in 200 μL 0.5M TEAB buffer and sonicated (2 s on, 2 s off, 450 w) for 15 min. The residual cellular debris was removed by centrifugation (30000 g, 4℃, 15 min).  Mass spectrometry was performed on Triple TOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) coupled to a LC-20AD Nano-HPLC system (SHIMADZU, Japan). For each analysis, the dried peptide fractions were resuspended in buffer A containing 5% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA) to a concentration of about 0.5 μg/μL and centrifuged at 20000 g, 4℃ for 10 min to remove insoluble substances. Peptide mixtures were loaded onto the trap column with an injection volume of 5 μL and at the flow rate of 8 μL/mL in 4min. The peptide samples were subsequently conducted on the analytical column at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. And then, the peptides were firstly eluted from the column with 5% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 5 min, followed by eluting from the column with linear solvent gradients (35min gradient from 5%-35% buffer B, increased to 60% buffer B in 5min, then increased to 80% in 2 min and held at the gradient for 2 min, back to 5% in 10 min and equilibrated the column at the gradient for 10min. The MS analysis was performed on a Nanospray III source and the instrument was operated in the positive ion mode, with an ion-spray voltage of 2.5 kV and an interface heater temperature of 150℃. MS spectra were acquired in high-resolution mode (>30000) using 100 ms accumulation time per spectrum and from one full MS scan (m/z 300-1500). A maximum of 40 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum, 2.8s for each cycle.

### Data Protocol
For Triple TOF 5600 data of phosphopeptides, the peak list of each raw MS data files were generated into mgf format files. All spectra were searched using Mascot v2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against Sinorhizobium meliloti protein database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genome/genomes/1004). The search criteria were set as follows: peptide mass tolerance of ± 0.05 Da, fragment mass tolerance of ±0.1 Da, trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of Met, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. The precursor and fragment ion tolerances were set to 2 ppm and 0.05 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Sinorhizobium meliloti, a facultative microsymbiont of alfalfa, should fine-tune its cellular processes to live saprophytically in soils characterized with limited nutrients and diverse stresses. In this study, TiO2 enrichment and LC-MS/MS were used to uncover the site-specific Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphoproteome of S. meliloti in minimum medium at stationary phase. There are a total of 96 unique phosphorylated sites, with a Ser/Thr/Tyr distribution of 63:28:5, in 77 proteins. Phosphoproteins identified in S. meliloti showed a wide distribution pattern regarding to functional categories, such as replication, transcription, translation, posttranslational modification, transport and metabolism of amino acids, carbohydrate, inorganic ion, succinoglycan etc. Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphosites identified within the conserved motif in proteins of key cellular function indicate a crucial role of phosphorylation in modulating cellular physiology. Moreover, phosphorylation in proteins involved in processes related to rhizobial adaptation was also discussed, such as those identified in SMa0114 and PhaP2 (polyhydroxybutyrate synthesis), ActR (pH stress and microaerobic adaption), SupA (potassium stress), chaperonin GroEL2 (viability and potentially symbiosis), and ExoP (succinoglycan synthesis and secretion). These Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphosites identified herein would be helpful for our further investigation and understanding of the role of phosphorylation in rhizobial physiology.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, and College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China
China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chang Fu Tian

### Lab Head
Dr Chang Fu TIAN
State Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, and College of Biological Sciences, China Agricultural University, Beijing, China


