### Accession
PXD020595

### Title
Structural changes and evolution of peptides during chill storage of pork

### Description
In this work, we investigated changes in protein structures in vacuum-packed pork during chill storage and its impact on in vitro protein digestion. Longissimus dorsi muscles were vacuum packed and stored at 4°C for 3 days. Samples were subjected to Raman spectroscopy, in vitro digestion and Nano LC-LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS/MS. The 3 d samples had lower α-helix content, but higher β-sheet, β-turn and random coil contents than the 0 d samples (P < 0.05). SDS-PAGE revealed significant protein degradation in the 3 d samples and the differences in digested products across storage time. Proteome analysis indicated that the 3 d samples had the higher susceptibility to digestion. Increasing protein digestibility was mainly attributed to the degradation of myofibrillar proteins. Thus, exposure of more enzymatic sites in loose protein structure during chill storage could increase protein degradation in meat.

### Sample Protocol
Longissimus dorsi muscles (size: 10×10×5 cm) were obtained from 8 native Suhuai pig carcasses at the same line in a commercial slaughterhouse. Each muscle was cut into four 2.5×10×5 cm pieces (weight: 50 to 65 g each), vacuum-packed and stored at 4 °C for 3 days.  Meat pieces were packed in plastic bags and cooked in a 72 °C water bath until the core temperature reached 70 °C. The core temperature was tracked by a portable thermal probe (Pt 100, Testo AG, Germany). After cooking, meat samples were cooled to room temperature (22 °C) for two hours(22 °C). Then, samples (1.00 g) were homogenized (9,600 rpm, 30 s, twice; 13,400 rpm, 30 s, twice) in PBS (10 mmol/L, pH 7.0). The homogenate was digested by gastric pepsin (32 mg/mL in 0.1mol/L HCl, pH 1.0) at 37 °C for 2 h and the digestion was stopped by adjusting the pH to 7.5 with 1 mol/L NaOH. Then the resulting mixture was digested by trypsin (24 mg/mL in 0.1 mol/L PBS, pH 7.0) at 37 °C for 2 h and stopped by heating the system at 95 °C for 5 min.Three volumes of ethanol were added to precipitate high molecular proteins and peptides by keeping the mixture at 4 °C for 12 h, and then centrifuging at 10,000×g at 4 °C for 20 min. The ethanol-soluble fractions of the digested products were identified by Nano LC-LTQ-Orbitrap XL MS-MS. Briefly, the ethanol in the supernatant part was removed by the termovap sample concentrator (ZXJY, Beijing, China), and further made into protein powder with a freeze dryer (Christ, Osterode, Germany). Protein powder was dissolved in 0.2% formic acid in ultrapure water and the samples were centrifuged (1515,000×g, 15 20 min, 4)°C) in ultra-0.5mL ﬁlter tubes (Amicon Ultra, Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) filter tubes (less than 3 KDa) and desalted in ZipTip C18 tips (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). Peptides (2 mg) were dissolved in 0.2% formic acid in ultrapure water (10 mL), Peptides (1.5μg) were and separated in a C18 column (2 cm×200 μm, 5 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA) and subsequently a C18 chromatographic column (75 μm× 100 mm, 3 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Elution was applied by running a mixture of buffer A (0.2% formic acid in 60% acetonitrile) and buffer B (0.2% formic acid in ultrapure water) at 300 nL/min. The elution buffers were dynamically changed and kept constant at 97% A, 3% B from 0 to 10 min, the proportions of A and B were 97%/3% from 0 to 10 min, 92% A, 8% B from 10 to 70 min, 62%/% A, 38% B from 70 to 72 min, 2%/% A, 98% B from 72 to 82 min, and 97%/% A, 3% B from 82 to 90 min. The eluted peptides were identified by a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA). A full-scan mode was selected from 300 to 1800 amu.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were matched using the Proteome Discoverer-1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Palo Alto, CA, USA). Pepsin and pepsin/trypsin were selected in peptic and peptic/tryptic peptides database search, respectively. The parameters for searching were set as follows: MS/MS tolerance: 10 ppm; main search: 4.5 ppm; missed cleavage: 2; searching database: Sus scrofa under Uniprot (Uniprot-Sus scrofa.fasta, http://www.uniprot.org/); de-isotopic: TRUE; fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (cys); variable modification: oxidation (met), acetyl (protein N-term); label free quantification (LFQ): TRUE; decoy database pattern: reverse; LFQ min ratio count: 1; match between runs: 2 min; peptide false discovery rate (FDR): 0.01; and protein FDR: 0.01. Proteins that could not be annotated were not further used. BIOPEP database was used in the search of similar sequences previously identified showing ACE inhibitory and DPPIV inhibitory activity (http://www.uwm.edu.pl/biochemia/index.php/pl/biopep).

### Publication Abstract
In this work, we investigated changes in protein structures in vacuum-packed pork during chill storage and its impact on the <i>in vitro</i> protein digestion. <i>Longissimus dorsi</i> muscles were vacuum packed and stored at 4&#xb0;C for 3 days. Samples were subjected to Raman spectroscopy, <i>in vitro</i> digestion and nano LC-MS/MS. The 3 d samples had lower &#x3b1;-helix content, but higher &#x3b2;-sheet, &#x3b2;-turn, and random coil contents than the 0 d samples (<i>P</i> &lt; 0.05). SDS-PAGE revealed significant protein degradation in the 3 d samples and the differences in digested products across the storage time. Proteome analysis indicated that the 3 d samples had the higher susceptibility to digestion. Increasing protein digestibility was mainly attributed to the degradation of myofibrillar proteins. Thus, exposure of more enzymatic sites in loose protein structure during chill storage could increase protein degradation in meat.

### Keywords
Pork; chill storage; in vitro digestion; lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
College of Food Science & Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Weigang 1#, Nanjing, 210095, P.R. China
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Xiao yu Zou

### Lab Head
Dr Chunbao Li
College of Food Science & Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Weigang 1#, Nanjing, 210095, P.R. China


