### Accession
PXD003911

### Title
Analysis of the glycoproteins present on Fasciola hepatica surface tegument

### Description
Fasciola hepatica, commonly known as liver fluke, is a trematode which causes Fasciolosis in ruminants and humans. The outer tegumental coat of F. hepatica is a complex metabolically active biological matrix that is continually exposed to the host immune system.  It is highly glycosylated and parasite-derived immunogenic oligosaccharide motifs and glycoproteins are currently being investigated as novel vaccine candidates. We selectively enriched for FhTeg mannosylated glycoprotein subsets using lectin affinity chromatography and identified 369 proteins by mass spectrometric analysis.

### Sample Protocol
FhTeg glycoproteins (Glyco-FhTeg) were isolated by biotinylating the carbohydrates with carbohydrate-specific EZ-link hydrazide-biotin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ireland) according to manufacturer guidelines. FhTeg-B was purified using the biotin/avidin system using a monomeric avidin-agarose column (Thermo Scientific, Pierce, Ireland). Non-biotinylated (non-glycosylated) proteins flowed through the column constituting the Avidin FT fraction, while biotinylated (glycosylated) proteins (Avidin B) were displaced from avidin-immobilised beads by elution with concentrated biotin in reducing conditions. Mannose-rich glycoprotein components of the FhTeg were obtained by lectin affinity chromatography using plant lectins ConA, LCA and GNL. FhTeg was buffer exchanged in lectin binding buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, 0.15 M NaCl, 1 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MnCl2, pH 7.2) using 7 kDa MWCO Zeba spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ireland) and then incubated with ConA-, LCA-, or GNL-agarose slurry (Vector Laboratories ltd, UK) with end-over-end agitation overnight at 4 ºC. The beads were centrifuged and the unbound fractions decanted. Following extensive washing, the beads were incubated for 3 h at room temperature with 2 column volumes of inhibiting sugars to elute bound oligosaccharides (0.5 M methylmannoside and 0.5 M methylglucoside for ConA; 0.5 M methylmannoside for GNL and LCA). High concentrations of salts and monosaccharides were removed from both unbound and bound fractions by diafiltration in Amicon Ultra centrifugal filters with 3 kDa MWCO (Millipore Ireland B.V., Cork, Ireland). LC-MS/MS experiments were performed with an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer connected to a Thermo Surveyor MS pump and equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, Ireland). The peptides were separated in a PicoFrit BioBasic C18 column (0.075 mm I.D. x 10 cm; New Objective), with a linear gradient from 2 to 50% solvent B (acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 30 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectra were acquired in the data-dependent acquisition mode (Xcalibur software, version 2.0). Each full-scan mass spectrum (m/z 400–2,000) was followed by the collision-induced dissociation of the seven ions giving the most intense signals. The dynamic exclusion function was enabled (30 s of exclusion), and the relative collisional fragmentation energy was set at 35%.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS spectra were analysed with Mascot (version 2.4.10; Matrix Science), set up to search against a database comprised of gene models identified from the recently sequenced F. hepatica draft genome (version 1.0, 101,780 entries; 22), assuming digestion with trypsin with 2 missed cleavages permitted. Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (24) with Scaffold delta-mass correction.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica, commonly known as liver fluke, is a trematode that causes Fasciolosis in ruminants and humans. The outer tegumental coat of F. hepatica (FhTeg) is a complex metabolically active biological matrix that is continually exposed to the host immune system and therefore makes a good vaccine target. F. hepatica tegumental coat is highly glycosylated and helminth-derived immunogenic oligosaccharide motifs and glycoproteins are currently being investigated as novel vaccine candidates. This report presents the first systematic characterization of FhTeg glycosylation using lectin microarrays to characterize carbohydrates motifs present, and lectin histochemistry to localize these on the F. hepatica tegument. We discovered that FhTeg glycoproteins are predominantly oligomannose oligosaccharides that are expressed on the spines, suckers and tegumental coat of F. hepatica and lectin blot analysis confirmed the abundance of N- glycosylated proteins. Although some oligosaccharides are widely distributed on the fluke surface other subsets are restricted to distinct anatomical regions. We selectively enriched for FhTeg mannosylated glycoprotein subsets using lectin affinity chromatography and identified 369 proteins by mass spectrometric analysis. Among these proteins are a number of potential vaccine candidates with known immune modulatory properties including proteases, protease inhibitors, paramyosin, Venom Allergen-like II, Enolase and two proteins, nardilysin and TRIL, that have not been previously associated with F. hepatica Furthermore, we provide a comprehensive insight regarding the putative glycosylation of FhTeg components that could highlight the importance of further studies examining glycoconjugates in host-parasite interactions in the context of F. hepatica infection and the development of an effective vaccine.

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica, Lectin, Tegument, Glycoproteins

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast
Head of School, Senior Lecturer, School of Biotechnology, Fundamental and Translational Immunology Group Leader Dublin City University, Dublin 9. Ireland

### Submitter
Krystyna Cwiklinski

### Lab Head
Dr Sandra O'Neill
Head of School, Senior Lecturer, School of Biotechnology, Fundamental and Translational Immunology Group Leader Dublin City University, Dublin 9. Ireland


