### Accession
PXD007118

### Title
Abl subtrates using tyrosine phosphoproteomics

### Description
In this study, we have prepared a mouse embryonic fibrobalst (MEF) cell line stably expressing R367A mutant human Abl in which the native mouse Abl1 and Abl2 were genetically deleted.  We have used these R367A mutant Abl cells in combination with mass spectrometry to identify phosphorylation targets of Abl.  Below, we describe these findings and their potential biological significance.

### Sample Protocol
1. Cells containing R367A mutant Abl were labeld with SILAC (K8 and R10) and treated with imidazole. 2. Cells were washed with PBS prior to scrapping.  3. Proteins were extracted by sonicating the cell pellets in the presence of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 20 mM HEPES, pH8 with phosphatase inhibitors including 1 mM orthopervandate).  4. Protein contration was measured by the standard BCA method and equal amounts of proteins from WT and R367A cells were mixed. 5. Proteins in the SILAC mix were digested using trypsin at 37C overnight.  6. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak and lyophilzed.  7. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended with IAP buffer provided in the kit.  8. Tyrosine phosphopeptides were enriched according to the manufacturer's protocol.  9. Peptides enriched were desalted by the Stage tip, drided and kept in -20C until LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant was used to analyze the mass spectrometry data and proteins were identified at 1% FDRs at the levels of protein and PSM.

### Publication Abstract
Identifying direct substrates targeted by protein kinases is important in understanding cellular physiology and intracellular signal transduction. Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics provides a powerful tool for comprehensively characterizing the downstream substrates of protein kinases. This approach is efficiently applied to receptor kinases that can be precisely, directly, and rapidly activated by some agent, such as a growth factor. However, nonreceptor tyrosine kinase Abl lacks the experimental advantage of extracellular growth factors as immediate and direct stimuli. To circumvent this limitation, we combine a chemical rescue approach with quantitative phosphoproteomics to identify targets of Abl and their phosphorylation sites with enhanced temporal resolution. Both known and novel putative substrates are identified, presenting opportunities for studying unanticipated functions of Abl under physiological and pathological conditions.

### Keywords
Silac, Ptyr

### Affiliations
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University

### Submitter
Min-Sik Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Min-Sik Kim
Department of Applied Chemistry, Kyung Hee University


