### Accession
PXD028680

### Title
A20 and ABIN-1 cooperate in balancing CBM complex-triggered NF-kB signaling in activated T cells

### Description
T cell activation initiates protective adaptive immunity, but counterbalancing mechanisms are critical to prevent overshooting responses and to maintain immune homeostasis. The CARD11-BCL10-MALT1 (CBM) complex bridges T cell receptor engagement to canonical NF-B signaling and MALT1 protease activation. Here we show that the A20-binding inhibitor of NF-B ABIN-1 (also termed TNIP1) is modulating the suppressive function of A20 in T cells. Using quantitative mass -spectrometry, we identified ABIN-1 as an interactor of the CBM signalosome in activated T cells, which similar to A20 counteracts inducible activation of human primary and Jurkat T cells. However, while A20 overexpression silences CBM complex-triggered NF-B and MALT1 protease activation independent of ABIN-1, the negative regulatory function of ABIN-1 depends on A20. We show that the suppressive function of A20 in T cells relies on ubiquitin binding through the C-terminal zinc finger (ZnF)4/7 motifs, but does not involve the deubiquitinating activity of the OTU domain. Mechanistic studies reveal that the A20/ABIN-1 module is recruited to the CBM complex via A20 ZnF4/7 and that proteasomal degradation of A20 and ABIN-1 releases the initial CBM complex from the negative impact of both regulators. ABIN-1 degradation involves K48-polyubiquitination, which is promoted by A20 ZnF4/7. Further, after pro-longed T cell stimulation ABIN-1 antagonizes MALT1-catalyzed cleavage of newly synthesized A20 and thereby impairs sustained CBM complex signaling. Taken together, interdependent post-translational mechanisms are tightly controlling expression and activity of the A20/ABIN-1 silencing module and the cooperative action of both negative regulators is critical to balance CBM complex signaling and T cell activation.

### Sample Protocol
For identification of BCL10-interaction partners, CK1a KO Jurkat T cells reconstituted with CK1a WT or D136N were used. 6 x 107 cells per sample were left untreated or stimulated for 20 min with P/I before lysis in 1% NP40 buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7,5), 10 mM Na-Pyrophosphate, 10 mM Na-Glycerophosphate, 1% NP40, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 10% Glycerol and protease inhibitors). BCL10-IP (0.5µg/sample anti-BCL10, C-17, sc-9560) was performed overnight and binding to Protein G Sepharose 4B beads (Life Technologies) was performed for 2 h at 4°C. After IP, beads were washed 2x in 1% NP40 buffer and 2x in 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) buffer. OIn-bead digestion was performed overnight at 37°C after re-suspending the beads in 2M urea dissolved in 50mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5) buffer and adding trypsin. The generated peptides were cleaned using in-house prepared SDB-RPS (Empore) StageTips. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm reversed-phase column (75 μm inner diameter, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin [Dr. Maisch GmbH]) with a binary buffer system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile plus 0.1% FA) over 60 minutes gradient (5%–30% of buffer B for 40 min, 30%–60% for 4 min, 60%–95% for 4 min and 12 minutes wash time at 95%) using the EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The flow rate was kept at 300 nL/min and the column temperature was maintained at 60°C. The nLC system was coupled to a Q Exactive HFX mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). It was operated in Top10 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. Full scans (300–1,650 m/z, maximum injection time 20ms, resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3e6 ions were acquired and the 10 most intense ions were isolated and fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (target 1e5 ions, maximum injection time 60 ms, isolation window 1.4 m/z, NCE 27%) and detected in the Orbitrap (resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z). Dynamic exclusion was set to 20s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed within the MaxQuant environment (versions 1.5.3.15 and 1.6.0.15) using the MaxLFQ algorithm for label-free quantification and the integrated Andromeda search engine with FDR < 0.01 at the protein and peptide levels. The search included oxidized methionine (M) and acetylation (protein N-term) as variable modifications and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification. Maximum of two miscleavages were allowed for trypsin digestion. Moreover, peptides with at least seven amino acids were considered for identification, and ‘‘match between runs’’ was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min to allow the quantification of MS1 features which were not identified in each single measurement. Peptides and proteins were identified using a UniProt FASTA database from Homo sapiens (2015) containing 21,051 entries. PERSEUS (versions 1.5.4.1 and 1.6.1.3) and GraphPad Prism version 7.03 were used to perform all statistical and bioinformatics analyses and for visualization. To determine interaction partners, the proteins identified only by site-modification or found in the decoy reverse database and the contaminants were filtered out before data analysis. MaxLFQ intensities were taken for quantification and transformed into log2 scale. Three biological replicates of each pulldown were grouped, and a minimum of three valid values was required in at least one group. Missing values were imputed based on a normal distribution (width = 0.3, down-shift = 1.8). Significance was assessed by two-sample student’s t-test (two-sided) including a permutation-based FDR of 5% and an S0 value of 0.1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Cbm complex, Proteomics, Immune suppression, Abin1, Adaptive immunity, T cell signaling, Mass spectrometry, A20

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Germany


