### Accession
PXD028151

### Title
Regulation of the Golgi apparatus by p38 and JNK kinases during cellular stress responses

### Description
p38 and JNK are activated in response to acute stress and inflammatory signals. Through modification of a plethora of substrates, these kinases profoundly re-shape cellular physiology for the optimal response to a harmful environment and/or an inflammatory state. Here, we utilized phospho-proteomics to identify several hundred substrates for both kinases. Our results indicate that the scale of signaling from p38 and JNK are of a similar magnitude. Among the many new targets, we highlight the regulation of the transcriptional regulators GIGYF1 and 2 by p38-dependent MK2 phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding. We also show that the Golgi apparatus contains numerous substrates, and is a major target for regulation by p38 and JNK. When activated, these kinases mediate structural rearrangement of the Golgi apparatus which positively affects protein flux through the secretory system. Our work expands on our knowledge about p38 and JNK signaling with important biological ramifications.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in hot GndCl buffer. Proteins were digested with lysC and trypsin in solution over-night. Peptides were cleaned up on C18 (Sep-pack) and TMT-labeled. 200ug of peptides from each condition were pooled and phospho-enriched using TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Raw Data Processing: All phospho-proteomics raw files were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) v1.6.14.0 using the integrated Andromeda Search engine (Cox et al., 2011). Data was searched against the human Uniprot Reference Proteome (2020, October release). TMT10plex was specified as quantification method. Trypsin was specified as enzyme, cleaving after all lysine and arginine residues and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were considered variable modifications with a total of 3 variable modifications per peptide. “Maximum peptide mass” was set to 7500 Da, the “modified peptide minimum score” and “unmodified peptide minimum score” were set to 25 and everything else was set to the default values, including the false discovery rate limit of 1% on both the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
p38 and c-Jun N-terninal kinase (JNK) are activated in response to acute stress and inflammatory signals. Through modification of a plethora of substrates, these kinases profoundly re-shape cellular physiology for the optimal response to a harmful environment and/or an inflammatory state. Here, we utilized phospho-proteomics to identify several hundred substrates for both kinases. Our results indicate that the scale of signaling from p38 and JNK are of a similar magnitude. Among the many new targets, we highlight the regulation of the transcriptional regulators grb10-interacting GYF protein 1 and 2 (GIGYF1/2) by p38-dependent MAP kinase-activated protein kinase 2 (MK2) phosphorylation and 14-3-3 binding. We also show that the Golgi apparatus contains numerous substrates, and is a major target for regulation by p38 and JNK. When activated, these kinases mediate structural rearrangement of the Golgi apparatus, which positively affects protein flux through the secretory system. Our work expands on our knowledge about p38 and JNK signaling with important biological ramifications.

### Keywords
P38, Jnk, Golgi

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Vice Director, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Proteomics Program University of Copenhagen


