### Accession
PXD045051

### Title
Activity-Guided Proteomic Profiling of Proteasomes

### Description
A composition of proteasome complexes in WT yeast, and the changes these complexes undergo upon the deletion of Pre9 (Δα3) or of Sem1 (ΔSem1) based on whole-cell proteomic analysis and to activity-guided proteasome profiling of indicates that the amounts of proteasomal proteins and proteasome interacting proteins in the assembled active proteasomes differ significantly from their total amounts in the cell as a whole. This data set is of the activity-guided profiling of the proteasome LFQ analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were collected by centrifugation of 20 ml culture of each strain in SD media at OD600 =1.5. Pellets were washed twice in 1 ml of 25mM Tris pH 7.4, 10mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 1mM ATP (BDL) and 1mM DTT (Buffer A). Next, each pellet was dissolved in 200µl Buffer A and 150μl of glass beads were added. The samples were vortexed vigorously for 1 min and then placed on ice for 1 min. This cycle was repeated 8 times in total. After lysis the supernatants were collected using a gel loading tip and centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C. The clear supernatants of each sample were collected. Native lysates (150 μgr) were run in 4% native PAGE in native running buffer (100 mM Tris Base, 100 mM Boric acid, 1 mM EDTA, 2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM ATP (BDL), 0.5 mM DTT) for 2 h at 130 V. For In-gel activity assay, the gel was incubated in 20 ml Buffer A supplemented with 20 μM Suc-LLVY-AMC (R&D Systems) at 30°C for 10 min and imaged under UV light. To visualize 20S and 20S+Blm 10 bands, the gel incubated in 20 ml Buffer A supplemented with 0.02% of SDS for an additional 10 min at 30°C. Active proteasome bands from 4% Native gel were excised under UV light after incubating them with Suc-LLVY-AMC substrate and collected into clean tubes. For different strains, the blade was changed or cleaned thoroughly with 70% alcohol. Excised gel pieces were incubated with destaining solution at RT on shaker overnight before in-gel trypsin digestion procedure as described before (PMID: 21427232). The resulting peptides were desalted using C18 StageTip. Samples were analyzed using Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) coupled to Easy nLC 1000 (Thermo). The peptides were resolved by reverse-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch; GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted with a linear 60 min gradient of 6–30% acetonitrile 0.1% formic acid for active proteasomes profiling and whole proteome analysis respectively. In both cases these gradients were followed by a 15 min gradient of 28–95%, and a 15 min wash at 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid in water (at flow rates of 0.15-0.2 μL/min). The MS analysis was in positive mode using a range of m/z 300–1800, resolution 60,000 for MS1 and 15,000 for MS2, using, repetitively, full MS scan followed by HCD of the 18 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan with an isolation window of 1.3 m/z. The other settings were NCE =27, minimum AGC target=8x103, intensity threshold=1.3x105 and dynamic exclusion of 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis and label-free quantification of the proteasome active complexes were carried out using MaxQuant (Version 2.1.3.0). In all searches the raw files were searched against the Uniprot Saccharomyces cerevisiae searches of Jan 2020 (that include 6060 protein sequences). MaxQuant searches were performed using tryptic digestion mode with a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. All other parameters were set as the default. Candidates were filtered to obtain FDR of 1% at the peptide and the protein levels. No filter was applied to the number of peptides per protein. For quantification, the match between runs modules of MaxQuant was used, and the label-free quantification (LFQ) normalization method was enabled (55) with default settings using LFQ quantification and match-between-runs options. MSFargger searches for proteasomal protein N-terminal cleavage were done by using semi-tryptic digestion. Search criteria included precursor and fragments tolerance of 20 ppm with oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications. The proteomic characterization of the active-proteasome complexes (marked with the word “all” in the relevant file names) was done by using all the different complexes (native gel bands) of a given samples and defining them as one sample in the MaxQuant search and quantification. The analysis of the relative amount of the different active proteasome species within each strain (marked with the word “Strains” in the relevant file names) was done while analyzing the files correspond to the different complexes of each strain separately (wt: analysis of the all the complexes of the wt strain; alpha3: analysis of all the complexes of alpha3 knockout; and sem:1 analysis of all the complexes of sem1 knockout). Proteasomal proteins N-terminal analysis was done based on searches with MSFragger version 3.7 via FregPipe version 19.1 (https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/). These searches for proteasomal protein N-terminal cleavage (in the New_MF_SemiMBR_yeast.zip) were done by using semi-tryptic digestion. Search criteria included precursor and fragments tolerance of 20 ppm with oxidation of methionine, and protein N-terminal acetylation set as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Proteasomes are multi-subunit, multi-catalytic protein complexes present in eukaryotic cells that degrade misfolded, damaged, or unstructured proteins. In this study, we used an activity-guided proteomic methodology based on a fluorogenic peptide substrate to characterize the composition of proteasome complexes in WT yeast and the changes these complexes undergo upon the deletion of Pre9 (&#x394;&#x3b1;3) or of Sem1 (&#x394;Sem1). A comparison of whole-cell proteomic analysis to activity-guided proteasome profiling indicates that the amounts of proteasomal proteins and proteasome interacting proteins in the assembled active proteasomes differ significantly from their total amounts in the cell as a whole. Using this activity-guided profiling approach, we characterized the changes in the abundance of subunits of various active proteasome species in different strains, quantified the relative abundance of active proteasomes across these strains, and charted the overall distribution of different proteasome species within each strain. The distributions obtained by our mass spectrometry-based quantification were markedly higher for some proteasome species than those obtained by activity-based quantification alone, suggesting that the activity of some of these species is impaired. The impaired activity appeared mostly among 20S<sup>Blm10</sup> proteasome species which account for 20% of the active proteasomes in WT. To identify the factors behind this impaired activity, we mapped and quantified known proteasome-interacting proteins. Our results suggested that some of the reduced activity might be due to the association of the proteasome inhibitor Fub1. Additionally, we provide novel evidence for the presence of non-mature and therefore inactive proteasomal protease subunits &#x3b2;2 and &#x3b2;5 in the fully assembled proteasomes.

### Keywords
Activity-guided profilling, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Biology Faculty Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel
Technion

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr Oded Kleifeld
Biology Faculty Technion - Israel Institute of Technology Haifa, Israel


