### Accession
PXD045389

### Title
BioID analysis of human protein GNL3

### Description
We performed a BioID experiment in a HEK293 Flp-In T-Rex cell line that contains human GNL3 cDNA integrated at the FRT site tagged with BirA and FLAG under the control of a promoter regulated with doxycycline.

### Sample Protocol
After lysis and centrifugation, biotinylated proteins were pull downed using Streptavidin-Agarose beads. After washes, biotinylated proteins were eluted from the beads in Laemmli buffer upon 95°C incubation. Biotinylated proteins were migrated on SDS PAGE for a short migration. After reduction and alkylation, proteins were digested using trypsin. For LC MSMS analysis, samples were loaded onto a reversed-phase column and separated with an UltiMate 3000 RSLC system coupled to a QExactive HF system.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were processed with MaxQuant using standard parameters with match between runs option. Spectra were matched against the UniProt reference proteome and statistical analysis was performed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
Faithful DNA replication requires specific proteins that protect replication forks and so prevent the formation of DNA lesions that may damage the genome. Identification of new proteins involved in this process is essential to understand how DNA lesions accumulate in cancer cells and how they tolerate them. Here, we show that human GNL3/nucleostemin, a GTP-binding protein localized mostly in the nucleolus and highly expressed in cancer cells, prevents nuclease-dependent resection of nascent DNA in response to replication stress. We demonstrate that inhibiting origin firing reduces resection. This suggests that the heightened replication origin activation observed upon GNL3 depletion largely drives the observed DNA resection probably due to the exhaustion of the available RPA pool. We show that GNL3 and DNA replication initiation factor ORC2 interact in the nucleolus and that the concentration of GNL3 in the nucleolus is required to limit DNA resection. We propose that the control of origin firing by GNL3 through the sequestration of ORC2 in the nucleolus is critical to prevent nascent DNA resection in response to replication stress.

### Keywords
Human

### Affiliations
UMR9002 CNRS-UM Institute of Human Genetics
FPP CNRS

### Submitter
Functional Proteomics Platform FPP

### Lab Head
Dr Cyril Ribeyre
UMR9002 CNRS-UM Institute of Human Genetics


