### Accession
PXD017090

### Title
Antibacterial properties and mechanism of action for serum obtained from the Chinese alligator (Alligator sinensis)

### Description
Chinese alligator (Alligator sinensis) is one of the rarest endangered reptiles found in China and possesses strong immune potential. This study tested the antibacterial ability of Chinese alligator serum (CAS) against Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and analyzed the underlying mechanisms. Results showed that the CAS had a marked antibacterial effect on K. pneumoniae, E. coli, and P. aeruginosa. However, S. aureus was only mildly affected, and this effect disappeared when incubated with Protease K. The serum proteome revealed that the antibacterial ability of CAS was produced by interactions between various proteins and that the complement proteins played a major antibacterial role. Furthermore, the prediction of the structure and function of complement component 3 revealed eight potential protein binding sites and one nucleic acid binding site that were likely related to the broad-spectrum antibacterial ability of this serum. This study provided evidence that CAS elicits significant antibacterial effects against some pathogens and provides the basis for further development of novel antibacterial drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Samples from two Chinese alligators were lysed with protein lysate, and then PMSF with a final concentration of 1 mM and EDTA with a final concentration of 2 mM was added. DTT was added with a final concentration of 10 mM after 5 minutes. The supernatant was extracted following ultrasonic treatment for 15 minutes and centrifugation at 25,000 x g for 20 minutes.  Five times the volume of precooled acetone was added to the supernatant. Following precipitation at -20oC for 2 hours and centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 20 minutes, the supernatant was discarded. Next, we collected the precipitation, added protein lysate to lyse, and added PMSF with a final concentration of 1 mm and EDTA with a final concentration of 2 mm, respectively, after 5 minutes, DTT with a final concentration of 10 mm was added. The supernatant was extracted following ultrasonic treatment for 15 minutes and centrifugation at 25,000 x g for 20 minutes. The supernatant was treated with DTT at a final concentration of 10 mm at 56oC for 1 hour to reduce and open the disulfide bond. The final concentration of 55 mm IAM was added, and the chamber was left for 45 minutes to allow for alkylation of the cysteine. Precooled acetone was added at a proper amount. Following precipitation at -20oC for 2 hours, and centrifugation at 25,000 x g for 20 minutes, the supernatant was discarded. The precipitate was lysed in 200 μl 0.5M TEAB (Applied Biosystems, Italy) for 15 minutes. Finally, centrifugation at 25,000 x g for 20 minutes and then the proteins in the supernatant were extracted and kept at -80°C for further analysis. 100 μg protein was taken out of each sample solution and was digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at 37°C for 12 hours, and the ratio of protein: trypsin is 20:1. Then the peptides were processed according to the manufacture’s guidelines for TMT (ThermoFisher, CA, USA), and the two samples were labeled with reagents 129 and 130, respectively. An LC-20AB HPLC Pump system (Shimadzu, Japan) and a 4.6×250 mm Ultremex SCX column, which contains 5-μm particles (Phenomenex, CA, USA) were used for chromatography of the sample. The mixed peptide was labeled and dried then reconstituted in 4 ml buffer A (25 ml HaH2PO4 in 25% CAN, pH 2.7). After loaded onto the column in which the rate of the flow was set as 1 mL/min, the sample would be eluted with a gradient: 10 min of buffer A, then 5% buffer B (25 mM NaH2PO4, 1 M KCl in 25% ACN, pH 2.7), followed by a 20-min linear gradient which raised the buffer B from 5% to 60%. Next, the proportion of buffer B was raised to 100% in 2 min and maintained for 1 min, then fell back to 5% to equilibrate with buffer A for 10 min before the next turn. The whole process was conducted with monitoring at an absorbance of 214 nm. Every 1 min the fractions were collected once. Finally, 12 fractions were treated by StrataX C18 column (Phenomenex, CA, USA) to desalt, then vacuum-dried. Each dried fraction was reconstituted in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) to 0.5 μg/μL, then centrifuged for 10 min at 20000 x g to get rid of the undissolved matter. 5μL of each fraction (containing about 2.5 μg protein) was loaded onto a 2 cm C18 trap column at flow rate of 8 μL/min for 4 min; then the sample was carried into the analytical C18 column at the rate of 300 nL/min, eluted and transported to the LC-20AD Nano HPLC (Japan). Then eluted at 5% buffer B (95% ACN, 0.1%FA) for 5 min, followed by a 35-min linear gradient raising the proportion of buffer B from 5% to 35%, then 60% in 5 min, 80% in 2 min and maintained for 2 min. Finally, the proportion was set back to 5% in 1 min and equilibrated for 10 min. The peptides were loaded into Q-Exactive (ThermoFisher, CA, USA). The primary resolution was set at 70000, and the secondary resolution was set at 17500. 15 parent ions with charges of 2+~5+ and peak intensity over 20000 were sorted out for secondary analysis. High-energy collision dissociation (HCD) operating mode with a normalized collision energy setting of 27 (±12%) was used for selecting peptides that were detected in orbitrap. Dynamic Exclusion duration was set for 15 s. The electrospray voltage was 1.6 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was performed by orbitrap. For full MS, the AGC target was 3e6, and for MS2 was 1e5. As for MS scans, 350 to 2000 Da was set as the m/z scan range. For MS2, the range was 100-1800.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted to MGF files using Proteome. Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), [5600 msconverter] and the MGF files were searched. Proteins identification were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, UK; version 2.3.02) (Table 1).  Pathway annotations of the proteins were conducted against the KEGG database.

### Publication Abstract
The Chinese alligator (<i>Alligator sinensis</i>) is an ancient reptile with strong immunity that lives in wetland environments. This study tested the antibacterial ability of Chinese alligator serum (CAS) against <i>Klebsiella pneumoniae</i>, <i>Escherichia coli</i>, <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i>, and <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i> and analyzed the potential underlying mechanisms. Results showed that the CAS had a marked antibacterial effect on <i>K. pneumoniae</i>, <i>E. coli</i>, and <i>P. aeruginosa</i>, while <i>S. aureus</i> was only mildly affected. However, these effects disappeared when Protease K was added to the serum. The serum proteome analysis revealed that the antibacterial ability of CAS was produced by interactions among various proteins and that the complement proteins played a major antibacterial role. Therefore, we made relevant predictions about the structure and function of complement component 3. In addition, sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis of complement component 3d (C3d) in four mammalian species and two alligator species showed that the amino acids that make up the acid pocket on the concave surface of alligator C3d are not identical to those in mammals. This study provided evidence that CAS elicits significant antibacterial effects against some pathogens and provides the basis for further development of novel antibacterial drugs.

### Keywords
Alligator sinensis, Serum, Complement system, Antibacterial, Protein

### Affiliations
MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, State Conservation Centre for Gene Resources of Endangered Wildlife, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Sheng-Guo Fang

### Lab Head
Dr Sheng-Guo Fang
MOE Key Laboratory of Biosystems Homeostasis & Protection, State Conservation Centre for Gene Resources of Endangered Wildlife, College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, P. R. China


