### Accession
PXD014814

### Title
Thermococcus kodakarensis proteins expressed at various temperatures reveals changes in RNA modifications

### Description
Thermococcus kodakarensis is a thermophilic archaea used in this study to determine how changes in growth temperature affect protein expression. This organism was chosen, in part, due to the simplified proteome and potential protein stability gained when analyzing proteins at room temperature. Two temperatures were used as well as one knockout cell line to determine the differences in protein expression. Specifically, changes in protein expression levels were used in conjunction with other data to determine the changing levels of RNA modification based on expression temperature.

### Sample Protocol
TCA precipitated proteins from T. kodakarensis cell lysate were digested by the standard LysC-trypsin protocol after reducing and modifying cysteine residues with chloroacetamide. Peptides were quantitated by the Pierce Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo) prior to analysis on a QExactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo) operated in positive mode. Samples were trapped on a PepMap 100 C18 column (5um, 2.1 x 5cm) prior to separation on an in-house packed C18 column (1.9µM particle, 75µm x 20cm) at a flow rate of 180nL/min. The column was interfaced directly with the QExactive mass spectrometer equipped with the NanoFlex source. Peptides were eluted over a gradient from 10-40% B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 6 hours. MS1 were collected at a resolving power of 70,000 and top 15 data dependent MS2 were collected at a resolving power of 15,000.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds.  Samples were analyzed in technical triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometer files had the MS and MS/MS data extracted by RawDistiller and searched using ProLuCID (v. 1.3.3) against the T. kodakarensis protein database downloaded from NCBI on 11-09-2018 with 386 common contaminants added. The database also contained the shuffled protein sequences to estimate false discovery rates (FDRs). Data were searched for methionine oxidation.  The result files from ProLucCID were further processed with DTASelect (v 1.9) to correlate peptide level information into protein information.  Using in-house developed software, swallow, the peptides spectrum matches were maintained at FDR levels less than 5% for protein and peptide level matches.  The datasets were compared using Contrast16 and quantitated using our in-hosue software NSAF7 (v 0.0.1).

### Publication Abstract
N<sup>4</sup>-acetylcytidine (ac<sup>4</sup>C) is an ancient and highly conserved RNA modification that is present on tRNA and rRNA and has recently been investigated in eukaryotic mRNA<sup>1-3</sup>. However, the distribution, dynamics and functions of cytidine acetylation&#xa0;have yet to be fully elucidated. Here&#xa0;we report ac<sup>4</sup>C-seq, a chemical genomic method for the transcriptome-wide quantitative mapping of ac<sup>4</sup>C at single-nucleotide resolution. In human and yeast mRNAs, ac<sup>4</sup>C sites are not detected but can be induced-at a conserved sequence motif-via the ectopic overexpression of eukaryotic acetyltransferase complexes. By contrast, cross-evolutionary profiling revealed unprecedented levels of ac<sup>4</sup>C across hundreds of residues in rRNA, tRNA, non-coding RNA and mRNA from hyperthermophilic archaea. Ac<sup>4</sup>C is markedly induced in response to increases in temperature, and acetyltransferase-deficient archaeal strains exhibit temperature-dependent growth defects. Visualization of wild-type and acetyltransferase-deficient archaeal ribosomes by cryo-electron microscopy provided structural insights into the temperature-dependent distribution of ac<sup>4</sup>C and its potential thermoadaptive role. Our studies quantitatively define the ac<sup>4</sup>C landscape, providing a technical and conceptual foundation for elucidating the role of this modification in biology and disease<sup>4-6</sup>.

### Keywords
Thermococcus kodakarensis, Qexactive plus, Proteomics, Theromphile

### Affiliations
Stowers Institute for Medical Research

### Submitter
Michaella Levy

### Lab Head
Dr Laurence Florens
Stowers Institute for Medical Research


