### Accession
PXD032150

### Title
Proteome Map of Human nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swab samples in VTM media following SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
A detailed proteomic analysis of the nasopharyngeal/oropharyngeal swab samples collected from normal individuals and individuals infected with SARS-CoV-2 involving high throughput quantitative (iTRAQ) proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from the two groups consisting of 3 positive and 3 negative pooled SARS-CoV-2 VTM samples. At the BSL3 lab facility, the pooled samples were centrifuged at high RPM, and the resulting pellet was washed with 1% PBS, resuspended in protein solubilization buffer, and sonicated for 10 minutes. After brief centrifugation, the supernatant was collected and quantified using the amido black method. A total of 200ug of protein was SDS gel electrophoresed and fractioned (five fractions) based on molecular weight. The fractions were gel eluted, trypsin digested and labelled with iTRAQ labels.  SARS-COV-2 negative samples were labelled with iTRAQ 114 and 115, and positive samples were labelled with 116 and 117. All the labelled peptides were pooled and analysed using Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (LCMS/MSMS) in the Orbitrap Velos Nano analyzer (Q-Exactive HF).

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer software using Human proteome database ands SARS-CoV-2 database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19

### Affiliations
CSIR-CCMB
Senior Principal Scientist CSIR-CCMB Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Mohammed Idris

### Lab Head
Dr Mohammed M Idris
Senior Principal Scientist CSIR-CCMB Hyderabad, India


