### Accession
PXD009174

### Title
Integrated proteomic analysis of Tumor Necrosis Factor α and Interleukin 1 β-induced endothelial inflammation

### Description
Objective The vascular endothelium provides a unique interaction plane for plasma proteins and leukocytes in inflammation. It has been established that particular proteins, including ICAM1, VCAM1 and SELE, are upregulated on the endothelial cell surface in the presence of pro-inflammatory cytokines Tumor Necrosis Factor α (TNFα) and Interleukin 1β (IL-1β). We now map cytokine-induced proteomic alterations to gain further insight into endothelial inflammation.  Approach and results We evaluated alterations in the in-depth proteome, cell surface proteome and phosphoproteome after 24 hours of cytokine stimulation. In addition, protein expression profiles were measured after 4, 8, 16 and 24 hours of stimulation. We found that cytokine-stimulation induced a two-step response. After 4 hours, initial protein alterations were detected, including upregulation of ICAM1 and SELE, followed by a second burst of regulation after 8 to 16 hours, which included proteins involved in antigen processing, cytokine production, virus defense and ECM-interaction. Furthermore, we found that TNFα and IL-1β provoke a highly similar endothelial response with few specific alterations. Using a novel cell surface proteomics approach, we observed highly similar changes on the cell surface. Two surface proteins displayed altered labeling of specific epitopes, suggesting that these sites are modified or involved in interactions. Combined,  our integrated proteomic data describes a full array of affected processes: leukocyte interaction, self-antigen presentation, cytokine production, nitric oxide production and extracellular matrix interaction.  Conclusions Our study provides a detailed quantitative proteomic analysis of endothelial inflammation in which novel inflammation-responsive proteins were uncovered, and a two-step cytokine response was identified.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared in triplicate with SILAC label switching. SILAC BOECs were grown to confluency and mock-, IL-1β or TNFα (10 ng/ml) treated for 24 hours.  Cell surface labeling SILAC-labeled cells were washed with wash buffer (10 mM HEPES, 135 mM NaCl, 10 mM KCl, 5 mM CaCl∙2 H2O, 2 mM MgSO4∙7 H2O, pH 7.5) and labeled with 3 mM EZ-link Sulfo-NHS-LC-Biotin (Thermo Scientific) in wash buffer, for 30 minutes at 4 °C. The label was quenched by washing four times with 100 mM Glycine in wash buffer.  Mass spectrometry sample preparation Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH 7.5, supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific). Light, medium and heavy SILAC-labeled samples were combined in a 1:1:1 protein ratio and subjected to Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) as described by Wiśniewski et al.25. For proteome analysis tryptic peptides were desalted using C18 StageTips26. In-depth proteomes were obtained by fractionation of 50 µg tryptic peptides using Strong Anion eXchange (SAX) using Empore Anion and Cation Exchange-SR Extraction Disks (3M) as described by Wisniewski et al.25, with elution buffers of pH 11, 8, 6, 5, 4 and 3. The flow-through was acidified with TFA and loaded onto a separate C18 StageTip. For cell surface peptidome analysis, the remaining tryptic digests were vacuum dried, supplemented with NaCl to a final concentration of 150 mM with a volume of 450 µl. The samples were divided over 3 wells of a SigmaScreen Streptavidin coated 96-wells cluster (Sigma-Aldrich), which was prewashed three times with wash buffer (50 mM (NH4)HCO3, 150 mM NaCl, pH 8.3). After overnight incubation at 4 °C, the unbound fraction was transferred and subjected to another round of streptavidin pull-down and wells were washed 5 times with wash buffer. Biotinylated peptides were subsequently eluted with 50 µl 5% formic acid, 70% acetonitrile (ACN) per well for 2 hours at 4 °C followed by a second elution for 5 minutes at 4 °C with the same elution buffer. Eluates from the same sample and the same round of pull-down (in total 300 µl) were pooled, vacuum dried to 20 µl, diluted to 100 µl with 0.5% acetic acid, acidified to pH <2.5 with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and desalted using C18 StageTips. For phosphoproteomic analysis, samples were processed as previously described27.    Mass spectrometry analysis Tryptic peptides were separated by nanoscale C18 reverse chromatography coupled on line to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Nanospray Flex Ion Source, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on a 20 cm 75–360 µm inner-outer diameter fused silica emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH). The column was installed on a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLC nanoSystem (Thermo Scientific) using a MicroTee union formatted for 360 μm outer diameter columns (IDEX) and a liquid junction. The spray voltage was set to 2.15 kV. Buffer A was composed of 0.5% acetic acid and buffer B of 0.5% acetic acid, 80% acetonitrile. Peptides were loaded for 17 min at 300 nl/min at 5% buffer B, equilibrated for 5 minutes at 5%  buffer B (17-22 min) and eluted by increasing buffer B from 5-15% (22-87 min) and 15-38% (87-147 min), followed by a 10 minute wash to 90% and a 5 min regeneration to 5%. For proteome and cell surface peptidome samples, analysis was performed as described before28. Briefly, survey scans of peptide precursors from 400 to 1500 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1.5 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed by isolation with the quadrupole with isolation window 1.6, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30, and rapid scan mass spectrometry analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 104 and the max injection time was 35 ms. Only those precursors with charge state 2–7 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles. For phosphoproteome samples a slightly adjusted protocol was used: the resolution of the survey scan was set to 240K with a 2 × 105 ion count target. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed on the 10 most intense ions by isolation using the quadrupole and analysis in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30K. The MS2 ion count target was set to 5x104 with a maximum injection time of 60 ms. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Proteome data processing and analysis Raw files were analyzed with the MaxQuant (1.5.3.8) computational platform29. Proteins and peptides were identified using the Andromeda search engine by querying the human Uniprot database (release 2-2015, 89.796 entries) using standard settings. Relative quantification was based on SILAC (Arg0Lys0, Arg6Lys4 and Arg10Lys8) using unique peptides for quantification only and enabling the ‘re-quantify’ and ‘match between runs’ options. For the cell surface peptidome the addition of a biotin group (339.16166 Da) was used as a variable modification and for the phosphoproteome ‘Phospho (STY)’ was used as a variable modification. Two subsequent pull-downs of biotin- and phosphopeptides of the same sample were treated as fractions of the same sample. MaxQuant output tables were loaded and analyzed using Rstudio 1.0.44 using R version 3.3.2.30. In brief, ‘reverse’, ‘potential contaminant’, ‘only identified by site’ and peptides quantified in less than 3 replicates in 1 condition were filtered out. For phosphoproteomic analysis only class I phosphopeptides31 were selected (localization probability >0.75, score difference >5). For cell surface peptidome analysis biotinylated peptides were filtered according to the same criteria. Statistical analysis was performed using a linear model without intercept and applying contrasts for each comparison in cases with multiple comparisons. For data containing a single experimental group, one-sample t-tests were performed. P values were adjusted for multiple testing using Benjamini-Hochberg and p <0.05 and a log2 fold change ≥1 was considered significant and relevant. Results were imported in Perseus (1.5.3.2) software to generate heat-plots. For Gene Ontology-term enrichment analysis, gene lists of significantly affected proteins/peptides were generated. For cell surface proteome enrichment, GO-term enrichment of biotin-modified peptides compared to the whole peptide pool was assessed using Cytoscape 3.4.0.32 with the BiNGO plug-in33. Ontology and annotation datasets were downloaded on 3-3-2016 from the Gene Ontology Consortium website (www.geneontology.org). Enrichment analysis of stimulus-affected proteins was performed using the hypergeometric method from goseq34 (1.24.0), FDR adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered significant. The significantly enriched GO-terms were grouped and visualized with gogadget35 (2.0), using hierarchical clustering of the overlap indexes (with ward.D agglomeration method and Euclidean distance). Similarity between the GO-terms were further visualized in networks with Cytoscape’s Enrichment Map36 plugin. The PhosphoPath plug-in37 was employed to visualize affected proteins.

### Publication Abstract
The vascular endothelium provides a unique interaction plane for plasma proteins and leukocytes in inflammation. The pro-inflammatory cytokines Tumor Necrosis Factor &#x3b1; (TNF&#x3b1;) and interleukin 1&#x3b2; (IL-1&#x3b2;) have a profound effect on endothelial cells, which includes increased levels of adhesion molecules and a disrupted barrier function. To assess the endothelial response to these cytokines at the protein level, we evaluated changes in the whole proteome, cell surface proteome and phosphoproteome after 24&#x202f;h of cytokine treatment. The effects of TNF&#x3b1; and IL-1&#x3b2; on endothelial cells were strikingly similar and included changes in proteins not previously associated with endothelial inflammation. Temporal profiling revealed time-dependent proteomic changes, including a limited number of early responsive proteins such as adhesion receptors ICAM1 and SELE. In addition, this approach uncovered a greater number of late responsive proteins, including proteins related to self-antigen peptide presentation, and a transient increase in ferritin. Peptide-based cell surface proteomics revealed extensive changes at the cell surface, which were in agreement with the whole proteome. In addition, site-specific changes within ITGA5 and ICAM1 were detected. Combined, our integrated proteomic data provide detailed information on endothelial inflammation, emphasize the role of the extracellular matrix therein, and include potential targets for therapeutic intervention. SIGNIFICANCE: Pro-inflammatory cytokines induce the expression of cell adhesion molecules in vascular endothelial cells. These molecules mediate the adhesion and migration of immune cells across the vessel wall, which is a key process to resolve infections in the underlying tissue. Dysregulation of endothelial inflammation can contribute to vascular diseases and the vascular endothelium is therefore an attractive target to control inflammation. Current strategies targeting endothelial adhesion molecules, including PECAM, CD99, ICAM1 and VCAM1 do not completely prevent transmigration. To identify additional therapeutic targets, we mapped the endothelial proteome after pro-inflammatory cytokine treatment. In addition to the whole proteome, we assessed the surface proteome to focus on cell adhesion molecules, and the phosphoproteome to uncover protein activation states. Here, we present an integrated overview of affected processes which further improves our understanding of endothelial inflammation and may eventually aid in therapeutic intervention of imbalanced inflammation.

### Keywords
Cell surface proteomics, Tnfα, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Inflammation, Time-resolved, Il-1β, Endothelium

### Affiliations
Sanquin Research, Department of Plasma Proteins, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Sanquin Research

### Submitter
Eelke Béguin

### Lab Head
Dr Maartje van den Biggelaar
Sanquin Research, Department of Plasma Proteins, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


