### Accession
PXD026533

### Title
Ubiquitylation of RIPK3 beyond-the-RHIM limits RIPK3 activity and cell death

### Description
Pathogen recognition receptors and TNF superfamily members engage Receptor Interacting Serine/threonine Kinase-3 (RIPK3) to activate programmed cell death, including MLKL-mediated necroptosis and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis. However, the post-translational control of RIPK3 signalling is not fully understood. Using mass-spectrometry, we identified a novel ubiquitylation site on murine RIPK3 beyond the RIP homotypic interaction motif (RHIM) on K469. Complementation of RIPK3-deficient cells with a Ripk3K469R mutant demonstrated that the decoration of RIPK3 K469 by ubiquitin limits both RIPK3-mediated caspase-8 activation and apoptotic killing, in addition to RIPK3 autophosphorylation and MLKL-mediated necroptosis. Unexpectedly, the overall ubiquitylation of mutant RIPK3K469R was enhanced, which largely resulted from additional RIPK3 ubiquitylation on K359. Loss of RIPK3 K359 ubiquitylation reduced RIPK3K469R hyper-ubiquitylation and limited the ability of Ripk3K469R/K469R to trigger enhanced killing. Ripk3K469R/K469R mice challenged with Salmonella displayed increased bacterial loads in the spleen and liver, with reduced IFN serum levels. Therefore, RIPK3 K469 ubiquitylation can function to prevent RIPK3 ubiquitylation on alternate lysine residues, which otherwise promote RIPK3 oligomerization and consequent cell death signalling.

### Sample Protocol
MDFs were seeded in 4x15 cm plates at 80% confluency, stimulated with 20 ng/mL Dox overnight, lysed in DISC buffer, and FLAG-purified as described above, except that samples were washed twice in MS buffer (1% Triton X-100, 1 M urea, 500 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA) at 4oC with rotation for 15 min. Eluted samples were subjected to tryptic digestion, following the FASP protocol described previously (Wisniewski et al., 2009).  Samples were analysed on a M-class UPLC (Waters, USA) coupled to a timsTOF Pro (Bruker, Germany) equipped with a CaptiveSpray source. Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN, 1% formic acid (FA) separated on a 25cm X 75μm analytical column, 1.6μm C18 beads with a packed emitter tip (Aurora Series, IonOpticks, Australia). The column temperature was maintained at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation GmbH, Germany). The column was equilibrated using 5 column volumes before loading sample in 100% buffer A (99.9% MilliQ water, 0.1% FA). Samples were separated at 400nl/min using a linear gradient from 2% to 17% buffer B (99.9% ACN, 0.1% FA; 55min), 17% to 25% buffer B (21min) before ramping to 35% buffer B (13min), ramp to 85% buffer B (3min) and sustained for 10min. The timsTOF Pro (Bruker) was operated in PASEF mode using Compass Hystar 5.0.36.0. Alternatively, samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and injected and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a M-class UPLC system (Waters, USA) using a 250mm × 75µm column (1.6µm C18, packed emitter tip; IonOpticks, Australia) with a linear 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% Formic acid in Milli-Q water) to 34% solvent B (0.1% Formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). The UPLC was coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant peaks. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 100000 ions and an isolation width of 2 m/z and fragmented using HCD with normalized collision energy of 27. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 50ms for MS/MS. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Mus Musculus database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini, oxidation of methionine and diGly motif of Lysine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 6 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% with the match between runs option enabled.  Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output files. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least 50% of the replicates in one group were removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Missing values were imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 s.d., and a s.d. of 0.3 times the s.d. of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential peptide expression between groups was calculated using the Limma R package. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using Benjamini–Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Pathogen recognition and TNF receptors signal via receptor interacting serine/threonine kinase-3 (RIPK3) to cause cell death, including MLKL-mediated necroptosis and caspase-8-dependent apoptosis. However, the post-translational control of RIPK3 is not fully understood. Using mass-spectrometry, we identified that RIPK3 is ubiquitylated on K469. The expression of mutant RIPK3 K469R demonstrated that RIPK3 ubiquitylation can limit both RIPK3-mediated apoptosis and necroptosis. The enhanced cell death of overexpressed RIPK3 K469R and activated endogenous RIPK3 correlated with an overall increase in RIPK3 ubiquitylation. <i>Ripk3</i> <sup><i>K469R/K469R</i></sup> mice challenged with <i>Salmonella</i> displayed enhanced bacterial loads and reduced serum IFN&#x3b3;. However, <i>Ripk3</i> <sup><i>K469R/K469R</i></sup> macrophages and dermal fibroblasts were not sensitized to RIPK3-mediated apoptotic or necroptotic signaling suggesting that, in these cells, there is functional redundancy with alternate RIPK3 ubiquitin-modified sites. Consistent with this idea, the mutation of other ubiquitylated RIPK3 residues also increased RIPK3 hyper-ubiquitylation and cell death. Therefore, the targeted ubiquitylation of RIPK3 may act as either a brake or accelerator of RIPK3-dependent killing.

### Keywords
Caspase-8, Ubiquitin, Mlkl, Ripk3, Cell death, Necroptosis, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
WEHI
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr James Vince
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia


