### Accession
PXD042983

### Title
BLM helicase protein negatively regulates stress granule formation through unwinding RNA G-quadruplex structures

### Description
We ran native 5% polyacrylamide-TBE gel for electro mobility shift assay (EMSA) for DNA/RNA G4 structures with or without recombinant human core-BLM (cBLM) protein, which was extracted and purified from E.coli in order to show binding of the RNA/DNA by this protein. To further evidence, we cut the equivalent gel area where the shifted band is located for all the wells (DNA only, DNA+cBLM, RNA, RNA+cBLM and cBLM only) and anlayzed by LC-MS/MS to identify human BLM and to see if there are some E.coli contaminations in those specific bands. Moreover, we analyzed the stock solution of the recombinant cBLM as general control.

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands were excised from the gel, sliced into 1-2 mm pieces and placed in a microcentrifuge tube. Gel bands were destained with a solution of 15 mM Potassium Ferricyanide/50 mM Sodium Thiosulphate, followed by washes with water, 200 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile. Then, the gel pieces were dried. Protein disulfide bonds were reduced by saturating the dry gel bands with 10 mM dithiothreitol in 25 mM NH4HCO3 at 56 °C for 1 hour and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 in the dark for 45 min at room temperature. Bands were washed twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3 and twice with 25 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% ACN. Bands were vacuum dried, then, the bands gel pieces were rehydrated with 500 ng trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI, USA) in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were then extracted by addition of 50% ACN/5% formic acid, vortexed, centrifuged, and the supernatant collected. The samples were stored in -20 ˚C until further analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting peptides were analyzed using nanoflow liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometry (Q Exactive HF). The samples were analyzed on the instrument separately in discovery mode. Data processing step: the raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.4, and searched against a protein database containing the recombinant helicase protein sequence that we provided, the E. coli K12  protein database as downloaded from Uniprot.org and a list of common lab contaminants. The search was done with two search algorithms- SequestHT and MS Amanda.

### Publication Abstract
Bloom's syndrome (BLM) protein is a known nuclear helicase that is able to unwind DNA secondary structures such as G-quadruplexes (G4s). However, its role in the regulation of cytoplasmic processes that involve RNA G-quadruplexes (rG4s) has not been previously studied. Here, we demonstrate that BLM is recruited to stress granules (SGs), which are cytoplasmic biomolecular condensates composed of RNAs and RNA-binding proteins. BLM is enriched in SGs upon different stress conditions and in an rG4-dependent manner. Also, we show that BLM unwinds rG4s and acts as a negative regulator of SG formation. Altogether, our data expand the cellular activity of BLM and shed light on the function that helicases play in the dynamics of biomolecular condensates.

### Keywords
Blm, Sg, Emsa, G-quadruplex, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
The Weizmann Institute of Science

### Submitter
Yehuda Danino

### Lab Head
Dr Eran Hornstein
The Weizmann Institute of Science


