### Accession
PXD029692

### Title
Phosphatidic acid features double membrane vesicle formation during Hepatitis C and SARS-CoV-2 infection

### Description
Double membrane vesicles (DMVs) are used as replication organelles by pathogenic RNA viruses such as hepatitis C virus (HCV) and severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2  (SARS-CoV-2). Viral DMVs are morphologically analogous to DMVs formed during autophagy, and although the proteins required for DMV formation are extensively studied, the lipids driving their biogenesis are largely unknown. Here we show that production of the lipid phosphatidic acid (PA) by acylglycerolphosphate acyltransferase (AGPAT) 1 and 2 in the ER is important for DMV biogenesis in autophagy and viral replication. Using DMVs in HCV-replicating cells as model, we found that AGPATs are recruited to and critically contribute to viral replication in HCV and SARS-CoV-2 infected cells. AGPAT1/2 double knockout impaired HCV and SARS-CoV-2 induced DMV biogenesis as well as formation of autophagosomes. By using correlative light and electron microscopy, we observed the relocalisation of AGPAT proteins to viral DMVs. In addition, an intracellular PA sensor accumulated at DMV formation sites, consistent with elevated levels of PA in fractions of purified DMVs analyzed by lipidomics. Apart from AGPATs, PA is generated by alternative pathways via phosphotidylcholine (PC) and diacylglycerol (DAG). Pharmacological inhibition of these synthesis pathways also impaired HCV and SARS-CoV-2 replication. These data identify PA as an important lipid that is used in seemingly disparate biological processes, i.e. autophagy and replication organelle formation by diverse RNA viruses. In addition, our data argue that host-targeting therapy aiming at PA synthesis pathways might be suitable to control SARS-CoV-2 replication.

### Sample Protocol
Pull-down of NS4B-associated membrane fractions was performed as described above, but using Huh7-Lunet cells containing the subgenomic replicon sg4BHA31R, and cells containing the analogous replicon with non-tagged NS4B and control Huh7-Lunet cells stably overexpressing HA-tagged Calnexin (CNX-HA). Bound proteins were eluted from the beads by using SDS buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 7.9], 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 2% SDS). Eluates were subjected to filter aided sample preparation by using a 3 kDa molecular weight cutoff filter (VIVACON 500; Sartorius Stedim Biotech GmbH, 37070 Goettingen, Germany) according to the procedure described earlier (9). Fifty microliters of sample were directly mixed in the filter unit with 200 μl of freshly prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl [pH 8.5] (UA buffer) and centrifuged at 14.000 × g for 15 min at 20°C to remove SDS. Any residual SDS was washed out by two washing steps with 200 μl UA buffer. Proteins were alkylated by incubation with 100 μl 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. After washing three times with 100 μl of UA buffer and three times with 100 μl of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer [pH 8.0] (SIGMA-Aldrich Chemie GmbH, Germany), proteins were digested with 1.25 μg trypsin overnight at 37°C. Peptides were recovered from the filter by centrifugation, applying 40 μl of 50 mM TEAB buffer, followed by 50 μl 0.5 M NaCl (SIGMA-Aldrich Chemie GmbH). Eluted peptides were acidified with TFA, desalted using C18 solid phase extraction spin columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA), organic solvent removed in a vacuum concentrator at 45°C and reconstituted in 5% formic acid for analysis by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). LC-MS/MS was performed on a hybrid linear trap quadrupole (LTQ) Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Agilent 1200 HPLC nanoflow system (Agilent Biotechnologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) via nanoelectrospray ion source using a liquid junction (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Normalized amounts of tryptic peptides (~1 μg) were loaded onto a trap column (Zorbax 300SB-C18 5 μm; 5 × 0.3 mm; Agilent Biotechnologies) at a flow rate of 45 μl/min using 0.1% TFA as loading buffer. After loading, the trap column was switched in-line with a 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm long analytical column (packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Mobile-phase A consisted of 0.4% formic acid in water and mobile-phase B of 0.4% formic acid in a mix of 90% acetonitrile and 9.61% water. The flow rate was set to 230 nl/min and a 90 min gradient applied (36 to 30% solvent B within 81 min, 30 to 65% solvent B within 8 min, 65 to 100% solvent B within 1 min, 100% solvent B for 6 min before equilibrating at 36%  solvent B for 18 min). For the MS/MS experiment, the LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the 15 most intense precursor ions selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the linear ion trap (LTQ). MS1-scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer using a scan range of 350 to 1,800 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 (at 400 m/z). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to a target of 1×106 and a maximum injection time of 500 ms. MS2-scans were acquired in parallel in the linear ion trap with AGC target settings of 5×104 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Precursor isolation width was set to 2 Da and the CID normalized collision energy to 30%. The threshold for selecting precursor ions for MS2 was set to ~2,000 counts. Dynamic exclusion for selected ions was 30 seconds. A single lock mass at m/z 445.120024 was employed

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 platform, utilizing the database search engine Sequest HT. Percolator V3.0 was used to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on peptide and protein level under strict conditions. Precursor masses were recalibrated prior to Sequest HT searches using full tryptic digestion against the human SwissProt database v2017.06 (20,456 sequences and appended known contaminants) with up to one miscleavage site. Oxidation (+15.9949 Da) of methionine and acetylation (+42.010565 Da) of protein N-terminus were set as variable modifications, whilst carbamidomethylation (+57.0214 Da) of cysteine residues was set as fixed modifications. Data was searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and 0.6 Da on the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1. For calculation of protein intensities, the Minora Feature Detector node and Precursor Ions Quantifier node, both integrated in Thermo Proteome Discoverer were used. Automated chromatographic alignment and feature linking mapping (“matching between run”; https://www.maxquant.org) were enabled. Precursor abundance was calculated using intensity of peptide features including only unique peptide groups. SAINTexpress version 3.6.3 (11) was used to identify interactors in NS4B and CNX pulldowns. The protein intensities obtained from Proteome Discoverer analysis were averaged over technical replicates and used as inputs for the analysis with the SAINTexpress tool. Proteins having SAINT AvgP>0.95 were considered as interactors. All proteins identified by SAINT as interactors (1,543 proteins) of at least one of the baits (NS4B or CNX) were normalized to equal total abundance in each sample analyzed for differential abundance between the NS4B and CNX pulldowns using the limma R software package (12). Functional networks for 309 NS4B and 195 CNX significantly enriched proteins (2-fold enriched and having Limma q values of ≤0.05) were generated using ClueGO v2.5.5 app embedded in Cytoscape 3.7.2 (13). The human GO (Biological Processes, version from 27 February 2019) was used with the following settings: type of analysis: single; GO terms level: 3–4; GO term restriction: 3 genes and 4%; evidence code: all experimental. A significance threshold level of 0.05 was applied.

### Publication Abstract
Double membrane vesicles (DMVs) serve as replication organelles of plus-strand RNA viruses such as hepatitis C virus (HCV) and SARS-CoV-2. Viral DMVs are morphologically analogous to DMVs formed during autophagy, but lipids driving their biogenesis are largely unknown. Here we show that production of the lipid phosphatidic acid (PA) by acylglycerolphosphate acyltransferase (AGPAT) 1 and 2 in the ER is important for DMV biogenesis in viral replication and autophagy. Using DMVs in HCV-replicating cells as model, we found that AGPATs are recruited to and critically contribute to HCV and SARS-CoV-2 replication and proper DMV formation. An intracellular PA sensor accumulated at viral DMV formation sites, consistent with elevated levels of PA in fractions of purified DMVs analyzed by lipidomics. Apart from AGPATs, PA is generated by alternative pathways and their pharmacological inhibition also impaired HCV and SARS-CoV-2 replication as well as formation of autophagosome-like DMVs. These data identify PA as host cell lipid involved in proper replication organelle formation by HCV and SARS-CoV-2, two phylogenetically disparate viruses causing very different diseases, i.e. chronic liver disease and COVID-19, respectively. Host-targeting therapy aiming at PA synthesis pathways might be suitable to attenuate replication of these viruses.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Dmvs, Lipid phosphatidic acid, Hepatitis c

### Affiliations
CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine
Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Frédéric FONTAINE

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf Bartenschlager
Department of Infectious Diseases, Molecular Virology, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany


