### Accession
PXD008245

### Title
A functional genomics screen identifies genes required for Schizosaccharomyces pombe meiosis

### Description
Meiosis is a specialized cell division that generates gametes, such as eggs and sperm. Errors in meiosis result in miscarriages and are the leading cause of birth defects, however the molecular origins of these defects remain unknown. Studies in model organisms are beginning to identify the genes and pathways important for meiosis, but the parts list is still poorly defined. Here we present a comprehensive catalogue of genes required for meiosis in the fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Our genome-wide functional screen surveyed all non-essential genes for roles in chromosome segregation and spore formation. Novel genes required at distinct stages of the meiotic chromosome segregation and differentiation programme were identified. Preliminary characterization implicated three of these genes in centrosome/spindle pole body function, centromere and cohesion function. Our findings represent a near-complete parts list of genes required for meiosis in fission yeast, providing a valuable resource to advance our molecular understanding of meiosis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and washed in sterile water by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 8 min.Cells were resuspended in 0.2x cell volume of sterile water plus 2 mM PMSF and frozen as pellets in liquid nitrogen. 3 g of cells were ground 5 times in a Retsch Mixer Mill MM400 then thawed in Hyman buffer(50 mM Bis-Tris propane, pH7; 100 mM KCl; 5 mM EGTA; 10% (v/v Glycerol)plus inhibitors (5 μg/ml each chymostatin, leupeptin, antipain, pepstatin A, E-64; 4mM AEBSF (pefablock); 2 mM benzamidine, 2 mM PMSF, 0.4 mM LR-microcystin,N-ethylmaleimide(NEM), sodium orthovanadate, b-glycerolphosphate, sodium pyrophosphate). Triton X-100 was added to 0.1%, the extract was sonicated at 38% 1x 30 s before spinning at 4,000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was quickly filtered through a 1.6 micron glass microfiber filter (Whatman 25mm GD/X). and extract was added to GFP-TRAP®_M (Chromotek), at a ratio of 25 ul beads per ml of extract. This was then incubated at 4 °C rotating for 1 h. The beads were washed once with cold hyman buffer then 3 times with high salt hyman buffer (500 mM KCl). Proteins were eluted by incubating beads with 0.2M glycine pH2.5 rotating for 10min at room temperature. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube containing 1/10th 199 volume 1M Tris pH9.0 to neutralize. NuPAGE® LDS with 5% β-mercaptoethanol was added, the samples boiled at 100 °C for 5 min before being spun down at 13,000 rpm for 5 min prior to loading onto a precast NuPAGE® 8–12% Bis-Tris gel (Novex). A Pierce silver staining kit (Thermo Scientific) was used to visualize bands.  Excised gel bands were de-stained and proteins were digested with trypsin, as previously described (Shevchenko et al, 1996). In brief, proteins were reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, UK) for 20 min at ambient temperature in the dark. They were then digested overnight at 37°C with 12.5 ng μL-1 trypsin (Pierce, UK).  Following digestion, samples were diluted with equal volume of 0.1% TFA and spun onto StageTips as describe by Rappsilber et al (2003). Peptides were eluted in 20 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA and concentrated down to 4 μL by vacuum centrifugation (Concentrator 5301, Eppendorf, UK). The peptide sample was then prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis by diluting it to 5 μL by 0.1% TFA. LC-MS-analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) coupled on-line, to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano Systems (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Peptides were separated on a 50 cm EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific, UK), which was assembled on an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific, UK) and operated at 50oC. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in LC-MS grade water and mobile phase B consisted of 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto the column at a flow rate of 0.3 μL min-1 and eluted at a flow rate of 0.2 μL min-1 according to the following gradient: 2 to 40% mobile phase B in 150 min and then to 95% in 11 min. Mobile phase B was retained at 95% for 5 min and returned back to 2% a minute after until the end of the run (190 min).  FTMS spectra were recorded at 60,000 resolution (scan range 350-1500 m/z) with an ion target of 7.0e5. MS2 was performed in the orbitrap (30,000 resolution) with ion target of 1.0E4 and HCD fragmentation (Olsen et al, 2007) with normalized collision energy of 25. The isolation window in the quadrupole was 1.6 Thomson. Only ions with charge between 2 and 7 were selected for MS2.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software platform (Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.2.8 was used to process the raw files and search was conducted against Schizosaccaromyces pombe complete/reference proteome set of PomBase database (released on 01/07/2016), using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). For the first search peptide tolerance was set to 20 ppm while for the main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 pm. Isotope mass tolerance was 2 ppm and maximum charge to 7. Digestion mode was set to specific with trypsin allowing maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification.  Oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Peptide and protein identifications were filtered to 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Meiosis is a specialized cell division that generates gametes, such as eggs and sperm. Errors in meiosis result in miscarriages and are the leading cause of birth defects; however, the molecular origins of these defects remain unknown. Studies in model organisms are beginning to identify the genes and pathways important for meiosis, but the parts list is still poorly defined. Here we present a comprehensive catalog of genes important for meiosis in the fission yeast, <i>Schizosaccharomyces pombe</i> Our genome-wide functional screen surveyed all nonessential genes for roles in chromosome segregation and spore formation. Novel genes important at distinct stages of the meiotic chromosome segregation and differentiation program were identified. Preliminary characterization implicated three of these genes in centrosome/spindle pole body, centromere, and cohesion function. Our findings represent a near-complete parts list of genes important for meiosis in fission yeast, providing a valuable resource to advance our molecular understanding of meiosis.

### Keywords
Sporulation, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, Meiosis, Chromosome segregation

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Adele Marston

### Lab Head
Dr Adele Marston
WTCCB, University of Edinburgh


