### Accession
PXD026586

### Title
SynGAP variant from Japanese ALS cohort alters the recruitment of RNA binding proteins

### Description
FUS is one of the pathogenic RNA-binding proteins for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We previously reported that FUS stabilized SynGAP mRNA at its 3’UTR and maintained spine maturation and cognitive function in mice. To elucidate whether this mechanism could be pathogenic for ALS, we identified SynGAP 3’UTR variant at the binding site of FUS, different from that in mice, from a multicenter cohort in Japan. Human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSC)-derived motor neurons with SynGAP variant showed spine abnormality with aberrant SynGAP splicing. To evaluate how SynGAP variant altered the access of RNA binding proteins to SynGAP 3'UTR, we performed pull down assay by using biotinylated RNA probes with or without the variant.

### Sample Protocol
To assess the interaction of SynGAP mRNA 3’ UTR with endogenous RNA-biding proteins, a biotinylated RNA pull down assay was performed as described previously and in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures (Yokoi et al., 2017, Udagawa et al., 2015). SynGAP 3’UTR sequence was amplified from plamids made in 3’RACE of WT iPSC-derived motor neurons. The variant was induced by PrimeSTAR Mutagenesis Basal kit (Takara) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. DNA templates were amplified by RT-PCR using primers 5’- TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGCCCACCCAGCATCAGAGACC -3’ and 5’- GTCCCTGGGGGTCAAAGAGA -3’, and purified by PCR purification kit (Qiagen) as a template for in vitro transcription. T7 RNA polymerase (Takara) with biotin RNA labeling mix (Roche) was used for in vitro transcription as described in the manufacturer’s instructions. The lysate containing 300 μg proteins from motor neuron cultures prepared as described above was incubated with 3 μg of biotinylated RNA for 1 hr at RT, and streptavidin dynabeads (Invitrogen) were added. At 1 hr of incubation at 4 ℃, beads were washed with Brain IP buffer three times, boiled with 4 x NuPAGE LDS-PAGE sample buffer (Novex) containing beta-mercaptoethanol for 5 min at 95 ℃, and analyzed by western blotting. Band intensities of input and pull down were quantified.

### Data Protocol
For LC/MS/MS analysis, proteins in pull down assay were stained by Silver stain kit (Invitrogen), and bands of interest were excised and destained according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The proteins were digested by trypsin for 16 h at 37°C after reduction and alkylation. The peptides were analyzed by LC−MS using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc., Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano LC system (Dionex Co., Amsterdam, The Netherlands) using a nano HPLC capillary column, 150 mm × 75 μm i.d (Nikkyo Technos Co., Japan) via a nanoelectrospray ion source. Reversed-phase chromatography was performed with a linear gradient (0 min, 5% B; 100 min, 40% B) of solvent A (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) and solvent B (95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) at an estimated flow rate of 300 nL/min. A precursor ion scan was carried out using a 400–1600 mass to charge ratio (m/z) prior to MS/MS analysis. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 0.8 Th with the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 30%, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. Only those precursors with charge state 2–6 were sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 15 s with a 10 ppm tolerance. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Publication Abstract
Fused in sarcoma (FUS) is a pathogenic RNA-binding protein in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We previously reported that FUS stabilizes Synaptic Ras-GTPase activating protein 1 (<i>Syngap1</i>) mRNA at its 3' untranslated region (UTR) and maintains spine maturation. To elucidate the pathologic roles of this mechanism in ALS patients, we identified the <i>SYNGAP1</i> 3'UTR variant rs149438267 in seven (four males and three females) out of 807 ALS patients at the FUS binding site from a multicenter cohort in Japan. Human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived motor neurons with the <i>SYNGAP1</i> variant showed aberrant splicing, increased isoform &#x3b1;1 levels, and decreased isoform &#x3b3; levels, which caused dendritic spine loss. Moreover, the <i>SYNGAP1</i> variant excessively recruited FUS and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK), and antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) blocking HNRNPK altered aberrant splicing and ameliorated dendritic spine loss. These data suggest that excessive recruitment of RNA-binding proteins, especially HNRNPK, as well as changes in <i>SYNGAP1</i> isoforms, are crucial for spine formation in motor neurons.<b>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</b> It is not yet known which RNAs cause the pathogenesis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We previously reported that Fused in sarcoma (FUS), a pathogenic RNA-binding protein in ALS, stabilizes synaptic Ras-GTPase activating protein 1 (<i>Syngap1</i>) mRNA at its 3' untranslated region (UTR) and maintains dendritic spine maturation. To elucidate whether this mechanism is crucial for ALS, we identified the <i>SYNGAP1</i> 3'UTR variant rs149438267 at the FUS binding site. Human-induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC)-derived motor neurons with the <i>SYNGAP1</i> variant showed aberrant splicing, which caused dendritic spine loss along with excessive recruitment of FUS and heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein K (HNRNPK). Our findings that dendritic spine loss is because of excess recruitment of RNA-binding proteins provide a basis for the future exploration of ALS-related RNA-binding proteins.

### Keywords
Syngap, Ipsc, Fus, Als, Motor neuron

### Affiliations
Department of Neurology, Nagoya University
Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine

### Submitter
Satoshi Yokoi

### Lab Head
Dr Masahisa Katsuno
Department of Neurology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine


