### Accession
PXD009326

### Title
Mass Spectrometry Utilities: Fast post processing of mass spectrometry data.

### Description
Development of Mass Spectrometry Utilities as a tool to complex MS data output as obtained from MaxQuant. As proof of concept the proteolytic degradation of glycerophosphoryl diester phosphodiesterase GlpQ by the protein quality control protease DegP is analyzed. Mass spectrometry was used to monitor proteolysis over time in the absence and presence of a peptidic allosteric activator of DegP. The software’s output clearly shows the increased proteolytic activity of DegP in the presence of the activating peptide, identifies statistically significant products of the proteolysis and offers insights into substrate specificity.

### Sample Protocol
Protease assays GlpQ (preincubated with 6 M urea for 30 min at RT) was added as a 10-fold dilution to DegP and incubated at 45 oC. Samples were taken at time points 0, 5, 15, 30 and 60 minutes and subjected to MS. When indicated, 50 µM of the allosteric EfeB peptide (DYFGSALLRV) was present in the reaction mix. For subsequent MS identification of the proteolytic products, samples were precipitated by addition of 4 Vol Acetone and incubation at -20°C. The insoluble unprocessed substrates were removed by centrifugation (20000 ×g, 10 min, 4°C) and transfer of the peptide containing supernatant to fresh Eppendorf tubes. The supernatant was removed by evaporation in a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). The dry proteolytic products were then taken up in 0.5% formic acid and desalted on home-made 2 disc C18 StageTips as previously described. After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1 % formic acid solution. LC-MS/MS settings Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 22 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45°C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/min). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 40 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 35 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 2 min and 100% B for 3 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 10 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda search in MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) using the default settings. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated. The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the Uniprot E. coli reference database (UP000000625_83333.fasta, 4306 entries). The Sequences for DegP and GlpQ were substituted with the sequences of the overexpressed 6×His fusion proteins. All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant, 245 entries). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and no static modification. Enzyme specificity was set to “unspecific”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 min and the alignment time window set to 20 min. For the analysis of the peptide cleavage sites the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current of the respective peptides was used as reported by MaxQuant in the peptide.txt file.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Data analysis, Proteolysis, Glpq, Degp, Msu

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


