### Accession
PXD012011

### Title
Ctenopharyngodon idella iTRAQ - Understanding the Immune Mechanisms of Vibrio mimicus targeted epitopes gene vaccine by iTRAQ Technology

### Description
Understanding the Immune Mechanisms of Vibrio mimicus targeted epitopes gene vaccine by iTRAQ Technology

### Sample Protocol
The samples used for iTRAQ analysis were the same as those used for RNA sequencing. Total protein was extracted from each sample according to the method of Long et al. The quality of proteins was assessed using a protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, CA, USA) and 12% SDS-PAGE. Then extracted protein was kept at − 80 °C for further analysis. The iTRAQ labeling, SCX fraction and LC−MS/MS analysis were carried out by Beijing Genomic Institute (BGI, Wuhan, China). In brief, protein samples were digested with trypsin (protein/trypsin=20:1) overnight at 37 °C. The digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ reagents 119 and 121 according to the manufacturer's protocol for iTRAQ Reagent-8plex Multiplex Kit (AB SCIEX). After labeling, samples were fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) hromatography using a HPLC system (Shimadzu, Japan) equipped with an Ultremex SCX column (Phenomenex, CA, USA). The eluted peptides were pooled into 12 fractions, desalted using a Strata X C18 column (Phenomenex), and dried under vacuum. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded into a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shimadzu, Japan) for separation, and then subjected to tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS, Thermo Fisher, MA, USA) coupled online to the nanoHPLC. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) for further identification and quantification as previously described.

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained from LC–MS/MS analysis were processed using Proteome DiscovererTM Software 2.1 (Thermo, United States). Proteins identification was performed by using Mascot software (version 2.3.02) against Cyprinidae database (31,834 sequences, http://www.uniprot.org/uniprot/?query=Cyprinidae&sort=score). Search parameters were set as followed: MS/MS ion search; trypsin enzyme; fragment mass tolerance 0.05 Da; monoisotopic mass values; variable modifications of Gln- > pyro-Glu (N-term Q), oxidation (M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y); peptide mass tolerance ±20 ppm; Fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8 plex (N-term), and iTRAQ 8 plex (K). Each confident protein identification involves at least one unique peptide. For protein quantitation, iTRAQ labeled peptides was quantified with the IQuant software that was independently developed by the BGI company in China, and the parameters were set as follows: (i) Quant-peptide: use all unique peptide; (ii) Quant-number: at least two unique spectra; (iii) Normalization: VSN; (iv) Protein-Ratio: weighted average; (v) Statistical analysis: permutation test. Only proteins with p-value < 0.05 and fold-change > 1.21or <0.83 between the immunized group and control group were defined as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). The GO annotation and KEGG enrichment analysis of all DEPs was performed in a manner similar to the transcripts. To determine the correlation among DEPs, the selected immune-related the protein interaction network was constructed by String (http://string-db.org/) and Cytoscape3.0 (http://www.cytoscape.org/) as previous reports (54,55). In the network, nodes are proteins, lines represent the predicted functional associations, and the number of lines represents the strength of predicted functional interactions between proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ctenopharyngodon idella, Vaccine, Itraq

### Affiliations
Anhui Agriculture University
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, P. R. China

### Submitter
JiaJun Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin-Nian Li
College of Animal Science and Technology, Anhui Agricultural University, Hefei 230036, P. R. China


