### Accession
PXD036132

### Title
Proteomics to identify putative genes underlying fruit ripening and related to long shelf life

### Description
Our aim was to gather additional evidence of tomato fruit ripening by assessing two long shelf life near isogenic lines (NILs). These two NILs, named NIL115 and NIL080, carried wild introgression provided by S. pimpinellifolium accession LA0722 in the genetic background of Caimanta (CAI) from S. lycopersicum. Pericarp tissue was collected from the four genotypes (NIL115, NIL080, CAI and LA0722) at two ripening stages: mature green (MG) and red ripe (RR). A label-free quantitation (LFQ) proteomic analysis was carried out to identify differentially abundant proteins between MG and RR.

### Sample Protocol
Pericarp tissue was collected from a single fruit of three different plants per NIL (three biological replicates) at two ripening stages: mature green (MG) and red ripe (RR). The parental genotypes (CAI and LA0722) were included for comparisons. Proteins were extracted from 1 g of pericarp per genotype–ripening stage combination.  Powdered tissue was subjected to extensive cleanup with 10% (w/v) TCA/acetone and acetone plus 10 mM DTT and air-dried. Dry powdered tissue was extracted using an SDS extraction buffer (0.15 M Tris-HCl solution pH 8.8 with bromophenol blue). Phenol and protein extract were mixed at a 1:1 (v/v) ratio. Proteins were selectively precipitated from the phenol phase with cold methanol plus 0.1 M ammonium acetate. The protein pellets were dissolved in 60 μL of 6 M urea and 1% w/v CHAPS. A total number of 24 samples were sent to the CEQUIBIEM Proteomics Facility (Universidad de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, Argentina) for protein digestion and MS analysis. Each sample was reduced with 20 mM DTT for 45 min at 56°C, alkylated with 50 mM Iodoacetamide for 45 min in the dark and digested with trypsin overnight. Extraction of peptides was performed with acetonitrile and salt cleaning was carried out through Zip-Tip C18 (Merck). Desalted peptides were analyzed by nano-high performance liquid chromatography (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap technology mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive, high collision dissociation cell and Orbitrap analyzer Thermo Scientific). Peptide ionization was performed by electrospray (Easy Spray, Thermo Scientific) at 2.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
The obtained spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Scientific). The search was performed using 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance and 0.05 Da fragmentation mass tolerance with 1% false discovery rate. Tryptic cleavage was then selected, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation on methionine was used as dynamic modification and carbamidomethylation on cysteine was used as static modification. For protein identification, searches were conducted against the Solanum lycopersicum cv. Heinz 1706 database (UniProt, proteome reference: UP000004994). Protein intensities were log transformed. The imputation of Log2 intensity values were carried out using a downshifted normal distribution with width 0.3 and downshift 1.8 for each sample. The relative abundance of peptides across ripening stages was compared using R Software (version 3.6.3). Briefly, the empirical Bayes analysis pipeline of Bioconductor limma package was used to obtain the differential expressed proteins (DEPs) between the two ripening stages (mature green (MG) versus red ripe (RR)) in each genotype. A p-value < 0.05 and values of Log2 fold-change above 1 or below -1 were set to determine significantly increased abundant proteins in MG or RR stages.

### Publication Abstract
The elucidation of the ripening pathways of climacteric fruits helps to reduce postharvest losses and improve fruit quality. Here, we report an integrative study on tomato ripening for two near-isogenic lines (NIL115 and NIL080) with <i>Solanum pimpinellifolium</i> LA0722 introgressions. A comprehensive analysis using phenotyping, molecular, transcript, and protein data were performed. Both NILs show improved fruit firmness and NIL115 also has longer shelf life compared to the cultivated parent. NIL115 differentially expressed a transcript from the APETALA2 ethylene response transcription factor family (AP2/ERF) with a potential role in fruit ripening. E4, another ERF, showed an upregulated expression in NIL115 as well as in the wild parent, and it was located physically close to a wild introgression. Other proteins whose expression levels changed significantly during ripening were identified, including an ethylene biosynthetic enzyme (ACO3) and a pectate lyase (PL) in NIL115, and an alpha-1,4 glucan phosphorylase (Pho1a) in NIL080. In this study, we provide insights into the effects of several genes underlying tomato ripening with potential impact on fruit shelf life. Data integration contributed to unraveling ripening-related genes, providing opportunities for assisted breeding.

### Keywords
Ripening stage; red ripe, Mature green, Fruit softening, Solanum spp., Fruit ripening

### Affiliations
Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias Agrarias (IICAR-CONICET-UNR), Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR). Campo Experimental “José Villarino”, S2125ZAA Zavalla, ARGENTINA
Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias Agrarias (IICAR-CONICET-UNR), Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias - Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR). Campo Experimental “José Villarino”, S2125ZAA Zavalla, ARGENTINA

### Submitter
Melisa Di Giacomo

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Hernán Pereira da Costa
Instituto de Investigaciones en Ciencias Agrarias (IICAR-CONICET-UNR), Facultad de Ciencias Agrarias Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR). Campo Experimental “José Villarino”, S2125ZAA Zavalla, ARGENTINA


