### Accession
PXD034636

### Title
Proteomic analysis of blood biomarkers predicting prognosis of high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma

### Description
Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal female cancer and tends to be diagnosed at an advanced stage, resulting high recurrence and mortality rates despite the treatment. Accurate prediction of prognosis is necessary to facilitate molecular profiling-based treatment. We investigated novel, blood-based prognostic biomarkers for high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) using mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion was performed using 2 μL of each plasma sample as previously described, with some modifications. Briefly, 23 μL of protein digestion buffer, including reduction and alkylation reagents, was added to 2 μL plasma samples in 96 well-plates. The mixture was boiled for 25 min at 60℃ to denature and alkylate the proteins. After cooling samples to room temperature, protein digestion was performed at 37℃ overnight using a trypsin/LysC mixture at a 100:1 protein-to-protease ratio. The second digestion was performed at 37℃ for 2 h using trypsin (enzyme-to-substrate ratio [w/w], 1:1000). All resulting peptides were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The acidified peptides were loaded onto custom-made styrene divinylbenzene reversed-phase sulfonate-StageTips according to previously described procedures.

### Data Protocol
All raw MS files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.1.0). MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, with 88,657 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. For label-free quantification, the intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) algorithm was used on the MaxQuant platform.Briefly, iBAQ values, determined using MaxQuant, are the raw intensities divided by the number of theoretical peptides. Thus, the iBAQ values were proportional to the molar quantities of the proteins. Perseus software was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is one of the most lethal female cancers. For accurate prognosis prediction, this study aimed to investigate novel, blood-based prognostic biomarkers for high-grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC) using mass spectrometry-based proteomics methods. We conducted label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using frozen plasma samples obtained from patients with newly diagnosed HGSOC (n = 20). Based on progression-free survival (PFS), the samples were divided into two groups: good (PFS &#x2265;18&#xa0;months) and poor prognosis groups (PFS &lt;18&#xa0;months). Proteomic profiles were compared between the two groups. Referring to proteomics data that we previously obtained using frozen cancer tissues from chemotherapy-na&#xef;ve patients with HGSOC, overlapping protein biomarkers were selected as candidate biomarkers. Biomarkers were validated using an independent set of HGSOC plasma samples (n&#xa0;= 202) via enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). To construct models predicting the 18-month PFS rate, we performed stepwise selection based on the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) with 5-fold cross-validation. Analysis of differentially expressed proteins in plasma samples revealed that 35 and 61 proteins were upregulated in the good and poor prognosis groups, respectively. Through hierarchical clustering and bioinformatic analyses, GSN, VCAN, SND1, SIGLEC14, CD163, and PRMT1 were selected as candidate biomarkers and were subjected to ELISA. In multivariate analysis, plasma GSN was identified as an independent poor prognostic biomarker for PFS (adjusted hazard ratio, 1.556; 95% confidence interval, 1.073-2.256; p&#xa0;= 0.020). By combining clinical factors and ELISA results, we constructed several models to predict the 18-month PFS rate. A model consisting of four predictors (FIGO stage, residual tumor after surgery, and plasma levels of GSN and VCAN) showed the best predictive performance (mean validated AUC, 0.779). The newly developed model was converted to a nomogram for clinical use. Our study results provided insights into protein biomarkers, which might offer clues for developing therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Human, Plasma, Biomarker, Boxcar

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


