### Accession
PXD015544

### Title
Human Heart Whole Tissue Lysate LC-MS/MS

### Description
Commercial human heart whole tissue lysates were analyzed with LC-MS/MS with an inclusion list of alternative sequences (Lau et al. bioRxiv 2019).

### Sample Protocol
200 µg of adult whole normal human heart tissue lysate (Novus Biologicals NB820-59217) was digestedwere extracted by commercial RIPA or M-Per tissue lysis buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 1x Thermo Halt protease/phosphatase inhibitor followed by brief pulses of sonication with typically 6 pulses at 20% amplitude followed by 5 sec cooldown on ice. Total protein extracts for each sample were quantified by bicinchoninic acid assays and 150 µg proteins were digested on 10-kDa MWCO polyethersulfone filters (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were washed with 8 M urea, buffer-exchanged with triethylammonium bicarbonate (100  mM, 100  μL), reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (3μL of 0.5 M, mM, 55  °C, 30  min) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (7.5 μL of 375  mM, ambient temperature, 30  min). Proteins were digested on-filter (16  hr, 37  °C) with sequencing-grade modified trypsin (50:1, Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade). The peptides were then pre-fractionated into 10 fractions using pH-10 reversed-phase spin columns (Thermo Pierce). Optional heavy modifications (R[13C(6)15N(4)] and KR[13C(6)15N(2)) were allowed.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw spectrum files were converted to open-source [.mzML] formats using ProteoWizard msconvert v.3.0.11392 with the following options (--filter “peakPicking vendor”). Database search against custom databases were performed using the SEQUEST algorithm implemented in Comet v.2017.01 rev.0 with the following options (--peptide_mass_tolerance 10 --peptide_mass_unit 2 --isotope_error 2 --allowed_missed_cleavage 2 --num_enzyme_termini 1 --fragment_bin_tol 0.02). Conventional settings for other Comet parameters were used and a reverse decoy database was generated from the custom database for each search for FDR estimation. Static cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (C +57.021464 Da; Unimod accession #4) modification was specified. Tryptic and semi-tryptic peptides within a 10-ppm parent mass window surrounding the candidate precursor mass were searched, allowing up to 2 miscleavage events. Peptide spectrum match data were filtered and target and decoy sequence matches were re-ranked using the semi-supervised learning method implemented in Percolator in the Crux v.3.0 Macintosh binary distribution

### Publication Abstract
The protein-level translational status and function of many alternative splicing events remain poorly understood. We use an RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-guided proteomics method to identify protein alternative splicing isoforms in the human proteome by constructing tissue-specific protein databases that prioritize transcript splice junction pairs with high translational potential. Using the custom databases to reanalyze &#x223c;80 million mass spectra in public proteomics datasets, we identify more than 1,500 noncanonical protein isoforms across 12 human tissues, including &#x223c;400 sequences undocumented on TrEMBL and RefSeq databases. We apply the method to original quantitative mass spectrometry experiments and observe widespread isoform regulation during human induced pluripotent stem cell cardiomyocyte differentiation. On a proteome scale, alternative isoform regions overlap frequently with disordered sequences and post-translational modification sites, suggesting that alternative splicing may regulate protein function through modulating intrinsically disordered regions. The described approach may help elucidate functional consequences of alternative splicing and expand the scope of proteomics investigations in various systems.

### Keywords
Human, Heart, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Consortium of Fibrosis Research and Translation  Department of Medicine-Cardiology Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus
UC Denver, Anschutz Medical Campus

### Submitter
Maggie Pui Yu Lam

### Lab Head
Dr Maggie Pui Yu Lam
Consortium of Fibrosis Research and Translation  Department of Medicine-Cardiology Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus


