### Accession
PXD030499

### Title
Genetic determinants of genomic stability identified by comprehensive in vivo analyses of micronucleus formation

### Description
Genomic instability due to defective DNA damage response or arising from mitotic chromosomal imbalance can lead to sequestration of DNA in aberrant extranuclear structures called micronuclei (MN).  Although MN are a hallmark of genomic instability associated diseases and ageing, the catalogue of genetic players that regulate their generation remains to be determined.  Here analysed 996 mouse mutant lines, revealing 143 factors whose loss significantly increases (71) or decreases (72) MN formation.  Most such genes, including the Dscc1 (DNA replication and sister chromatid cohesion 1) gene, have never been studied in mouse models.  We found that Dscc1 defective mice were sub-viable and displayed phenotypes like the clinical characteristics of cohesinopathy patients.  After validating the DSCC1-MN phenotype in human cells, we used genome-wide CRISPR-Cas9 screening to define its synthetic lethal and synthetic viable interactors.  Perhaps surprisingly, we found that loss of Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) can rebalance/rescue phenotypes associated with DSCC1 loss in a manner paralleling restoration of SMC3 (structural maintenance of chromosomes protein 3) protein acetylation.  Our study provides a resource of novel factors involved in maintenance of genomic stability and shows how this information can be used to uncover mechanisms relevant to better understand disease biology.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were lysed in 5%SDS/100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma) buffer with probe sonication and heating.  Protein concentration were measured by Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay kit. 100 µg of proteins per sample was taken. Proteins were reduced by TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, Sigma), alkylated by iodoacetamide (Sigma), and then purified by trichloroacetic acid (TCA) precipitation. Purified proteins were digested in 100 mM TEAB by trypsin (ThermoFisher) at 1:25 (by weight) at 37C for 18 hours. 40 µg peptides were labelled by 0.8 mg TMT10plex according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Samples were mixed, dried in SpeedVac, and then were fractionated on an XBridge BEH C18 column (2.1 mm i.d. x 150 mm, Waters) with 5% ACN/0.1% NH4OH (pH 10) – 35% CH3CN /0.1% NH4OH in 30 min / total cycle 60min. The flow rate was at 200 µl/min.  Fractions were collected ay every 30 sec and then concatenated to 12 fractions and dried in SpeedVac.  The peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid (FA)/H2O and analysed on the Orbitraip Fusion hybrid mass spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (both from Thermo Fisher). Samples were first loaded and desalted on a PepMap C18 nano trap (100 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 100 Å, 5 µ) then peptides were separated on a PepMap C18 column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm) over a linear gradient of 4 – 33.6% CH3CN/0.1% FA in 180 min / cycle time at 210 min at a flow rate at 300 nl/min. The MS acquisition used MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) with the Top Speed 3s cycle time.  Briefly, the Orbitrap full MS survey scan was m/z 380 – 1500 with the resolution 120,000 at m/z 200, with AGC set at 4e5 and 50 ms maximum injection time.  Multiply charged ions (z = 2 – 6) with intensity threshold at 5000 were fragmented in ion trap at 35% collision energy, with AGC at 1e4 and 50 ms maximum injection time, and isolation width at 0.7 Da in quadrupole.  The top 10 MS2 fragment ions were SPS selected with the isolation width at 0.7 Da, and fragmented in HCD at 60% NCE, and detected in the Orbitrap to get the report ions’ intensities at a better accuracy. The resolution was set at 60,000, and the AGC at 6e4 with maximum injection time at 105 ms.  The dynamic exclusion was set 60 s with ± 7 ppm exclusion window.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher) using the Sequest HT search engine. Spectra were searched against fasta files of reviewed Uniprot homo Sapien entries (December 2021) and an in-house contaminate database. Search parameters were: trypsin with 2 maximum miss-cleavage sites, mass tolerances at 30 ppm for Precursor, and 0.6 Da for fragment ions, dynamic modifications of Deamidated (N, Q), and Oxidation (M), static modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and TMT6plex (Peptide N-terminus and K). Peptides were validated by Percolator with q-value set at 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). The TMT10plex reporter ion quantifier included 20 ppm integration tolerance on the most confident centroid peak at the MS3 level. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. The co-Isolation threshold was set at 100%.  Peptides with average reported S/N>3 were used for protein quantification, and the SPS mass matches threshold was set at 50%.  Report ions intensities were normalized by total peptide amount, and then scaled on all average to correct the variation by for different protein loading in each channel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Tmt, Ms3

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jyoti Choudhary
The Institute of Cancer Research


