### Accession
PXD009393

### Title
Proteome analysis of microvessels from CADASIL patients

### Description
CADASIL, the most frequent and intensely studied monogenic SVD, is characterized by a severe pathology in the cerebral vasculature including the mutation-induced aggregation of the Notch3 extracellular domain (Notch3ECD) and the formation of protein deposits of insufficiently determined composition in the extracellular space of vessel walls. To advance our understanding of protein accumulation in CADASIL-affected tissue, we quantitatively determined the proteome of cerebral vessels isolated from patient and control autopsy samples (n = 6 for each group), obtaining 95 proteins with significantly increased abundance.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated vessels were lysed in a buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 100 mM DTT by homogenization with a dounce tissue grinder (Wheaton) and heating for 3 min at 95 °C. Afterwards, the samples were sonicated (5 times, 30 s, amplitude 100%, duty cycle 50%) with intermediate cooling using a VialTweeter sonicator (Hielscher). Cell debris and undissolved material was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 15 min. A protein amount of 15 µg from human or mouse vessel lysate were subjected to proteolytic digestion by trypsin using filter assisted sample preparation (FASP) and spin filters with a 30 kDa cut-off (Sartorius). Peptides were desalted, dried by vacuum centrifugation and dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid. An amount of 1.3 µg of peptides was separated on a nanoLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm/50 cm x 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) with a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (ACN) containing 0.1% formic acid (0 min, 2% ACN; 5 min, 5% ACN; 185 min, 25% ACN; 230 min, 35% ACN; 250 min, 60% ACN; 255 min, 95% ACN, 270 min, 95% ACN) at 50 °C column temperature (30 cm column length for human and 50 cm for mouse samples). The nanoLC was coupled online via a nanospray flex ion source equipped with a column oven (Sonation) to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 and a m/z range from 300 to 1400. The top 10 peptide ions exceeding an intensity of 1.5 x 104 were chosen for collision induced dissociation. Fragment ion spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500. A dynamic exclusion of 120 s was used for peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The data were analyzed with the Maxquant software version 1.5.4.1 and searched against a reviewed canonical FASTA database of Homo sapiens (UniProt, download: July 11th 2016, 20203 entries). Two missed trypsin cleavages were allowed for the database search. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as static modifications. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide and peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. The false discovery rate (FDR) for both peptides and proteins was adjusted to less than 1% using a target and decoy (reversed sequences) search strategy. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) and a phenotypically similar recessive condition (CARASIL) have emerged as important genetic model diseases for studying the molecular pathomechanisms of cerebral small vessel disease (SVD). CADASIL, the most frequent and intensely explored monogenic SVD, is characterized by a severe pathology in the cerebral vasculature including the mutation-induced aggregation of the Notch3 extracellular domain (Notch3<sup>ECD</sup>) and the formation of protein deposits of insufficiently determined composition in vessel walls. To identify key molecules and pathways involved in this process, we quantitatively determined the brain vessel proteome from CADASIL patient and control autopsy samples (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;6 for each group), obtaining 95 proteins with significantly increased abundance. Intriguingly, high-temperature requirement protein A1 (HTRA1), the extracellular protease mutated in CARASIL, was found to be strongly enriched (4.9-fold, p&#x2009;=&#x2009;1.6&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>-3</sup>) and to colocalize with Notch3<sup>ECD</sup> deposits in patient vessels suggesting a sequestration process. Furthermore, the presence of increased levels of several HTRA1 substrates in the CADASIL proteome was compatible with their reduced degradation as consequence of a loss of HTRA1 activity. Indeed, a comparison with the brain vessel proteome of HTRA1 knockout mice (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;5) revealed a highly significant overlap of 18 enriched proteins (p&#x2009;=&#x2009;2.2&#x2009;&#xd7;&#x2009;10<sup>-16</sup>), primarily representing secreted and extracellular matrix factors. Several of them were shown to be processed by HTRA1 in an in&#xa0;vitro proteolysis assay identifying them as novel substrates. Our study provides evidence for a loss of HTRA1 function as a critical step in the development of CADASIL pathology linking the molecular mechanisms of two distinct SVD forms.

### Keywords
Human, Small vessel disease, Microvessels, Cadasil

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research (ISD) Klinikum der Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Haffner
Institute for Stroke and Dementia Research (ISD) Klinikum der Universität München Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 Munich Germany


