### Accession
PXD029070

### Title
Rat vascular smooth muscle cells LC-MS/MS

### Description
Crotonylation of histones is discovered of late as one of post-translational modification that can regulate gene expression. However, the function of crotonylation on non-histone proteins in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMC) is unclear. Here, we aim to use modification and proteomic analysis to find the cellular characteristic of crotonylated non-histone proteins and the crosstalk with ubiquitinated proteins in vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) phenotypic remodeling. We performed modification and proteomic analysis of VSMCs before and after stimulated with platelet-derived growth factor-BB (PDGF-BB). The crotonylated and ubiquitinated pan-antibody was used to enrich the protein and then subjected to high-throughput mass spectrometry analysis. The enrichment analysis was performed within differentially modified proteins in regards to GO terms, KEGG and protein domain.

### Sample Protocol
1.Preparation of VSMC extraction for LC-MS VSMCs with or without PDGF-BB stimulated were collected and treated three times by sonicate on ice with a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in this kind of lysis buffer (3 μM TSA, 50 mM NAM ,8 M urea, and 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The supernatant was transferred to new tubes after centrifuging at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the protein concentration was detected with BCA kit based on the manufacturer’s instructions.  2.Trypsin Digestion For digestion, dithiothreitol (5 mM) was used to reduce the total proteins, lasting 30 min at temperature of 56 °C and iodoacetamide (11 mM) was used to alkylate at room temperature lasting 15 min in darkness. NH4HCO3 (100 mM) was added to the concentration of 2M. Finally, the trypsin was added with the ratio of 1:50 for overnight and 1:100 ratio for 4h.  3.HPLC Fractionation High pH reverse-phase HPLC was used to fractionate the tryptic peptides into fractions by using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were distributed in a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) lasting 60 min and then clustered into 60 fractions. At last, 10 fractions appeared and they were dried by vacuum centrifuging.  4.Affinity Enrichment of crotonylated peptides The approach of enrichment of peptides was as followed. NETN buffer was used to dissolved the peptides and pre-washed beads was added to shake at 4°C overnight. After washing by NETN and H2O for four times and twice, respectively, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid was used to elute the beads. Finally, the fractions was dried by vacuum for LC-MS/MS.  5.LC-MS/MS Analysis Load the peptides onto a reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.) after dissolving by 0.1% formic acid (solvent A). Based on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min, the gradient was distributed from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile), lasting 26 min, 23% to 35% for 8 min and up to 80% for 3 min. NSI source was used to analyze the peptide after the combining of tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) with online to the UPLC. The detailed treatment parameters are provided in supplementary materials.

### Data Protocol
6.Database Search Based on the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8), MS/MS data could be processed. UniProt database was searched with reverse decoy database. And the STRING database was used to search for the protein-protein interaction. Other description of the parameters or standard could be seen supplementary materials.  7.Statistical analysis Quantification of proteomic data was processed by Maxquant software (version 1.5.2.8). It should be noted that the common peptides shared by different groups were excluded from quantification. T-test was used to analyze the significant differences between replicates. We took the specific fold change (>1.2) and p value (<0.05) of proteins into account to perform the differential analysis. The other data was analyzed with one-way ANOVA using SPSS software. P ≤0.05 was thought as statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Vsmc

### Affiliations
Hebei Medical University
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Key Laboratory of Medical Biotechnology of Hebei Province, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China

### Submitter
Li-Hua Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Li-Hua Dong
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medicine, Key Laboratory of Medical Biotechnology of Hebei Province, Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China


