### Accession
PXD004285

### Title
Non-intein splicing of RB47 -  Activation of an Endoribonuclease by Non-intein Protein Splicing

### Description
The poly A binding protein RB47 was purified from C. reinhardtii chloroplasts and was found to have endoribonuclease activity. MS analysis suggested that an internal non-conserved linker (NCL)sequence was absent from the native protein. Recombinant, full length RB47 protein, including the NCL did not have endoribonuclease activity while versions lacking the NCL were active. An in vitro system, utilizing recombinant RB47 and chloroplast lysates, recreated the processing of RB47 in that the NCL was excised and the flanking sequences were spliced together.

### Sample Protocol
Protein bands were excised from SDS PAGE gels and digested with trypsin or trypsin and formic acid prior to analysis by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanospray Flex ion source, and coupled with a Dionex UltiMate3000RSLCnano system

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were subjected to database searches using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) Two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed, the peptide precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The Chlamydomonas reinhardtii chloroplast-localized poly(A)-binding protein RB47 is predicted to contain a non-conserved linker (NCL) sequence flanked by highly conserved N- and C-terminal sequences, based on the corresponding cDNA. RB47 was purified from chloroplasts in association with an endoribonuclease activity; however, protein sequencing failed to detect the NCL. Furthermore, while recombinant RB47 including the NCL did not display endoribonuclease activity in vitro, versions lacking the NCL displayed strong activity. Both full-length and shorter forms of RB47 could be detected in chloroplasts, with conversion to the shorter form occurring in chloroplasts isolated from cells grown in the light. This conversion could be replicated in vitro in chloroplast extracts in a light-dependent manner, where epitope tags and protein sequencing showed that the NCL was excised from a full-length recombinant substrate, together with splicing of the flanking sequences. The requirement for endogenous factors and light differentiates this protein splicing from autocatalytic inteins, and may allow the chloroplast to regulate the activation of RB47 endoribonuclease activity. We speculate that this protein splicing activity arose to post-translationally repair proteins that had been inactivated by deleterious insertions or extensions.

### Keywords
C. reinhardti, Rb47, Intein, Chloroplast

### Affiliations
Boyce Thompson Institute

### Submitter
Stephen Campbell

### Lab Head
Dr David Stern
Boyce Thompson Institute


