### Accession
PXD009799

### Title
ICAP2 Immunoprecipitation results

### Description
The mitochondrial ATP synthase is a macromolecular motor that uses the proton gradient to generate ATP. Proper ATP synthase function requires a stator linking the catalytic and rotary portions of the complex. However, sequence-based searches fail to identify genes encoding stator subunits in apicomplexan parasites like Toxoplasma gondii or the related organisms that cause malaria. Here, we identify 11 previously unknown subunits from the Toxoplasma ATP synthase, which lack homologs outside the phylum. Hidden Markov modeling suggests that two of them—ICAP2 and ICAP18—share distant homology with mammalian stator subunits. Our mass spcetrometry analysis indicates that both proteins form part of the ATP synthase complex.

### Sample Protocol
After each immunoprecipitation experiment, bands from the SDS-PAGE gels were excised, divided into ~2 mm squares and washed overnight in 50% methanol in water. These were washed once more with 47.5% methanol 5 % acetic acid in water for 2 h, dehydrated with acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. Reduction and alkylation of disulfide bonds was carried out by the addition of 30 µl 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3) for 30 min. Samples were alkylated by removal of the DTT solution and addition of 100 mM iodoacetamide in 100 mM NH4HCO3 for 30 min. Samples were sequentially washed with aliquots of acetonitrile, 100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile and dried in a speed-vac. The bands were enzymatically digested with 300 ng of sequencing-grade Trypsin (Promega, cat. no. V5111) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 for 10 mins, on ice. Sufficient NH4HCO3 was added to rehydrate the gel pieces. These were allowed to digest overnight at 37°C with gentle agitation. Peptides were extracted by gently agitating the gel bands 10 min with sequential 50 µl washes with 50 mM NH4HCO3, and twice with 47.5% acetonitrile 5% formic acid in water. All extractions were pooled in a 0.5 ml conical autosampler vial. Organic solvent was removed and the volumes were reduced to 15 µl using a speed-vac. Samples were analyzed by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using a Waters NanoAcquity in line with a ThermoFisher Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer, in a nano-flow configuration. The mass spectrometer was operated in a top 10 data-dependent acquisition mode using a 240,000 FWHM m/z resolution in the Orbitrap and fragmentation in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Peptide searches were performed with Mascot (Matrix Science) algorithms against the T. gondii protein database (version 11, ToxoDB.org) concatenated to a database of common contaminants (keratin, trypsin, etc). The resulting Mascot search results were then loaded into Scaffold (Proteome Software) and a minimum peptide threshold of 95% was used for identification of peptides prior to the analysis described in the results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Toxoplasma, Mitochondria, Atp synthase

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute 
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute  of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts USA

### Submitter
Diego Huet

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute  of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts USA


