### Accession
PXD027430

### Title
Proteomic study in sucrose secreting mutant of cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942.

### Description
We conducted proteomic analysis of a strain engineered for inducible secretion of sucrose.

### Sample Protocol
Proteolytic Digestion Protein pellets were re-suspended in 270uL of 100mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 10% trifluoroethanol.  Samples were reduced and alkylated by adding TCEP and Iodoacetamide at 10mM and 40mM, respectively and incubating for 5min at 45C with shaking at 1400 rpm in an Eppendorf ThermoMixer.  Trypsin, in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, was added at a 1:100 ratio (wt/wt) and the mixture was incubated at 37C overnight.  Final volume of each digest was ~300uL. After digestion, the samples were acidified to 2% TFA and subjected to C18 solid phase clean up using StageTips1 to remove salts.  Eluates were dried using a vacuum centrifuge.  TMT Labeling Peptide samples were then re-suspended in 100uL of 100mM TEAB and labeled with TMT reagents from Thermo Scientific (www.thermo.com) according to manufacturers’ instructions.  A 2uL aliquot of each labeled peptide sample was taken for label incorporation testing.  The remainder of each labeled sample was combined in equal amounts by volume and purified by solid phase extraction using c18 SepPak cartridges (www.waters.com).  Eluted peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation to ~2uL and stored at -20C.  Purified peptides were re-suspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA to 20uL.   LC/MS/MS Analysis An injection of 5uL was automatically made using a Thermo (www.thermo.com) EASYnLC 1200 onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.1mm x 20mm C18 trapping column and washed for ~5min with buffer A.  Bound peptides were then eluted onto a Thermo Acclaim PepMap RSLC 0.75mm x 500mm C18 analytical column over 125min with a gradient of 5%B to 8%B in 5min, 8%B – 40%B in 109min, ramping to 90%B in 1min and held at 90%B for the duration of the run (Buffer A = 99.9% Water/0.1% Formic Acid, Buffer B =80% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic Acid/19.9% water) at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min.  Column temperature was maintained at 50C using an integrated column heater (PRSO, v2, www.sonation.com).  Eluted peptides were sprayed into a ThermoScientific Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (www.thermo.com) using a FlexSpray spray ion source.  Survey scans were taken in the Orbi trap (120,000 resolution, determined at m/z 200) and the top 10 ions in each survey scan are then subjected to automatic higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) with fragment spectra acquired at 45,000 resolution.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS spectra are converted to peak lists using ProteomeDiscoverer, v2.2.0 (www.thermo.com) and searched against a protein database containing all S. elongatus PC7942 entries found in NCBI (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, downloaded 2019-03-19), customer provided sequences and appended with common laboratory contaminants (downloaded from www.thegpm.org) using the Mascot searching algorithm, v 2.6, within ProteomeDiscoverer.  The Mascot output was then analyzed using Scaffold Q+S, v4.9.0 (www.proteomesoftware.com) to probabilistically validate protein identifications with the X!Tandem validation search option selected.  Assignments validated using the Scaffold 1%FDR confidence filter are considered true.    Mascot parameters for all databases were as follows: -  allow up to 2 missed tryptic sites -  Fixed modification of Carbamidomethyl Cysteine, TMT10 of Lysine and peptide N-term - variable modification of Oxidation of Methionine - peptide tolerance of +/- 10ppm - MS/MS tolerance of 0.02 Da

### Publication Abstract
Photosynthetic organisms possess a variety of mechanisms to achieve balance between absorbed light (source) and the capacity to metabolically utilize or dissipate this energy (sink). While regulatory processes that detect changes in metabolic status/balance are relatively well studied in plants, analogous pathways remain poorly characterized in photosynthetic microbes. Here, we explored systemic changes that result from alterations in carbon availability in the model cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus PCC 7942 by taking advantage of an engineered strain where influx/efflux of a central carbon metabolite, sucrose, can be regulated experimentally. We observed that induction of a high-flux sucrose export pathway leads to depletion of internal carbon storage pools (glycogen) and concurrent increases in estimates of photosynthetic activity. Further, a proteome-wide analysis and fluorescence reporter-based analysis revealed that upregulated factors following the activation of the metabolic sink are concentrated on ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase-oxygenase (Rubisco) and auxiliary modules involved in Rubisco maturation. Carboxysome number and Rubisco activity also increased following engagement of sucrose secretion. Conversely, reversing the flux of sucrose by feeding exogenous sucrose through the heterologous transporter resulted in increased glycogen pools, decreased Rubisco abundance, and carboxysome reorganization. Our data suggest that Rubisco activity and organization are key variables connected to regulatory pathways involved in metabolic balancing in cyanobacteria.

### Keywords
Synechococcus elongatus (strain pcc 7942) (anacystis nidulans r2)

### Affiliations
Michigan State University
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Michigan State University (lab head)

### Submitter
Amit Singh

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel C Ducat
Department of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology Michigan State University (lab head)


