### Accession
PXD036417

### Title
Counterintuitive structural and functional effects due to naturally-occurring mutations targeting the active site of the disease-associated NQO1 enzyme

### Description
Our knowledge on the genetic diversity of the human genome is exponentially growing. However, our capacity to establish genotype-phenotype correlations in a large-scale requires a combination of detailed experimental and computational work. This is a remarkable task in human proteins, which are typically multifunctional and structurally complex. In addition, mutations often prevent the determination of mutant high-resolution structures by X-ray crystallography. We have characterized here the effects of five mutations in the vicinity of the active site of the disease-associated NQO1 protein which are found either in cancer cell lines or in massive exome sequencing analysis in human population. Using a combination of H/D exchange, rapid-flow enzyme kinetics, binding energetics and conformational stability, we show that mutations in both sets may cause counterintuitive functional effects that are explained well by their effects on local stability regarding different functional features. Importantly, mutations predicted to be highly deleterious (even those affecting the same protein residue) may cause mild to catastrophic effects on protein function. These functional effects are not well explained by current predictive bioinformatic tools and evolutionary models that account for site conservation and physicochemical changes upon mutation. Our study also reinforces the notion that naturally-occurring mutations not (yet?) identified as disease-associated can be highly deleterious. Our approach, combining protein biophysics and structural biology tools is readily accessible to broadly increase our understanding of genotype-phenotype correlations and to improve predictive computational tools aimed at distinguishing disease-prone against neutral missense variants in the human genome.

### Sample Protocol
Amide hydrogen/deuterium exchange (HDX) of NQO1 was studied for the WT and mutant variants in the NQO1holo and NQO1dic states. To start the exchange reaction 20 μM protein solution was diluted ten times with a D2O-based 20 mM HEPES-NaOH, 100 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM TCEP (tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine), pD 7.4. The exchange was terminated after 10, 50, 250, 1250 and 6250 s by mixing (1:1) with 0.5 M Glycine-HCl, pH 2.3 and the samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Time points 10, 250 and 6250 s were replicated. Custom-made co-immobilized nepenthesin-2/pepsin column was used for online proteolysis which was driven by 0.4% formic acid (FA) in water pumped at 200 μl·min-1. Solvent was delivered by 1260 Infinity II Quaternary pump (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a SecurityGuard™ pre-column (ULTRA Cartridges UHPLC Fully Porous Polar C18, 2.1 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using the same solvent. Duration of digestion and desalting was 3 minutes. Following desalting, the peptides were separated on an analytical column (LUNA® Omega Polar C18 Column, 100 Å, 1.6 µm, 100 mm X 1.0 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using 1290 Infinity II LC System (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Linear gradient 5-45% B in 6 min was followed by a quick step to 99% B lasting 5 min. Flow during the separation was 40 μl·min-1. Solvent A was 0.1% FA / 2% acetonitrile (ACN) in water, B was 0.1% FA / 98% ACN in water. Digestion, desalting, and separation steps were performed at 0 °C and pH 2.3 to minimize deuterium back-exchange. LC system was directly coupled to an ESI source of 15T FT-ICR mass spectrometer (solariX XR, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) operating in a broad-band MS mode.

### Data Protocol
Correction of back-exchange was done using fully deuterated control prepared for each NQO1 variant. The data were further processed in DataAnalysis 5.3, exported and assembled into a project under in-house developed program Deutex. Peptides were identified using separate data-dependent LC-MS/MS runs carried out using identical LC setup connected to ESI-timsTOF Pro with PASEF. MASCOT (v 2.4, Matrix Science, London, UK) was used for data searching against a custom-built database containing sequences of the proteases, NQO1 variants and common contaminantions. Decoy search was enabled with false-discovery ratio < 1% and Ion Score cut-off 20.  To evaluate the effect of mutations, the difference in kinetics of deuterium incorporation (% D vs. time) of mutants and the WT protein was calculated for a given ligation state and for each protein segment experimentally determined. The average of the two most different time points (mutant-WT) was used to determine the Δ%Dav values. This parameter allows to readily compare the HDX kinetics between two given NQO1 states/variants in different protein segments as recently described.

### Publication Abstract
Our knowledge on the genetic diversity of the human genome is exponentially growing. However, our capacity to establish genotype-phenotype correlations on a large scale requires a combination of detailed experimental and computational work. This is a remarkable task in human proteins which are typically multifunctional and structurally complex. In addition, mutations often prevent the determination of mutant high-resolution structures by X-ray crystallography. We have characterized here the effects of five mutations in the active site of the disease-associated NQO1 protein, which are found either in cancer cell lines or in massive exome sequencing analysis in human population. Using a combination of H/D exchange, rapid-flow enzyme kinetics, binding energetics and conformational stability, we show that mutations in both sets may cause counterintuitive functional effects that are explained well by their effects on local stability regarding different functional features. Importantly, mutations predicted to be highly deleterious (even those affecting the same protein residue) may cause mild to catastrophic effects on protein function. These functional effects are not well explained by current predictive bioinformatic tools and evolutionary models that account for site conservation and physicochemical changes upon mutation. Our study also reinforces the notion that naturally occurring mutations not identified as disease-associated can be highly deleterious. Our approach, combining protein biophysics and structural biology tools, is readily accessible to broadly increase our understanding of genotype-phenotype correlations and to improve predictive computational tools aimed at distinguishing disease-prone against neutral missense variants in the human genome.

### Keywords
Genotype-phenotype correlations; protein structure-function; structural stability; catalytic mechanism

### Affiliations
BioCeV - Institute of Microbiology of the CAS
Institute of Microbiology - BioCeV, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic

### Submitter
Dmitry Loginov

### Lab Head
Dr Petr Man
Institute of Microbiology - BioCeV, Academy of Sciences of the Czech Republic


