### Accession
PXD037706

### Title
Membrane Protein Modification Modulates Big and Small Extracellular Vesicle Biodistribution and Tumorigenic Potential in Breast Cancers in vivo

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by cells to mediate intercellular communication under pathological and physiological conditions. While small EVs (sEVs; <100–200 nm, exosomes) are intensely investigated, the properties and functions of medium and large EVs (big EVs [bEVs]; >200 nm, microvesicles) are less well explored. Here, we identify bEVs and sEVs as distinct EV populations, and determine that bEVs are released in a greater bEV:sEV ratio in the aggressive human triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype. PalmGRET, bioluminescence resonance energy transfer (BRET)-based EV reporter, reveals dose-dependent EV biodistribution at non-lethal and physiological EV dosages, as compared to lipophilic fluorescent dyes. The bEVs and sEVs exhibit unique biodistribution profiles, yet individually promote in vivo tumor growth in a syngeneic immunocompetent TNBC breast tumor murine model. The bEVs and sEVs share mass spectrometry (MS)-identified tumor progression-associated EV surface membrane proteins (tpEVSurfMEMs), which include SLC29A1, CD9 and CD44. Remarkably, tpEVSurfMEM depletion attenuates EV lung organotropism, alters biodistribution, and reduces protumorigenic potential. This study identifies distinct in vivo property and function of bEVs and sEVs in breast cancer, which suggest the significant role of bEVs in diseases, diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

### Sample Protocol
Polyacrylamide gel slices containing bEV and sEV protein lysates were resolved in 10 × 10−1 M tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (Sigma-Aldrich) with 50 × 10−1 M ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) for 30 min at 37°C and alkylated in 50 × 10−1 M iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) with 50 × 10−1 M ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min in the dark at 25°C. Trypsin/Lys-C solution (Promega) was added and incubated at 37°C for 12 h. The resulting peptides were extracted from the gel fragments and analyzed with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid quadrupole-ion trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) combined with Ultimate system 3000 nanoLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with HCD (higher energy collision dissociation) MS/MS mode.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra raw files were processed for peak detection using MaxQuant version 1.6.5.01 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Peptides were identified by using the Andromeda search engine and the Swiss-Prot database. The proteomics data were searched against the UniProt Mus musculus database (Swiss-Prot, 17,009 reviewed protein sequences, UP000000589). The search criteria used were trypsin specificity, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl, and variable modifications of oxidation and acetyl (Protein N-term), and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A minimum of five amino acids in the peptide length was required. The precursor mass tolerance was 20 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was 0.5 Da. A false discovery rate of 0.01 and PeptideRank of 1 were set for peptide identification filters.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are released by cells to mediate intercellular communication under pathological and physiological conditions. While small EVs (sEVs; &lt;100-200&#xa0;nm, exosomes) are intensely investigated, the properties and functions of medium and large EVs (big EVs (bEVs); &gt;200&#xa0;nm, microvesicles) are less well explored. Here, bEVs and sEVs are identified as distinct EV populations, and it is determined that bEVs are released in a greater bEV:sEV ratio in the aggressive human triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) subtype. PalmGRET, bioluminescence-resonance-energy-transfer (BRET)-based EV reporter, reveals dose-dependent EV biodistribution at nonlethal and physiological EV dosages, as compared to lipophilic fluorescent dyes. Remarkably, the bEVs and sEVs exhibit unique biodistribution profiles, yet individually promote in vivo tumor growth in a syngeneic immunocompetent TNBC breast tumor murine model. The bEVs and sEVs share mass-spectrometry-identified tumor-progression-associated EV surface membrane proteins (tpEVSurfMEMs), which include solute carrier family 29 member 1, Cd9, and Cd44. tpEVSurfMEM depletion attenuates EV lung organotropism, alters biodistribution, and reduces protumorigenic potential. This study identifies distinct in vivo property and function of bEVs and sEVs in breast cancer, which suggest the significant role of bEVs in diseases, diagnostic and therapeutic applications.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica
Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Bryan John Magoling

### Lab Head
Dr Charles P. Lai
Institute of Atomic and Molecular Sciences, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


