### Accession
PXD011196

### Title
Proteomic analysis of roots of Arabidopsis plda1 mutants

### Description
PLDa1 is a phospholipid hydrolyzing enzyme playing multiple regulatory roles in stress response in plants. Its signaling activity is mediated via the PLDa1 dependent phosphatidic acid production, by its capacity to bind and modulate the G-protein complex or by interaction with other proteins. Relative quantitative proteomic analysis of two tDNA insertion Arabidopsis plda1 mutants has been performed. Remarkably, PLDa1 deficiency caused differential regulation of many proteins which form protein complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Plant root material was homogenized using liquid nitrogen in mortar and pestle and subjected to phenol protein extraction followed by methanol precipitation. Protein tryptic digest was analyzed using nano-HPLC (Ultimate 3000) linked to LTQ ORBITRAP VELOS mass spectrometer (THERMO).

### Data Protocol
Raw data were matched to NCBI Arabidopsis protein Ref database, using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software. Results were filtered by FDR<1.0%. Label-free relative quantitative analysis was based on precursor spectral intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Phospholipase D&#x3b1;1 (PLD&#x3b1;1) belongs to phospholipases, a large phospholipid hydrolyzing protein family. PLD&#x3b1;1 has a substrate preference for phosphatidylcholine leading to enzymatic production of phosphatidic acid, a lipid second messenger with multiple cellular functions. PLD&#x3b1;1 itself is implicated in biotic and abiotic stress responses. Here, we present a shot-gun differential proteomic analysis on roots of two Arabidopsis <i>pld&#x3b1;1</i> mutants compared to the wild type. Interestingly, PLD&#x3b1;1 deficiency leads to altered abundances of proteins involved in diverse processes related to membrane transport including endocytosis and endoplasmic reticulum-Golgi transport. PLD&#x3b1;1 may be involved in the stability of attachment sites of endoplasmic reticulum to the plasma membrane as suggested by increased abundance of synaptotagmin 1, which was validated by immunoblotting and whole-mount immunolabelling analyses. Moreover, we noticed a robust abundance alterations of proteins involved in mitochondrial import and electron transport chain. Notably, the abundances of numerous proteins implicated in glucosinolate biosynthesis were also affected in <i>pld&#x3b1;1</i> mutants. Our results suggest a broader biological involvement of PLD&#x3b1;1 than anticipated thus far, especially in the processes such as endomembrane transport, mitochondrial protein import and protein quality control, as well as glucosinolate biosynthesis.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis root plda1 mutants

### Affiliations
IGBB, Mississippi State University
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University

### Submitter
Tibor Pechan

### Lab Head
Dr Tibor Pechan
Institute for Genomics, Biocomputing and Biotechnology Mississippi State University


