### Accession
PXD012024

### Title
Dual targeting of BCR-ABL1 and IRE1α is a promising therapeutic strategy in Ph+ ALL

### Description
BCR-ABL positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell survival is strongly dependent on the IRE1α-XBP1 branch of the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR). In the study at hand, we have focused on exploring the link between BCR-ABL1 and IRE1α to better understand whether a simultaneous pharmacological inhibition of both pathways could represent a beneficial therapeutic strategy in Philadelphia positive (Ph+) ALL. Therefore, the effect on the phosphoproteome of two inhibitors (MKC-8866 and Nilotinib) as well as a combination of both compounds was analysed in this study.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines (SUP-B15 and TOM1) were treated for 16 h with DMSO or inhibitors MKC-8866 30 µM and/or nilotinib 500 nM (single or both combined). Cells were lysed in 8M Urea buffer, reduced, alkylated and digested o/n with LysC and Trypsin, according to standard protocols. The digested peptides of the conditions were then modified using the dimethyl labelling method (light (L), intermediate (M) and heavy (H)). Experiment 1 and 3: DMSO (L), MKC-8866 (M), both drugs (H); Experiment 2 and 4 DMSO (L), Nilotinib (M), both drugs (H). The DMSO (L) and the both drugs (H) were identical in 1&2 and 3&4. Experiments 3&4 were a biological replicate of 1&2. Alls amples were measured twice (technical replicate). After combinig the labelled samples, the peptide mixtures were subjected to a) high pH reversed phase chromatography separation and b) to TiO2/Ti-IMAC based phosphopeptide enrichment. The resulting samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Elite coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data was analysed using MaxQuant (1.5.1.2) and the built-in Andromeda search engine. The spectra were searched against the human UniProt database version 01/17 (only reviewed and canonical entries). The search settings for MaxQuant were: multiplicity of 3; labels: DimethLys0 and DimethNter0 for “light”, DimethLys4 and DimethNter4 for “intermediate”, and DimethLys8 and DimethNter8 for “heavy”. carbamidomethylation (Cys) as a fixed modification; oxidation (Met); phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr) as variable modifications. FDR 0.01% on protein, peptide and PTM level.

### Publication Abstract
BCR-ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) cell survival is dependent on the inositol-requiring enzyme 1 alpha (IRE1&#x3b1;) branch of the unfolded protein response. In the current study, we have focused on exploring the efficacy of a simultaneous pharmacological inhibition of BCR-ABL1 and IRE1&#x3b1; in Philadelphia-positive (Ph+) ALL using tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) nilotinib and the IRE1&#x3b1; inhibitor MKC-8866. The combination of 0.5 &#xb5;M nilotinib and 30 &#xb5;M MKC-8866 in Ph+ ALL cell lines led to a synergistic effect on cell viability. To mimic this dual inhibition on a genetic level, pre-B-cells from conditional Xbp1+/fl mice were transduced with a BCR-ABL1 construct and with either tamoxifen-inducible cre or empty vector. Cells showed a significant sensitization to the effect of TKIs after the induction of the heterozygous deletion. Finally, we performed a phosphoproteomic analysis on Ph+ ALL cell lines treated with the combination of nilotinib and MKC-8866 to identify potential targets involved in their synergistic effect. An enhanced activation of p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase &#x3b1; (p38&#x3b1; MAPK) was identified. In line with this findings, p38 MAPK and, another important endoplasmic reticulum-stress-related kinase, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) were found to mediate the potentiated cytotoxic effect induced by the combination of MKC-8866 and nilotinib since the targeting of p38 MAPK with its specific inhibitor BIRB-796 or JNK with JNK-in-8 hindered the synergistic effect observed upon treatment with nilotinib and MKC-8866. In conclusion, the identified combined action of nilotinib and MKC-8866 might represent a successful therapeutic strategy in high-risk Ph+ ALL.

### Keywords
Treatment, Bcr-abl1, Cell death, Ire1α, Map kinase, Ph+ all

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University Medical School, Aachen, Germany,

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Iris Appelmann
Department of Hematology, Oncology, Hemostaseology and Stem Cell Transplantation, RWTH Aachen University Medical School, Aachen, Germany,


