### Accession
PXD026408

### Title
RADIATION-INDUCED MODIFICATIONS IN MICRO-RNA AND PROTEOMIC CARGO IN PLASMA-DERIVED EXTRACELLULAR VESICLES

### Description
In this study, to delineate the radiation-induced changes in miRNAs and protein cargo, we established the microRNA and proteome profiles of plasma EVs collected from mice that had been sham- (SI), whole body (WBI), or partial body irradiated (PBI) with 2 Gy X-rays 24 hours before. The radiation-induced changes in the miRNA and protein composition of EVs can influence the stress response of distant cells by propagating damaging or protective signals. Testing EVs in functional assays may be a read out of the multiple radiation-induced signaling networks, crucial for gaining an understanding of the EVs properties. Therefore, to functionally elucidate the pathophysiological changes in the contents of EVs induced by irradiation, we here investigated the EV-induced cellular responses in vivo, by injecting WBI, PBI and SI plasma-derived EVs in the cerebellum of neonatal mice, highly susceptible to radiation injury, and evaluating the level of apoptosis.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse irradiation  C57Bl/6J female mice of 8 weeks of age were subjected to WBI or PBI with 2.0 Gy of X-rays. Irradiation was performed using a Gilardoni CHF 320 G X-ray generator (Gilardoni, Mandello del Lario Italy) operated at 250 kVp, 1 mA for 0.1 Gy and 15 mA for 2.0 Gy, with Half-Value Layer = 1.6 mm Cu (additional filtration of 2.0 mm Al and 0.5 mm Cu). PBI was performed by exposing the lower third of the mouse body, whilst the upper two thirds were shielded with a lead-shield. Additional groups of mice were sham-irradiated. Animal study was performed according to the European Community Council Directive 2010/63/EU, approved by the local Ethical Committee for Animal Experiments of the ENEA, and authorized by the Italian Ministry of Health (n° 539/2018-PR). A schematic representation of the experimental design is illustrated in Figure 1. Isolation of EVs One or twenty four after SI, PBI or WBI irradiation with 2 Gy of X-rays, animals were sacrificed, blood was collected and blood plasma was separated and snap frozen for later exosome extraction. All the samples were shipped to Oxford Brookes University (OBU) for exosome isolations and characterization as described (Tuncay Cagata, 2020).  MS sample preparation and measurement The proteomics analysis was performed using three biological samples, each pooled from plasma EVs isolarted from 10 mice. Ten µg of sample were enzymatically digested using a modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol as described by (Wisniewski et al., 2009; Grosche et al.,MCP 2016). Peptides were stored at -20°C until MS measurement. Mass spectrometry (MS) measurement was performed in data dependent (DDA) mode. MS data were acquired on a Q Exactive (QE) high field (HF) mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) as described in Hladik et al. (J Proteome Res. 2020 Jan 3;19(1):337-345. PMID: 31657930)

### Data Protocol
Data Processing – Protein Identification Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific; version 2.4.1.15) was used for peptide and protein identification via a database search (Sequest HT search engine) against Swiss-Prot mouse data base (Release 2020_02, 17061 sequences), considering full tryptic specificity, allowing for up to one missed tryptic cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a static modification. Dynamic modifications included deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met; and a combination of Met loss with acetylation on protein N-terminus. Percolator was used for validating peptide spectrum matches and peptides, accepting only the top-scoring hit for each spectrum, and satisfying the cutoff values for FDR <1%, and posterior error probability <0.01. The final list of proteins complied with the strict parsimony principle.  Data processing – Label-free quantification The quantification of proteins, was based on the area value of the abundance values for unique plus razor peptides. Abundance values were normalized in a retention time dependent manner to account for sample loading errors. The protein abundances were calculated summing up the abundance values for admissible peptides. The final abundance ratio (fold change) was calculated using median abundance values of three replicate analyses each. The statistical significance of the ratio change was ascertained employing the T-test approach described in Navarro et al. (Navarro P, Trevisan-Herraz M, Bonzon-Kulichenko E, Núñez E, Martínez-Acedo P, Pérez-Hernández D, Jorge I, Mesa R, Calvo E, Carrascal M, Hernáez ML, García F, Bárcena JA, Ashman K, Abian J, Gil C, Redondo JM, Vázquez J. General statistical framework for quantitative proteomics by stable isotope labeling. J Proteome Res. 2014 Mar 7;13(3):1234-47. doi: 10.1021/pr4006958. Epub 2014 Feb 10. PMID: 24512137) which is based on the presumption that we look for expression changes for proteins that are just a few in comparison to the number of total proteins being quantified. The quantification variability of the non-changing "background" proteins can be used to infer which proteins change their expression in a statistically significant manner. Proteins were defined as significantly up- or downregulated if they fulfilled the following filtering criteria: fold change of ≥1.30 (upregulation) or ≤0.77 (downregulation); (ii) q (FDR corrected p) ≤0.05 and (iii) protein identification by at least two unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Radiation; ionizing radiation; neonatal cerebellum; apoptosis, Proteomics, Mirnome

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy
Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Christine von Toerne

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Teresa Mancuso
Laboratory of Biomedical Technologies, Agenzia Nazionale per le Nuove Tecnologie, l'Energia e lo Sviluppo Economico Sostenibile (ENEA), Rome, Italy


