### Accession
PXD013986

### Title
Molecular complexity of the major urinary protein system of the Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus C4PR_LIV

### Description
Major urinary proteins (MUP) are the major component of the urinary protein fraction in house mice (Mus spp.) and rats (Rattus spp.). The structure, polymorphism and functions of these lipocalins have been well described in the western European house mouse (Mus musculus domesticus), clarifying their role in semiochemical communication. The complexity of these roles in the mouse raises the question of similar functions in other rodents, including the Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus. Norway rats express MUPs in urine but information about specific MUP isoform sequences and functions is limited. In this study, we present a detailed molecular characterization of the MUP proteoforms expressed in the urine of two laboratory strains, Wistar Han and Brown Norway, and wild caught animals, using a combination of manual gene annotation, intact protein mass spectrometry and bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches. Detailed sequencing of the urinary MUP isoforms reveals a less complex pattern of primary sequence polymorphism in the rat than the mouse. However, rat MUPs exhibit added complexity in the form of post-translational modifications, including the phosphorylation of Ser4 in some isoforms, and exoproteolytic trimming of specific isoforms.

### Sample Protocol
urine (diluted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reach 25 µg in 40 µL) were denatured with RapiGest (Waters Corporation) and alkylated, prior to digestion with trypsin or endopeptidase Lys C. To stop the proteolytic reaction and to inactivate and precipitate the detergent, TFA (final concentration 0.5 % (v/v)) was added, followed by incubation for 45 min at 37 °C. To remove all insoluble material, samples were centrifuged twice at 13,000 g for 15 min. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a QExactive instrument (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 LC nano system (Thermo Scientific). Protein digests were resolved on an Easy-spray PepMap RSLC C18 column over a linear gradient from 3 to 40% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% v/v formic acid. The QExactive instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired at 70,000 resolution and the ten most intense multiply charged ions (charge ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30% standardized collision energy. Fragments ions were detected at 35,000 resolution and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were analysed using Peaks Studio 8.0 (Bioinformatics solutions Inc.) to identify post-translational modifications, using a database containing all the entries annotated for Rattus norvegicus in Uniprot (www.uniprot.org) (updated on 20170605) and the sequences of the mature MUP proteins, applying a FDR < 1 %, trypsin was selected as the specific enzyme, allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation as fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable.

### Publication Abstract
Major urinary proteins (MUP) are the major component of the urinary protein fraction in house mice (Mus spp.) and rats (Rattus spp.). The structure, polymorphism and functions of these lipocalins have been well described in the western European house mouse (Mus musculus domesticus), clarifying their role in semiochemical communication. The complexity of these roles in the mouse raises the question of similar functions in other rodents, including the Norway rat, Rattus norvegicus. Norway rats express MUPs in urine but information about specific MUP isoform sequences and functions is limited. In this study, we present a detailed molecular characterization of the MUP proteoforms expressed in the urine of two laboratory strains, Wistar Han and Brown Norway, and wild caught animals, using a combination of manual gene annotation, intact protein mass spectrometry and bottom-up mass spectrometry-based proteomic approaches. Cluster analysis shows the existence of only 10 predicted mup genes. Further, detailed sequencing of the urinary MUP isoforms reveals a less complex pattern of primary sequence polymorphism in the rat than the mouse. However, unlike the mouse, rat MUPs exhibit added complexity in the form of post-translational modifications, including the phosphorylation of Ser4 in some isoforms, and exoproteolytic trimming of specific isoforms. Our results raise the possibility that urinary MUPs may have different roles in rat chemical communication than those they play in the house mouse. Shotgun proteomics data are available via ProteomExchange with identifier PXD013986.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Rattus norvegicus, 2u-globulins, Mups

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, University of Liverpool
G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB United Kingdom

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Rob J Beynon
G44, Biosciences Building| Institute of Integrative Biology University of Liverpool Crown Street | Liverpool  | L69 7ZB United Kingdom


