### Accession
PXD029119

### Title
Eukaryotic catecholamine hormones influence the chemotactic  control of Vibrio campbellii by binding to the coupling protein CheW

### Description
In addition to their well-known role as stress-associated catecholamine hormones in animals and humans, epinephrine (EPI) and norepinephrine (NE) act as interkingdom signals between eukaryotic hosts and bacteria. However, the molecular basis of their effects on bacteria is not well understood. In initial phenotypic studies utilizing Vibrio campbellii as a model organism, we characterized the bipartite mode of action of catecholamines, which consists of promotion of growth under iron limitation, and enhanced colony expansion. In order to identify the molecular targets of the hormones, we designed and synthesized tailored probes for chemical proteomic studies. As the catechol group in EPI and NE acts as iron chelator and is prone to form a reactive quinone moiety, we devised a photoprobe based on the adrenergic agonist phenylephrine (PE), which solely influenced colony expansion on soft agar. Using this probe, we identified CheW, located at the core of the chemotaxis signaling network, as a major target. In vitro studies confirmed that EPI, NE, PE, as well as labetalol, a clinically applied antagonist, bind to purified CheW with affinity constants in the sub-micromolar range. In line with these findings, exposure of V. campbellii to these adrenergic agonists affects the chemotactic control of the bacterium. This study highlights a previously unknown effect of eukaryotic signaling molecules on bacterial motility.

### Sample Protocol
Photolabeling experiments: Live cells of V. campbellii were treated with the photoprobe, UV-irradiated, and lysed. Lysate was separated into a PBS-soluble and insoluble fraction and labeled proteins were clicked to biotin tags. Proteins were then enriched on avidin beads, digested (trypsin), and peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus.  isoDTB experiments: Labeling with the photoprobe was performed in V. campbellii lysate, labeled proteins were clicked to isotopically labeled desthiobiotin tags (isoDTB) and enriched on avidin beads. Following tryptic digestion, beads were washed and labeled peptides were eluted and analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus.  Co-IP: Live V. campbellii was treated with epinephrine, proteins were crosslinked with DSSO, cells lysed, and proteins were pulled down using an anti-CheW antibody. After tryptic digestion, peptides were measured on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Photolabeling: Data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) and peptides were searched against the UniProt database for Vibrio campbellii ATCC BAA-1116 / BB120 (taxon identifier 338187, downloaded on 17.02.2020). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Trypsin (without N-terminal cleavage to proline) was set as proteolytic enzyme with a maximum of two allowed 8 missed cleavages. Label-free quantification (LFQ) mode was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2. The “match between runs” (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time window) and second peptide identification options were activated. All other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. LFQ intensities were further processed with Perseus version 1.6.1.1. Peptides of the categories “only identified by site”, “reverse”, or “potential contaminant” were removed and LFQ intensities were log2-transformed. Data were filtered to retain only protein groups identified in at least 3/4 valid values (experiments: competitive labeling PE-P vs. EPI; competitive labeling PE-P vs. PRO/LAB; Co-IP), 4/5 valid values (competitive labeling PE-P vs. PE), or 3/3 valid values (labeling with EPI-P1) in at least one group and missing values were imputed (width 0.3, downshift 1.8, total matrix). A two-sample Student´s t-test with permutation-based FDR (FDR 0.05) was performed and the significance cut-off was set at p-value = 0.05 (-log10(p-value) = 1.3) and an enrichment factor of 2 (log2(x) = 1) or 4 (log2(x) = 2) as indicated in the plots.   isoDTB data: Software was set up using the MSconvert tool (version: 3.0.19172-57d620127) of the ProteoWizard software (version: 3.0.19172 64bit), the FragPipe interface (version: 14.0), MSFragger (version: 3.1.1), Philosopher (version: 3.3.10), IonQuant (version 1.4.6), and Python (version: 3.7.3). The FASTA file (Vibrio campbellii ATCC BAA-1116/BB120; taxon identifier 338187, downloaded on 17.02.2020) was modified by adding the reverse sequences manually. Amino acid selectivity was analyzed and data were evaluated and filtered performing an Offset Search in MSFragger with mass offsets set as 740.3974 or 746.4040. Run MS1 quant was enabled with Labeling based quant with masses set as 740.3974 or 746.4040. Specific amino acids were quantified and data were evaluated and filtered performing a Closed Search in MSFragger with variable modifications set to 740.3974 or 746.4040 on Tyr. Run MS1 quant was enabled with Labeling based quant with masses set as 740.3974 or 746.4040.

### Publication Abstract
SignificanceHost-emitted stress hormones significantly influence the growth and behavior of various bacterial species; however, their cellular targets have so far remained elusive. Here, we used customized probes and quantitative proteomics to identify the target of epinephrine and the &#x3b1;-adrenoceptor agonist phenylephrine in live cells of the aquatic pathogen <i>Vibrio campbellii</i>. Consequently, we have discovered the coupling protein CheW, which is in the center of the chemotaxis signaling network, as a target of both molecules. We not only demonstrate direct ligand binding to CheW but also elucidate how this affects chemotactic control. These findings are pivotal for further research on hormone-specific effects on bacterial behavior.

### Keywords
Epinephrine, Phenylephrine, Q exactive plus, V. campbellii, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Center for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Angela Weigert Muñoz

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Center for Functional Protein Assemblies, Technical University of Munich, Germany


