### Accession
PXD009844

### Title
regulatory changes induced by miR-223 in a monocyte/macrophage cell line.

### Description
We used a multi-omics approach combining transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics to study the impact of over-expression and inhibition of the microRNA miR-223, a pleiotropic regulator of metabolic-related disease, in the RAW monocyte-macrophage cell line. We analyzed the levels of proteins, mRNAs, and metabolites in order to identify genes involved in miR-223 regulation, to determine candidate disease biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets. We observed that both up- and down-regulation of miR-223 induced profound changes in the mRNA, protein and metabolite profiles in RAW cells. Microarray-based transcriptomics evidenced a change in 120 genes that were linked predominantly to histone acetylation, bone remodeling and RNA regulation. In addition, 30 out the 120 genes encoded long noncoding RNAs. The nanoLC-MS/MS revealed that 52 proteins were significantly altered when comparing scramble, pre- and anti-miR-223 treatments. Sixteen out of the mRNAs coding these proteins genes are predicted to have binding sites for miR-223. CARM-1, Ube2g2, Cactin and Ndufaf4 were confirmed to be miR-223 targets by western blotting. Analyses using Gene Ontology annotations evidenced association with cell death, splicing and stability of mRNAs, bone remodeling and cell metabolism. miR-223 alteration changed the expression of CARM-1, Ube2g2, Cactin and Ndufaf4 during osteoclastogenesis and macrophage, indicating that these genes are potential biomarkers of these processes. The most important discriminant metabolites found in the metabolomics study were found to be hydrophilic amino acids, carboxylic acids linked to metabolism and pyrimidine nucleotides, indicating that changes in miR-223 expression alter the metabolic profile of cells, and may affect their apoptotic and proliferative state.

### Sample Protocol
FASP (Filter-aided sample preparation) procedure for protein digestion was performed as described previously [14] using 30kDa MWCO centrifugal filter units (Microcon, Millipore, Cat No MRCF0R030). Briefly, sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, 2% final) was added to 100µg of each lysate to increase solubility of the proteins. Proteins were reduced with 0.1M dithiotreitol (DTT) for 30min at 60°C, then applied to the filters, mixed with 200µL of 8M urea in 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.8 (UA buffer) and finally centrifuged for 15min at 15,000g. In order to remove detergents and DTT, the filters were washed twice with 200µl of UA buffer. Alkylation was carried out by incubation for 20min in the dark with 50mM iodoacetamide. Filters were then washed twice with 100µl of UA buffer (15 000 x g for 15min) followed by two washes with 100µl of ABC buffer (15 000 x g for 10min) to remove urea. All centrifugation steps were performed at room temperature. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:30 ratio and digestion was performed by overnight incubation at 37°C.  Samples were vacuum dried, and resuspended in 100 µL of 10% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, for LC-MS/MS. For each run, 1 µL was injected in a nanoRSLC-Q Exactive PLUS (RSLC Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated on a 50cm reversed-phase liquid chromatographic column (Pepmap C18, Thermo Scienfitic). Chromatography solvents were (A) 0.1% formic acid in water, and (B) 80% acetonitrile, 0.08% formic acid. Peptides were eluted from the column with the following gradient 5% to 40% B (120 min), 40% to 80% (10 minutes). At 131 min, the gradient returned to 5% to re-equilibrate the column for 30 minutes before the next injection. Two blanks were run between triplicates to prevent sample carryover. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed by data dependent MS/MS, using top-10 acquisition method. Briefly, the instrument settings were as follows: resolution was set to 70,000 for MS scans and 17,500 for the data dependent MS/MS scans in order to increase speed. The MS AGC target was set to 3.106 counts, while MS/MS AGC target was set to 1.105. The MS scan range was from 400 to 2000 m/z. MS and MS/MS scans were recorded in profile mode. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec duration. Three technical replicates of each sample were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
For data processing following nanoLC-MS/MS acquisition, the MS files were processed with the MaxQuant software version and searched with Andromeda search engine against Swissprot mouse database.To search parent mass and fragment ions, we set a mass deviation of 5 ppm and 20 ppm respectively. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and strict specificity for trypsin cleavage was required, allowing up to two missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation (Met) and N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rates (FDRs) at the protein and peptide level were set to 1%. Scores were calculated in MaxQuant as described previously [15]. The reverse and common contaminants hits were removed from MaxQuant output. Proteins were quantified according to the MaxQuant label-free algorithm using LFQ intensities [15] [16] [17]; protein quantification was obtained using at least 2 peptides per protein.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis, including heatmaps, profile plots and clustering, were performed with Perseus software (version 1.5.0.31) freely available at www.perseus-framework.org [17]. For statistical comparison, we set three groups (Scramble, pre-miR-223 and anti-miR-223), each containing four biological replicates. We then filtered the data to keep only proteins with at least 3 valid values out of 4 in at least one group. Next, the data were imputed to fill missing data points by creating a Gaussian distribution of random numbers with a standard deviation of 33% relative to the standard deviation of the measured values and 3 standard deviation downshift of the mean to simulate the distribution of low signal values. We performed an ANOVA test, p<0.01, S0=1. Hierarchical clustering of proteins that survived the test was performed in Perseus on logarithmised LFQ intensities after z-score normalization of the data, using Euclidean distances

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microrna, Mir-223, Bone differentiation, Gene regulation, Vascular, Multi-omics

### Affiliations
Necker proteomics, INSERM
3Plateforme Protéomique 3P5-Necker, Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker and Université Paris Descartes, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris,

### Submitter
Chiara guerrera

### Lab Head
Dr Chiara Guerrera,
3Plateforme Protéomique 3P5-Necker, Structure Fédérative de Recherche Necker and Université Paris Descartes, INSERM US24/CNRS UMS3633, Paris,


