### Accession
PXD044409

### Title
In planta expression of human polyQ-expanded huntingtin fragment reveals mechanisms to prevent disease-related protein aggregation

### Description
LiP-MS experiment was performed HEK293 cells which are expressing eGFP +mRFP-HTTQ74 or eGFP-SPP+mRFP-HTTQ74 to analyze structural changes in proteome level between these two conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in LiP buffer (1 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 100 mM HEPES, pH 7.4). Cell lysates were homogenized by electro-douncer and centrifuged at 16,000g for 10 min at 4°C. The protein concentration was measured with the Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher). Equal amounts of lysates were divided into PCR tube strips for LiP and control total levels proteome analysis. The samples were incubated at 25°C for 5 min. Subsequently, proteinase K (Sigma) was added to LiP samples to a final concentration of 0.1 μg/μl, incubated at 25°C for 5 min and then incubated at 99°C for 5 min. Finally, the samples were incubated at 4°C for 5 min. The control samples without proteinase K were subjected to the same incubation procedure. After that, 10 % sodium deoxycholate (DOC) was added and samples were incubated on ice for 5 min. The samples were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 37 °C, followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min. Then, we diluted the DOC concentration to 1% and added 1 μg trypsin together with 0.1 μg Lys-C to each sample followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C. Then, the enzymatic digestion was stopped by adding formic acid and the precipitated DOC was removed through filtration on 0.2 μm PVD membranes by spinning. Stage tip extraction was used for cleaning up peptides. Samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, granted by the German Research Foundation under INST 1856/71-1 FUGG) mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an Vanquish neo in trap-and-elute setup (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim 5µm PepMap 300 µ Cartridge) with a flow of 60 µl/min before reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical column (30 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated with an initial flow rate of 400 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 2% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 6 % in 4 min. Then, flow was reduced to 300 nl/min and B increased to 20% B in 50 min, up to 35% B within 27 min and up to 95% solvent B within 1.0 min while again increasing the flow to 400 nl/min, followed by column wash with 95% solvent B and reequilibration to initial condition. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50V compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85°C for the outer electrode. MS1 scans were acquired from 399 m/z to 1001 m/z at 15k resolution. Maximum injection time was set to 22 ms and the AGC target to 100%. MS2 scans ranged from 400 m/z to 1000 m/z and were acquired at 15 k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 100%. DIA scans covering the precursor range from 400 - 1000 m/z and were acquired in 60 x 10 m/z windows with an overlap of 1 m/z. All scans were stored as centroid.

### Data Protocol
Raw measurements were aggregated to peptide and protein quantities by DIA-NN. Structural effects were calculated using the R package LiPAnalyzeR (https://github.com/LuiseNagel/LiPAnalyzeR). Differential expression of peptide and protein levels was calculated using linear models where the condition is the predictor and expression is the response variable. P-values of structural and expression changes were adjusted using false discovery rate (FDR) correction. In addition to global, i.e., within effect group correction, peptide-level effects were alternatively corrected per protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Caenorhabditis elegans, Protein aggregation, Huntington’s disease

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
University of Cologne, Germany


