### Accession
PXD007719

### Title
The role of the sRNA GcvB in Pasteurella multocida protein production

### Description
In this study, transcriptomic analysis of the P. multocida strain VP161 revealed a putative sRNA with high identity to GcvB from Escherichia coli and Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium. High-throughput quantitative liquid proteomics was used to compare the proteomes of the P. multocida VP161 wild-type strain, a gcvB mutant and a GcvB overexpression strain. These analyses identified 47 proteins that displayed significant differential production after inactivation of gcvB, 37 of which showed increased production. Thus, GcvB predominantly acts to negatively regulate protein production in P. multocida. Of the 37 proteins that were repressed by GcvB, 27 were predicted to be involved in amino acid biosynthesis or transport. Bioinformatic analyses of putative P. multocida GcvB target mRNAs identified a strongly conserved 10 nucleotide consensus sequence, 5’‑AACACAACAT-3’, with the central eight nucleotides identical to the seed binding region present within GcvB mRNA targets in E. coli and S. Typhimurium.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteomes of the wild-type P. multocida VP161, the gcvB mutant with empty vector and the GcvB overexpression strain were determined using label-free quantitative proteomics. Cells were grown in HI broth to early-exponential growth phase (OD600=0.2) and pelleted by centrifugation. Cell pellets were lysed in 1% w/v SDC (sodium deoxycholate; Sigma), 100 mM Tris (pH = 8.1) and further homogenised on a Soniprep 150 Plus sonicator (MSE). The protein concentration was determined using a BCA assay kit (Pierce). A 200 µg aliquot of each total protein sample was denatured using 10 mM TCEP (Thermo Ccientific) and free cysteine residues were alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma). Trypsin Gold (Promega) was used to digest the proteins and SDC removed by extraction with water-saturated ethyl acetate. All samples were desalted using P-10 ZipTip columns (Agilent, OMIX-Mini Bed 96 C18), vacuum-dried and reconstituted in buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) prior to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Acquired .raw files were analysed with MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2008) to globally identify and quantify proteins across the various conditions. Statistical analyses for identification of differentially produced proteins were performed using the Limma package within R studio.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Pasteurella multocida</i> is a Gram-negative bacterium responsible for many important animal diseases. While a number of <i>P. multocida</i> virulence factors have been identified, very little is known about how gene expression and protein production is regulated in this organism. Small RNA (sRNA) molecules are critical regulators that act by binding to specific mRNA targets, often in association with the RNA chaperone protein Hfq. In this study, transcriptomic analysis of the <i>P. multocida</i> strain VP161 revealed a putative sRNA with high identity to GcvB from <i>Escherichia coli</i> and <i>Salmonella enterica</i> serovar Typhimurium. High-throughput quantitative liquid proteomics was used to compare the proteomes of the <i>P. multocida</i> VP161 wild-type strain, a <i>gcvB</i> mutant, and a GcvB overexpression strain. These analyses identified 46 proteins that displayed significant differential production after inactivation of <i>gcvB</i>, 36 of which showed increased production. Of the 36 proteins that were repressed by GcvB, 27 were predicted to be involved in amino acid biosynthesis or transport. Bioinformatic analyses of putative <i>P. multocida</i> GcvB target mRNAs identified a strongly conserved 10 nucleotide consensus sequence, 5'-AACACAACAT-3', with the central eight nucleotides identical to the seed binding region present within GcvB mRNA targets in <i>E. coli</i> and <i>S.</i> Typhimurium. Using a defined set of seed region mutants, together with a two-plasmid reporter system that allowed for quantification of sRNA-mRNA interactions, this sequence was confirmed to be critical for the binding of the <i>P. multocida</i> GcvB to the target mRNA, <i>gltA</i>.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Gcvb, Pasteurella multocida

### Affiliations
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia
Monash University

### Submitter
Ralf Schittenhelm

### Lab Head
Dr John D. Boyce
Infection and Immunity Program, Monash Biomedicine Discovery Institute and Department of Microbiology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia


