### Accession
PXD039658

### Title
Acetylation Coordinates the Crosstalk between Carbon Metabolism and Ammonium Assimilation

### Description
Enteric bacteria use up to 15% of their cellular energy for ammonium assimilation via glutamine synthetase (GS)/glutamate synthase (GOGAT) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH), in response to low or high ammonium availability. However, the sensory mechanisms for effective and appropriate coordination between carbon metabolism and ammonium assimilation are not fully elucidated. Here, we report that, in Salmonella, carbon metabolism coordinates the activities of GS/GDH via functional reversible protein lysine acetylation. Glucose simultaneously promotes acetyltransferase Pat-mediated acetylation on Lys164 and Lys353 of GS to activate the adenylylated-GS by inducing its conformation change, while on Lys128 of GDH to inactivate the enzyme by impeding its catalytic center, respectively, which are reversed by deacetylase CobB-mediated deacetylation. Molecular dynamic (MD) simulations indicated that the acetylation activation of GS activity was adenylylation-dependent. Acetylation and deacetylation occur within minutes of ‘glucose shock’ to promptly adapt to ammonium/carbon variation and finely balance glutamine/glutamate synthesis. Acetylation can rehabilitate the growth tardiness of Salmonella mutant with chromosomal mimetic mutation of adenylylated-GS and thus help its survival in mice. Thus, glucose-driven acetylation integrates the signals of assimilation and carbon metabolism for proper growth control.

### Sample Protocol
1. Salmonella G2466 strain was first grown overnight in 20 ml LB medium to reach saturation. Cells were harvested by centrifuge at 8,000×g for 10 min and washed with fresh M9 medium for three times. Certain of amount of re-suspended (2 ml M9 medium) cells were inoculated into 50 ml fresh M9 medium with 20 mM glucose to ensure the initial O.D.600=0.100 in a 250 ml flask. Cells were grown at 37 °C with shaking 220 rpm and harvested at mid-log phase by centrifuge at 8,000×g for 15 min. Cells were disrupted by sonication on ice in PBS buffer. Soluble proteins were obtained by collecting supernatant after centrifuge of broken cell suspension at 20,000×g for 40 min at 4 °C. Proteins were precipitated by adding ice-cold acetone to a final concentration of 85%. The protein pellet was washed by 80% ice-cold acetone two times and vacuum dried.  2. Dried protein pellets were reconstituted in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and protein concentrations was determined by Bio-Rad protein assay solution (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight with gentle shaking at 37 °C with a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/50. After overnight digestion, additional trypsin was added to the digestion mixture with a trypsin/protein ratio of 1/500 and incubated at 37 °C for another 3-4 hours. The trypsin in the digestion reaction was inactivated by heating at 99 °C for 5 min. The solution was cleared by centrifuging at 10,000 × g on desktop centrifuge, solution was vacuum dried two times to remove bicarbonate salts.  3. Anti-acetyllysine antibody was conjugated to protein A beads (Santa Cruz, CA) by mixing 100 μl antiserum (home made) with 50 μl protein A beads in 500 μl pH 7.5 PBS. Conjugated beads were washed by pH 7.5 PBS three times after the conjugation was carried out at 4 °C for 3 hours with gentle shaking.  4. Trypsin digested peptide mixture from step 1 was reconstituted in NETN buffer (0.5% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 100 mM NaCl). Conjugated antibody was added to the solution and incubated at 4 °C for 3-5 hours. Supernatant was removed by carefully washing beads by ETN (1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris [pH 8.0], 100 mM NaCl) buffer three times.  5. The bound peptides were eluted by 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. The resulting peptides were assayed by continuously separated by SCX followed by C18 columns (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) before being subjected to MS/MS analysis in an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, 8 Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were initially searched against the NCBI database with the aid of the Sequest search engine. Searches for acetylated peptides were done against Salmonella proteins database by first allowing only singly charged fragments followed by allowing both singly charged and multiply charged fragments. To collect positive hits, the following selection thresholds were applied: mass accuracy: 5 ppm, delta cn: 0.1, primary score: 200, rsp: 5, those peptides having scores (XC) above 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5 for ion charges at +1, +2 and +3 and higher were automatically selected as positives identification. Peptides with marginal scores were under manual spectra examination to be included in the positive list. The data from three experiments were combined. Positive hits from both searches were then combined but marked differently.

### Publication Abstract
Enteric bacteria use up to 15% of their cellular energy for ammonium assimilation via glutamine synthetase (GS)/glutamate synthase (GOGAT) and glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) in response to varying ammonium availability. However, the sensory mechanisms for effective and appropriate coordination between carbon metabolism and ammonium assimilation have not been fully elucidated. Here, we report that in Salmonella enterica, carbon metabolism coordinates the activities of GS/GDH via functionally reversible protein lysine acetylation. Glucose promotes Pat acetyltransferase-mediated acetylation and activation of adenylylated GS. Simultaneously, glucose induces GDH acetylation to inactivate the enzyme by impeding its catalytic centre, which is reversed upon GDH deacetylation by deacetylase CobB. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations indicate that adenylylation is required for acetylation-dependent activation of GS. We show that acetylation and deacetylation occur within minutes of "glucose shock" to promptly adapt to ammonium/carbon variation and finely balance glutamine/glutamate synthesis. Finally, in a mouse infection model, reduced S.&#x2009;enterica growth caused by the expression of adenylylation-mimetic GS is rescued by acetylation-mimicking mutations. Thus, glucose-driven acetylation integrates signals from ammonium assimilation and carbon metabolism to fine-tune bacterial growth control.

### Keywords
Coordination, Carbon metabolism, Ammonium assimilation, Acetylation

### Affiliations
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

### Submitter
Qijun Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Wang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


