### Accession
PXD033400

### Title
Multi omics analysis of adaptation to repeated DNA damage in prostate cancer cells.

### Description
DNA damage is frequently utilized as the basis for cancer therapies; however, resistance to DNA damage remains one of the biggest challenges facing cancer patients and their treating clinicians. Critically, the molecular drivers behind resistance are poorly understood. To address this question, we created an isogenic model of prostate cancer exhibiting more aggressive characteristics to better understand the molecular signatures associated with resistance and metastasis. 22Rv1 cells were repeatedly exposed to DNA damage daily for 6 weeks, similar to patient treatment regimes. Using Illumina MethylationEPIC arrays and RNA-seq, we compared the DNA methylation and transcriptional profiles between the parental 22Rv1 cell line and the lineage exposed to prolonged DNA damage. Here we show that repeated DNA damage drives the molecular evolution of cancer cells to a more aggressive phenotype and identify molecular candidates behind this process. Total DNA methylation was increased in cells exposed to repeated DNA damage. Further, RNA-seq demonstrated these cells had dysregulated expression of genes involved in metabolism and the unfolded protein response (UPR) with ASNS identified as central to this process. While limited overlap between RNA-seq and DNA methylation was evident, OGDHL was identified as altered in both data sets. Utilising a second approach we profiled the proteome in 22Rv1 cells following a single dose of radiotherapy. This analysis also highlighted the UPR in response to DNA damage. Together, these analyses identified dysregulation of metabolism and the UPR and identified ASNS and OGDHL as candidate genes for resistance to DNA damage. This work provides critical insight into molecular changes which may underpin treatment resistance and metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using denaturing lysis buffer (7 M urea (Sigma), 2 M thiourea (Sigma) and 30 mM Trizma base (Sigma) containing protease inhibitors (Roche). Cell lysates were sonicated for 3 cycles of 15 seconds pulse with 5 seconds interval on ice. Cell lysates were mixed gently on a rotary suspension mixer at 4°C for 2 hours, centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 15 minutes before supernatant was collected. Protein concentration was determined by performing Pierce™ 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Proteins (30 µg/sample) were sequentially reduced and alkylated then cleaned up using the SP3 method.

### Data Protocol
DIA-MS raw files were processed using Spectronaut software (version 15.0) (Biognosys AB, Wagistrasse, SWI).  A project-specific library was generated using the Pulsar search engine to search the DIA MS2 spectra against the Homo sapiens UniProt reference proteome comprising 20,443 entries (downloaded December 2019).  With the exception that single-hit proteins were excluded, default (BGS factory) settings were used for both spectral library generation and DIA data extraction. For library generation, N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were included as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide, protein and PSM thresholds were set to 0.01. Mass tolerances were based on first pass calibration and extensive calibration for the calibration and main searches, respectively, with correction factors set to 1 at the MS1 and MS2 levels. Targeted searching of the library based on XIC extraction deployed dynamic retention time alignment with a correction factor of 1. Protein identification deployed a 0.1% or 1% q-value thresholds at the precursor and protein levels, respectively, and automatic generation of mutated peptide decoys based on 10% of the library and dynamic decoy limitation for protein identification. MS2-level data were used for relative peptide quantitation between experimental samples, using the intensity values for the Top3 peptides (stripped sequences) and cross-run normalization based on median peptide intensity.

### Publication Abstract
Retinal neovascularization is a severe complication of proliferative diabetic retinopathy (PDR). MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are master regulators of gene expression that play an important role in retinal neovascularization. In this study, we show that miR-143-3p is significantly downregulated in the retina of a rat model of oxygen-induced retinopathy (OIR) by miRNA-sequencing. Intravitreal injection of synthetic miR-143 mimics significantly ameliorate retinal neovascularization in OIR rats. miR-143 is identified to be highly expressed in the neural retina particularly in the ganglion cell layer and retinal vasculature. In miR-143 treated cells, the functional evaluation showed a decrease in cell migration and delayed endothelial vessel-like tube remodeling. The multiomics analysis suggests that miR-143 negatively impacts endothelial cell activity through regulating cell-matrix adhesion and mediating hypoxia-inducible factor-1 signaling. We predict hub genes regulated by miR-143 that may be involved in mediating endothelial cell function by cytoHubba. We also demonstrate that the retinal neovascular membranes in patients with PDR principally consist of endothelial cells by CIBERSORTx. We then identify 2 hub genes, thrombospondin 1 and plasminogen activator inhibitor, direct targets of miR-143, that significantly altered in the PDR patients. These findings suggest that miR-143 appears to be essential for limiting endothelial cell-matrix adhesion, thus suppressing retinal neovascularization.

### Keywords
Dna damage, Radiotherapy, Prostate cancer, Multi-omics, Unfolded protein response

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


