### Accession
PXD019764

### Title
Lowering Sample Requirements to Study Tyrosine Kinase Signaling using Phosphoproteomics with the TMT Calibrator Approach

### Description
Analysis of tyrosine kinase signaling is critical for the development of targeted cancer therapy.  Currently, immunoprecipitation (IP) of phosphotyrosine (pY) peptides prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is used to profile kinase substrates.  A typical protocol requests 10 mg of total protein from ~108 cells or 50-100 mg of tissue. Large sample requirements can be cost prohibitive or not feasible for certain experiments. Sample multiplexing in chemical labeling reduces the protein amount required for each sample, and newer approaches use a material-rich reference channel as a calibrator to trigger detection and quantification for smaller samples.  Here, we demonstrate that the tandem mass tag (TMT) calibrator approach reduces the sample input for pY profiling 10-fold (to ~1 mg total protein per sample from 107 cells grown in one plate), while maintaining the depth of pY proteome sampling and the biological content of the experiment.  This strategy opens more opportunities for pY profiling of large sample cohorts and samples with limited protein quantity such as immune cells, xenograft models, and human tumors.

### Sample Protocol
PC9 lung cancer cells (n = 10^7) were treated with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) vehicle control, Erlotinib (0.5 micromolar), or Osimertinib (0.5 micromolar) for 1 hour.  One bulk preparation (n = 10^8) was treated with DMSO and used as a benchmark for comparison and a higher content sample to support label free quantification across samples using the "match between runs" feature of MaxQuant; Cell lysis and protein extraction were performed according to the vendor’s protocol (#8803S, Cell Signaling Technology). Bradford assays (Coomassie Plus, Pierce) estimated the protein concentration in each sample.  Then, 1 mg of total protein from each sample and 10 mg from the reference sample were reduced, alkylated, digested and desalted. The peptides were redissolved in 700 microliters of immuno-affinity purification (IAP) buffer. P-Y-1000 antibody beads were used to enrich pY-peptides.    A nanoflow ultra high performance liquid chromatograph interfaced with an electrospray quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (RSLCnano and Q Exactive HF-X, Thermo) were used for LC-MS/MS peptide sequencing and TMT quantification.

### Data Protocol
For this upload, LC-MS/MS data were searched with Mascot to identify tyrosine phosphorylated peptides from human entries in the UniProt database.  For the manuscript, MaxQuant (v.1.6.2.10) identified and quantified pY peptides in human proteins from the UniProt August 2019 release using default MS2 TMT11plex settings with PSM FDR set at 0.05 and phosphoSTY as a variable modification.  MaxQuant results were normalized,prior to visualization using Perseus (v.1.6.2.3).

### Publication Abstract
Analysis of tyrosine kinase signaling is critical for the development of targeted cancer therapy. Currently, immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine (pY) peptides prior to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) is used to profile tyrosine kinase substrates. A typical protocol requests 10&#xa0;mg of total protein from &#x2248;10<sup>8</sup> cells or 50-100&#xa0;mg of tissue. Large sample requirements can be cost prohibitive or not feasible for certain experiments. Sample multiplexing using chemical labeling reduces the protein amount required for each sample, and newer approaches use a material-rich reference channel as a calibrator to trigger detection and quantification for smaller samples. Here, it is demonstrated that the tandem mass tag (TMT) calibrator approach reduces the sample input for pY profiling tenfold (to &#x2248;1&#xa0;mg total protein per sample from 10<sup>7</sup> cells grown in one plate), while maintaining the depth of pY proteome sampling and the biological content of the experiment. Data are available through PRIDE (PXD019764 for label-free and PXD018952 for TMT). This strategy opens more opportunities for pY profiling of large sample cohorts and samples with limited protein quantity such as immune cells, xenograft models, and human tumors.

### Keywords
Signaling, Label free quantification, Lung cancer, Phosphotyrosine, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Moffitt Cancer Center
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA

### Submitter
John Koomen

### Lab Head
Dr John M. Koomen, PhD
Moffitt Cancer Center Tampa, FL, USA


