### Accession
PXD000574

### Title
Dectin-1/Syk pathway activates autophagy-dependent unconventional protein secretion from human macrophages

### Description
Before stimulation, the cells were washed and the culture media was changed to RPMI-1640. After stimulation, cell culture media were collected, concentrated, and the proteins were precipitated with 2-D Clean-Up Kit (GE Healthcare) followed by protein alkylation,  trypsin digestion and iTRAQ labelling of the resulting peptides according to manufacturer´s instructions (Applied Biosystems).  Control sample was labeled with 114, LPS-stimulated with 115, Curdlan-stimulated with 116, and GBY-stimulated with 117 isobaric tag.  After labelling the samples were pooled and dried, and the peptides were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography  using an Ettan HPLC system (Amersham Biosciences) connected to a PolySULFOETHYL A column. Each SCX-fraction containing  labelled peptides was analyzed twice with nano-liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using Ultimate 3000 nano-liquid  chromatograph (Dionex) and QSTAR Elite hybrid quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems / MDS Sciex)  with nano-ESI ionization as previously described (Lietzén et al., 2011). MS data were acquired automatically using Analyst QS 2.0 software.  Protein identification and relative quantitation were performed with ParagonTM search algorithm (Shilov et al., 2007) using ProteinPilot  2.0 interface (AB Sciex). Data files from both technical replicates of an iTRAQ sample set were processed together. Database searching  was done against UniProt human database (version 2008-01-28 with 20330 human sequences) and ´decoy` database (the reverse  amino acid sequence for false discovery rate estimation). The search criteria were: cysteine alkylation with MMTS, trypsin digestion,  biological modifications allowed, thorough search and detected protein threshold of 95% confidence (Unused ProtScore > 1.3).  Importantly, automatic bias correction was not used in quantitation. The false discovery rates were calculated as previously  described (Elias and Gygi, 2007) and were 1.4% and 2% for the two biological replicates.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Dectin-1 is a membrane-bound pattern recognition receptor for &#x3b2;-glucans, which are the main constituents of fungal cell walls. Detection of &#x3b2;-glucans by dectin-1 triggers an effective innate immune response. In this study, we have used a systems biology approach to provide the first comprehensive characterization of the secretome and associated intracellular signaling pathways involved in activation of dectin-1/Syk in human macrophages. Transcriptome and secretome analysis revealed that the dectin-1 pathway induced significant gene expression changes and robust protein secretion in macrophages. The enhanced protein secretion correlated only partly with increased gene expression. Bioinformatics combined with functional studies revealed that the dectin-1/Syk pathway activates both conventional and unconventional, vesicle-mediated, protein secretion. The unconventional protein secretion triggered by the dectin-1 pathway is dependent on inflammasome activity and an active autophagic process. In conclusion, our results reveal that unconventional protein secretion has an important role in the innate immune response against fungal infections.

### Keywords
Human, Dectin-1, Macrophages, Itraq

### Affiliations
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Tuula Nyman

### Lab Head


