### Accession
PXD017045

### Title
Proteomics and phosphoproteomics of sepsis induced acute and chronic kidney disease

### Description
Sepsis induced acute kidney injury (AKI) is associated with a rapid decline of kidney function, leading to unacceptably high morbidity and mortality rate as well as progression to chronic kidney disease (CKD). We have recently developed a septic AKI mouse model. By quantitatively assessing the kidney proteome and phosphoproteome changes upon bacterial infection, we accurately quantified over 2,200 kidney proteins with high confidence, which provided us the first global overview of the extensively remodeled kidney proteome and revealed widespread metabolic and oxidation-reduction processes undergone in septic kidney. This data will give us unprecedented insight into how renal cells response to microbe invasion, and will likely serve as a reference dataset of systems biology.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney samples were digested using self-packed suspension trap (STrap) filters and desalted using C18 based StageTip protocol. The LC-MS/MS analyses were perforemd using Ultimate 3000 nano LC coupled to Q Exactive mass spectrometry (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant and Andromeda software suite were used for label-free quantitation; Perseus (version 1.6) was empolyed for downstream bioinformatics analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Sepsis-induced acute kidney injury (S-AKI) is the most common complication in hospitalized and critically ill patients, highlighted by a rapid decline of kidney function occurring a few hours or days after sepsis onset. Systemic inflammation elicited by microbial infections is believed to lead to kidney damage under immunocompromised conditions. However, although AKI has been recognized as a disease with long-term sequelae, partly because of the associated higher risk of chronic kidney disease (CKD), the understanding of kidney pathophysiology at the molecular level and the global view of dynamic regulations <i>in situ</i> after S-AKI, including the transition to CKD, remains limited. Existing studies of S-AKI mainly focus on deriving sepsis biomarkers from body fluids. In the present study, we constructed a mid-severity septic murine model using cecal ligation and puncture (CLP), and examined the temporal changes to the kidney proteome and phosphoproteome at day 2 and day 7 after CLP surgery, corresponding to S-AKI and the transition to CKD, respectively, by employing an ultrafast and economical filter-based sample processing method combined with the label-free quantitation approach. Collectively, we identified 2,119 proteins and 2950 phosphosites through multi-proteomics analyses. Among them, we identified an array of highly promising candidate marker proteins indicative of disease onset and progression accompanied by immunoblot validations, and further denoted the pathways that are specifically responsive to S-AKI and its transition to CKD, which include regulation of cell metabolism regulation, oxidative stress, and energy consumption in the diseased kidneys. Our data can serve as an enriched resource for the identification of mechanisms and biomarkers for sepsis-induced kidney diseases.

### Keywords
Proteomics; phosphoproteomics; sepsis; kidney; aki; ckd

### Affiliations
University of Delaware
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850

### Submitter
Yanbao Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Yanbao Yu
J. Craig Venter Institute 9605 Medical Center Dr. Rockville, MD 20850


