### Accession
PXD033442

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis of Seminal Plasma Exosomes in Buffalo with High and Low Sperm Motility

### Description
Exosomes are nanosized membranous vesicles secreted by variety types of cells and regulate intercellular communication through deliver bioactive substances. They are found in abundance in biological fluids including semen. Although protein composition and potential fertility biomarkers of seminal plasma exosomes (SPE) have been identified in human, but they remains unclear in buffalo. Here, we aim to discover the protein correlation between spermatozoa, seminal plasma (SP) and SPE, then further compare and analyze the protein differences between high and low motility SPEs in buffalo. SPEs were concentrated and purified by ultracentrifugation combined by sucrose density gradient centrifugation, followed by verification by western blot, nanoparticle tracking analysis, and transmission electron microscopy. Protein composition in spermatozoa, SP and SPE, and protein difference in high and low motility SPEs were identified by LC-MS/MS proteomic analysis and functional analyzed by a comprehensive bioinformatic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
After digestion, the resulted peptide was desalted with Strata X SPE column (Phenomenex, Guangzhou, China) according to the manufacture’s protocol. For isotope labeling, the dried peptide was re-dissolved with 500 mM TEAB and reacted with iTRAQ Reagent-8Plex (Cat No.4390812, Applied Biosystems Sciex) for 2 h with shocking at RT. Samples of three replicates in H-group were labeled with iTRAQ-113, and samples in L-group were labeled with iTRAQ-114. For each replicate, the labeled peptide in two groups were mixed and dried. The samples were then dissolved in solvent A (2% ACN, pH 10) and injected to the HPLC system (Waters e2695) for separating fractions using a high pH reverse-phase C18 column (130 Å, 3.5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm) (XBridge Peptide BEH C18, Waters). Binding peptide was eluted under a gradient as described by Lin et al. (2020). For proteomic analysis of spermatozoa, SP and SPE samples, peptide was divided into 6 fractions and desalted with Ziptip C18 Tips (ZTC18S096, Millipore).  Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS system consist of an Easy-nanoLC coupled with LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, each peptide fraction was loaded on a reversed-phase trap column (Acclaim PepMap®100 C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and then delivered to a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, 50 μm × 15 cm). A 60 min elution gradient from 2% ~ 98% solvent B at 300 nL/min was used for mass spectrometric analyze. The acquired precursor ions ranging from 300 ~ 1800 m/z were detected by orbitrap analyzer at the resolution of 70,000. The top 20 abundant precursor ions were fragmented at the selection window of 2 m/z using CID mode at 27% normalized collision energy. Fragment ions were also analyzed by orbitrap at the resolution of 17,500 and the scan range of 100+ m/z. The dynamic exclusion duration were set at 45 s and the ion 445.12003 (m/z) was used as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
The peptide mass spectrum was searched against to the Uniprot database of Bos taurus (UP000009136) using SEQUEST software integrated into Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) platform. Trypsin/P was selected as the working enzyme. The max missed cleavage was set as two. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as fixed modification, while iTRAQ 8plex (N-term, K, Y) and oxidation (M) were set as variable modifications. The peptide mass error was limited to 10 ppm and the product ion mass error was set including in 0.02 Da. False Distribution Rate (FDR) was set as p<0.05.

### Publication Abstract
A comprehensive identification of the proteins of spermatozoa and seminal plasma enables the full characterization of sperm biology and is essential to understand how seminal plasma influences sperm fertility. In this study, proteomics of buffalo spermatozoa and seminal plasma were analyzed using a bottom-up approach. A total of 2147 and 864 proteins were identified from mature spermatozoa and seminal plasma, respectively. Of these, 371 proteins-42.9% in the seminal plasma set-were common to both spermatozoa and seminal plasma. ODF2, AKAP4, and TUBB were the most highly abundant proteins of spermatozoa whereas the three most highly abundant proteins in seminal plasma were ALB, CLU, and AZGP1. Gene Ontology (GO) analysis indicated that most sperm proteins were involved in transport, phosphorylation and macromolecule localization. More seminal plasma proteins were related to proteolysis, response to stimulus and homeostatic process. Pathways associated with energy metabolism, protein processing and RNA transport were significantly enriched in spermatozoa. In buffalo seminal plasma, three distinguishing GO pathways-proteasome activity, lysosomal activity, complement and coagulation cascades-were found to play important roles in sperm protection. Protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis indicated that 531 and 620 proteins participated in buffalo sperm and seminal plasma PPI networks, respectively. Sub-network mining elaborated detailed biological events. This study is the first to provide an in-depth proteomic analysis of buffalo spermatozoa and seminal plasma. The results extend our understanding of male buffalo reproduction and provide clues for determining the relationships between sperm biology and seminal plasma.

### Keywords
Buffalo; seminal plasma; exosomes; proteome; activity; sperm motility

### Affiliations
Guangxi university, state key lab for subtropical Agro-bioresource conservation and utilization, SKLCUSA
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Ulilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresource

### Submitter
qiang Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Qiang Fu
State Key Laboratory for Conservation and Ulilization of Subtropical Agro-bioresource


