### Accession
PXD036962

### Title
Comparative proteomic and transcriptomic analysis of the impact of androgen stimulation and darolutamide inhibition on prostate cancer cells

### Description
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling is a major driver and therapy target in prostate cancer. Several inhibitors of AR function are approved for different stages of the disease and their impact on downstream gene transcription has been described. However, the ensuing effects of androgen and anti-androgens at the protein level are less well understood. Here, we focused on the AR inhibitor darolutamide which has recently been approved for non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer. Here we determined the impact of darolutamide, a recently approved AR antagonist which significantly extends progression-free and overall survival in non-metastatic CRPC (31, 32), on the prostate cancer proteome. We first determined the direct binding between darolutamide and the AR in living prostate cancer cells in a label-free context using the cellular high throughput thermal shift assay (CETSA HT). We then generated comprehensive proteomic profiles of prostate cancer cells treated with androgen and darolutamide, and compared them with transcriptomic profiles. We found a generally high concordance between proteomic and transcriptomic data, both on the level of detected expressed genes and their protein products, as well as in terms of the corresponding biological programs. However there were cases where protein and gene expression levels were not regulated in parallel, suggesting an additional post-transcriptional regulation step controlling protein abundance to occur in several instances.

### Sample Protocol
VCaP cells were treated with 5 different conditions and sampled at 2 different time points (14 and 28 hours) in triplicates - For all experiments the cells were first stimulated with R1881 (metribolone) and then treated one of three different compounds - For one condition the replicates were only stimulated, so that as a control there was one set of replicates unstimulated and untreated - Cells were lysed harshly using 5% SDS, proteins were digested with trypsin via S-trap sample preparation and peptides were off-line fractionated (high-pH reverse phase) into 6 fractions - Single fractions were measured for 2 hours each by nanoLC-MS/MS analysis on a Q-Exactive Orbitrap system coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano

### Data Protocol
Data processing (MaxQuant, Version: 1.6.2.6) - Protease: Trypsin; Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C); Variable modification: Oxidation (M);Acetyl (Protein N-term); Label: none; Quantification: label-free quantification (LFQ); Database: “gencode.v28.pc_translations.fa; PSM/Protein FDR: 0.01; Match between runs: TRUE

### Publication Abstract
Several inhibitors of androgen receptor (AR) function are approved for prostate cancer treatment, and their impact on gene transcription has been described. However, the ensuing effects at the protein level are far less well understood. We focused on the AR signaling inhibitor darolutamide and confirmed its strong AR binding and antagonistic activity using the high throughput cellular thermal shift assay (CETSA HT). Then, we generated comprehensive, quantitative proteomic data from the androgen-sensitive prostate cancer cell line VCaP and compared them to transcriptomic data. Following treatment with the synthetic androgen R1881 and darolutamide, global mass spectrometry-based proteomics and label-free quantification were performed. We found a generally good agreement between proteomic and transcriptomic data upon androgen stimulation and darolutamide inhibition. Similar effects were found both for the detected expressed genes and their protein products as well as for the corresponding biological programs. However, in a few instances there was a discrepancy in the magnitude of changes induced on gene expression levels compared to the corresponding protein levels, indicating post-transcriptional regulation of protein abundance. Chromatin immunoprecipitation DNA sequencing (ChIP-seq) and Hi-C chromatin immunoprecipitation (HiChIP) revealed the presence of androgen-activated AR-binding regions and long-distance AR-mediated loops at these genes.

### Keywords
Darolutamide, Vcap, Andrigen receptor signalling

### Affiliations
OmicScouts GmbH
Omicscouts GmbH

### Submitter
Stefan Maier

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes Hahne
OmicScouts GmbH


