### Accession
PXD032063

### Title
Detecting mistranslation from a serine tRNA with proline anticodon expressed in yeast

### Description
Mistranslation, the mis-incorporation of an amino acid not specified by the “standard” genetic code, occurs in all cells. tRNA variants that increase mistranslation arise spontaneously and engineered tRNAs can achieve mistranslation frequencies approaching 10% in yeast and bacteria. The goal of this study was to detect and quantify mistranslation from a serine tRNA variant with proline UGG anticodon and G26A secondary mutation engineered in yeast

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in a denaturing lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris, pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl) and lysed by bead-beating. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature, and the alkylation was quenched with additional 5 mM dithiothreitol for 15 min at room temperature. Robotic purification and digestion of proteins into peptides were performed on the KingFisherTM Flex using LysC and the R2-P1 method as described in Leutert et al. (2019). Peptides were analyzed on a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide samples were resuspended in 4% acetonitrile, 3% formic acid and loaded onto a 100 μm ID × 3 cm precolumn packed with Reprosil C18 3 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH), and separated by reverse‐phase chromatography on a 100 μm ID × 30 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil C18 1.9 μm beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) housed into a column heater set at 50°. Peptides were separated using a gradient of 5-30% acetonitrile in 0.125% formic acid at 400 nL/min over 95 minutes, with a total 120 minute acquisition time. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a defined cycle time of 3 seconds. For each cycle one full mass spectrometry scan was acquired from 350 to 1200 m/z at 120,000 resolution with a fill target of 3E6 ions and automated calculation of injection time. The most abundant ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation using 2 m/z precursor isolation window and beam‐type collisional‐activation dissociation (HCD) with 30% normalized collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired at 15,000 resolution by setting the AGC target to standard and injection time to automated mode. Fragmented precursors were dynamically excluded from selection for 60 seconds.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched against the S. cerevisiae protein sequence database (downloaded from the Saccharomyces Genome Database resource in 2014) using Comet (release 2015.01; Eng et al. 2013). The precursor mass tolerance was set to 50 ppm. Constant modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation (57.0215 Da) and variable modification of methionine oxidation (15.9949 Da) were used for all searches. Variable modification of proline to alanine (-26.0157 Da) or arginine to serine (-69.0691 Da) were used for the respective mistranslating tRNAs. A maximum of two for each variable modifications were allowed per peptide. Search results were filtered to a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide spectrum match level using Percolator (Käll et al. 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Transfer RNA variants increase the frequency of mistranslation, the misincorporation of an amino acid not specified by the "standard" genetic code, to frequencies approaching 10% in yeast and bacteria. Cells cope with these variants by having multiple copies of each tRNA isodecoder and through pathways that deal with proteotoxic stress. In this study, we define the genetic interactions of the gene encoding tRNASerUGG,G26A, which mistranslates serine at proline codons. Using a collection of yeast temperature-sensitive alleles, we identify negative synthetic genetic interactions between the mistranslating tRNA and 109 alleles representing 91 genes, with nearly half of the genes having roles in RNA processing or protein folding and turnover. By regulating tRNA expression, we then compare the strength of the negative genetic interaction for a subset of identified alleles under differing amounts of mistranslation. The frequency of mistranslation correlated with the impact on cell growth for all strains analyzed; however, there were notable differences in the extent of the synthetic interaction at different frequencies of mistranslation depending on the genetic background. For many of the strains, the extent of the negative interaction with tRNASerUGG,G26A was proportional to the frequency of mistranslation or only observed at intermediate or high frequencies. For others, the synthetic interaction was approximately equivalent at all frequencies of mistranslation. As humans contain similar mistranslating tRNAs, these results are important when analyzing the impact of tRNA variants on disease, where both the individual's genetic background and the expression of the mistranslating tRNA variant need to be considered.

### Keywords
Mistranslation, Yeast, Trna

### Affiliations
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA

### Submitter
Matthew Berg

### Lab Head
Dr Judit Villen
Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, USA


