### Accession
PXD027164

### Title
Global protein responses of multi-drug resistant plasmid containing Escherichia coli to beta-lactams and ciprofloxacin.

### Description
Our study aimed to analyse the responses of the clonal ST131 strain, containing the ESBL and multi-drug resistance plasmid under different beta-lactam and ciprofloxacin antibiotic stress in comparison with no antibiotic stresses in order to identify the specific response of a MDR plasmid to the specific antibiotic and the potential interaction between the plasmid and the host bacteria under different stresses. The aim was to understand how the plasmid and bacterial host proteins are influenced by the different antibiotic stresses. By analysing these factors systematically we aimed to identify the pathways and core or antibiotic specific responses of the bacteria. Using proteomics we provide an unbiased protein map of a pathogen with a MDR plasmid under antibiotic stress and compare it with the same bacteria in the absence of the stress.

### Sample Protocol
The bacterial strain Escherichia coli NCTC 13400, containing the MDR conjugative plasmid pEK499, was used in all experiments. The pEK499 plasmid was 117,536 bp in length and belongs to incompatibility group F as represented a fusion of two replicons of types FII and FIA (Woodford et al., 2009 https://doi.org/10.1128/AAC.00688-09). Escherichia coli (NCTC 13400) containing the MDR plasmid pEK499 was exposed to antibiotic stresses for which the bacteria displayed a resistance phenotype (ampicillin 64mg/L, cefotaxime 256 mg/L) and those, which there was no resistance phenotype (imipenem 0.06 mg/L, ciprofloxacin 0.06 mg/L). The control comprised the E. coli with pEK499 grown without antibiotic stress. All strains were grown separately in LB at 37 ⁰C with shaking at 200 rpm. All experiments were performed in biological triplicates. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 3000 rpm for 15 minutes. The cell pellet was resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate (1 ml, 50 Mm, pH 7.8) and sonicated on ice in 10 second bursts five times. The lysate was subjected to centrifugation at 13, 000 rpm to collect the cellular debris. The supernatant was quantified using the QubitTM quantification system (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The protein sample was reduced by adding 5 μl 0.2 M dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 95°C for 10 minutes, followed by alkylation with 0.55M iodoacetamide (4 µl) at room temperature, in the dark for 45 minutes. Alkylation was stopped by adding DTT (20 µl, 0.2 M) and incubation for 45 minutes at 25 °C. Sequence Grade Trypsin (Promega) (0.5 µg/µl) was added to the proteins and incubated at 37°C for 18 hours. The digested protein sample was brought to dryness using a Speedyvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120). Samples were purified for mass spectrometry using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedyVac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120) and resuspended in 2% v/v acetonitrile and 0.05% v/v TFA to give a final peptide concentration of 1 µg/µl. The samples were sonicated for five minutes to aid peptide resuspension, followed by centrifugation for five minutes at 14,500 g. The supernatantwas removed and used for mass spectrometry. Three independent biological replicates for each group were analysed. Digested proteins (1 µg) isolated from each of the digested E. coli protein samples were loaded onto a QExactive (ThermoFisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient on a 50 cm EASY-Spray PepMap C18 column with 75 µm diameter (2 µm particle size), using a 65 minutes reverse phase gradient for the A. fumigatus CuF and a 133 minutes reverse phase gradient for the E. coli proteins at a flow rate of 300 nL/min-1. All data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in an automatic dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 70,000 resolution and a range of 400 – 1600 m/z, was followed by an MS/MS scan at 17,500 resolution, with a range of 200-2000 m/z to select the 15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.  Quantitative analysis (protein quantification and LFQ normalization of the MS/MS data) of the E. coli  proteome arising from exposure to the different antibiotics, was performed using MaxQuant version 1.6.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in (Hubner et al., 2010). The Andromeda search algorithm incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data against the Uniprot-SWISS-PROT database for Escherichia coli K12 (4319 entries) and the E. coli strain A plasmid pEK499 (141 entries).  The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % for both peptides and proteins, and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acid length were considered for identification and proteins were only considered identified when observed in three replicates of one sample group.

### Data Protocol
Perseus v.1.5.5.3 (www.maxquant.org/) was used for data analysis, processing and visualisation. Normalised LFQ intensity values were used as the quantitative measurement of protein abundance for subsequent analysis. The data matrix was first filtered for the removal of contaminants and peptides identified by site. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and each sample was assigned to its corresponding group, i.e. E. coli exposed to P. aeruginosa-conditioned medium (control) versus P. aeruginosa exposed to A. fumigatus-conditioned medium or Co-culture-conditioned medium. Proteins not found in all four three out of four replicates in at least one group were omitted from the analysis. A data-imputation step was conducted to replace missing values with values that simulate signals of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (SD) of all measured values and a width of 0.3 times this SD.   To visualise differences between two samples, pairwise Student’s t-tests were performed for all using a cut-off of p<0.05 on the post-imputated dataset. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p-values on the y-axis and log2 fold-change values on the x-axis for each pairwise comparison. The ‘categories’ function in Perseus was utilized to highlight and visualise the distribution of various pathways and processes on selected volcano plots. Statistically significant (ANOVA, p<0.05) proteins were chosen for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotics, Anti microbial resistance, Proteomics, E. coli

### Affiliations
Biology
Maynooth University, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Maynooth University, Ireland


