### Accession
PXD029340

### Title
Insight into the interplay between thiol oxidoreductases of oxidative activity of Campylobacter jejuni

### Description
The bacterial proteins of the Dsb family catalyze the formation of disulfide bridges between cysteine residues that stabilize protein structures and ensure their proper functioning. Here we report the detailed analysis of the Dsb pathway of Campylobacter jejuni. The oxidizing Dsb system of this pathogen is unique because it consists of two monomeric DsbAs (DsbA1 and DsbA2) and one dimeric bifunctional protein (C8J_1298). Previously, we showed that DsbA1 and C8J_1298 are redundant. Here we unraveled the interaction between the two monomeric DsbAs by in vitro and in vivo experiments and by solving their structures and found that both monomeric DsbAs are dispensable proteins. Their structures confirmed that they are homologs of EcDsbL. The slight differences seen in the surface charge of the proteins do not affect the interaction with their redox partner. Comparative proteomics showed that several respiratory proteins, as well as periplasmic transport proteins, are targets of the Dsb system. Some of these, both donors and electron acceptors, are essential elements of C. jejuni respiratory process under oxygen-limiting conditions in the host intestine. The data presented provides detailed information on function of the C. jejuni Dsb system, identifying it as a potential target for novel antibacterial molecules.

### Sample Protocol
C. jejuni cells were grown in liquid BHI-FBS (FBS 5%, v/v) at 37°C for 16-18 h under microaerobic conditions. Periplasmic protein extracts from C. jejuni were prepared according to Hinikier & Bardwell with minor modifications [43]. The cell suspensions were centrifuged (5000 g, 20 min, 4°C) and resulting pellets were resuspended in 1 ml of TSE buffer (0.2 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 0.5 M sucrose and 1 mM EDTA). Cells were incubated on ice for 30 min, transferred into Eppendorf tubes and centrifuged (16,000 g, 30 min, 4°C). Resulting supernatants containing periplasmic proteins were moved into a new tube. Periplasmic proteins were then precipitated by adding trichloroacetic acid (TCA) to a final concentration 15 % (v/v), incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged (16,000 g, 30 min, 4°C). Pellets were washed with ice-cold acetone twice and dried. The samples were stored at -20°C. Protein pellets were subjected to a standard procedure of trypsin digestion, during which proteins were reduced with 5 mM TCEP in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 h at 60°C, blocked with 10mM MMTS for 10 min at RT and digested overnight with 10 µl of 0.1 µg/µl trypsin (Promega). Resulting peptide mixtures were subjected to peptide solid-phase extraction with Waters Oasis Sample Extraction system and resuspended in 2% ACN/0.1% TFA. Peptide concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific). 3 µg of each sample was analysed using LC-MS system composed of an UPLC chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters) directly coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on C18 pre-column (180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) using 0.1% FA in water as a mobile phase and then transferred to a nanoAcquity BEH C18 column (75 µm x 250 mm, 1.7 µm, Waters) using ACN gradient (0 – 35% ACN in 160 min) in the presence of 0.1% FA at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Blank runs were performed between samples to ensure lack of cross-contamination. To increase the number of peptides and proteins for analysis, separate series of measurements from pooled samples in 3 m/z ranges (300-600, 580-800, 780-2000) were performed.

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS/MS data were preprocessed with Mascot Distiller software (v. 2.7, MatrixScience, London, UK), and a search was performed with the Mascot Search Engine (MatrixScience, London, UK, Mascot Server 2.7). The amino acid sequence database was composed of two Campylobacter jejuni proteomes (strains 81-176 and NCTC 11168, 3,371 sequences; 1,034,205 residues) derived from Uniprot and contaminat database (115 sequences; 38,188 residues). To reduce mass errors, the peptide and fragment mass tolerance settings were established separately for individual LC-MS/MS runs after a measured mass recalibration – typical tolerance value for parent ions was 5 ppm and for daughter ions – 0.01 Da. The rest of search parameters were as follows: enzyme, Trypsin; missed cleavages, 1; fixed modifications, Methylthio (C); variable modifications, Oxidation (M); instrument, HCD. A statistical assessment of the confidence of peptide assignments was based on the target/decoy database search strategy. Proteins with less than two peptides and proteins identified by a subset of peptides from another protein were removed from analysis. Proteins that exactly matched the same set of peptides were combined into a single group (family).  The lists of identified peptides were merged into one common list. This list was overlayed onto 2-D heatmaps generated from LC-MS/MS datasets by tagging the peptide-related isotopic envelopes with corresponding peptide sequence tags on the basis of the measured/theoretical mass difference, the deviation from the predicted elution time and the match between theoretical and observed isotopic envelopes. The abundance of each peptide was determined as the height of a 2-D fit to the monoisotopic peak of the tagged isotopic envelope. Quantitative values were next exported into text files, along with peptide/protein identifications, for statistical analysis with Diffprot software. Diffprot was run with the following parameters: number of random peptide sets = 10 6; clustering of peptide sets – only when 90% identical; normalization by LOWESS.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterial proteins of the Dsb family catalyze the formation of disulfide bridges between cysteine residues that stabilize protein structures and ensure their proper functioning. Here, we report the detailed analysis of the Dsb pathway of <i>Campylobacter jejuni</i>. The oxidizing Dsb system of this pathogen is unique because it consists of two monomeric DsbAs (DsbA1 and DsbA2) and one dimeric bifunctional protein (C8J_1298). Previously, we showed that DsbA1 and C8J_1298 are redundant. Here, we unraveled the interaction between the two monomeric DsbAs by in vitro and in vivo experiments and by solving their structures and found that both monomeric DsbAs are dispensable proteins. Their structures confirmed that they are homologs of EcDsbL. The slight differences seen in the surface charge of the proteins do not affect the interaction with their redox partner. Comparative proteomics showed that several respiratory proteins, as well as periplasmic transport proteins, are targets of the Dsb system. Some of these, both donors and electron acceptors, are essential elements of the <i>C. jejuni</i> respiratory process under oxygen-limiting conditions in the host intestine. The data presented provide detailed information on the function of the <i>C. jejuni</i> Dsb system, identifying it as a potential target for novel antibacterial molecules.

### Keywords
Dsb, Bacteria, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
IBB PAS
Department of Bacterial Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Poland

### Submitter
Agata Malinowska

### Lab Head
Dr Katarzyna Jagusztyn-Krynicka
Department of Bacterial Genetics, Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of Biology, University of Warsaw, Poland


