### Accession
PXD004398

### Title
Giardia Secretome Highlights Secreted Tenascins as a Key Component of Pathogenesis

### Description
Giardia causes more episodes of illness worldwide than any other parasite. It is a flagellated cyst-forming enteric pathogen that inhabits the lumen of the small intestine and although it is clear that more and less virulent strains do occur, pathogenesis and virulence of Giardia remains poorly understood. Identification of Giardia virulence factors is highly desirable since their expression would be the best indicator for determining disease outcome. The advent of quantitative proteomics has been timely in investigating which proteins are likely to be secreted virulence factors. Here we successfully apply such analyses to the whole parasite and to the supernatants derived from the parasite, in order to ascertain a repertoire of secreted proteins. In our initial analysis we compared replicates of Giardia cells and culture supernatants from the two major lineages which cause human disease – assemblage A and assemblage B. The genome of Giardia is believed to contain open reading frames which could encode as many as 6000 proteins. In our study we confirm expression of ~1600 proteins from each assemblage, the vast majority of which being common to both lineages. To look for actual enrichment of secreted proteins, we considered the ratio of proteins in the supernatant compared with the pellet. This simple method defines a small group of enriched proteins, putatively secreted at a steady state by cultured growing Giardia trophozoites of both assemblages. This secretome contains a high proportion annotated to have N’ terminus signal peptides, with some showing evidence of having recently evolved under strong positive selective pressure. The most abundant secreted proteins include known virulence factors such as the Cathepsin B cysteine proteases and members of a Giardia superfamily of Cysteine Rich Proteins which comprises VSPs, HCMPs and a new class of virulence factors, the Giardia Tenascins. Since we also find that physiological function of human enteric epithelial cells can be disrupted by soluble factors even in the absence of the trophozoites we are able to propose a straightforward model of Giardia pathogenesis incorporating key roles for the major Giardia derived soluble mediators.

### Sample Protocol
Giardia trophozoites from the genome reference strains WB (assemblage A) and GS (assemblage B), were cultured in TYI-S-33 under standard conditions23 and harvested during the midlog phase of their growth curves. Trophozoites were washed 3 x in PBS and then incubated in non-supplemented DMEM for 45 minutes at 37°C. After incubation, an aliquot was analysed by flow cytometry to evaluate the viability of the Giardia samples. Trophozoites and supernatant were separated by centrifugation and both trophozoite pellet and supernatant were harvested. Supernatants were analysed by SDS page electrophoresis and were tested on cultured epithelial cells (Caco-2) to ensure the presence of proteins and biological activity (see below). Supernatants and pellets were sent to the Institute of Infection and Global Health at the University of Liverpool for mass spectrometry analysis (Figure S3). Proteins contained in supernatant were concentrated in Vivaspin columns with 25 mM Ambic. Peptide mixtures were analysed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer or a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Replicate runs were time-aligned using default settings and an auto-selected run as a reference. Peaks were picked by the software using default settings and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state of between +2 and +6. Peptide intensities of replicates were normalised against the reference run by Progenesis LC-MS. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis LC–MS and exported for peptide identification using the PEAKS Studio 7 (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against a custom database that contained the common contamination and internal standards, GiardiaDB-3.1_GintestinalisAssemblageA_AnnotatedProteins or GiardiaDB-3.1_GintestinalisAssemblageB_AnnotatedProteins. The search parameters for Orbitrap-Velos were as follows; precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) set as a variable modification. The search parameters for Q Exactive were as follows; precursor mass tolerance was set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.01 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (M) set as a variable modification. The false discovery rates were set at 1% and at least two unique peptides were required for reporting protein identifications. Protein abundance (iBAQ) was calculated as the sum of all the peak intensities (from Progenesis output) divided by the number of theoretically observable tryptic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pathogenesis, Giardia, Secretome

### Affiliations
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University, UK
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Dong Xia

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Wastling
Faculty of Natural Sciences, Keele University, UK


