### Accession
PXD003136

### Title
Interleukin-6 induced ‘acute’ response promotes Th1 anti-tumor immunity in cryo-thermal therapy: shotgun proteomics

### Description
Cryo-thermal therapy has been proven to be a promising novel systemic strategy for advanced breast cancer, resulting in higher incidence of tumor regression and enhanced remission of metastasis. The mechanism by which such strategy boosts the anti-tumor activity remains unclear. To gain a system-wide understanding of the anti-tumor response, here we utilized a spontaneous metastatic mouse model and quantitative proteomics to compare the N-glycoproteome changes following treatment or not in 94 serum samples over 8 time points. We quantified 231 high confident N-glycosylated serum proteins in total using iTRAQ labeling shotgun proteomic. 53 of them showed significant regulatory patterns over time course, in which we identified acute phase response as the most enhanced pathway and markedly distinguished in the hierarchical proteome profile. We therefore investigated the function of acute response in tumoricidal effect using quantitative parallel reaction monitoring proteomics and flow cytometry upon 23 out of 53 significant proteins. We found that cryo-thermal therapy reshaped the tumor chronic inflammatory microenvironment to an ‘acute’ phenotype, accompanying ‘acute’ and markedly high expression of acute phase proteins and their key upstream regulator -interleukin 6. Such IL-6 mediated ‘acute’ phenotype drove the tumor site from a Th2 immunosuppressive, pro-tumorigenic to a Th1 immunostimulatory, tumouricidal phenotype, inducing a switch from IL-4 and Treg-promoting ICOSL expression to Th1-promoting IFN –γand IL-12 production, skewing to complement system activation and CD86+MHCII+ dendritic cells maturation, and enhancing the proliferation of Th1 memory cells. We also found an increased production of tumor metastatic inhibitors under such ‘acute’ environment, favoring the anti-metastatic effect. In this study, we revealed that IL-6 mediated ‘acute’ inflammatory profile played a key role to suppress immunosuppression and wake up the anti-tumor activity, recovering host metabolism and physiology. This could guide us a better understanding to improve this cancer treatment for better therapeutic effect.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse sera were denatured, reduced, alkylated and digested to peptides. Peptides were then subjected to the hydrized beads to capture the glycopeptide. Those glycopeptide from multiple conditions were labeled with 8-plex iTRAQ reagent, and mixed to three groups (A, B and C). Each group was then separated into 8 fractions using off-gel fractionation system. Each fraction was analyzed with two replicates using Orbitrap Elite.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files from DDA acquisition were analyzed by the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline software suite (TPP, Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA) (version 4.7.0). Raw files were first converted to centroid mzXML and MS/MS spectra acquired were searched with comet (version 2.0) against a combined UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot and UniProtKB/VarSplic mouse database downloaded with reversed sequences. Common contaminants were included. Searching parameters were used as follows: precursor ion mass tolerance: ±10 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; semi-tryptic termini and two missing cleavages were allowed; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C); isobaric modification of lysine and peptide N-terminal residue; dynamic modification: oxidation (M) and deamidation (N). Searching results were further processed with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet embedded in TPP. False discovery rate (FDR) for protein was set to 0.01. Isobaric labeling quantification was performed by LIBRA integrated in TPP and only unique N-glycopeptides with a PeptideProphet score ≥ 0.85, corresponding to an FDR <0.01 were considered for N-glycosylated protein quantification. The efficiency of glycopeptide capture was carried out and measured as the percentage of peptides with NXS/T sequence motif (X represents any amino acid residue except proline) in total peptides and corresponding glycosites were checked in Uniprot manually.

### Publication Abstract
Cryo-thermal therapy has been emerged as a promising novel therapeutic strategy for advanced breast cancer, triggering higher incidence of tumor regression and enhanced remission of metastasis than routine treatments. To better understand its anti-tumor mechanism, we utilized a spontaneous metastatic mouse model and quantitative proteomics to compare N-glycoproteome changes in 94 serum samples with and without treatment. We quantified 231 highly confident N-glycosylated proteins using iTRAQ shotgun proteomics. Among them, 53 showed significantly discriminated regulatory patterns over the time course, in which the acute phase response emerged as the most enhanced pathway. The anti-tumor feature of the acute response was further investigated using parallel reaction monitoring target proteomics and flow cytometry on 23 of the 53 significant proteins. We found that cryo-thermal therapy reset the tumor chronic inflammation to an "acute" phenotype, with up-regulation of acute phase proteins including IL-6 as a key regulator. The IL-6 mediated "acute" phenotype transformed IL-4 and Treg-promoting ICOSL expression to Th1-promoting IFN-&#x3b3; and IL-12 production, augmented complement system activation and CD86(+)MHCII(+) dendritic cells maturation and enhanced the proliferation of Th1 memory cells. In addition, we found an increased production of tumor progression and metastatic inhibitory proteins under such "acute" environment, favoring the anti-metastatic effect. Moreover, cryo-thermal on tumors induced the strongest "acute" response compared to cryo/hyperthermia alone or cryo-thermal on healthy tissues, accompanying by the most pronounced anti-tumor immunological effect. In summary, we demonstrated that cryo-thermal therapy induced, IL-6 mediated "acute" microenvironment shifted the tumor chronic microenvironment from Th2 immunosuppressive and pro-tumorigenic to Th1 immunostimulatory and tumoricidal state. Moreover, the magnitude of "acute" and "danger" signals play a key role in determining the efficacy of anti-tumor activity.

### Keywords
Acute phase response, Th1 anti-tumor immunity, Parallel reaction monitoring, Cryo-thermal therapy, Interleukin-6

### Affiliations
Bioheat and mass transfer laboratory, Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
shanghai jiaotong university

### Submitter
ting xue

### Lab Head
Dr Lisa X.Xu
Bioheat and mass transfer laboratory, Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University


