### Accession
PXD032788

### Title
Labeled quantitative proteomics dataset of optogenetics induced axon regeneration

### Description
This labeled quantitative proteomics dataset was collected from a transgenic channel rhodopsin mouse model (Chr2) subjected to light stimulation after traumatic optic nerve crush (ONC) was performed. Mouse models expressing channel rhodopsin were subjected to therapeutic light stimulation promoting axon regeneration of retinal ganglion cell (RGC) axons post optic nerve crush. Experimental mice and wild type control mice were euthanized, and optic nerves were collected. A protein extraction was carried out by careful mincing of the tissue in extraction buffer (TEAB, NaCl and SDS). Protein amount normalization across samples was achieved using dot blot densitometry using ImageJ software. Samples were labelled using a modified 16plex TMT (Tandem Mass Tag) kit for quantification after overnight trypsin digestion. Untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5.

### Sample Protocol
Animals were euthanized and optic nerves were collected. There were 12 experimental conditions and three biological replicates for each condition for a total of 36 nerves. Protein extraction was carried out by mincing of tissue in TEAB, NaCl and SDS. Dot blot densitometry was used to estimate and normalize protein amounts across all samples. Protein was trypsin digested overnight and samples were labelled with TMT label reagents. Each set of biological replicates was labelled with 12 labelling reagents (modified from a 16Plex Thermo Scientific kit) and combined into three separate tubes for mass spec analysis. Samples were separated with an Easy-Spray HPLC column (Thermo Scientific) on an Easy-nLC 1000 instrument (Thermo Scientific). Untargeted mass spectrometry was performed on a QExactive mass spectrometer (LC MS-MS).

### Data Protocol
All raw mass spectrometry data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5. The mouse proteome was downloaded from UniProt and used as the target database. Max missed cleavage site was set to 2 and minimum peptide length to 6. Precursor Mass Tolerance was set to 10ppm and Fragment Mass Tolerance to 0.02 Da. Post-translational modifications included oxidation, acetylation, carbamidomethylation and TMTpro. Normalization was set to total peptide amount and confidence to high.

### Publication Abstract
This labeled quantitative proteomics dataset was collected from a transgenic channel rhodopsin mouse model (Chr2) subjected to light stimulation after traumatic optic nerve crush (ONC). Protein extraction was performed by careful mincing of the tissue in extraction buffer (TEAB, NaCl and SDS). Protein amounts were normalized across samples using dot blot densitometry and ImageJ software. Samples were labeled for quantification using a modified TMTpro&#x2122; 16plex Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific&#x2122;) after performing an overnight trypsin digestion. Untargeted liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (LC-MS/MS). Data analysis was performed using Proteome Discoverer&#x2122; 2.5 (Thermo Scientific&#x2122;). This data has been deposited to the ProteomeXchange (PX) and is available through PRIDE with the identifier PXD032788.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteome, Axon regeneration, Optogenetic stimulation, Rhythmic light stimulation

### Affiliations
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Miami Integrative Metabolomics Research Center, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute (McKnight Vision Research Center)
Bascom Palmer Eye Institute, Department of Ophthalmology, Miller School of Medicine at University of Miami, Miami, FL 33136, USA

### Submitter
Sanjoy Bhattacharya

### Lab Head
Dr Sanjoy K Bhattacharya
University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, Department of Ophthalmology, Miami Integrative Metabolomics Research Center, Bascom Palmer Eye Institute (McKnight Vision Research Center)


