### Accession
PXD021658

### Title
Thiol-ene microfluidic chip for fast on-chip sample clean-up, separation and ESI mass analysis of peptides and proteins

### Description
Microfluidic devices coupled to MS promises low manufacturing costs, low sample consumption and channels with a high surface area to volume ratio and tailorable functional groups. Here, we describe a thiol-ene-based microfluidic chip that is capable of sample loading, desalting and on-chip reversed phase chromatography prior to on-chip electrospray ionization for the intact analysis of proteins and peptides, as well as, for on-chip bottom-up proteomics workflows coupled directly with mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
The samples are mostly non-treated protein and peptide spiked samples, except for a single offline experiment with tryptic digestion of hemoglobin later used to test trapping of peptides on the on-chip packed bed.

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed solely in full scan mode (MS only), proteins was deconvoluted using Waters MassLynx software (MaxEnt) and Magtran (by Zhongqi Zhang and Alan G. Marshall). Peptide mapping was performed according to in-silico tryptic digests using the software GPMAW (General Protein/Mass Analysis for Windows, Lighthouse data, Odense Denmark) as presented in Peri, S.; Steen, H.; Pandey, A. GPMAW – a Software Tool for Analyzing Proteins and Peptides. Trends Biochem. Sci. 2001, 26 (11), 687–689. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0968-0004(01)01954-5.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Emitter, Monolith, Electrospray ionisation, Mass spectrometry, Reversed-phase chromatography, Microfluidics

### Affiliations
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Rasmus Svejdal

### Lab Head
Dr Kasper D. Rand
Protein Analysis Group, Department of Pharmacy, University of Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark


