### Accession
PXD002899

### Title
CRM1 Exportome and nucleocytoplasmic partition

### Description
CRM1 mediates one of the major nuclear export pathways with the broadest range of cargoes. So far, more than 100 structurally and functionally diverse CRM1 cargoes have been described. We employed affinity purification mass spectrometry for in depth characterization of CRM1 "exportome" in three model systems and we identified surprisingly large numbers, namely >700 export substrates from the yeast S. cerevisiae, ≈ 1000 from Xenopus oocytes and >1050 from human cells.I. Futher, we quantified the partitioning of ≈9600 proteoforms between nucleus and cytoplasm of Xenopus oocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Two sample processing workflows were employed. First, proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE, in-gel digested with trypsin, and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Second, proteins were in solution digested with first Lys-C and trypsin. Resulting peptides were fractioned by high pH reverse phase chromatography into 48 fractions which were pooled together, and then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.0.30) and peak lists were searched with in-built Andromeda search engine. Xenopus samples were searched against X. laevis protein database with 79,214 entries (Wühr et al., 2014), human samples were searched against human UniProt FASTA database (download date:  June 2014, 20,258 entries) and for yeast samples a S. cerevisiae Uniprot FASTA database (download date:  June 2014, 6743 entries) were used. The Andromeda search engine parameters were: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications; tryptic specificity was considered with proline restriction; up to two missed cleavages were allowed; and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids.  The MS survey scan mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm, and MS/MS mass tolerances to 20 ppm (Orbitrap) and 0.5 Da (LTQ ion trap), respectively. The false discovery rate was set to 1% at both the peptide and the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
CRM1 is a highly conserved, RanGTPase-driven exportin that carries proteins and RNPs from the nucleus to the cytoplasm. We now explored the cargo-spectrum of CRM1 in depth and identified surprisingly large numbers, namely &gt;700 export substrates from the yeast S. cerevisiae, &#x2248;1000 from Xenopus oocytes and &gt;1050 from human cells. In addition, we quantified the partitioning of &#x2248;5000 unique proteins between nucleus and cytoplasm of Xenopus oocytes. The data suggest new CRM1 functions in spatial control of vesicle coat-assembly, centrosomes, autophagy, peroxisome biogenesis, cytoskeleton, ribosome maturation, translation, mRNA degradation, and more generally in precluding a potentially detrimental action of cytoplasmic pathways within the nuclear interior. There are also numerous new instances where CRM1 appears to act in regulatory circuits. Altogether, our dataset allows unprecedented insights into the nucleocytoplasmic organisation of eukaryotic cells, into the contributions of an exceedingly promiscuous exportin and it provides a new basis for NES prediction.

### Keywords
Human, Xenopus, S.cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
Henning Urlaub: Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany;  Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,  Dirk Goerlich:Department of Cellular Logistics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany;

### Submitter
Samir Karaca

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub and Dirk Görlich
Henning Urlaub: Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany;  Bioanalytics, Institute for Clinical Chemistry University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen,  Dirk Goerlich:Department of Cellular Logistics, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Göttingen, Germany;


