### Accession
PXD029913

### Title
Adaptive partitioning of a gene locus to the nuclear envelope in Saccharomyces cerevisiae is driven by polymer-polymer phase separation

### Description
Partitioning of active gene loci to the nuclear envelope is a key mechanism by which organisms can increase the speed of adaptation and metabolic robustness to fluctuating resources in the environment. In the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae, adaptation and transcriptional memory induced by nutrient depletion or other stresses, results from relocalization of active gene loci from nucleoplasm to the nuclear envelope, leading to increased transport of mRNAs to the cytosol and their translation. The mechanism by which this translocation occurs remains a mystery. We show here, that for the inositol depletion-responsive gene locus INO1 in yeast, translocation to the nuclear envelope is caused by a local phase transition of the mechanical stiffness of chromatin surrounding activated INO1 that favors phase separation of the active gene locus into low density regions of chromatin proximal to the nuclear envelope. Gene regulatory elements essential to translocation encode binding sites for histone acetyl transferases, which are necessary for chromatin decompaction. INO1 locus partitioning can be explained by a phenomenological model of chromatin decompaction, which reflects stiffening of chromatin and its partitioning into a dilute chromatin phase adjacent to the nuclear envelope, from the dense chromatin found in the nucleoplasmic phase. Recent evidence suggests that this demixing of chromatin could be due to the dissolution of multivalent chromatin interactions mediated by histone post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Cultures and Streptavidin Affinity Purification  The protocol for biotinylated proteins purification was modified from Opitz et al. Cells were inoculated in 4 L of SDC medium without inositol plus D-biotin (B4639, Sigma-Aldrich) added to final concentration of 10 μM. Cells were grown to OD600 of 0.8 and harvested by filtration using a Kontes™ Ultra-Ware™ Microfiltration Assembly with Fritted Glass Support (90 mm) and MF-Millipore™ Membrane Filters, 0.45 µm pore size (HAWP0900 Millipore). Pellets were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at -80°C. Cell lysis was performed under cryogenic conditions using solid phase milling in a planetary ball mill (Retsch PM 100) producing a fine cell grindate. Grindate samples were stored at −80°C until processed. Biotinylated proteins were purified using streptavidin-sepharose beads (GE Healthcare, 17-5113-01). For each sample, 0.7 g of crude extract was resuspended in 6.3 ml of buffer A: commercial buffer W (100 mM Tris-Cl, 150 M NaCl, 2-1003-100, IBA) containing 0.1 % SDS, 0.5 % Sodium Deoxycholate, and protease inhibitors mixture (cOmplete™, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, 11836170001, Roche). Samples were homogenized with a vortex agitator, polytron (PT1200E, for 30 seconds, one time), and incubated at 65°C for 5 minutes in a water bath. Subsequent clarification was performed by two rounds of centrifugation at 2465 × g, 4°C, 5 minutes, and 20292 × g, 4°C, 20 minutes, respectively. Triplicates for each sample were prepared; clear extracts were incubated with 30 µl of beads previously equilibrated with buffer A. Samples with beads were incubated for 3 hours at 4°C and gentle mixing (VWR® Nutating Mixer). Beads were washed with buffer A and transferred to 1.5 ml Protein LoBind tubes (Eppendorf, 0030108422) to significantly reduce sample binding to the surface and increase the recovery for mass spectrometry. Three consecutive washes with buffer A were performed, followed by four quick washes with 50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8 (ABC). 30 µL of 50 mM ABC pH 8 containing 6mM fresh DTT were added to each tube followed by 30 minutes incubation at 37°C with gentle agitation in a ThermoMixer (Eppendorf) at 350 RPM. Samples were spun quickly and 5ul IAA 126 mM dissolved in ABC 50 mM pH 8 were added to each tube and incubated for another 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. Tubes were quickly spun again and 5 ul Trypsin/LysC Mix (Promega, V5073) dissolved in ABC 50 mM pH 8 at 200 ng/ul were added to each one. Samples were digested on-beads overnight at 37°C, 350 RPM. The next day, after a quick spin, 60 µl of MS grade H2O were added to the beads, mixed, and centrifuged at low speed (1 min, 400 RCF). 80 µl of the peptides digests were transferred to new labeled Protein LoBind tubes before adding formic acid (FA) to a final concentration of 4 % v/v. The peptides were dried in a SpeedVac at room temperature and then stored at −80°C.  Mass spectrometry  Samples were resuspended in 11 µl of 2 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 1 % FA containing 0.5X of iRT standard peptides (Biognosys, Ki-3002-1), of which, 2 µl of each sample was further diluted 1/5 in the same buffer. Diluted samples were loaded (2.5 µl each) at 450 nl min−1 on a 17 cm × 75 µm i.d. PicoFrit fused silica capillary column (New Objective), packed in-house with Jupiter 5 µm C18 300 Å (Phenomenex). The column was mounted in an Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems) and coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex Ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nl min−1 on 2-slope gradient made with 0.2 % FA in water (buffer A) and 0.2 % FA in 100 % ACN (buffer B). Concentration of buffer B first increased from 2 % to 36 % over 105 minutes, and from 36% to 80% over 12 minutes. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-independent acquisition mode. Full MS scans in the range of 400-1000 m/z range were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120 K. Each full scan was followed by 25 MS2 acquisition windows with 24 m/z increments and 0.5 m/z overlaps, covering each full scan. Matching MS2 m/z window precursor ions were fragmented by HCD at a 30 % collision energy and acquired in the Orbitrap at a 30 K resolution. Both MS and MS2 AGC target were set to 4e5 with maximum fill times of 60 ms. The lock mass option (lock mass: m/z 371.101233) was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS RAW files were analyzed with Spectronaut v15.1.210713 (Biognosys) by directDIA. The Fasta database was downloaded from Uniprot and consisted of all Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288c verified nuclear proteins entries (1749).  Considered peptide length for Pulsar search was 6-52 amino acids with two missed cleavages tolerance, using the semi-specific Trypsin/P rules. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modifications while oxidation of methionines, protein N-termini acetylation, biotinylation of lysines and protein N-termini as well as phosphorylation (STY) were set as variable modifications, with a maximum of five. Peptide spectrum match, peptides, and protein group FDR were set at default value of 0.01. Machine learning was applied per run and both precursor and protein were identified at a Qvalue cutoff of 0.01. Proteins were quantified at the MS2 level on stripped peptide median quantities. Unique peptides were used for quantification. Only proteins for which values from all biological triplicates were measured in the sgRNA-BirA*-dCas9 were kept for quantification, and no values were imputed during the analysis. 

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gene partitioning, Active chromatin, Ino1, Phase separation, Chromatin decompaction, Nuclear envelope, Active gene

### Affiliations
Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University
Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)
Universite de Montreal

### Submitter
Marlene Oeffinger

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Eloise Oeffinger
Associate Research Professor, Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM) Professeure agrégée, Département de biochimie et médecine moléculaire, Université de Montréal Associate Professor, Division of Experimental Medicine, McGill University


