### Accession
PXD000851

### Title
Membrane proteomic analysis of colorectal cancer tissue

### Description
We performed shotgun proteomics of colorectal cancer tissue and premalignant lesions using iTRAQ to identify biomarker candidate proteins for colorectal cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Six tissues each were collected from patients with colorectal polyps and cancer with/without metastasis. The membrane fraction prepared from these specimens. The reference pool was arranged by mixing an equal amount of 18 membrane fraction extracts. These extracts were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin. The tryptic digests of the reference pool, cancer without metastasis, cancer with metastasis, and polyps were labeled with iTRAQ reagents 114, 115, 116, and 117, respectively. The iTRAQ-labeled peptides were fractionated using a HPLC system with a SCX column. Six iTRAQ analysis sets (from 1st to 6th set) were performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were examined using Proteome Discoverer ver.1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Mascot v2.3.1 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProt/SwissProt (release-2010_05), which contained 20,295 sequences of Homo sapiens.

### Publication Abstract
Recent advances in quantitative proteomic technology have enabled the large-scale validation of biomarkers. We here performed a quantitative proteomic analysis of membrane fractions from colorectal cancer tissue to discover biomarker candidates, and then extensively validated the candidate proteins identified. A total of 5566 proteins were identified in six tissue samples, each of which was obtained from polyps and cancer with and without metastasis. GO cellular component analysis predicted that 3087 of these proteins were membrane proteins, whereas TMHMM algorithm predicted that 1567 proteins had a transmembrane domain. Differences were observed in the expression of 159 membrane proteins and 55 extracellular proteins between polyps and cancer without metastasis, while the expression of 32 membrane proteins and 17 extracellular proteins differed between cancer with and without metastasis. A total of 105 of these biomarker candidates were quantitated using selected (or multiple) reaction monitoring (SRM/MRM) with stable synthetic isotope-labeled peptides as an internal control. The results obtained revealed differences in the expression of 69 of these proteins, and this was subsequently verified in an independent set of patient samples (polyps (n = 10), cancer without metastasis (n = 10), cancer with metastasis (n = 10)). Significant differences were observed in the expression of 44 of these proteins, including ITGA5, GPRC5A, PDGFRB, and TFRC, which have already been shown to be overexpressed in colorectal cancer, as well as proteins with unknown function, such as C8orf55. The expression of C8orf55 was also shown to be high not only in colorectal cancer, but also in several cancer tissues using a multicancer tissue microarray, which included 1150 cores from 14 cancer tissues. This is the largest verification study of biomarker candidate membrane proteins to date; our methods for biomarker discovery and subsequent validation using SRM/MRM will contribute to the identification of useful biomarker candidates for various cancers. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000851.

### Keywords
Human, Membrane protein, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation

### Submitter
Hideaki Kume

### Lab Head
Dr Takeshi Tomonaga
Laboratory of Proteome Research, National Institute of Biomedical Innovation


