### Accession
PXD021088

### Title
Dystrophin domains R4-15 and R20-23

### Description
Goal was to assess protein linkers between microtubules and dystrophin (specifically dystrophin regions R4-15 and R20-23). Two paired 10-plex TMT experiments were used to compare sixteen unique Dystrophin Glycoprotein Complex (or microtubule) enrichments (four genotypes, each with n=4) plus four pooled samples to allow comparison across the two individual 10-plex experiments for microtubules or DGC. A pair of 10-plex TMT(20 tags total) for the DGC enrichements, and a second pair of TMT (20 tags) for the MT enrichments.   Samples are gastroc skeletal muscle from mouse.

### Sample Protocol
DGC(dystrophin glycoprotein complex) was enriched from mouse gastrocnemius muscles by WGA beads. Microtubule enrichments were collected by centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed in scaffold. Each experimental line (Dys∆H2-R15-mdx, Dys∆MTB-mdx, Dys∆R4-23/∆CT-mdx) was compared to the control line Dys∆71-78-mdx to allow identification of proteins for which there was a significant log2 fold change in expression in experimental compared to control. Proteins of interest were those significantly different in all 3 experimental lines compared to Dys∆71-78-mdx (R4-15 and R20-23 connection), those altered similarly in Dys∆H2-R15-mdx and Dys∆R4-23/∆CT-mdx but not changed in Dys∆MTB-mdx compared to Dys∆71-78-mdx (R4-15 connection), and those altered similarly in Dys∆MTB-mdx and Dys∆R4-23/∆CT-mdx but not changed in Dys∆H2-R15-mdx compared to Dys∆71-78-mdx (R20-23 connection).  The tandem mass spectra were analyzed using Sequest (XCorr Only) in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). We used the NCBI Reference Sequence mouse protein sequence database (taxon ID 10088) from Aug 22, 2018 merged with the common lab contaminant protein database from https://www.thegpm.org/crap/, with a total of 185018 entries, for the database searching. The Sequest search parameters included: trypsin enzyme, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, precursor ion tolerance 50 ppm, S-methylthiocysteine as a fixed modification; pyroglutamic acid from glutamine, deamidation of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation and TMT 10plex for lysine and peptide N-termini as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microtubules, Dystrophin glycoprotein complex, Mice, Micro-dystrophin, Dystrophin

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota

### Submitter
D'anna Nelson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. James Ervasti
University of Minnesota


