### Accession
PXD011095

### Title
Repression of Human Papillomavirus Oncogene Expression under Hypoxia is Mediated by PI3K/mTORC2/AKT Signaling

### Description
Cornerstones of the regulatory phenomena observed in hypoxic HPV-positive cancer cells are: (i) hypoxia blocks E6/E7, an effect that can be counteracted by (ii) AKT inhibition and by (iii) high glucose supply. To gain further insights into the underlying regulatory circuits, mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteome analyses were performed comparing normoxic and hypoxic SiHa cells and assessing their response towards AKTi VIII and 25 mM glucose under hypoxia

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were suspended in 0.1 % (w/v) RapiGest-SF (Waters) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, pH 8). Cell lysis and shearing of chromatin was performed in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode) in a final volume of max. 300 µl, 15-20 cycles of 30’’/30’’ (ON/OFF) at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA-assay following the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Prior to protein digestion disulfide bonds were reduced by 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 °C and subsequently alkylated with 15 mM 2- chloroacetamide for 30 min at room temperature (RT). Proteolytic digestion was performed with trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Promega) in a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) overnight at 37 °C, shaking at 700 rpm. Following digestion, 1 % trifluoroacetic acid was added (pH < 2) to stop digestion and break down RapiGest by incubation at 37 °C for 30 min followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 10 min. Supernatants were transferred to a new tube and dried in a vacuum centrifuge. Isobaric labeling of the peptides was performed with 10-plex TMT reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Dried samples were dissolved in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10), prior  to fractionation on a 1200 Infinity HPLC system (Agilent) with a Gemini C18 column (3 µm, 110 Å, 100 × 1.0 mm; Phenomenex) using a linear 60 min gradient from 0 % to 35 % (v/v) ACN in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) at a flow rate of 0.1 ml/min. Sixty 1-min fractions were collected and pooled into twelve fractions, dried and reconstituted in 0.1 % formic acid (FA). Fractions were injected by an Easy-nLC 1200 nano-UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) onto a trap column (Pepmap, 100 μm x 2cm, C18, 5 μm 100Å pores) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC  75 μm × 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µM, 100Å) by applying a  multistep gradient (Solvent A: 0.1 % FA in water, Solvent B: 0.1 % FA, 80 % ACN 29.9 % water) from : 3–50 % B over 90 min. Eluting peptides were electro-sprayed by applying 2 kV on a 10 µm Picotip coated emitter (New Objective) into an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode of acquisition using the vendor supplied default settings for synchronous precursor selection (SPS) MS3 fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectra were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1.0.81 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), using the SEQUEST search engine against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot databases of Homo sapiens (21.06.2018), and human papillomavirus 16 (21.06.2018) proteome databases. Search settings: digestion reagent: trypsin, precursor and product ion tolerances were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as a variable modification. For TMT labels, TMT6-plex on lysine and peptide N-termini were set as a static modification. The percolator algorithm was used as the false discovery rate (FDR) calculator, and all peptides were filtered at a ‘strict’ target FDR level of 0.01. Identification of differentially expressed proteins was performed with Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma, Version 3.36.2; Rstudio, Version 1.1.456), with a p-value below 0.05 (adjusted for multiple testing according to Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
Hypoxia is linked to therapeutic resistance and poor clinical prognosis for many tumor entities, including human papillomavirus (HPV)-positive cancers. Notably, HPV-positive cancer cells can induce a dormant state under hypoxia, characterized by a reversible growth arrest and strong repression of viral E6/E7 oncogene expression, which could contribute to therapy resistance, immune evasion and tumor recurrence. The present work aimed to gain mechanistic insights into the pathway(s) underlying HPV oncogene repression under hypoxia. We show that E6/E7 downregulation is mediated by hypoxia-induced stimulation of AKT signaling. Ablating AKT function in hypoxic HPV-positive cancer cells by using chemical inhibitors efficiently counteracts E6/E7 repression. Isoform-specific activation or downregulation of AKT1 and AKT2 reveals that both AKT isoforms contribute to hypoxic E6/E7 repression and act in a functionally redundant manner. Hypoxic AKT activation and consecutive E6/E7 repression is dependent on the activities of the canonical upstream AKT regulators phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K) and mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) complex 2 (mTORC2). Hypoxic downregulation of E6/E7 occurs, at least in part, at the transcriptional level. Modulation of E6/E7 expression by the PI3K/mTORC2/AKT cascade is hypoxia specific and not observed in normoxic HPV-positive cancer cells. Quantitative proteome analyses identify additional factors as candidates to be involved in hypoxia-induced activation of the PI3K/mTORC2/AKT signaling cascade and in the AKT-dependent repression of the E6/E7 oncogenes under hypoxia. Collectively, these data uncover a functional key role of the PI3K/mTORC2/AKT signaling cascade for viral oncogene repression in hypoxic HPV-positive cancer cells and provide new insights into the poorly understood cross talk between oncogenic HPVs and their host cells under hypoxia.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Oncogenic HPV types are major human carcinogens. Under hypoxia, HPV-positive cancer cells can repress the viral E6/E7 oncogenes and induce a reversible growth arrest. This response could contribute to therapy resistance, immune evasion, and tumor recurrence upon reoxygenation. Here, we uncover evidence that HPV oncogene repression is mediated by hypoxia-induced activation of canonical PI3K/mTORC2/AKT signaling. AKT-dependent downregulation of E6/E7 is only observed under hypoxia and occurs, at least in part, at the transcriptional level. Quantitative proteome analyses identify additional factors as candidates to be involved in AKT-dependent E6/E7 repression and/or hypoxic PI3K/mTORC2/AKT activation. These results connect PI3K/mTORC2/AKT signaling with HPV oncogene regulation, providing new mechanistic insights into the cross talk between oncogenic HPVs and their host cells.

### Keywords
Human, Quantitative proteomics, Hypoxia, Tmt, Hpv

### Affiliations
Felix Hoppe-Seyler, Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany
DKFZ Heidelbeg

### Submitter
Bianca Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Hoppe-Seyler
Felix Hoppe-Seyler, Molecular Therapy of Virus-Associated Cancers, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), D-69120 Heidelberg, Germany


