### Accession
PXD030749

### Title
Identification of SFXN1 partners LC-MSMS

### Description
Sideroflexins (SFXN) are evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial carriers belonging to the SCL56 family. Because little is known about SFXN1 interactome, a high-throughput search of SFXN1 binding partners was launched with the aim to better understand its mitochondrial functions. The large-scale identification of SFXN1 physical partners was based on co-immunoprecipitation followed by shotgun mass spectrometry (coIP/LC-MSMS).

### Sample Protocol
Enriched mitochondrial fraction from MCF-7 cells were prepared as described above. Protein content was estimated by Bradford assay. Proteins (250 µg/condition) were subjected to immunoprecipitation using the Bio-Adembeads protocol (PAG 0463, Ademtech, Pessac, France). Briefly, 250 µg of enriched mitochondrial fraction were incubated in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.5% deoxy-cholate complemented with anti-protease cocktail) supplemented with 2 µg of a rabbit anti-SFXN1 antibody (HPA063745, Sigma Aldrich, Saint-Quentin-Fallavier, France) or a rabbit IgG control antibody (Cat#12-370, Merck Millipore, Overijse, Belgium) for 30 minutes at RT at 1000 rpm on a tube rotator.  After washing and equilibration in lysis buffer, 20 µl of magnetic beads were added to the immune complex and incubated 30 minutes under agitation (1000 rpm at RT). The magnetic beads were washed thrice in lysis buffer and the bound proteins were then eluted twice using 15 µl of PAG elution buffer (Cat#10701, Ademtech, Pessac, France). The acidic pH was neutralized with 1 volume (30 µl) of 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 10 µL of 0.5 M Tris pH 7.5 be-fore sample preparation for MS/MS injection. Protein extracted from eluates were in-cubated with 25 mM NH4HCO3 buffer containing sequencing-grade trypsin (0.4µg for 55µL; Promega) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were desalted using ZipTip µ-C18 Pipette Tips (Millipore). Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Q-Exactive Plus, coupled respectively to a Nano-LC Proxeon 1000 equipped with an easy spray ion source (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). On the Q-Exactive Plus instrument, peptides were loaded with an online preconcentration method and separated by chromatog-raphy using a Pepmap-RSLC C18 column (0.75 x 500 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) from Thermo Scientific, equilibrated at 50°C and operated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted by a gradient of solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and solvent B (100 % ACN, 0.1% FA), the column was first equilibrated 5 min with 95 % of A, then B was raised to 35 % in 93 min and finally, the column was washed with 80% B during 10 min and re-equilibrated at 95% A during 10 min. Peptides were analyzed in the Orbitrap cell at a resolution of 70,000, with a mass range of m/z 375-1500 and an AGC target of 3.106. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 28 % and a dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds. MS/MS data were acquired in the Orbitrap cell in a Top20 DDA mode, at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 2.105. Monocharged peptides and unassigned charge states were excluded from the MS/MS acquisition. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50 ms for MS and 45 ms for MS/MS acquisitions respectively. (Proteomics/Mass Spectrometry Core Facility, Institut Jacques Monod).

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS data were processed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Scientific, version 2.2) coupled to the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.1). The mass tolerance was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragments. The maximum number of missed cleavages was limited to two. The following variable modifications were allowed: oxidation (Met), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr), acetylation (Protein N-term). The SwissProt database (2017_12 release) with the Homo sapiens taxonomy was used for the MS/MS identification step. Peptide identifications were validated using a 1 % FDR (False Discovery Rate) threshold calculated with the Percolator algorithm. High confidence proteins identified in the SFXN1 condition were considered as potential SFXN1 partners if no peptide of the concerned protein was identified in the control condition. Samples:  1)      1806004-Q1       CT IgG rabbit (Mascot A4) 2)      1806004-Q2       IP SFXN1 (Mascot B4

### Publication Abstract
Sideroflexins (SFXN, SLC56) are a family of evolutionarily conserved mitochondrial carriers potentially involved in iron homeostasis. One member of the SFXN family is SFXN1, recently identified as a human mitochondrial serine transporter. However, little is known about the SFXN1 interactome, necessitating a high-throughput search to better characterize SFXN1 mitochondrial functions. Via co-immunoprecipitation followed by shotgun mass spectrometry (coIP-MS), we identified 96 putative SFXN1 interactors in the MCF7 human cell line. Our in silico analysis of the SFXN1 interactome highlights biological processes linked to mitochondrial organization, electron transport chains and transmembrane transport. Among the potential physical partners, ATAD3A and 17&#x3b2;-HSD10, two proteins associated with neurological disorders, were confirmed using different human cell lines. Nevertheless, further work will be needed to investigate the significance of these interactions.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Mitochondria, Coip/lc-msms

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-En-Yvelines LGBC UVSQ/EPHE EA4589
University of Lyon (UCBL)

### Submitter
Mourad Bekhouche

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Le Floch-Leleu
Laboratoire de Génétique et Biologie Cellulaire, Université de Versailles Saint-Quentin-En-Yvelines LGBC UVSQ/EPHE EA4589


