### Accession
PXD021826

### Title
Mitochondria-rough-ER Contacts in The Liver Regulate Systemic Lipid Homeostasis

### Description
Contacts between organelles create microdomains that play major roles in regulating key intracellular activities and signaling pathways, but whether they also directly regulate systemic cellular activities, remains unknown. Here, we report the ultrastructural organization and dynamics of a new type of inter-organelle contact which is formed by rough-Endoplasmic Reticulum that is closely wrapped around the mitochondrion (wrappER). To elucidate the in vivo function of this inter-organelle association, mouse liver fractions enriched in wrappER-associated-mitochondria were analyzed in parallel by transcriptomics, proteomics, and lipidomics. The biochemical signature of the wrappER points to an unexpected role in the biogenesis of very-low-density lipoproteins (VLDLs). Altering wrappER-mitochondria contacts curtails liver VLDL secretion and increases hepatic fatty acids, lipid droplets and neutral lipid content. Conversely, acute liver-specific ablation of Mttp, the most upstream regulator of VLDL biogenesis, mirrors this hepatic dyslipidemia phenotype and promotes remodelling of the wrappER-mitochondria contact. The participation of liver wrappER-mitochondria contacts in VLDL biology reveals a role of inter-organelle contacts in systemic lipid homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
After acetone precipitation, protein pellets were resuspended in Buffer-1 (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 1% sodium deoxycholate, pH 8), and quantified using the Micro-Bredford assay (Bio-Rad). 10 ug of proteins were reduced at 37 °C with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested overnight with trypsin. Proteolysis was stopped by acidification (3% acetonitrile, 1% TFA, 0.5% acetic acid) and peptides were purified on stage tip (C18), vacuum dried, and resuspended in 50 ul 0.1% formic acid. One tenth of this volume (1 ug) was separated by online reversed-phase nanoscale capillary liquid chromatography and analyzed by electrospray mass spectrometry (LC MS/MS) using an Ekspert NanoLC425 (Eksigent Technologies) coupled to a 5600+ mass spectrometer (Sciex) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Tryptic peptides were trapped at 4 ml/min on a PepMap Acclaim C18 column (5 x 0.3 mm; Thermo FisherScientific) and eluted through a self-packed PicoFrit column (New Objective) filled with ReproSil C18 (3 µm, 180 x 0.075 mm, 120 Å; Dr Maisch GmbH). Separation was achieved with a 5–35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid over 90 min at 300 nl/min. Peptides were ionized by electrospray with 2.3 kV. Mass spectra were acquired using a data-dependent acquisition mode using Proteome Analyst software (v1.7). Each full scan mass spectrum (400 to 1250 m/z) was followed by collision-induced dissociation of the twenty most intense ions. Dynamic exclusion was set for a period of 12 sec and a tolerance of 100 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Database searching Mascot generic format (MGF) peak list files were created using the Protein Pilot software (v4.5; Sciex). MGF sample files were then analyzed using Mascot (v2.5.1; Matrix Science). Mascot was setup to search the contaminants_thegpm_20170713.fasta and the REF_MusMusculus_ci_10090_up000000589_20180509 database (61364 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.100 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 0.100 Da. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, as well as methionine oxidation, were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. -Criteria for protein identification Scaffold (v. 4.8.6; Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 96.0% probability to achieve an FDR (False Discovery Rate) less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 97.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 1 identified peptide. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Wrapper, Wam, Mouse, Vldl, Liver, Lipid homeostasis

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular biology, medical biochemistry and pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, QC, Canada
Université Laval

### Submitter
Luca Pellegrini

### Lab Head
Dr Luca Pellegrini
Department of Molecular biology, medical biochemistry and pathology, Faculty of Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, QC, Canada


