### Accession
PXD000900

### Title
Confetti: A Multi-protease Map of the HeLa Proteome for Comprehensive Proteomics

### Description
Tryptic digestion proteomics gives limited coverage of many protein sequences as many proteins produce tryptic peptides that cannot be observed easily. Confetti is our comprehensive map of coverage for the HeLa proteome, using 48 different digests and CID/HCD LC-MS/MS analyses. An associated dataset belonging to the same study can be found under the PX identifier PXD001258.

### Sample Protocol
Whole lysate extracted from HeLa cells was digested with ArgC, AspN, Chymotrypsin, Elastase, GluC, LysC and Trypsin, individually and in combination. A total of 48 digests were performed - 7 single enzyme, 20 double enzyme, 21 triple enzyme. The resulting samples were injected for analysis on Orbitrap Elite (using CID) and Q Exactive (HCD) instruments. A 160 min gradient was employed and 1-3 injections were performed for each sample. The most complimentary 5 digests in each of CID and HCD analyses were fractionated into 8 fractions using a tip-based SAX protocol. Fractionated samples were injected in triplicate on the Orbitrap Elite or Q Exactive, using a 200 minute gradient.

### Data Protocol
Unfractionated raw data were converted to MGF format using ProteoWizard msconvert with the MS2Denoise option. Peptide identifications were performed using OMSSA and X!Tandem within the Central Proteomics Facilities Pipeline (CPFP). Fractionated data were analyzed using X!Tandem, OMSSA and Myrimatch, from MzML files created with msconvert. Peptide spectrum matches at a 1% PSM FDR were imported into a MySQL database. Protein inference was performed using a minimal set cover algorithm, using peptides filtered to a 1% PSM FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Bottom-up proteomics largely relies on tryptic peptides for protein identification and quantification. Tryptic digestion often provides limited coverage of protein sequence because of issues such as peptide length, ionization efficiency, and post-translational modification colocalization. Unfortunately, a region of interest in a protein, for example, because of proximity to an active site or the presence of important post-translational modifications, may not be covered by tryptic peptides. Detection limits, quantification accuracy, and isoform differentiation can also be improved with greater sequence coverage. Selected reaction monitoring (SRM) would also greatly benefit from being able to identify additional targetable sequences. In an attempt to improve protein sequence coverage and to target regions of proteins that do not generate useful tryptic peptides, we deployed a multiprotease strategy on the HeLa proteome. First, we used seven commercially available enzymes in single, double, and triple enzyme combinations. A total of 48 digests were performed. 5223 proteins were detected by analyzing the unfractionated cell lysate digest directly; with 42% mean sequence coverage. Additional strong-anion exchange fractionation of the most complementary digests permitted identification of over 3000 more proteins, with improved mean sequence coverage. We then constructed a web application (https://proteomics.swmed.edu/confetti) that allows the community to examine a target protein or protein isoform in order to discover the enzyme or combination of enzymes that would yield peptides spanning a certain region of interest in the sequence. Finally, we examined the use of nontryptic digests for SRM. From our strong-anion exchange fractionation data, we were able to identify three or more proteotypic SRM candidates within a single digest for 6056 genes. Surprisingly, in 25% of these cases the digest producing the most observable proteotypic peptides was neither trypsin nor Lys-C. SRM analysis of Asp-N versus tryptic peptides for eight proteins determined that Asp-N yielded higher signal in five of eight cases.

### Keywords
Enzymes, Non-tryptic, Lc-ms/ms, Digestion

### Affiliations
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
Ex-UTSW & Oxford

### Submitter
David Trudgian

### Lab Head
Dr Hamid Mirzaei
University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center


