### Accession
PXD018509

### Title
The analysis of SNT differential proteins after intervention UC based on proteomics

### Description
Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion via a nano-electrospray ion source. Tryptic peptides were dissolved with a loading buffer (acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid), and were eluted with a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Survey scans were acquired after an accumulation of 5×105 ions in the Orbitrap for m/z 300-1,400 using a resolution of 120,000 at m/z. The top speed data-dependent mode was selected for fragmentation in the cell at a normalized collision energy of 32%, and fragment ions were then transferred into the ion trap analyzer with the AGC target at 5×103 and maximum injection time at 35 ms. The dynamic exclusion of previously acquired precursor ions was enabled at 18 s. The Proteome Discoverer 1.4.1.14 was used for analysis of the protein spectrum. Oxidation (Methionine) and acetylation (Protein-N term) were chosen as variable modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation was chosen as a fixed modification. Two missed cleavage sites for trypsin were allowed. The intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ)-based protein quantification were performed by an in-house software. The interaction of SNT-related differentially expressed proteins was investigated by STRING 11.0 (https://string-db.org). The differentially expressed protein interaction network (high reliability, interaction score > 0.4, PPI enrichment P-value < 1.0×10 -16) was selected for the analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Orbitrap Fusion was set to ot-it mode. The range of scanning was 300 to 1,400 m/z, the resolution was 120,000, and the maximum injection time was 50ms. For the parent ions, charge states of 2~6 are selected for fragmentation after high-energy collision dissociation, in which the normalized collision energy is 32 %. The MS2 spectrum was obtained in fast mode in an ion trap with an automatic gain control (AGC) setting of 7,000 and a maximum injection time of 35ms. Dynamic exclusion is set to 18 s.

### Data Protocol
The lab-free quantification method was used for the relative quantification of proteins. The iBAQ values of a single protein were normalized to the values of all proteins. Pairwise paired T test was performed on the normal group, model group and SNT group. P < 0.05 and more than 2 times the change difference between the model group and the normal group and the SNT group/model group was considered as the target differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the precise clinical use of Sinitang decoction (SNT) in ulcerative colitis (UC). Network pharmacology-based analysis of the drug components-targets-diseases-pathways was used to predict the possible clinical applications of SNT. Next, 2,4,6-trinitrobenzenesulfonic acid (TNBS) was used to establish a rat model of UC, and the efficacy of SNT against UC was tested, followed by a proteomic analysis of the specific signatures regulated by SNT against UC. SNT was predicted to be effective in inflammatory bowel disease, UC, and several other diseases. In the rats with UC, SNT decreased the disease activity index and colon mucosal damage index compared to the untreated UC model rats. Additionally, SNT reversed the upregulated levels of serum tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-&#x3b1;, prostaglandin E<sub>2</sub> (PGE<sub>2</sub>), interleukin (IL)-6, and nitric oxide (NO) in UC model rats. The proteomic analysis identified 78 proteins that were differentially regulated by SNT in the rats with UC, which were associated with the Gene Ontology terms sulfur compound binding, calcium ion binding, and Toll-like receptor (TLR)-4 binding. Among these differentially regulated proteins, C-reactive protein (CRP) and collagen alpha-1(XII) chain (COL12A1) were found to be signature proteins associated with the efficacy of SNT against UC. This study represents the first precise investigation of the efficacy and mechanisms of SNT against UC, and shows that SNT is a promising candidate for personalized management of UC.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Snt, Differential protein, Uc

### Affiliations
Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences

### Submitter
enhui Ji

### Lab Head
Dr Hongjun Yang
Institute of Chinese Materia Medica, China Academy of Chinese Medical Sciences


