### Accession
PXD023174

### Title
Cerebrospinal fluid proteome maps detect pathogen-specific host response patterns in meningitis

### Description
Meningitis is a life-threatening condition characterized by the inflammation of the leptomeningeal membranes surrounding the brain and spinal cord. The term meningitis is an umbrella term and includes several different etiologies. The majorities of meningitis cases are caused by viruses (viral meningitis; VM) and are often associated with low mortality rates and low risk of developing neurological. In contrast, meningitis caused by some viral infections, such as tick-borne encephalitis (TBE), can be life-threatening when left untreated with increased risk of developing neurological sequelae. Acute bacterial meningitis (ABM), however, is one of the leading causes of death due to infectious diseases worldwide and is associated with rapid disease progression, high mortality rates and increased risk of long-term neurological sequelae in survivors. As meningitis is caused by numerous different pathogens, the host-response is typically highly variable and it is currently unknown if different pathogens can introduce specific proteome changes in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In this study we applied DIA-MS to provide novel insights for in-depth understanding of central nervous system functioning and host response during meningitis in a cohort of patients with differential diagnosis of meningitis, to account for variability contributed by different disease-causing pathogens. The results reveal drastic changes in the CSF proteome during meningitis, where in particular a massive increase of neutrophil derived proteins in the CSF correlated with ABM, suggesting that activated neutrophils play a particular role in ABM. Additionally both ABM and VM result in marked reduction of brain-specific proteins in the CSF, which could be indicative of pathophysiological mechanisms leading to brain damage. Furthermore, generation of lasso regression model enables separation of ABM with high sensitivity and specificity, demonstrating that several proteins are required to confidently discriminate between ABM, VM and BM.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples from patients clinically suspected of meningitis underwent a lumbar puncture and CSF samples were collected. The patients were categorized into following groups: ABM (n=35), BM (n=7), VM (n=21), suspected ABM (n=5), suspected VM (n=16), inflammation with no infection (n=2), control (n=49) and subarachnoidal hemorrhage (SAH, total n=23). A constant volume of 50 μl of each CSF sample was used. Samples were heat-inactivated, homogenized and in-solution digested in trypsin (denaturated in urea, reduced in TCEP, alkylated and tryptically cleaved overnight). C18-columns were used according to manufacturer's instructions to clean-up and concentrate the peptide samples. All peptide analyses were performed on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For shotgun analysis, peptides were separated on an EASY-Spray column (Thermo Scientific; ID 75 μm x 25 cm, column temperature 45 °C). Column equilibration and sample load were performed using constant pressure at 600 bar. Solvent A was used as stationary phase (0.1 % formic acid). Solvent B (mobile phase; 0.1 % formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was used to run a linear gradient from 5 % to 35 % over 60 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. One full MS scan (resolution 70,000 @ 200 m/z; mass range 400-1,600 m/z) was followed by MS/MS scans (resolution 17,500 @ 200 m/z) of the 15 most abundant ion signals (TOP15). The precursor ions were isolated with 2 m/z isolation width and fragmented using higher-energy collisional-induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 30. Charge state screening was enabled and unassigned or singly charged ions were rejected. The dynamic exclusion window was set to 10 s. Only MS precursors that exceeded a threshold of 1.7e4 were allowed to trigger MS/MS scans. The ion accumulation time was set to 100 ms (MS) and 60 ms (MS/MS) using an AGC target setting of 1e6 (MS and MS/MS).  For data-independent acquisition (DIA), peptides were separated using an EASY-spray column (Thermo Fisher Scientific; ID 75 ym x 25 cm, column temperature 45'C). Column equilibration and sample load was performed at 600 bar. Solvent A was used as stationary phase (0.1 % formic acid).  Solvent B (mobile phase; 0.1 % formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) was used to run a linear gradient from 5 % to 35 % over 120 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A full MS scan (resolution 70,000 @ 200 m/z; mass range from 400 to 1,200 m/z) was followed by 32 MS/MS full fragmentation scans (resolution 35,000 @ 200 m/z) using an isolation window of 26 m/z (including 0.5 m/z overlap between the previous and next window). The precursor ions within each isolation window were fragmented using higher-energy collisional-induced dissociation at a normalized collision energy of 30. The automatic gain control was set to 1e6 for both MS and MS/MS with ion accumulation times of 100 ms (MS) and 120 ms (MS/MS). The obtained raw files were converted to mzML using MSConvert.  

### Data Protocol
The shotgun MS data was searched with Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP, v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0, Build 201405161127) using X!Tandem against the UniProt human reference proteome (UP000005640, Oct-2015, reviewed and canonical proteins only). Reverse approach was used for decoy proteins. The following modification parameters were used: cysteine carbamidomethylation (fixed modification), methionine oxidation (variable modification), variable acetylation of the N-terminae, carbamoylmethyl-cysteine cyclization of the N-terminal cysteines, and pyro-glutamic acid formation from glutamic acid and glutamine. Enzyme specificity was set for trypsin and allowed two missed cleavage sites.  The precursor mass tolerance thresholds were 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 50 ppm. The raw files were gzipped and Numpressed (Teleman, et al 2014) and converted to mzML format using MSconvert from ProteoWizard (v3.05930 suite, REF Chambers, Nat Biotehcnol 2012). Assay libraries were created using the Fraggle-Franklin-Tramler workflow (Teleman, et al 2017). For DIA analysis, DIANA v2.0.0 was used (Teleman, et al 2015,) with a 20 ppm extraction window.

### Publication Abstract
Meningitis is a potentially life-threatening infection characterized by the inflammation of the leptomeningeal membranes. Many different viral and bacterial pathogens can cause meningitis, with differences in mortality rates, risk of developing neurological sequelae, and treatment options. Here, we constructed a compendium of digital cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteome maps to define pathogen-specific host response patterns in meningitis. The results revealed a drastic and pathogen-type specific influx of tissue-, cell-, and plasma proteins in the CSF, where, in particular, a large increase of neutrophil-derived proteins in the CSF correlated with acute bacterial meningitis. Additionally, both acute bacterial and viral meningitis result in marked reduction of brain-enriched proteins. Generation of a multiprotein LASSO regression model resulted in an 18-protein panel of cell- and tissue-associated proteins capable of classifying acute bacterial meningitis and viral meningitis. The same protein panel also enabled classification of tick-borne encephalitis, a subgroup of viral meningitis, with high sensitivity and specificity. The work provides insights into pathogen-specific host response patterns in CSF from different disease etiologies to support future classification of pathogen type based on host response patterns in meningitis.

### Keywords
Human, Meningitis, Cerebrospinal fluid

### Affiliations
Lund University
Division of clinical sciences (IKVL), Department for infectious diseases, BMC D13, Lund University

### Submitter
Anahita Bakochi

### Lab Head
Dr Johan Malmstrom
Division of clinical sciences (IKVL), Department for infectious diseases, BMC D13, Lund University


