### Accession
PXD020009

### Title
The previously uncharacterized HCMV protein pUL13 increases mitochondrial bioenergetics during infection

### Description
HCMV is a prevalent human pathogen which has been shown to globally alter cellular metabolism during its replication cycle, increasing central carbon metabolism, lipid metabolism, and OXPHOS. Here we demonstrate that the previously uncharacterized viral protein pUL13 is required for productive viral replication and sufficient to increase OXPHOS during infection.

### Sample Protocol
TMT-MS sample processing protocol (raw files annotated with '20191029'): fibroblasts were infected with WT or dUL13 HCMV and collected 12, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours post infection. Cells were lysed, proteins were digested with MS-grade trypsin, and the resulting peptides were labeled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent. A pooled mixture of all samples across three biological replicates was labeled with a TMT11-131C Label Reagent and used as the internal reference channel. The TMT channels were mixed in equal protein quantities per sample, desalted, and fractionated using cation exchange and reversed-phase sulfonate solid state matrices. The fractionated samples were analyzed via nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For analysis of pUL13 interactions in uninfected cells expressing mitochondrial-localized pUL13 (raw files annotated with '20171110'), U2OS cells were transfected with either MLS-UL13-3xFLAG or the control MLS-YFP-3xFLAG construct in biological triplicate. Cells were collected and the mitochondrial fraction was enriched using density gradient ultracentrifugation. The mitochondrial pellets were lysed and IPs were conducted using anti-FLAG antibody conjugated to protein A/G magnetic beads. The bound proteins were eluted from the beads, digested for mass spectrometry using Filter Aided Sample Prep (FASP) and desalted via StageTips. The peptides were analyzed using nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For analysis of pUL13 interactions during infection (raw files annotated with '20180308'), pUL13-GFP IPs, along with the matched GFP-virus control, were performed in biological duplicate at each time point of infection (24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi) for discovery and targeted experiments. The cells were lysed and IPs were conducted using pre-conjugated GFP-Trap magnetic beads. The bound proteins were eluted from the beads, digested for mass spectrometry using Filter Aided Sample Prep (FASP) and desalted via StageTips. The infection time course pUL13 IPs were analyzed with LC-MS/MS using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos ETD mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
TMT-MS data was processed using Proteome Discover 2.3. Subsequent filtering was performed in Microsoft Excel. IP-MS data was processed using Proteome Discover 2.2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Etc, Hcmv, Pul13, Oxphos

### Affiliations
Princeton University

### Submitter
Cora Betsinger

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana Cristea
Princeton University


