### Accession
PXD037000

### Title
Proteolytic processing of galectin-3 is crucial for host microbiome homeostasis

### Description
To identify relevant substrates for meprin α/β heterodimers, we applied mass spectrometry-based N-terminomics of mouse colon tissue as well as of human Caco-2 cells and identified galectin-3 as a novel intestinal substrate. The proteolytic processing of galectin-3 by meprin α/β heterodimers plays a key role in the maintenance of the host-microbiome homeostasis within the colon.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse tissue from mep1a-/-, mep1b-/-, mep1a/b-/-, lgals3-/- and mep1b-/-;VilCre;Rosa26mep1b-HA mice was isolated from mice sacrificed with cervical dislocation according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals  All the tissues were homogenized in lysis buffer (cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS (pH 7.4)) using the Precellys® 24 (VWR) for 3 cycles at 6,500 rpm and 4°C. The homogenates were incubated for 2 hours at 4°C and afterward centrifuged for 30 min at 13,500 g at 4°C. The protein concentration of all lysates was determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer´s instructions.  HYTANE analysis  Colon tissue and Caco-2 lysates were sonicated, centrifuged at 20,000 g for 5 min at 4°C and each sample was methanol/chloroform/water (MCW) precipitated to remove any interfering substances such as small primary amines which can impede labelling. Samples were resuspended in 6 M Guanidine-HCl in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and a BCA Protein Assay on a diluted fraction was performed to determine protein concentration.  Approximately 100 µg of each sample was reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, 5 mM final) for 30 min at 65°C and then alkylated with iodoacetamide (12.5 mM final) at room temperature for 15 min. Samples were then labeled with TMT reagent (TMT-6-plex) in equal volume of DMSO so that the final concentration of DMSO was 50%. The samples were left to react for 1h at 25°C and then quenched with hydroxylamine (1% final) for 30 min at 37°C. All channels were combined and the sample was MCW precipitated. The pellet was washed with methanol and then re-dissolved in 3 M Guanidine HCl and then diluted to a final concentration of approximately 0.85 M. The sample was digested with trypsin (approximately 35:1 ratio of protein to enzyme) and left to digest overnight at 37°C.  The “neo” N-termini generated as a result of trypsin digestion were depleted using HYTANE (HYdrophobic Tagging-Assisted N-termini Enrichment) (Chen et al. 2016)   All the samples were injected in duplicate on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UHPLC coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen). The samples were washed on a trap column (Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18, 5 mm × 300 μm, 5 μm, 100 Å, Dionex) for 4 min with 3% ACN/ 0.1% TFA at a flow rate of 30 μl/min prior to peptide separation using an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 analytical column (50 cm × 75 μm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Dionex). A flow rate of 300 nl/min using eluent A (0.05% formic acid (FA)) and eluent B (80% ACN/0.04% FA) was used for gradient separation (180-minute gradient, 5-40% B). Spray voltage applied on a metal-coated PicoTip emitter (10 μm tip size, New Objective, Woburn, Massachusetts, US) was 1.7 kV, with a source temperature of 250°C. Full scan MS spectra were acquired between 375 and 1,400 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200 and the top ten most intense precursors with charge states greater than 2+ were selected for fragmentation using an isolation window of 1.2 m/z and with HCD normalized collision energies of 33 at a resolution of 30,000.  Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (20 and 30 seconds) were enabled.  For the Q Exactive of the CaCO-2 cells, the full scan MS spectra were acquired between 300 and 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The ten most intense precursors with charge states greater than 2+ were selected with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z and fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energies of 35 at a resolution of 17,500. Lock mass (445.120025) and dynamic exclusion (30 seconds) were enabled.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and Statistics The MS raw files were processed by Proteome Discoverer 2.2 and MS/MS spectra were searched using the Sequest HT algorithm against a database containing common contaminants and a mouse database. The enzyme specificity was set to semi-ArgC with two missed cleavages allowed. An MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and a MS2 tolerance of 0.02 Da was implemented. Oxidation (15.995 Da) of methionine residues, acetylation (42.011 Da) and TMT6-plex (229.163 Da) on the peptide N-terminus was set as a variable modification while carbamidomethylation (57.02146 Da) on cysteine residues and TMT on lysine residues was set as a static modification. Technical injection replicates were set as fractions. Normalized, scaled abundance from Proteome Discoverer were exported, log 2 transformed and statistical analysis (t-test) performed in Perseus (Perseus_1.6.10.43).  Volcano plots were generated using the GraphPad Prism software. N-termini were considered significant if they had a p-value less than or equal to 0.05, and a log 2-fold change of +/- 0.58.

### Publication Abstract
The metalloproteases meprin &#x3b1; and meprin &#x3b2; are highly expressed in the healthy gut but significantly decreased in inflammatory bowel disease, implicating a protective role in mucosal homeostasis. In the colon, meprin &#x3b1; and meprin &#x3b2; form covalently linked heterodimers tethering meprin &#x3b1; to the plasma membrane, therefore presenting dual proteolytic activity in a unique enzyme complex. To unravel its function, we applied N-terminomics and identified galectin-3 as the major intestinal substrate for meprin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimers. Galectin-3-deficient and meprin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; double knockout mice show similar alterations in their microbiome in comparison to wild-type mice. We further demonstrate that meprin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimers differentially process galectin-3 upon bacterial infection, in germ-free, conventionally housed (specific pathogen-free), or wildling mice, which in turn regulates the bacterial agglutination properties of galectin-3. Thus, the constitutive cleavage of galectin-3 by meprin &#x3b1;/&#x3b2; heterodimers may play a key role in colon host-microbiome homeostasis.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Meprin, N-terminomics

### Affiliations
Institute of Experimental Medicine, University of Kiel, 24188 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Institute of Experimental Medicine, University of Kiel, 24188 Kiel, Germany


