### Accession
PXD003362

### Title
microRNA-140 inhibits inflammation and stimulates chondrogenesis in a model of IL1β-induced osteoarthritis

### Description
Osteoarthritis is a devastating disease of articular cartilage. The pathogenic factors contributing to this disorder are inflammation, extracellular matrix degradation and failure to rebuild the articular cartilage. Preclinical studies suggest that microRNA-140 (miR-140) may play a protective role in osteoarthritis development, but little is known about the mechanism by which this may occur. Here we present the results of overexpression of miR-140 in an in vitro model of osteoarthritis, evaluated by global proteomics analysis. We show that inflammation is reduced through the differential synthesis of multiple proteins involved in the nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells 1 (NFKB) pathway, articular cartilage regeneration may be induced through the upregulation of many of the components involved in the synthesis of hyaline extracellular matrix, and cartilage degeneration may be reduced through the reduced expression of aggrecanases. Thus, miR-140 overexpression may have a beneficial effect on the development of osteoarthritis through the differential synthesis of a surprisingly large number of proteins involved in all three pathogenic processes. These results show how intraarticular injection of miR-140 may benefit patients suffering from osteoarthritis.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts were obtained using ionic detergents which were eventually cleared from the samples using molecular filter devices prior to MS analysis. Peptides were obtained through trypsin reaction (1:50 w/w) (Promega) and then desalted using STAGE-TIPs. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a nano EASY nLC1000 instrument connected to a quadrupole – Orbitrap (QExactive) mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (EasySpray/Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Peptide/protein identification was performed using MaxQuant software, version 1.4.0.8 (Cox 2008). Normalized LFQ intensity values were imported into the R software and paired t-tests were used to identify differently expressed proteins. P < 0.05 was considered significant. All proteins that did not change in the same direction in all donors were excluded. The proteomic analysis was intended as a screening method. When correction for multiple testing was performed, most of the described changes disappeared. Correction for multiple testing was therefore not performed.  However, as this approach will include false positive results the most important and interesting protein changes were validated by western blotting.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis is a serious disease of articular cartilage. The pathogenic factors contributing to this disorder are inflammation, extracellular matrix degradation and failure to rebuild the articular cartilage. Preclinical studies suggest that microRNA-140 may play a protective role in osteoarthritis development, but little is known about the mechanism by which this occurs. Here we present the results of forced expression of microRNA-140 in an in vitro model of osteoarthritis, evaluated by global proteomics analysis. We show that inflammation was reduced through the altered levels of multiple proteins involved in the nuclear factor of kappa light polypeptide gene enhancer in B-cells 1 pathway. microRNA-140 upregulated many of the components involved in the synthesis of hyaline extracellular matrix and reduced the levels of aggrecanases and syndecan 4, thus potentially both increasing cartilage repair and reducing cartilage breakdown. These results show how forced expression of microRNA-140 is likely to counteract all three pathogenic processes, and support the idea that intra-articular injection of microRNA-140 may benefit patients suffering from early osteoarthritis.

### Keywords
Articular cartilage, Il1b, Microrna-140, Inflammation, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, PO Box 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway
Dept. of Immunology

### Submitter
Gustavo de Souza

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Brinchmann
Department of Immunology, Oslo University Hospital Rikshospitalet, PO Box 4950 Nydalen, 0424 Oslo, Norway


