### Accession
PXD006146

### Title
Definition of a high-confidence mitochondrial proteome at quantitative scale_absolute quantification of carbon source-dependent protein expression

### Description
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism and signaling and their malfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative, quantitative MS-based experimental approach to define the high confidence proteome of yeast mitochondria and to identify new mitochondrial proteins. The analysis includes protein abundance under fermentable and non-fermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein analysis and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified novel mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster as well as new mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high confidence source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
LC/MS sample preparation: Yeast were grown in SILAC medium (0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base without amino acids supplemented with selected amino acids and nucleobases) containing 3% (w/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) galactose or 2% (w/v) glucose as carbon source and either 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4) and lysine (13C6/15N2), 'medium-heavy' arginine (13C6/14N2) and lysine (4H2) or the respective 'light' amino acids. The experiment was performed in three independent replicates with label-switch. Cell lysates were prepared, mixed in 1:1:1 ratios (glycerol:galactose:glucose) and adjusted to 8 M urea and 50 mM NH4HCO3 by directly adding the required amounts of the chemicals to the samples. Cysteine residues were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (30 min, 37°C) and free thiol groups were subsequently alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide/50 mM NH4HCO3 (30 min at RT in the dark). The alkylation reaction was quenched by adding DTT to a final concentration of 25 mM. Proteins (300 µg per replicate) were digested with LysC followed by trypsin. For digestion with LysC, urea concentration was adjusted to 1.6 M using 50 mM NH4HCO3. LysC was added at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:100 and digestion was performed for 4 h at 37°C followed by incubation with trypsin (added at a protease-to-protein ratio of 1:50) overnight at 37°C. Proteolysis was stopped by acidifying the samples with 100% TFA. Peptides were desalted using C18 cartridges (3M Empore, St. Paul, USA), dried in vacuo and fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography. To this end, peptides were resuspended in 99% solvent A (10 mM NH4OH, pH 10) and 1% solvent B [10 mM NH4OH in 90% (v/v) ACN] and loaded onto a Gemini-NX column (Phenomenex, Aschaffenburg, Germany) using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) at a flow rate of 200 µl/min and a column temperature of 40°C. Peptides were eluted by applying a gradient of 1-54% solvent B (starting after 5 min) in 53 min followed by 54-78% B in 5 min, 5 min at 78% B, and 78-1% B in 7 min. Fractions were collected in 40 s intervals between minute 1 and minute 73 in a non-contiguous, concatenated way resulting in a total of 12 fractions. Peptides were lyophilized, washed with 70% (v/v) ACN, dried again in vacuo, and resuspended in 150 µl of 0.1% TFA, of which 15 µl were analyzed by LC-MS. LC/MS analysis: Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a Q Exactive instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) directly coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were washed and preconcentrated on a PepMap C18 precolumn (5 mm x 300 µm inner diameter; Thermo Scientific) and separated using an AcclaimPepMap RSLC column (50 cm x 75 µm inner diameter; pore size, 100 Å; particle size, 2 µm) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40°C. For peptide elution, a binary solvent systems was used consisting of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) (solvent A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/86% (v/v) ACN (solvent B). Peptide separation was performed using a gradient of 4-39% solvent B in 195 min, 39-54% B in 15 min, 54-95% B in 5 min, and 5 min at 95% B.  The Q Exactive was externally calibrated using standard compounds and operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 375-1,700 were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000 (at m/z 200). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3 x 10E6 ions and the maximum injection time to 60 ms. A TOP15 method was used for higher energy collisional dissociation of precursor peptides (z ≥ 2) in the orbitrap with a normalized collision energy of 28%, an AGC of 10E5, and a max. injection time of 120 ms. The dynamic exclusion time for previously fragmented precursors was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide and protein identification and quantification, mass spectrometric raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.3.12) with its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against a custom-made protein database containing all entries of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (http://www.yeastgenome.org/, downloaded  02/04/2016; 6,726 entries) and 47 entries for putative small open reading frames reported by Smith et al. (Cell Reports 7, 2014). Data were also correlated with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. The database search was performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions and tryptic specificity (trypsin/P) allowing three missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy and Arg6/Lys4 as medium-heavy labels. The options 'requantify', 'match between runs' (match from and to), and 'iBAQ' were enabled. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of six amino acids and a maximum mass of  4,600 Da. Lists of peptides and proteins identified by MaxQuant were filtered by applying a false discovery rate of 0.01. For SILAC-based protein quantification, at least one unique peptide and a minimum ratio count of one were required. The determination of absolute protein copy numbers for cells grown on galactose, glycerin, or glucose was performed based on the MS intensities for light, medium-heavy, and heavy SILAC-labeled proteins according to the 'Proteomic Ruler' strategy (Wisniewski et al., Molecular and Cellular Proteomics 13, 2014) using Perseus (Tyanova et al., Nat. Methods 13, 2016) with the 'proteomic ruler' plugin. The data obtained were subjected to k-means clustering to group proteins showing similar characteristics and low variance in the respective experiment. Clustering was based on absolute protein copy numbers determined for yeast grown on galactose (Gal), glycerin (Glyc), or glucose (Glu). Only proteins for which copy numbers were determined for all carbon sources in all replicates (n=3) were considered. For each protein, ratios of mean log2 copy numbers Gal/Glu and Glyc/Glu were calculated. To reveal proteins with significant carbon source-dependent changes in copy numbers, an analysis of variance test was performed between the Gal/Gluc and Glyc/Gluc data using the R package 'stats'. 1,576 proteins showed significant differences (p-value ≥ 0.05) in protein copy numbers and were used for the k-means clustering analysis ('stats' package). The Davies-Bouldin index was used to determine the optimal number of clusters for this dataset (i.e., k=14). Clusters were further clustered by hierarchical clustering using the mean ratio of each cluster to reveal (dis)similarities between individual clusters ('stats' package). For each of the 14 clusters, a Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed based on GO terms retrieved from the Saccharomyces Genome Database using an in-house developed script and all proteins quantified in the dataset as background. The two-sided Fisher's exact test was used to calculate mid p-values. Raw mid p-values were corrected for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment and GO terms with a corrected mid p-value of < 0.05 were considered enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling, and their dysfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome, and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative experimental approach to define the proteome&#xa0;of yeast mitochondria. We classified &gt; 3,300 proteins of mitochondria and mitochondria-associated fractions and defined 901 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, expanding the set of mitochondrial proteins by 82. Our analysis includes&#xa0;protein abundance under fermentable and nonfermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein&#xa0;experiments, and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS), and the coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster, as well as mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high-confidence&#xa0;source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Keywords
Absolute proteome quantification, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
Universität Freiburg, Warscheid Lab

### Submitter
Christian D. Peikert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


