### Accession
PXD025213

### Title
Supermeres, a new functional extracellular nanoparticle replete with disease biomarkers and therapeutic target

### Description
Extracellular vesicles, including exosomes, and exomere nanoparticles, are under intense investigation for cargo that may serve as clinical biomarkers or therapeutic targets. Here, we report discovery of a new extracellular nanoparticle, termed supermeres. We performed LC/MS-MS proteomics analyses on gradient-purified sEVs, NVs, exomeres and supermeres. The proteomic profile of supermeres is clearly distinct from that of sEVs, NVs and exomeres This study identifies a new functional nanoparticle replete with potential circulating biomarkers and therapeutic targets that can be exploited for clinical benefit in a host of diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Extracellular samples including sEV, non-vesicular fractions, exomeres and supermeres were isolated from DiFi cells using high speed sequential ultracentrifugation and high-resolution iodixanol density gradient fractionation. Samples were lysed and quantified by BCA method. Equal amounts of proteins from each fraction were run into SDS-PAGE gels for about 1cm, gels were stained with Coomassie blue, gel regions were excised from the gel, proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin, and peptides were analyzed via LC/MS-MS using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For identification of peptides and proteins, tandem mass spectra were searched with Sequest against the UniprotKB human proteome database. Search results were assembled using Scaffold 4.3.2, where a minimum protein probability of 99%, a minimum peptide probability of 95%, and a minimum of 2 distinct peptides within the sample set were required for protein and peptide identifications. Spectral counts of proteins were normalized by the total spectral counts and log2-transformed. Principal component analysis was performed to assess the similarity between samples. Differential expression between sEV, NV, exomere and supermere was identified using Limma. Proteins with a fold change of > 2 and a false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Supermere, Sev, Exomere, Colorectal cancer, Difi, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt university
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt University


