### Accession
PXD020330

### Title
Small extracellular vesicles from serum (human)

### Description
Quantitative comparison of the protein load of small extracellular vesicles circulating in serum prior and after high intensity interval training.

### Sample Protocol
To characterize small extracellular vesicles derived from human serum in sedentary state and after high intensity interval training, "exosomal" fraction was generated by a combination of size exclusion chromatography (IZON columns) and ultracentrifugation. Samples were measured by DIA using a project specific spectral library.

### Data Protocol
DDA and DIA data were imported into Spectronaut Pulsar 12 (Biognosys) to generate a sample specific library using the default settings (modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed); oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) (variable); enzyme: Trypsin/P; max. missed cleavages: 2)71,72. Pulsar search was done against a human FASTA file (UniProtKB database, reviewed SwissProt, Homo sapiens TaxID 9096 canonical and isoforms, downloaded 07-2018), results were filtered by an FDR of 1% on precursor and protein group level (Q value <0.01). For quantitative analysis the DIA data were analyzed in Spectronaut Pulsar (Biognosys) using the generated library (obtained from the corresponding DDA and DIA runs) with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
High-intensity interval training (HIIT) improves cardiorespiratory fitness (VO<sub>2</sub>max), but its impact on metabolism remains unclear. We hypothesized that 12-week HIIT increases insulin sensitivity in males with or without type 2 diabetes [T2D and NDM (nondiabetic humans)]. However, despite identically higher VO<sub>2</sub>max, mainly insulin-resistant (IR) persons (T2D and IR NDM) showed distinct alterations of circulating small extracellular vesicles (SEVs) along with lower inhibitory metabolic (protein kinase C&#x3b5; activity) or inflammatory (nuclear factor &#x3ba;B) signaling in muscle of T2D or IR NDM, respectively. This is related to the specific alterations in SEV proteome reflecting down-regulation of the phospholipase C pathway (T2D) and up-regulated antioxidant capacity (IR NDM). Thus, SEV cargo may contribute to modulating the individual metabolic responsiveness to exercise training in humans.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Dia, Small extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Platform proteome Analysis Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center
German Diabetes Center
Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry

### Submitter
Stefan Lehr

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Lehr
Platform proteome Analysis Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry German Diabetes Center


