### Accession
PXD004744

### Title
TDP-43 loss of function inhibits endosomal trafficking and alters trophic signaling in neurons - Surface labelling

### Description
Nuclear clearance of TDP-43 into cytoplasmic aggregates is a key driver of neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but the mechanisms are unclear. Here, we show that TDP-43 knockdown specifically reduces number and motility of RAB11-positive recycling endosomes in dendrites, while TDP-43 overexpression has the opposite effect. This is associated with delayed transferrin recycling in TDP-43 knockdown neurons and decreased 2-transferrin levels in patient CSF. Whole proteome quantification identified upregulation of the ESCRT component VPS4B upon TDP-43 knockdown in neurons. Luciferase report assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation suggest that TDP-43 represses VPS4B transcription. Preventing VPS4B upregulation or expression of its functional antagonist ALIX restores trafficking of recycling endosomes. Proteomic analysis revealed broad reduction in surface expression of key receptors upon TDP-43 knockdown including ErbB4, the neuregulin 1 receptor. TDP-43 knockdown delays surface delivery of ErbB4. ErbB4 overexpression, but not neuregulin 1 stimulation, prevents dendrite loss upon TDP-43 knockdown. Thus, impaired recycling of ErbB4 and other receptors to the cell surface may contribute to TDP-43 induced neurodegeneration by blocking trophic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
The protocol was adapted from (Kuhn et al., 2012). 4.5 million neurons in a 10 cm dish labeled for 48 hours with 200 nM ManNAz were washed twice with cold PBS. Afterwards 100 nM DBCO-PEG12-biotin (Click Chemistry tools) diluted in 2 ml PBS were evenly distributed on the neurons and incubated at 4°C for 2 hours. Neurons were washed twice with PBS and then lysed in 5 ml buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 2 mM EDTA, 1 % NP40) per dish. After centrifugation at 4000 g equal protein amounts of the clarified lysate were loaded on a polyprep column with a streptavidin bead bed (300 µl slurry). After binding of proteins, streptavidin beads were washed 3 times with 10 ml PBS supplemented with 1% SDS. To elute the biotinylated glycoproteins, streptavidin beads were boiled with urea sample buffer containing 3 mM biotin. Samples were analyzed twice using an Easy NLC 1000 nanoflow HPLC system II (Proxeon) connected to an LTQ-Velos Orbitrap Pro (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated by reverse phase chromatography using in-house made 30 cm columns (New Objective, FS360-75-8-N-S-C30) packed with C18-AQ 2,4 µm resin (Dr Maisch GmbH, Part No. r124.aq). A 90-min gradient (5–40%) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min was used. The measurement method consisted of an initial FTMS scan recorded in profile mode with 30 000 m/z resolution, a mass range from 300 to 2000 m/z and a target value of 1,000,000. Subsequently, collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation was performed for the 15 most intense ions with an isolation width of 2 Da in the ion trap. A target value of 10,000, enabled charge state screening, a monoisotopic precursor selection, 35% normalized collision energy, an activation time of 10 ms, wide band activation and a dynamic exclusion list with 30 s exclusion time were applied.

### Data Protocol
Data from three independent experiments with two technical replicates were analyzed with MaxQuant suite (version 1.5.3.12) in combination with the Andromeda search algorithm as above. First search, mass recalibration and main search of tryptic peptides were performed using a rat Uniprot database downloaded on the 08/21/2012. Two missed cleavages were allowed. Peptide as well as protein false discovery rate was set to 1%. Mass accuracy was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 5 ppm for the main search. Quantification was performed between the respective control and TDP43 knockdown condition on the basis of unique and razor peptides. Missing values were imputed in Perseus 1.5.16 following a standard distribution. P-values were calculated from log2 transformed LFQ ratios using a heteroscedastic, two-sided Student’s t-test. Proteins with a p-value of p ≤ 0.05 were considered as hits. To correct for multiple hypothesis testing the Benjamini-Hochberg post-test was applied with an adjusted false discovery rate of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear clearance of TDP-43 into cytoplasmic aggregates is a key driver of neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but the mechanisms are unclear. Here, we show that TDP-43 knockdown specifically reduces the number and motility of RAB11-positive recycling endosomes in dendrites, while TDP-43 overexpression has the opposite effect. This is associated with delayed transferrin recycling in TDP-43-knockdown neurons and decreased &#x3b2;2-transferrin levels in patient CSF Whole proteome quantification identified the upregulation of the ESCRT component VPS4B upon TDP-43 knockdown in neurons. Luciferase reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation suggest that TDP-43 represses VPS4B transcription. Preventing VPS4B upregulation or expression of its functional antagonist ALIX restores trafficking of recycling endosomes. Proteomic analysis revealed the broad reduction in surface expression of key receptors upon TDP-43 knockdown, including ErbB4, the neuregulin 1 receptor. TDP-43 knockdown delays the surface delivery of ErbB4. ErbB4 overexpression, but not neuregulin 1 stimulation, prevents dendrite loss upon TDP-43 knockdown. Thus, impaired recycling of ErbB4 and other receptors to the cell surface may contribute to TDP-43-induced neurodegeneration by blocking trophic signaling.

### Keywords
Surface labelling, Erbb4, Ftld, Tdp-43, Als, Recycling endosomes

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 München Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Dieter Edbauer
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Feodor-Lynen-Str. 17 81377 München Germany


