### Accession
PXD002758

### Title
strawberry leaves lysine acetylation LC-MS/MS

### Description
Protein lysine acetylation is a reversible and dynamic post-translational modification. It plays an important role in regulating diverse cellular processes including chromatin dynamic, metabolic pathways and transcription in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Although studies of lysine acetylome on plants have been reported, the throughput was not high enough, hindering the deep understanding of lysine acetylation in plant physiology and pathology. In this study, taking advantages of anti-acetyllysine-based enrichment and high-sensitive-mass spectrometer, we applied an integrated proteomic approach to comprehensively investigate lysine acetylome in strawberry. In total, we identified 1392 acetylation sites in 684 proteins, representing the largest dataset of acetylome in plant to date. To reveal the functional impacts of lysine acetylation in strawberry, intensive bioinformatic analysis was performed. The results significantly expanded our current understanding of plant acetylome and demonstrated that lysine acetylation is involved in multiple cellular metabolism and cellular processes. More interestingly, nearly 50% of all acetylated proteins identified in this work were localized in chloroplast and the vital role of lysine acetylation in photosynthesis was also revealed. Taken together, this study not only established the most extensive lysine acetylome in plants to date, but also systematically suggests the significant and unique roles of lysine acetylation in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Tryptic Digestion The strawberry leaves were first grinded by liquid nitrogen and the cell powder was transferred to 2 mL centrifuge tube and precipitated with cold 10% TCA/acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail Set VI and PVPP powder for 2 h at -20 °C. After centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with cold acetone supplemented with 50 mM DTT, 1mM PMSF for three times. After air drying, the precipitate was re-suspended in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 2 mM EDTA, 10 mM DTT and 1% ProteaseInhibitor Cocktail Set VI). The sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube, reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 °C and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein was precipitated with 3 volumes of pre-chilled acetone for 30 min at -20 °C. After centrifugation, the pellet was then dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and sonicated for 5 min. Repeat the centrifugation step and collect the supernatant. Protein content was determined with 2-D Quant kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Approximately 10 mg protein for each sample was digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 °C in a 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio. Affinity Enrichment of Lysine-acetylated Peptides Affinity enrichment of lysine acetylated peptides was performed as described previously (Wu et al., 2013). Briefly, to enrich Kac peptides, tryptic peptides were dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) and incubated with pre-washed anti-acetyllysine agarose beads (PTM Biolabs, Hangzhou, China) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were carefully washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried in the SpeedVac. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer's instructions, followed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were searched by using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.0.5). Tandem mass spectra were searched against strawberry database (45,377 sequences) concatenated with reverse decoy database and protein sequences of common contaminants. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 3 missing cleavages, 4 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 6 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamido methylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 0.01. Minimum peptide length was set at 7 Lysine acetylation site identifications with localization probability less than 0.75 or from reverse and contaminant protein sequences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Protein lysine acetylation is a reversible and dynamic post-translational modification. It plays an important role in regulating diverse cellular processes including chromatin dynamic, metabolic pathways, and transcription in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Although studies of lysine acetylome in plants have been reported, the throughput was not high enough, hindering the deep understanding of lysine acetylation in plant physiology and pathology. In this study, taking advantages of anti-acetyllysine-based enrichment and high-sensitive-mass spectrometer, we applied an integrated proteomic approach to comprehensively investigate lysine acetylome in strawberry. In total, we identified 1392 acetylation sites in 684 proteins, representing the largest dataset of acetylome in plants to date. To reveal the functional impacts of lysine acetylation in strawberry, intensive bioinformatic analysis was performed. The results significantly expanded our current understanding of plant acetylome and demonstrated that lysine acetylation is involved in multiple cellular metabolism and cellular processes. More interestingly, nearly 50% of all acetylated proteins identified in this work were localized in chloroplast and the vital role of lysine acetylation in photosynthesis was also revealed. Taken together, this study not only established the most extensive lysine acetylome in plants to date, but also systematically suggests the significant and unique roles of lysine acetylation in plants.

### Keywords
Ms, Strawberry leaves, Lysine acetylation

### Affiliations
PH.D student
Institute of Biology, Hangzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
jun zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Xianping Fang
Institute of Biology, Hangzhou Academy of Agricultural Sciences


