### Accession
PXD026841

### Title
Protection of the prodomain α1-helix correlates with latency in the transforming growth factor-β family

### Description
The 33 members of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) family are fundamentally important for organismal development and homeostasis. Family members are synthesized and secreted as pro-complexes of non-covalently associated prodomains and growth factors (GF). Pro-complexes from a subset of family members are latent and require activation steps to release the GF for signaling. Why some members are latent while others are non-latent is incompletely understood, particularly because of large family diversity. Here, we have examined representative family members in negative stain electron microscopy (nsEM) and hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) to identify features that differentiate latent from non-latent members. nsEM showed three overall pro-complex conformations that differed in prodomain arm domain orientation relative to the bound growth factor. Two cross-armed members, TGF-β1 and TGF-β2, were each latent. However, among V-armed members, GDF8 was latent whereas ActA was not. All open-armed members, BMP7, BMP9, and BMP10, were non-latent. Family members exhibited remarkably varying HDX patterns, consistent with large prodomain sequence divergence. A strong correlation emerged between latency and protection of the prodomain α1-helix from exchange. Furthermore, latency and protection from exchange correlated structurally with increased α1-helix buried surface area, hydrogen bonds, and cation-pi bonds. Moreover, a specific pattern of conserved basic and hydrophobic residues in the α1-helix and aromatic residues in the interacting fastener were found only in latent members. Thus, this first comparative survey of TGF-β family members reveals not only diversity in conformation and dynamics but also unique features that distinguish latent members.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling: 3 µL of stock [TGF-β1 (30 µM), TGF-β2 (29 µM), BMP7 (272 µM), BMP9 (17 µM), BMP10 (60 µM), latent GDF8 (11 µM), primed GDF8 (20 µM), and ActA (120.4 µM)] were individually diluted 15-fold at 20 °C into their respective labeling buffers (LB) for deuterium labeling.  LB1 (20 mM TRIS, 150mM NaCl, 99.9% D2O, pD 7.5) was used for all proteins except BMP9 were LB2 [PBS (1.8 mM KH2PO4, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 137 mM NaCl), 99.9% D2O, pD 7.4)] was used.  The final volume during labeling was 45 µL.  The time course (TC) for labeling was TC1 (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour, 3 hours) for all proteins except BMP9 and BMP10 where TC2 (3 seconds, 10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes, 1 hour and 4 hours) was used. The labeling reactions were quenched with the addition of 48 µL of ice-cold quenching buffer (QB) as follows: QB1 [150mM potassium phosphate, 0.5M tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.3] for TGFβ1, TGFβ2, GDF8; QB2 [3.5M GnHCl, 100mM sodium phosphate, 0.25M tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.3] for BMP7, BMP10 and activin; QB3 [4M GnHCl, 250mM sodium phosphate, 0.5M tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP-HCl), H2O, pH 2.35] for BMP9.  After quenching, each sample was immediately by LC/MS.  LC/MS:  All LC steps were performed with a Waters HDX system containing an HDX unit and NanoAcquity UPLC pumps.  Deuterated and control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using an Poroszyme immobilized pepsin cartridge (2.1 mm x 30 mm, Applied Biosystems, 2313100. Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 µm, (Waters, 186003975)] for 3 minutes at 100 µL/min, eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 µL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 1.0 mm ×100 mm column (Waters, 186002346).  The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  The back pressure averaged ~8500 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  To eliminate peptide carryover between runs, a wash solution of [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  The analytical column was not washed.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters XevoG2-mass spectrometer with a conventional electrospray source. The instrument was scanned over the range 100 to 2000 m/z with the following configuration: capillary was 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/µL at a flow rate of 5 µL/min prior to data collection.  All experiments were performed under identical experimental conditions; deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative.  The error of measuring the mass of each deuterated peptide averaged ± 0.15 Da across two technical replicates as given by the DynamX software, which in some cases is an average of more than one charge state.  The average amount of back-exchange was 30–35%, based on analysis of highly deuterated peptide standards.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using 3 replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered as follows: 2 consecutive product ions, minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.2; maximum mass error of 10 ppm. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuteratered form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were converted to percent relative deuteration for each peptide assuming total loss of label from the N-terminal backbone amide hydrogen of each peptide.  The results were plotted on respective crystal structures and sequence alignments, displayed as % deuteration at each time point of D2O labeling. No subtractive methods were used for overlapping peptides; all peptides including overlapping are shown in the Supplemental Figures, and when mapped to a crystal structure only representative peptides were used without subtractive manipulation.

### Publication Abstract
The 33 members of the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-&#x3b2;) family are fundamentally important for organismal development and homeostasis. Family members are synthesized and secreted as pro-complexes of non-covalently associated prodomains and growth factors (GF). Pro-complexes from a subset of family members are latent and require activation steps to release the GF for signaling. Why some members are latent while others are non-latent is incompletely understood, particularly because of large family diversity. Here, we have examined representative family members in negative stain electron microscopy (nsEM) and hydrogen deuterium exchange (HDX) to identify features that differentiate latent from non-latent members. nsEM showed three overall pro-complex conformations that differed in prodomain arm domain orientation relative to the bound growth factor. Two cross-armed members, TGF-&#x3b2;1 and TGF-&#x3b2;2, were each latent. However, among V-armed members, GDF8 was latent whereas ActA was not. All open-armed members, BMP7, BMP9, and BMP10, were non-latent. Family members exhibited remarkably varying HDX patterns, consistent with large prodomain sequence divergence. A strong correlation emerged between latency and protection of the prodomain &#x3b1;1-helix from exchange. Furthermore, latency and protection from exchange correlated structurally with increased &#x3b1;1-helix buried surface area, hydrogen bonds, and cation-pi bonds. Moreover, a specific pattern of conserved basic and hydrophobic residues in the &#x3b1;1-helix and aromatic residues in the interacting fastener were found only in latent members. Thus, this first comparative survey of TGF-&#x3b2; family members reveals not only diversity in conformation and dynamics but also unique features that distinguish latent members.

### Keywords
Electron microscopy (em), Transforming growth factor beta (tgf‐β), Bone morphogenetic protein (bmp), Hydrogen exchange mass spectrometry, Activin

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


