### Accession
PXD027128

### Title
Novel recognition site for polyUb and UBL signals in Rpn1

### Description
Rpn1 is the largest proteasomal receptor for polyubiquitin and shuttle proteins contains one known binding site for polyubiquitin and shuttle proteins. We used a combination of NMR spectroscopy, photo-crosslinking, mass spectrometry, and mutagenesis,to confirm the presence of additional ubiquitin recognition site on RPN1. This novel site is situated in the N-terminal section of Rpn1, a region previously surmised to be devoid of functionality.

### Sample Protocol
S. cerevisiae Rpn1 fragment consists of residues 214-355  was expressed as a His6-Smt3-Rpn1 (214-355) fusion construct in E. coli BL21(DE3) Codon Plus cells. Following IPTG induction the cells were collected and the pellet was resuspended in 40 mL of Extraction Buffer (50 mM Tris, 500 mM potassium chloride, 20 mM imidazole, 7 M urea, 3 mM TCEP, pH 8.0). As before, DNAse I and one protease inhibitor tablet were added to the solution, which was then rocked overnight.The resulting solution was clarified by ultracentrifugation and filtered. The supernatant was then loaded onto a 5 mL HisTrap (GE Healthcare) column pre-equilibrated with Extraction Buffer. A shallow gradient with 50 mM Tris, 500 mM potassium chloride, 20 mM imidazole, 3 mM TCEP, pH 8.0 was used to slowly remove urea from the buffer over several hours, thereby allowing the protein to refold on the column. His6-Smt3-Rpn1214-355 was eluted from the column with 50 mM Tris, 500 mM potassium chloride, 250 mM imidazole, 3 mM TCEP, pH 8.0. His6-ULP1 was added to the solution to cleave His6-Smt3 from Rpn1214-355, and the solution was dialyzed overnight against 50 mM HEPES, 500 mM potassium chloride, 3 mM TCEP, 5% glycerol, pH 7.6. The solution was then loaded onto a pre-equilibrated 5 mL HisTrap column and Rpn1214-355 was collected in the flow-through. Gel filtration was used to separate monomeric Rpn1 (214-355) from any oligomeric species, whereby the solution was loaded onto a HiLoad 16/60 Superdex 75 pg (GE Healthcare) column equilibrated with 50 mM HEPES, 500 mM potassium chloride, 3 mM TCEP, pH 7.6.  Bpa-containing Ub monomers and dimers (Ub-T9Bpa or DiUb-Q49Bpa)from H. sapiens were generated and purified as described before(PMID: 30668904). Photo-crosslinking samples were prepared in 50 mM HEPES, 50 mM potassium chloride, 1 mM TCEP, pH 7.6 and contained 50 μM of Rpn1(214-355) (or Rpn1(214-324) or Rpn1(214-290)) and 25 μM of the Bpa-containing Ub or DiUbiquitin species. Samples were incubated on ice and exposed to UV irradiation at λ=365 nm (UV365nm) for one hour, as detailed elsewhere (PMID: 30668904). Crosslinking products of Rpn1(214-355) and Ub-T9Bpa were precipitated with 80% acetone and the ensuing pellet was resuspended in either 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 6M urea or 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 8M GuHCl. Cysteines were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. The samples were diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the concentration of urea or GuHCl below 1 M, prior to digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 w/w enzyme:substrate ratio for 12 hours at 37°C. Samples were lyophilized, dissolved in 8M GuHCl, and then subjected to a second digestion with trypsin (1:50 w/w). Crosslinking products of Rpn1(214-324) and Ub-T9Bpa or DiUb-Q49Bpa were prepared in a similar manner following in-gel digestion protocols described previously (PMID: 21048196).  The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted using C18 Stage-tips and subjected to LC-MS analysis using a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to nano-HPLC. The peptides were resolved by reversed-phase chromatography on 0.075 × 180 mm fused silica capillaries (Agilent J&W) packed with Reprosil reversed-phase material (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). The peptides were eluted with a linear 60 minute gradient of 5–28% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, followed by a 15 minute gradient of 28–95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and a 10 minute wash of 95% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid (at flow rates of 0.15 μl/min). MS was performed in positive mode using an m/z range of 300–1800, a resolution of 60,000 for MS1, and a resolution of 15,000 for MS2; repetitively full MS scans were followed by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most dominant ions selected from the first MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Identification of crosslinked peptides was performed following analysis of the MS RAW files by pLink (version 2.3.9, via pFind Studio (PMID: 31363125)), using Bpa as the crosslinker and trypsin as the digestion enzyme, with a maximum of three missed cleavage sites. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionines was set as a variable modification. Peptide N-terminal and lysine carbamylation was included as a variable modification for the in-solution digestion of Ub-T9Bpa–Rpn1(214-355) in urea. Considered peptide mass was set to 400-10,000 kDa and peptide length was set to 4-40 amino acid residues. Precursor tolerance was set to 10 ppm, while fragment tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Results were filtered by application of a precursor mass accuracy of ±10 ppm and 5% FDR. Searches were conducted against database containing sequences of ubiquitin and Rpn1214-355 supplemented with the sequences 293 known contaminant proteins (total of 295 sequences). The search results were also validated against a larger database composed of these 295 sequences supplemented with E. coli protein sequences (Uniprot version 2021_01) that contained 4686 sequences in total (2 target proteins, 4393 e.coli proteins and 293 known contaminant proteins)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Bpa, Uv-crosslinking, Rpn1

### Affiliations
Technion
Center Biomol. Struct. & Organization Dept Chemistry & Biochemistry University of Maryland College Park, MD 20742-3360 USA

### Submitter
Oded Kleifeld

### Lab Head
Dr David Fushman
Center Biomol. Struct. & Organization Dept Chemistry & Biochemistry University of Maryland College Park, MD 20742-3360 USA


