### Accession
PXD013707

### Title
Deep proteome analysis of more than 12000 proteins in buffalo mammary epithelial cells identifies protein signatures for active proliferation and lactation

### Description
Extensive branching morphogenesis takes place during pregnancy in the mammary gland. It is accompanied by the rapid proliferation of the Mammary Epithelial Cells (MECs). To gain insights into the proteomic changes that occur during the proliferation of MECs from buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) origin, we explored the deep proteome profile of buffalo mammary epithelial cells (BuMECs) using mass spectrometry (MS). To achieve this, we employed the sub-cellular fractionation approach and secretome analysis. Proteins were isolated separately from four subcellular fractions (SCFs) containing cytosolic (SCF-I), membranous and membranous organelle’s (SCF-II), nuclear (SCF-III) and cytoskeletal (SCF-IV). These sub-cellular specific protein fractions were processed using in-solution digestion and analyzed with nano-LCMS/MS. The MS analysis identified 8330, 5970, 5288 and 4818 non-redundant proteins in the fractions SCF I, II, III and IV respectively. To evaluate the secretory proteins in these cells, gel-based proteome approach was used which revealed a total of 792 non-redundant proteins. Altogether, combined analysis of all the five fractions including four sub-cellular fractions and secretome resulted in the identification of 12,609 non-redundant proteins. A total of 325 molecular pathways were identified after extensive analysis. The most enriched pathways associated with these proteins were metabolic, PI3-AKT, MAPK, mTOR, Insulin, estrogen and Oxytocin signaling. Our study demonstrated for the first time highest number of proteins identified by MS in any cell types including MECs.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins were isolated from the four sub cellular fractions and the interfering substances such as detergents, salts, lipids and nucleic acids were removed from the protein preparations using 2D-clean up kit (GE Healthcare, USA). The pellet was rehydrated in the                                            2% Diethylamine and the total protein concentration was estimated using 2D-Quant kit (GE Healthcare, USA) as per manufacturer’s instructions. For the secretome analysis, the 30 ml conditioning media was collected from the proliferating cells, filtered using 0.2 μm syringe filter and centrifuged at 1500 rpm to remove the cell debris. Further, the media was concentrated using 3 kDa molecular weight cut off centricon at 4000 g and 4 °C, and stored at -80 °C until further processing for mass spectrometry. The subcellular protein fractions were processed separately for the In-sol trypsin digestion. In brief, 45 mM DTT in 50 mM NH4HCO3 was used to reduce the disulfide bonds followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 100 mM IAA in 50 mM NH4HCO3. Whereas, the conditioning media protein was digested using the In-gel method. In brief, destained bands were reduced with the 5 mMdithiothrietol (DTT) in 40 mM NH4HCO3. Digestion was carried out overnight using 12.5 ng/ul trypsin (Modified sequencing grade; Promega, USA) at 37 °C. Subsequently digested proteins were lyophilized and desalted using zip-tip C18 (Millipore, Germany) following manufacturer’s instructions and stored at -80°C until MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The nano-LCMS/MS results were analyzed using the Protein Scape software (McHugh et al., 2008 and Naru et al., 2016). Peak lists were generated by qTOF control (version 24.8) using the Hystar post processing program to automatically subtract baseline, smoothen peaks and to generate centroid data before submission to Mascot (2.4.1 Matrix Science, UK) with proteins identified by correlation of mass spectra to entries in the Bos taurus database. Mascot MS/MS ion search criteria were as follows: taxonomy-other mammalia, trypsin digestion, allowing up to one missed cleavage, peptide tolerance of 50 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da. The Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was searched as a fixed modification, whereas Carbamidomethyl, Gln->pyro-Glu, Carbamyl, Carboxymethyl, Oxidation, Phospho, and Glu -> pyro-Glu were searched as the variable modifications. The “ion score cutoff” was manually set to 15 thereby eliminating the lowest quality matches. To eliminate false positives, 1% FDR was applied at both protein and peptide levels. Subsequent bioinformatics analysis was performed using the various softwares including PANTHER (Protein Analysis through Evolutionary Relationships://www.pantherdb.org), DAVID v. 6.7, STRING (http://string-db.org) and Cytoscape plug-in ClueGo.

### Publication Abstract
The mature mammary gland is made up of a network of ducts that terminates in alveoli. The innermost layer of alveoli is surrounded by the differentiated mammary epithelial cells (MECs), which are responsible for milk synthesis and secretion during lactation. However, the MECs are in a state of active proliferation during pregnancy, when they give rise to network like structures in the mammary gland. Buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) constitute a major source of milk for human consumption, and the MECs are the major precursor cells which are mainly responsible for their lactation potential. The proteome of MECs defines their functional state and suggests their role in various cellular activities such as proliferation and lactation. To date, the proteome profile of MECs from buffalo origin is not available. In the present study, we have profiled in-depth proteome of in vitro cultured buffalo MECs (BuMECs) during active proliferation using high throughput tandem mass spectrometry (MS). MS analysis identified a total of 8330, 5970, 5289, 4818 proteins in four sub-cellular fractions (SCFs) that included cytosolic (SCF-I), membranous and membranous organelle's (SCF-II), nuclear (SCF-III), and cytoskeletal (SCF-IV). However, 792 proteins were identified in the conditioned media, which represented the secretome. Altogether, combined analysis of all the five fractions (SCFs- I to IV, and secretome) revealed a total of 12,609 non-redundant proteins. The KEGG analysis suggested that these proteins were associated with 325 molecular pathways. Some of the highly enriched molecular pathways observed were metabolic, MAPK, PI3-AKT, insulin, estrogen, and cGMP-PKG signalling pathway. The newly identified proteins in this study are reported to be involved in NOTCH signalling, transport and secretion processes.

### Keywords
Mammary gland;buffalo; subcellular;proteomics; secretome

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Structural Biology Lab, Animal biotechnology Center, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, India
ICAR

### Submitter
Ashok Kumar Mohanty

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Ashok Kumar Mohanty
Proteomics and Structural Biology Lab, Animal biotechnology Center, National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, India


