### Accession
PXD005778

### Title
Proteomics of copepods during diel vertical migration

### Description
One of the greatest cyclical patterns in the pelagic ecosystem is the daily vertical migration of various zooplankton and fish to depth, a process referred to as diel vertical migration (DVM). DVM is considered to be energetically costly as tiny plankton migrate hundreds of meters in a 24 hour period. To study the metabolic demands of DVM, the copepod Pleuromamma xiphias was collected during upwards and downwards migration off of Bermuda. Data-dependent acquisition on the Q-Exactive detected >1600 proteins, 180 of which were differentially abundant between the two sampling periods.

### Sample Protocol
Female copepods were flash frozen after collection in a plankton net. Each copepod was homogenized in 50 mM NH4HCO3 before 6 M urea was added. After sonication and protein quantification, Tris-HCl (1.5 M, pH 8.8) and TCEP were added to each sample and incubated 1 hour at 37C. Iodoacetamide was added to alkylate the proteins and incubated for 1 hour, in the dark at room temperature (RT). Excess iodoacetamide was absorbed over a 1 hour incubation at RT by diothiothreitol. Samples were preliminarily digested to reduce the number of undigested cleavage sites by LysC for 1 hour at RT at a 1:20 enzyme:protein ratio. After LysC digestions, NH4HCO3 and HPLC-grade methanol were added to each sample to allow trypsin digestion. Trypsin was added in a 1:20 ratio and incubated overnight at RT. The next day, samples were evaporated, reconstituted in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted using a MacroSpin Column from the Nest Group. Desalted peptides were dried and reoncstituted in 100 ul of 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer in triplicate with an acetonitrile gradient of 5-85% over 75 minutes. The analytical and pre-column were packed in-house with C18 Dr. Maisch beads.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identifications and protein inferences for tandom mass spectra were found through Comet searches and the Trans Proteomic Pipeline against the P. xiphias proteome.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dda, Copepod, Proteomics, Dvm

### Affiliations
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences
University of Washington

### Submitter
Emma Timmins-Schiffman

### Lab Head
Dr Amy Maas
Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences


