### Accession
PXD029101

### Title
Proteomics of Dictyostelium discoideum mitochondria

### Description
There is a paucity of data regarding what proteins localize to the mitochondria in the social amoeba Dictyostelium discoideum. Therefore, here, we utilized high-throughput tandem mass tag (TMT)-based protein quantitation to identify proteins in the whole-cell lysate, as well as in crude and purified mitochondrial samples. We then calculated the ratio of a protein’s abundance in the mitochondria isolates, both crude and highly purified, versus its abundance in the whole-cell lysate. The resulting value, indicating its enrichment in mitochondrial preparations, was further normalized to the average enrichment ratio of 47 reference mitochondrial proteins, to compute the relative enrichment ratio. Using this approach, we identified 908 putative mitochondrial proteins. We ultimately combined proteomic and in silico analyses to yield a comprehensive mitochondrial protein compendium. Our compendium lays the foundation for future studies to understand the functions of conserved mitochondrial proteins in health and diseases using D. discoideum as the model. It also provides an entry to study many fascinating mitochondrial processes that are unique in protists. Additionally, through comparative genomics, our compendium will complement mitochondrial protein discovery in other organisms and may shed light on the evolution of mitochondrial proteomes and processes.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested at a concentration of 1-3 x 106 cells/mL and resuspended at 2 x 107 cells/mL in 800 µL of Reagent A from the Mitochondrial Isolation Kit for Cultured Cells (Thermo Fisher #89874) on ice. Cell lysis and crude mitochondrial preparation were performed as previously described with modifications (Graham, 1999; Glancy and Balaban, 2011). Cells were lysed with 35 strokes of a Dounce homogenizer followed by the addition of an equal volume of Reagent C. Whole-cell lysate samples were stored at -80 °C or were centrifuged three times (700 x g, 10 minutes, 4 °C) to purify the mitochondria. For each centrifugation step, the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 mL tube. The crude mitochondrial lysate was used immediately for purification or was stored at -80 °C.  To generate purified mitochondrial isolates, Percoll gradient centrifugation was performed as follows. Lysis suspension (1-2 mL) was added to the top of a Percoll/Development Buffer solution (8 mL, 30% Percoll) in a 10 mL ultracentrifuge tube. Ultracentrifugation (68,000 x g, 40 minutes) yielded three distinct layers. The top layer, containing contaminants, was discarded. The middle layer, containing mitochondria, was transferred into a fresh 2 mL tube. Aliquots of the mitochondrial suspension were topped off with 500 µL of DB, then centrifuged (13,000 x g, 10 minutes, 4 °C). Following centrifugation, the supernatant was aspirated, and the mitochondria-containing pellet was maintained on ice. To lyse the mitochondria, the pellet was washed with 2 mL of DB, centrifuged (10,000 x g, 10 minutes, 4 °C), and resuspended in 2 mL of DB with urea (8M). Protein yield was quantified via Bradford Assay (BioRad) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.  Triplicates of whole-cell lysate, crude and purified mitochondrial samples were sequentially reduced, alkylated, digested overnight with trypsin, and labelled with 10-plex Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) (Dayon et al 2008). Labelled protein digests were then pooled, and then separated into 24 fractions using high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography (RPLC) (Yang et al 2012). Each fraction was analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) based nanoLCMS system.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein IDs were assigned by searching the resulting LCMS raw data against database downloaded from dictybase.org using Sequest HT algorithm on Proteome Discoverer 2.4 platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Three groups of samples were normalized to 47 reference mitochondrial proteins. The ratio of a protein’s abundance in the mitochondria isolates, both crude and highly purified, versus its abundance in the whole-cell lysate represents its enrichment in mitochondrial preparations.

### Publication Abstract
The social ameba <i>Dictyostelium discoideum</i> has emerged as a powerful model to study mitochondrial genetics and bioenergetics. However, a comprehensive inventory of mitochondrial proteins that is critical to understanding mitochondrial processes has yet to be curated. Here, we utilized high-throughput multiplexed protein quantitation and homology analyses to generate a high-confidence mitochondrial protein compendium consisting of 936 proteins. Our proteomic approach, which utilizes mass spectrometry in combination with mathematical modeling, was validated through mitochondrial targeting sequence prediction and live-cell imaging. Our final compendium consists of 936 proteins. Nearly, a third of <i>D.&#xa0;discoideum</i> mitochondrial proteins do not have homologs in humans, budding yeasts, or an ancestral alphaproteobacteria. Additionally, we leverage our compendium to highlight the complexity of metabolic reprogramming during starvation-induced development. Our compendium lays a foundation to investigate mitochondrial processes that are unique in ameba and to understand the functions of conserved mitochondrial proteins in <i>D.&#xa0;discoideum</i>.

### Keywords
Dictyostelium discoideum, Mitochondria purification, Lcmsms, Proteomics, Tmt

### Affiliations
The Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute
NIH

### Submitter
Yong Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Hong Xu
The Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Heart Lung and Blood Institute


