### Accession
PXD041416

### Title
Proteomic profiling of eIF3a conditional knockout mice

### Description
In this study, a Cre-loxP system was used to generate eIF3a conditional knockout mice. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling with LC-MS/MS analysis was used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in fat, lungs, skin, and spleen tissue of the eIF3a knockout mice and controls. Bioinformatics analysis was then used to explore the functions and molecular signaling pathways of these protein landscapes.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction The sample was grinded by liquid nitrogen into cell powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). (Note: For PTM experiments, inhibitors were also added to the lysis buffer, e.g. 3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM for acetylation.) The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. TMT/iTRAQ Labeling  After trypsin digestion, peptide was desalted by Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried. Peptide was reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for TMT kit/iTRAQ kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT/iTRAQ reagent were thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted and dried by vacuum centrifugation. HPLC Fractionation (optional) The tryptic peptides were fractionated into fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) over 60 min into 60 fractions. Then, the peptides were combined into 6 fractions and dried by vacuum centrifuging. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (solvent A), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (15-cm length, 75 μm i.d.). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 6% to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23% to 35% in 8 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 400 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system.The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 for full scan, and intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were then selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 28 and the fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0s dynamic exclusion. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Proteins were classified by GO annotation into three categories: biological process, cellular compartment and molecular function. For each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis: Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. These pathways were classified into hierarchical categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis: For each category proteins, InterPro (a resource that provides functional analysis of protein sequences by classifying them into families and predicting the presence of domains and important sites) database was researched and a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. Protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 subunit A (eIF3a) is the largest subunit of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor 3 (eIF3). eIF3a plays an integral role in protein biosynthesis, hence impacting the onset, development, and treatment of tumors. The proteins regulated by eIF3a are still being explored <i>in vivo</i>. In this study, a Cre-loxP system was used to generate eIF3a conditional knockout mice. Tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling with LC-MS/MS analysis was used to identify differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in fat, lungs, skin, and spleen tissue of the eIF3a knockout mice and controls. Bioinformatics analysis was then used to explore the functions and molecular signaling pathways of these protein landscapes. It was observed that eIF3a is essential for life sustenance. Abnormal tissue pathology was found in the lungs, fat, skin, spleen, and thymus. In total, 588, 210, 324, and 944 DEPs were quantified in the lungs, fat, skin, and spleen, respectively, of the eIF3a knockout mice as compared to the control. The quantified differentially expressed proteins were tissue-specific, except for eight proteins shared by the four tissues. A broad range of functions for eIF3a, including cellular signaling pathway, immune response, metabolism, defense response, phagocytes, and DNA replication, has been revealed using bioinformatics analysis. Herein, several pathways related to oxidative stress in the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database, including nitrogen metabolism, peroxisome, cytochrome P450 drug metabolism, pyruvate metabolism, PPAR signaling pathway, phospholipase D signaling pathway, B-cell receptor signaling pathway, ferroptosis, and focal adhesion, have been identified. Collectively, this study shows that <i>eIF3a</i> is an essential gene for sustaining life, and its downstream proteins are involved in diverse novel functions beyond mRNA translational regulation.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Knockout mice, Proteomics, Eif3a, Protein landscape

### Affiliations
csu
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University

### Submitter
Wei Zhuo

### Lab Head
Dr Zhaoqian Liu
Xiangya Hospital, Central South University


