### Accession
PXD044408

### Title
In planta expression of human polyQ-expanded huntingtin fragment reveals mechanisms to prevent disease-related protein aggregation.

### Description
We overexpressed eGFP, eGFP-SPP and pmRFP-Q74 construct in HEK93 cells. We made immunoprecipitation of GFP. We compare the interactome of eGFP and eGFP-SPP.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in modified Radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% IgPal, 1 mM PMSF, and 1 mM EDTA) supplemented with protease inhibitor (Roche). Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 10 min at 4°C. Then, the supernatant was collected and incubated with total anti-GFP antibody (ImmunoKontakt (amsbio), (1:100) for 30 min subsequently with 50 μl Protein A beads (Miltenyi, Germany) for 1 h on the overhead shaker at 4°C. As a control, the same amount of protein was incubated with anti-Igg antibody (Cell Signaling, 2729S (1:100)) in parallel. After this incubation, supernatants were subjected to magnetic column purification. We then performed three washes using wash buffer 1 (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl, 0.05% IgPal, and 5% glycerol). Next, columns were washed five times with wash buffer 2 (50 mM Tris–HCl (pH 7.4), 150 mM NaCl). Then, we subjected the columns to in-column tryptic digestion containing 7.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 2 M urea, 1 mM DTT and 5 ng ml-1 trypsin. Digested peptides were eluted using two times 50 μl of elution buffer 1 containing 2 M urea, 7.5 mM Ambic and 15 m CAA. Digests were incubated overnight at room temperature with mild shaking in the dark. The next day, samples were stage tipped for label-free quantification.   Samples were analyzed by the CECAD Proteomics Facility on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific, granted by the German Research Foundation under INST 216/1163-1 FUGG) mass  pectrometer equipped with a FAIMSpro differential ion mobility device that was coupled to an Vanquish neo in trap-and-elute setup (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto a precolumn (Acclaim 5μm PepMap 300 μ Cartridge) with a flow of 60 μl/min before reverse-flushed onto an in-house packed analytical column (30 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, filled with 2.7 μm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated with an initial flow rate of 400 nL/min and the following gradient: initial 2% B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile), up to 6 % in 3 min. Then, flow was reduced to 300 nl/min and B increased to 20% B in 26 min, up to 35% B within 15 min and up to 98% solvent B within 1.0 min while again increasing the flow to 400 nl/min, followed by column wash with 95% solvent B and reequilibration to initial condition. The FAIMS pro was operated at -50V compensation voltage and electrode temperatures of 99.5 °C for the inner and 85 °C for the outer electrode. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition top 24 mode with MS1 scans acquired from 350 m/z to 1400 m/z at 60k resolution and an AGC target of 300%. MS2 scans were acquired at 15 k resolution with a maximum injection time of 22 ms and an AGC target of 300% in a 1.4 Th window and a fixed first mass of 110 m/z.. All MS1 scans were stored as profile, all MS2 scans as centroid.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 2.2, Tyanova et al. NatProt) using default parameters against the Uniprot HUMAN canonical database (UP5640) with the match-between-runs option enabled between replicates. Follow-up analysis was done in Perseus 1.6.15 (Tyanova et al. NatMet). Protein groups were filtered for potential contaminants and insecure identifications. Remaining IDs were filtered for data completeness in at least one group and missing values imputed by sigma downshift (0.3 σ width, 1.8 σ downshift). Afterwards, FDR-controlled two-sided t-tests were performed. Finally,

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Protein aggregation, Huntington’s disease

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
University of Cologne Germany


