### Accession
PXD018088

### Title
Exploring the Wound Healing, Anti-Inflammatory, Anti-Pathogens and Proteomic Effects of Lactic Acid Bacteria on Keratinocytes

### Description
The topical application of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) is recognized as a useful approach to improve skin health. This work aims to characterize by a multidisciplinary approach, the wound healing, anti-inflammatory, anti-pathogens and proteomic effects of six LAB lysates, belonging to the genus Lactobacillus. Our results demonstrated that the tested LAB stimulated the proliferation of keratinocytes, and that L. plantarum 07 and L. salivarius SGL 19 accelerated the re-epithelization by inducing keratinocyte migration. The bacterial lysates also reduced the secretion of specific pro-inflammatory mediators from keratinocytes. Furthermore, viable L. salivarius SGL 19 and L. fermentum SGL 10 had anti-pathogen effects against S. aureus and S. pyogenes, while L. brevis SGL 12 and L. paracasei SGL 04 inhibited S. aureus and S. pyogenes, respectively. The tested lactobacilli lysates also induced specific proteome modulation of the exposed keratinocytes, involving dysregulation of proteins (such as interleukin enhancer-binding factor 2 and ATP-dependent RNA helicase) and pathways (such as cytokine, NF-kB, Hedgehog, and RUNX signaling) associated with their specific wound healing and anti-inflammatory effects. This study indicates the different potential of selected lactobacilli, suggesting that they may be successfully used in the future together with conventional therapies to bring relief from skin disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Identification and quantification of proteome modulation of keratinocytes treated with LAB lysate, or exposed to heat-killed S. aureus or S. pyogenes and then treated with LAB lysate, was performed as previously reported. Briefly, cells were collected, washed and lysed in 1X PBS added with protease inhibitors cocktail (Roche) and 0,1% SDS. After acetone precipitation, the collected proteins were resuspended in 100 mM NH4HCO3 and quantified by BCA Protein Assay (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Thus, 30 µg of extracted proteins were subjected to reduction and alkylation, and then to trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were analyzed by label-free LC-MS/MS, performed by using a micro-LC system (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, USA) interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Concord, Canada). Samples were subjected first to data-dependent acquisition (DDA) analysis to generate the SWATH-MS spectral library, and then to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA), based on a 25-Da window, using three technical replicates of each sample. The MS data were acquired by Analyst TF v.1.7 (AB SCIEX); while PeakView v.1.2.0.3 and Protein Pilot v.4.2 (AB SCIEX) programs were used to generate the peak-list. Protein identification was obtained using either Protein Pilot v.4.2 (AB SCIEX) and Mascot search engines performing the database search in UniProt/Swissprot (v.2018.02.01, 42,271 sequences entries). The obtained files from the DDA acquisitions were used for the library generation using a FDR threshold of 1%. Protein quantification was performed by PeakView v.2.0 and MarkerView v.1.2. (ABSCIEX) programs by extracting from SWATH files six peptides per protein with the highest MS1 intensity, and six transitions per peptide. Peptides with FDR lower than 1.0% were exported, and up- and down-regulated proteins were selected using p-value < 0.05 and fold change >1.5.

### Publication Abstract
The topical application of lactic acid bacteria (LAB) is recognized as a useful approach to improve skin health. This work aims to characterize by a multidisciplinary approach, the wound healing, anti-inflammatory, anti-pathogens and proteomic effects of six LAB lysates, belonging to the genus Lactobacillus. Our results demonstrated that the lysates of tested LAB stimulated the proliferation of keratinocytes, and that L. plantarum SGL 07 and L. salivarius SGL 19 accelerated the re-epithelization by inducing keratinocyte migration. The bacterial lysates also reduced the secretion of specific pro-inflammatory mediators from keratinocytes. Furthermore, viable L. salivarius SGL 19 and L. fermentum SGL 10 had anti-pathogenic effects against S. aureus and S. pyogenes, while L. brevis SGL 12 and L. paracasei SGL 04 inhibited S. aureus and S. pyogenes, respectively. The tested lactobacilli lysates also induced specific proteome modulation of the exposed keratinocytes, involving dysregulation of proteins (such as interleukin enhancer-binding factor 2 and ATP-dependent RNA helicase) and pathways (such as cytokine, NF-kB, Hedgehog, and RUNX signaling) associated with their specific wound healing and anti-inflammatory effects. This study indicates the different potential of selected lactobacilli, suggesting that they may be successfully used in the future together with conventional therapies to bring relief from skin disorders.

### Keywords
Keratinocytes; lactic acid bacteria; proteomics; anti-inflammatory; wound healing

### Affiliations
University of Eastern Piedmont 
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Biological Mass Spectrometry Lab, Department of Translational Medicine (DiMeT), Center for Translational Research on Autoimmune & Allergic Diseases - CAAD, University of Piemonte Orientale, Corso Trieste 15/A, 28100, Novara, Italy


