### Accession
PXD016178

### Title
Secretome analysis of cardiomyocytes identifies PCSK6 as a novel player in cardiac remodeling after myocardial infarction

### Description
Acute occlusion of a coronary artery results in swift tissue necrosis. Bordering areas of the infarcted myocardium may also experience impaired blood supply and reduced oxygen delivery leading to altered metabolic and mechanical processes. While transcriptional changes in hypoxic cardiomyocytes are well-studied, little is known about the proteins that are actively secreted from these cells.  We established a novel secretome analysis of cardiomyocytes by combining stable isotope labeling and click chemistry with subsequent mass spectrometry analysis. Further functional validation experiments included ELISA measurement of human samples, murine LAD ligation and adeno-associated virus (AAV) 9-mediated in vivo overexpression in mice.    The presented approach is feasible for the analysis of the secretome of primary cardiomyocytes without serum starvation. 1026 proteins were identified to be secreted within 24 hours, indicating a 5-fold increase in detection compared to former approaches. Among them, a variety of proteins have so far not been explored in the context of cardiovascular pathologies. One of the most strongly upregulated secreted factors upon hypoxia was proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 6 (PCSK6). Validation experiments revealed an increase of PCSK6 on mRNA and protein level in hypoxic cardiomyocytes. PCSK6 expression was elevated in hearts of mice following 3 days of ligation of the left anterior descending artery, a finding confirmed by immunohistochemistry. ELISA measurements in human serum also indicate distinct kinetics for PCSK6 in patients suffering from acute myocardial infarction, with a peak on day 3 post-infarction. Transfer of PCSK6-depleted cardiomyocyte secretome resulted in decreased expression of collagen I and III in fibroblasts compared to control treated cells, and siRNA mediated knockdown of PCSK6 in cardiomyocytes impacted transforming growth factor-β activation and mothers against decapentaplegic homolog 3 (SMAD3) translocation in fibroblasts. An Adeno-associated virus (AAV) 9-mediated, cardiomyocyte-specific overexpression of PCSK6 in mice resulted in increased collagen expression and cardiac fibrosis as well as decreased left ventricular function after myocardial infarction.  In conclusion, a novel mass spectrometry-based approach allows the investigation of the secretome of primary cardiomyocytes. Analysis of hypoxia-induced secretion led to the identification of PCSK6 to be crucially involved in cardiac remodeling after acute myocardial infarction.  Secretome analysis was performed on neonatal rat ventricular cardiomyocytes (NRVCMs) which were incubated under hypoxic conditions (1.5% O2, 5% CO2, 93.5% N2) for 12 (Hypoxia 0-12h), 24 (Hypoxia 0-24h) and 30 (Hypoxia 24-30h) hours. Furthermore, knockdown (KD) of PCSK6 in vitro mediated by small interfering RNA (siRNA) was performed to investigate changes in the secretome of cardiomyocytes with PCSK6 KD vs. control (control siRNA) during 24 hours of hypoxia (PCSK6 KD 0-24h). Cells were pulse-labeled with AHA (L-azidohomoalanine) and SILAC (stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture) for 12 (Hypoxia 0-12h), 24 (Hypoxia 0-24h/PCSK6 KD 0-24h) and 6 hours (Hypoxia 24-30h). For Hypoxia 0-12h 3 replicates, Hypoxia 0-24h 6 replicates, PCSK6 KD 0-24h 3 Replicates and Hypoxia 24-30h 2 replicates were performed with label-swap.

### Sample Protocol
NRVCMs were prepared from 1-3-day-old Wistar rats by using a discontinuous Percoll gradient.  Cells were incubated in depletion media for 30 minutes. Then, cells were divided into treatment (hypoxia or PCSK6 KD) and control groups. In the respective conditions, cardiomyocytes were incubated in SILAC medium supplemented with 0.1 mM AHA (L-azidohomoalanine), stable isotope labeled amino acids and 10% heat-inactivated dialyzed fetal bovine serum.  Hypoxia was induced in a controlled cell-culture incubator (1.5% O2). After the desired time period, the supernatant of treatment and respective control cell dishes were pooled, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. Transfection and knockdown were performed as described in the methods. Pooled and frozen cardiomyocyte supernatant was thawed and concentrated using Amicon Ultra® Centrifugal Filters (3 kDa cut off) by centrifugation at 5000 x g under 4°C. The Click-iT® Protein Enrichment Kit was applied according to the vendor’s protocol with slight modifications. The concentrated supernatant was diluted in urea buffer, catalyst solutions were added, and the sample was incubated over night at RT. Next, the resin was washed 4 times with water, sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer and 5 μL of 1 M dithiothreitol was added and the sample was incubated at 70°C for 15 minutes. After cooling of the sample to RT, the resin was aspirated, iodoacetamide in SDS washing buffer was added and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark. In the next step, the resin was transferred to a spin-column and washed successively with SDS buffer, 8 M urea/100 mM Tris pH 8, 20% isopropanol and 20% acetonitrile. Afterwards, an on-bead digestion was performed with trypsin.  Peptides were fractionated by high-pH reverse-phase chromatography using an Agilent 1200 Infinity high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The separation was at a flow rate of 0.1 mL/minute using the following gradient: 100% A for 2 minutes, from 100% A to 35% B in 59 minutes, to 85% B in a further 1 minute, and held at 85% B for an additional 15 minutes. 32 fractions were collected and subsequently pooled into 10 fractions. Pooled fractions were dried under vacuum centrifugation, reconstituted and then stored at -80°C until LC-MS analysis. LC-MS analysis of hypoxia-treated cardiomyocytes: Frozen peptide samples were reconstituted in formic acid. Peptides in the pooled fractions were separated using the nanoAcquity UPLC system fitted with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm x 200 mm). The outlet of the analytical column was coupled directly to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer using the Proxeon nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 7% in 10 minutes, then to 25% in 100 minutes and finally to 40% in a further 10 minutes. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer. Full scan MS spectra with mass range 300-1700 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the FT (Fourier transform) with resolution of 30000. The top 15 ions from the full MS scan were selected for fragmentation in the LTQ. Normalized collision energy of 40% was used, and the fragmentation was performed after accumulation of 3E4 ions or after filling time of 100 ms for each precursor ion (whichever occurred first). MS/MS data was acquired in centroid mode. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to 500 entries with maximum retention period of 30 s and relative mass window of 10 ppm. Lock mass correction was applied. LC-MS analysis of hypoxia-treated cardiomyocytes with PCSK6 knockdown: The frozen peptide samples were reconstituted in TFA 0.1%. Samples were analyzed using a Q Exactive Orbitrap with a trapping (Thermo acclaim pepmap 100, 100 μm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (Waters nanoEase BEH, 75 μm x 250 mm, C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å,) using the Thermo Easy nLC 1200 nanospray source. Solvent A was water, 0.1% formic acid and solvent B was 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a linear fashion from 3% to 8% in 4 minutes, then increased to 10% in 6 minutes, to 32% in 74 minutes, to 50% in 86 minutes and finally to 100% in a further 1 minute and went down to 3% for the last 11 minutes. MS1 detection occurred at 60000 resolution, AGC target 3E6, maximal injection time 32 ms and a scan range of 350-1500 m/z. MS2 occurred with stepped NCE 26 and detection in top20 mode with an isolation window of 2 m/z, AGC target 1E5 and maximal injection time of 50 ms. Mass spectrometer was operated in DDA mode with HCD peptide fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data Processing Protocol of hypoxia-treated cardiomyocytes: The mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5). Using the Andromeda search engine, the MS/MS spectra were searched against rattus norvegicus proteins (33,735 entries) in UniProt. For growth medium this database had been concatenated to bovine-specific part of UniProt (27,232 entries). Settings were set as follows: Enzyme specificity: trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, as well as replacement of methionine by AHA were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance: 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification: 1%. At least 1 unique peptide was required for protein identification. The protein identification was reported as an indistinguishable “protein group” if no unique peptide sequence to a single database entry was identified.  Data analysis of hypoxia-treated cardiomyocytes with PCSK6 knockdown: The mass spectrometric raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 1.5.1.2). Using the Andromeda search engine, the MS/MS spectra were searched against rattus norvegicus database in UniProt (Swiss-Prot database with 8,071 entries). For growth medium this database had been concatenated to bovine-specific part of UniProt. Settings were set as follows: Enzyme specificity: trypsin/P and a maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, as well as replacement of methionine by AHA were used as variable modifications. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Initial maximal allowed mass tolerance: 20 ppm for peptide masses, followed by 6 ppm in the main search and 0.5 Dalton for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification: 1%. 0 unique peptide was required for protein identification. Protein table was reviewed in further bioinformatic analysis and only proteins with at least 1 unique peptide were used for further analysis.  Statistical and bioinformatic analysis of secretome data: Only proteins quantified and found in more than 50% of the replicates were used for further analysis. Statistical analysis was performed with the Limma package in the “R” environment. First, a linear model was fitted. Then, an empirical Bayes moderated t-test was used. P-values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini and Hochberg method. Proteins with an adjusted p-value <0.05 were considered to be significantly differentially secreted. Secreted evidence was defined as UniProt keyword “Signal”, “Secreted”, significance in SignalP4.0 or presence in the secreted protein database (SPD).  For protein quantification a minimum of two ratio counts was set and the “requantify” and “match between runs” function enabled. For pSILAC samples a protein group was kept for the further analysis, if it contained at least 1 rat sequence and the number of identified peptide species carrying a medium-heavy or heavy label divided by the total number of peptide species detected in the complete experimental setup was higher than 0.2. Proteins assigned to contaminants or reverse sequences were removed. Average protein ratios were reported, if they were quantified in treatment and control group, based on at least two ratio counts. Proteins which were found in treatment and control group and therefore had a ratio (heavy over medium or medium over heavy SILAC-labeling) were defined as “identified proteins”. To exclude the possibility that SILAC-labeling impacts the quantification, a label-swap was performed in all experiments.   Experiments:  Hypoxic stimulation of cardiomyocytes: Hypoxia 0-12h (TK63, TK64 and TK65 - hypoxic stimulation for 12 hours with SILAC and AHA-labeling during the 12 hours) Hypoxia 0-24h (TK13, TK14, TK51, TK52, TK57 and TK58 - hypoxic stimulation for 24 hours with SILAC and AHA-labeling during the 24 hours) Hypoxia 24-30h (TK15 and TK16 - hypoxic stimulation for 30 hours with SILAC and AHA-labeling during last 6 hours). Data were processed with another experiment, only TK15 and TK16 is part of mentioned publication.  PCSK6 knockdown in cardiomyocytes under 24 hours of hypoxia: PCSK6 KD 0-24h (TK81, TK82 and TK83 - siRNA-mediated knockdown of PCSK6 vs. control during hypoxic stimulation. Hypoxic stimulation for 24 hours with SILAC and AHA-labeling during the 24 hours)

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myocardial infarction, Cardiomyocytes, Secretome, Remodeling

### Affiliations
University Heidelberg
Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany

### Submitter
Tim Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Florian Leuschner
Department of Cardiology, Medical University Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany


