### Accession
PXD017847

### Title
Specific features and assembly of the plant mitochondrial complex I revealed by cryo-EM

### Description
Mitochondria are the powerhouses of eukaryotic cells and the site of essential metabolic reactions. Their main purpose is to maintain the high ATP/ADP ratio that is required to fuel the countless biochemical reactions taking place in eukaryotic cells1. This high ATP/ADP ratio is maintained through oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). Complex I or NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase is the main entry site for electrons into the mitochondrial respiratory chain and constitutes the largest of the respiratory complexes2. Its structure and composition varies across eukaryotes species. However, high resolution structures are available only for one group of eukaryotes, opisthokonts3–6. In plants, only biochemical studies were carried out, already hinting the peculiar composition of complex I in the green lineage. Here, we report several cryo-electron microscopy structures of the plant mitochondrial complex I at near-atomic resolution. We describe the structure and composition of the plant complex I including the plant-specific additional domain composed by carbonic anhydrase proteins. We show that the carbonic anhydrase is an heterotrimeric complex with only one conserved active site. This domain is crucial for the overall stability of complex I as well as a peculiar lipid complex composed cardiolipin and phosphatidylinositols. Moreover we also describe the structure of one of the plant-specific complex I assembly intermediate, lacking the whole PD module, in presence of the maturation factor GLDH. GLDH prevents the binding of the plant specific P1 protein, responsible for the linkage of the PP to the PD module. Finally, as the carbonic anhydrase domain is likely to be associated with complex I from numerous other known eukaryotes, we propose that our structure unveils an ancestral-like organization of mitochondrial complex I.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analyses of the ribosome fractions were performed at the Strasbourg-Esplanade proteomic platform and performed as previously. In brief, proteins were trypsin digested, mass spectrometry analyses and quantitative proteomics were carried out by nanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis on a QExactive+ (Thermo) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against the TAIR A. thaliana database with a target-decoy strategy (release TAIRv10, 27281 forward protein sequences), and home-made cauliflower database extracted from UniProtKB (Swissprot+TrEMBL) including Brassica sub-taxonomy (release 2017_10, 59050 forward protein sequences) .Proteins were validated respecting FDR<1% (False Discovery Rate) and quantitative label-free analysis was performed through in-house bioinformatics pipelines.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria are the powerhouses of eukaryotic cells and the site of essential metabolic reactions. Complex I or NADH:ubiquinone oxidoreductase is the main entry site for electrons into the mitochondrial respiratory chain and constitutes the largest of the respiratory complexes. Its structure and composition vary across eukaryote species. However, high resolution structures are available only for one group of eukaryotes, opisthokonts. In plants, only biochemical studies were carried out, already hinting at&#xa0;the peculiar composition of complex I in the green lineage. Here, we report several cryo-electron microscopy structures of the plant mitochondrial complex I. We describe the structure and composition of the plant respiratory complex I, including the ancestral mitochondrial domain composed of the carbonic anhydrase. We show that the carbonic anhydrase is a heterotrimeric complex with only one conserved active site. This domain is crucial for the overall stability of complex I as well as a peculiar lipid complex composed of cardiolipin and phosphatidylinositols. Moreover, we also describe the structure of one of the plant-specific complex I assembly intermediates, lacking the whole P<sub>D</sub> module, in presence of the maturation factor GLDH. GLDH prevents the binding of the plant specific P1 protein, responsible for the linkage of the P<sub>P</sub> to the P<sub>D</sub> module.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Plant, Cryo-em, Complex i, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
CNRS, IBMC, FRC1589
Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, U1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R. Escarpit, F-33600 Pessac, France.

### Submitter
Lauriane Kuhn

### Lab Head
Dr Florent Waltz
Institut Européen de Chimie et Biologie, U1212 Inserm, Université de Bordeaux, 2 rue R. Escarpit, F-33600 Pessac, France.


