### Accession
PXD006899

### Title
Comparative proteomics of Desulfotomaculum kuznetsovii grown on methanol and ethanol

### Description
The aim of this study was to unravel the methanol metabolism of Desulfotomaculum kuznetsovii. Anaerobic methylotrophs, such as methanogens and acetogens, use a pathway initiated by a cobalamine-containing methanol methyltransferase, whereas aerobic methylotrophs generally oxidize methanol to formaldehyde through a pathway initiated by a methanol dehydrogenase. Sulfate-respiring cells grown with methanol in the presence and absence of cobalt and vitamin B12 were analyzed and compared with cells grown with lactate or ethanol. Proteome analysis showed the presence of two methanol degrading pathways in D. kuznetsovii: a cobalt-dependent methanol methyltransferase and a cobalt-independent alcohol dehydrogenase. This is the first time that two methanol pathways have been shown to be present in a single microorganism, and we hypothesize this can give D. kuznetsovii a competitive advantage.

### Sample Protocol
Desulfotomaculum kuznetsovii (DSM 6115T) was grown in triplicates or quadruplicates using different electron donors - lactate (20 mM), ethanol (20 mM), and methanol (20 mM) – and sulfate (20 mM) as electron acceptor. Incubations with methanol were done with and without vitamin B12 and cobalt. Washed cells were disrupted by sonification.  40 µg Protein in SDS gel loading buffer was loaded on a protein gel, run shortly and stained with Coomassie PageBlue. Proteins were reduced, and carbamidomethylated and each sample was divided into 4 slices which were cut and digested with trypsin. Peptides were measured by nLC – LTQ-OrbitrapXL MSMS.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (1.5.2.8) with Andromeda search engine was used for identification and relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Methanol is generally metabolized through a pathway initiated by a cobalamine-containing methanol methyltransferase by anaerobic methylotrophs (such as methanogens and acetogens), or through oxidation to formaldehyde using a methanol dehydrogenase by aerobes. Methanol is an important substrate in deep-subsurface environments, where thermophilic sulfate-reducing bacteria of the genus Desulfotomaculum have key roles. Here, we study the methanol metabolism of Desulfotomaculum kuznetsovii strain 17<sup>T</sup>, isolated from a 3000-m deep geothermal water reservoir. We use proteomics to analyze cells grown with methanol and sulfate in the presence and absence of cobalt and vitamin B12. The results indicate the presence of two methanol-degrading pathways in D. kuznetsovii, a cobalt-dependent methanol methyltransferase and a cobalt-independent methanol dehydrogenase, which is further confirmed by stable isotope fractionation. This is the first report of a microorganism utilizing two distinct methanol conversion pathways. We hypothesize that this gives D. kuznetsovii a competitive advantage in its natural environment.

### Keywords
Ethanol, Lactate, Sulfate reducing bacteria, Metabolism, Methanol

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Sjef Boeren

### Lab Head
Dr Sjef Boeren
Wageningen University


