### Accession
PXD020394

### Title
Quantitative proteomic dataset from oro- and naso-pharyngeal swabs used for COVID-19 diagnosis: detection of viral proteins and host’s biological processes altered by the infection

### Description
We recovered proteins from SARS-CoV-2 positive and negative oro/naso-pharyngeal swabs, obtained from diagnostic center localized at Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, and performed comparative quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Oro- and nasopharyngeal swabs were inactivated with 2% SDS. Protein extraction was performed by vigurous agitation and supernantant was recovered. Proteins were first separated shortly (1 cm) in a SDS-PAGE. Gels slices were destained, reduced, alkylated and digested with tripsin as usual. Peptide extraction from gel pieces was performed. Samples were analyzed by nano-LC MS/MS using a shotgun strategy on a nano-HPLC, UltiMate 3000 (Thermo) coupled on line to a Q Exactive Plus (Q-Orbitrap) (Thermo) mass spectrometer through an Easy-Spray source (Thermo). Five g of tryptic peptides were injected into an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 nano-trap column (75 um x 2 cm, 3 um particle size, Thermo) and separated using a 75 um x 50 cm, PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (2 um particle size, 100 Å, Thermo).

### Data Protocol
PatternLab for Proteomics (version 4.0) software (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org) was employed to generate a target-reverse database using sequences from Homo sapines and Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2, both downloaded from Uniprot consortium in June, 2020 (http://www.uniprot.org). In addition, 127 common mass spectrometry contaminants were incorporated. Thermo raw files were searched against the database using the software integrated Comet search engine applying the following parameters: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with full specificity and1 missed cleavage; oxidation of methionine as variable modification, carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification; 40 ppm of tolerance from the measured precursor m/z. XCorr and Z-Score were used as the primary and secondary search engine scores, respectively. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using the Search Engine Processor (SEPro) and acceptable FDR criteria was set on 1% at the protein level. PatternLab's Approximately Area Proportional Venn Diagram module was used to compare the proteins identified in positive and negative swabs and to determine which proteins were uniquely detected in each situation using a probability value of 0.05 as a filtering option. PatternLab’s T-Fold module was used to detect proteins present in both conditions butat significantly different relative abundance by spectral count analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Covid-19, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo, Proteomic and Analytical Biochemistry Unit
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo and Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay

### Submitter
Analía Lima

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo and Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable, Montevideo, Uruguay


