### Accession
PXD022328

### Title
Virulence factors associated with amoebic gill disease from Neoparamoeba perurans

### Description
The parasitic amoeba, Neoparamoeba perurans is the causative agent of Amoebic Gill Disease in salmonids. The parasite has previously been reported to lose virulence during prolonged in vitro maintenance. In this study, the impact of prolonged culture on N. perurans virulence and its proteome was investigated. Three isolates of N. perurans maintained in culture for varying durations were compared. Two isolates, attenuated and virulent, had their virulence assessed in an experimental trial using Atlantic salmon smolts and their bacterial community composition was evaluated by 16S rRNA Illumina MiSeq sequencing. Soluble proteins were isolated from a newly acquired, virulent and attenuated N. perurans culture and were analysed using two-dimensional electrophoresis (2D PAGE) coupled with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). An experimental challenge trial using Atlantic salmon smolts confirmed a loss in virulence in an N. perurans culture that was maintained in vitro for 3 years. A greater diversity of bacterial communities was found in the microbiome of the virulent isolate harbouring predominant genera belonging to Pseudoaltermonas spp, Vibrio spp and Fluviicola spp. Microbial community richness was reduced in the attenuated microbiome, with a singular species, Thalassopira xiamenensis, representing a large proportion of its microbiome. A collated proteome database of N. perurans, Amoebozoa and four bacterial genera resulted in 24 proteins differentially expressed between the three cultures. The present LC-MS/MS results indicate protein synthesis, oxidative stress and the plausible occurrence of immunomodulation are ultimately upregulated in a newly acquired N. perurans culture and future studies may exploit these protein identifications for therapeutic purposes in infected farmed fish.

### Sample Protocol
The newly acquired, virulent, and attenuated cultures of N. perurans were harvested in isolation of each other to avoid cross contamination. Confluent cultures of N. perurans were harvested by mechanical scraping followed by centrifugation at 1000 x g for 10 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (7M urea, 2% w/v CHAPS and 50 mM DTT) with HALT protease inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher). Samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and sonicated at 35 Hz on ice for 3 cycles of 30 seconds “pulse on” and 15 seconds “pulse off”. Samples were centrifuged to pellet the cell debris at 12, 000 x g at 4°C for 10 min and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tube for further removal of residual seawater.Each supernatant received 20% trichloroacetic acid TCA in acetone and was centrifuged for 30 min at 4°C at 12,000 x g. The pellet, containing precipitated proteins, was washed twice in 100% acetone and left to air dry before solubilisation in rehydration buffer 1 (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 1% ASB-14, 40 mM Tris, 0.001% Bromophenol Blue, 2% Bio-Lyte® [Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA]). Samples were incubated for 60 min at room temperature before determining protein concentration using the RC/DC kit (Bio- Rad). The soluble protein fraction from the newly acquired, virulent and attenuated N. perurans cultures were analysed in triplicate using 2D electrophoresis. Triplicate immobilised pH gradient strips (IPG, pH 4-7, 11 cm) were passively rehydrated overnight with 120 μg of protein in a final volume of 200 μL of re-hydration buffer 1. The strips were focused in a PROTEAN® i12™ IEF system (Bio-Rad) at a current limit of 50 Amp/IPG strip using a step voltage gradient (250 V for 20 min, stepped up to 8000 V maximum for 1 h; 26,000 V-h total) at 20°C. Prior to the second dimension IPG strips were equilibrated in a reducing buffer (6M urea, 0.375 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8, 2% (w/v) SDS, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2% (w/v) dithiothreitol ) for 20 min and subsequently placed in an alkylating buffer (6 M urea, 0.375 M Tris-HCL pH 8.8, 2% (w/v) SDS, 20% (v/v) glycerol, 2.5 % iodoacetamide) for 20 min. The second dimension was performed using AnykD™ Criterion™ TGX™ Precast gel in the Criterion™ Dodeca™ cell (Bio-Rad, CA) where IPG strips were electrophoresed for 40 min at 200 V. Gels were stained using QC Colloidal Coomassie (Bio-Rad) overnight and destained by washing in deionized water in triplicate, followed by incubation in wash buffer (10% ethanol [v/v], 7.5 % acetic acid [v/v]). Gel images were acquired using the Gel Doc™ EZ Gel Documentation System (Bio-Rad, CA) and images analysed using the SameSpots 5.1.0.0 software (TotalLab, Non-linear Dynamics, UK). Triplicate gels used to analyse the proteins extracted from the newly acquired, virulent and attenuated cultures were automatically aligned, and normalization of spots was performed using gels from the newly acquired culture as a reference to detect differentially expressed proteins. The software normalises volumes of each spot and detects differential proteins based on a difference in spot intensity using the ‘between subject’ experimental design. Differential spots were chosen for further analysis based on maximum fold change of ≥ 2 and ANOVA statistical significance (p <0.05) using the software’s statistical analysis function. Enzymatic in-gel digestion was performed as described by Shevchenko et al. (2006). Gels were rinsed with deionised water and spots of interest were excised and cut into pieces using a sterile scalpel. Gel pieces were microcentrifuged to collect excess water, destained with 100 μL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/acetonitrile (1:1, v/v) and incubated for 30 min with vortexing every 10 min. Following the addition of ammonium bicarbonate, 500 μL of neat acetonitrile (ACN) was added and incubated at room temperature until gel pieces were destained and decreased in size. The gel pieces were dried and rehydrated with trypsin buffer overnight at 37°C (13 ng/μl trypsin in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% [v/v] ACN on a thermomixer at 350 rpm. To terminate enzymatic digestion, 1% acetic acid (AA) was added to the samples. Peptides were desalted using C18 stage tips with Equilibration Buffer (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid [TFA] in MS grade water) and Elution Buffer (50% ACN 0.1% TFA in MS grade water). After drying by vacuum centrifugation, peptides were acidified by AA, desalted with C18 STAGE tips (Rappsilber, Mann and Ishihama, 2007), and resuspended in 2.5% ACN, 0.5% AA. Peptide fractions were analysed on a quadrupole Orbitrap (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer equipped with a reversed-phase NanoLC UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex LC Packings, now Thermo Scientific). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reverse phase columns (10 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter) and eluted with a linear gradient from 1 to 27% buffer B containing 0.5% AA 97.5% ACN in 58 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The injection volume was 5 μL.

### Data Protocol
Raw data from the Orbitrap Q-Exactive was processed using MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 for identification of proteins (Cox and Mann, 2008), incorporating the Andromeda search engine and MaxQuants contaminants fasta file (Cox et al., 2011). To identify peptides and proteins, MS/MS spectra were matched to a combined custom database comprised of N. perurans (20,887 proteins [v2, 07/08/2019, CSIRO]); UniProt reference proteome databases of Amoebozoa (109,415 proteins) and bacteria selected from the microbiome analysis (148,582 proteins) as well as a database of Paramoeba proteins from a taxonomy search on UniProtKB (5,001 proteins). All databases except for N. perurans were downloaded on May 8th 2020 from UniProt and further information on individual species protein counts are in Appendices Ⅰ, Ⅱ and Ⅲ.

### Publication Abstract
The causative agent of amoebic gill disease, Neoparamoeba perurans is reported to lose virulence during prolonged in vitro maintenance. In this study, the impact of prolonged culture on N. perurans virulence and its proteome was investigated. Two isolates, attenuated and virulent, had their virulence assessed in an experimental trial using Atlantic salmon smolts and their bacterial community composition was evaluated by 16S rRNA Illumina MiSeq sequencing. Soluble proteins were isolated from three isolates: a newly acquired, virulent and attenuated N. perurans culture. Proteins were analysed using two-dimensional electrophoresis coupled with liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). The challenge trial using na&#xef;ve smolts confirmed a loss in virulence in the attenuated N. perurans culture. A greater diversity of bacterial communities was found in the microbiome of the virulent isolate in contrast to a reduction in microbial community richness in the attenuated microbiome. A collated proteome database of N. perurans, Amoebozoa and four bacterial genera resulted in 24 proteins differentially expressed between the three cultures. The present LC-MS/MS results indicate protein synthesis, oxidative stress and immunomodulation are upregulated in a newly acquired N. perurans culture and future studies may exploit these protein identifications for therapeutic purposes in infected farmed fish.

### Keywords
Virulence factors, Neoparamoeba perurans, Lc- ms/ms, Amoebic gill disease, Microbiome

### Affiliations
GMIT
Department of Biopharmaceutical and Medical Science, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Orla Slattery

### Lab Head
Dr Orla Slattery
Department of Biopharmaceutical and Medical Science, Galway-Mayo Institute of Technology


