### Accession
PXD027130

### Title
Proteome profiling of RNF213 depleted cells reveals nitric oxide regulator DDAH1 antilisterial activity

### Description
RNF213 is a large, poorly characterized interferon-induced protein. Mutations in RNF213 are associated with predisposition for Moyamoya disease (MMD), a rare cerebrovascular disorder. Recently, RNF213 was found to have broad antimicrobial activity in vitro and in vivo, yet the molecular mechanisms behind this function remain unclear. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and validation by real-time PCR we here report that knockdown of RNF213 leads to transcriptional upregulation of MVP and downregulation of CYR61, in line with reported pro- and anti-bacterial activities of these proteins. Knockdown of RNF213 also results in downregulation of DDAH1, which we discover to exert anti-microbial activity against Listeria monocytogenes infection. DDAH1 regulates production nitric oxide (NO), a molecule with both vascular and antimicrobial effects. We show that NO production is reduced in macrophages from RNF213 KO mice, suggesting that RNF213 controls Listeria infection through regulation of DDAH1 transcription and production of NO. Our findings propose a potential mechanism for the antilisterial activity of RNF213 and highlight NO as a potential link between RNF213-mediated immune responses and the development of MMD.

### Sample Protocol
167,000 HeLa cells were seeded in 6-well plates and a commercially available siRNA pool was used to knockdown RNF213 (#M-023324-02, GE Healthcare Dharmacon). As control siRNA treatment, a pool of four scrambled siRNAs (#D-001206-13, GE Healthcare Dharmacon) was used. siRNAs were transfected with DharmaFECT transfection reagent (#T-2001-02, GE Healthcare Dharmacon) according to the instructions of the manufacturer. The next day, cells were either treated with 10 ng/mL of interferon-β (#11343524, Immunotools), or left untreated, for 24 h. There were four biological conditions consisting of four replicates to generate 16 samples. Cells were homogenized in 100 µL in 9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0. Samples were sonicated by three pulses of 5 s at an amplitude of 30% and centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000 × g at room temperature. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 min at 55 °C. Alkylation was done with 10 mM chloroacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. 5 mM DTT was added to stop alkylation and prevents methionine oxidation. Samples were diluted to 4 M urea and 100 µg of proteins were digested with 1 µg endopeptidase LysC (Promega) (1/100, w/w) for 4 h at 37 °C. Samples were further diluted to 2 M urea and proteins were digested with 1 µg trypsin (Promega) (1/100, w/w) overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were desalted on reversed phase C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). Purified peptides were dried under vacuum in HPLC inserts and stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were re-dissolved in 30 µL loading solvent A ((0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) and after UV peptide quantitation (Maia et al., 2020)) 2 µg was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany).  Peptides were separated on a 200 cm long micro pillar array column (µPAC™, PharmaFluidics) with C18-endcapped functionality. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column by a non-linear gradient from 2 to 55% solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) over 120 minutes at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min, followed by 5 min in 97% solvent B. The column was then re-equilibrated with 98% solvent A for 20 min. The column temperature was kept constant at 40 °C in a column oven (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive and data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (375–1,500 m/z, AGC target 3E6, maximum injection time 60 ms) with a resolution of 60,000 (at 200 m/z). The most intense ions (threshold >1.3E4, precursor charge state 2 to 6, dynamic exclusion time 12 s) were isolated in the trap with an isolation window of 1.5 Da. MS/MS spectra (200-2,000 m/z, AGC target 1E5, maximum injection time 80 ms, centroid data type) were acquired in the orbitrap at fixed first mass 145 m/z and at a resolution of 15,000 (at 200 m/z).  Peptide match was set on “preferred” and isotopes were excluded. Fragmentation was performed at a normalized collision energy of 28%. polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12003 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.11.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both peptide and protein level. All 16 raw spectral data files were searched together against the human reference proteome in Uniprot (downloaded from www.uniprot.org, database release from January 2020 containing 20,595 human protein sequences). Mass tolerance for precursor ions and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine–proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. Matching between runs was disabled and only proteins with at least one peptide were retained to compile a list of 3,377 identified proteins. Proteins were quantified with unique peptides intensity by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.6.2.3). The proteinGroups table from MaxQuant was loaded in Perseus and reverse database hits, potential contaminants and proteins only identified by site were removed. The MaxLFQ intensities were log2 transformed and replicate samples of each condition were grouped. Proteins with less than four valid values in at least one group were removed and missing values were imputed from a normal distribution around the detection limit to generate a list of 1,426 quantified proteins. To generate the volcano plots shown in Figure 1B-C, SAM t-tests (FDR = 0.05 and S0 = 1 cut-off values) (Tusher et al., 2001) were performed to compare the intensity of the proteins between the RNF213 knockdown and control conditions, either in the absence or presence of IFN type I. Significant hits are also shown in a heatmap in Figure 1D after non-supervised hierarchical clustering. The volcano plots and heatmap depicted in Supplementary Figure 1 were generated similarly after compare protein intensities between IFN-β treated and untreated samples, either with or without knockdown of RNF213.

### Publication Abstract
RNF213 is a large, poorly characterized interferon-induced protein. Mutations in RNF213 are associated with predisposition for Moyamoya disease (MMD), a rare cerebrovascular disorder. Recently, RNF213 was found to have broad antimicrobial activity <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i>, yet the molecular mechanisms behind this function remain unclear. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics and validation by real-time PCR we report here that knockdown of RNF213 leads to transcriptional upregulation of MVP and downregulation of CYR61, in line with reported pro- and anti-bacterial activities of these proteins. Knockdown of RNF213 also results in downregulation of DDAH1, which we discover to exert antimicrobial activity against <i>Listeria monocytogenes</i> infection. DDAH1 regulates production of nitric oxide (NO), a molecule with both vascular and antimicrobial effects. We show that NO production is reduced in macrophages from RNF213 KO mice, suggesting that RNF213 controls <i>Listeria</i> infection through regulation of DDAH1 transcription and production of NO. Our findings propose a potential mechanism for the antilisterial activity of RNF213 and highlight NO as a potential link between RNF213-mediated immune responses and the development of MMD.

### Keywords
Human, Rnf213, Infection, Listeria, Nitric oxide, Ddah1, Listeria monocytogenes, Bacteria

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent
VIB proteomics core, Ghent; VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, Ghent; Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University.

### Submitter
Fabien Thery

### Lab Head
Dr Francis Impens
VIB proteomics core, Ghent; VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology, Ghent; Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University.


