### Accession
PXD032862

### Title
Identification of interactions of Taf2 and Taf14 proteins.

### Description
Identification of proteins interacting with: 1. Full-length Taf14 2. Taf14-ET domain 3. Full-length Taf2 4. Taf2-deltaC

### Sample Protocol
Protein extract was made from 50 ml exponentially growing yeast cultures, Flag-tagged proteins were precipitated and protein complexes were eluted glycine buffer (50mM glycine-HCl, 150mM NaCl, pH 2.5). Eluted proteins were precipitated with TCA and digested with trypsi. The digested peptides were separated on 3 μm ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 15 cm × 75 μm ID emitter-column (New Objective) attached to an Agilent 1200 series nano-LC, and detected with an LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The proteomics datasets were preprocessed with MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
The transcriptional regulator Taf14 is a component of multiple protein complexes involved in transcription initiation and chromatin remodeling in yeast cells. Although Taf14 is not required for cell viability, it becomes essential in conditions where the formation of the transcription preinitiation complex is hampered. The specific role of Taf14 in mediating transcription initiation and preinitiation complex formation is unclear. Here, we explored its role in the general transcription factor IID by mapping Taf14 genetic and proteomic interactions and found that it was needed for the function of the complex if Htz1, the yeast homolog of histone H2A.Z, was absent from chromatin. Dissecting the functional domains of Taf14 revealed that the linker region between the YEATS and ET domains was required for cell viability in the absence of Htz1 protein. We further show that the linker region of Taf14 interacts with DNA. We propose that providing additional DNA binding capacity might be a general role of Taf14 in the recruitment of protein complexes to DNA and chromatin.

### Keywords
Yeast, Tfiid

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu; Riia 23, Tartu 51010, Estonia
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Arnold Kristjuhan

### Lab Head
Dr Arnold Kristjuhan
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of Tartu; Riia 23, Tartu 51010, Estonia


