### Accession
PXD018023

### Title
Urinary Metabolomic and Proteomic Analyses of a Prostatic Inflammation Mouse Model

### Description
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) relate to storage and/or voiding disturbances which are common among aging men. Disease etiology is largely unknown, and diagnosis is currently based on subjective symptom scores. While mainstay treatments can be ineffective and bothersome, biomarker discovery efforts may facilitate objective diagnostic criteria for personalized medicine and new potential druggable pathways. Since inflammation is one of its plausible etiologies, the goal of this project is to explore urinary metabolite and protein biomarkers as a non-invasive method to diagnose of LUTS which is induced by inflammation. Herein, a bacterial-induced prostatic inflammation model was established with C57BL/6J mice infected with uropathogenic E. coli 1677. Mouse urine samples were collected from control and treatment mice. Mass Spectrometry-based multi-omics analysis was employed here to discover urinary protein and metabolite-based biomarkers specific to prostatic inflammation-induced LUTS. We investigated the use of isobaric dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) labeling for metabolite identification and quantification for the mouse urine samples, and because of the use of DiLeu labeling, we combined metabolomics and proteomics on the same LC-MS platform. Overall, a total of 143 amine-containing metabolites and 1058 urinary proteins were identified and quantified, among them, 14 metabolites and 168 proteins were significantly changed by the inflammation treatment. Five metabolic pathways and four inflammatory-related biological processes were potentially disrupted. After compare with LUTS patient and other previously report, metabolite creatine and protein Polymeric Ig receptor presents especially attractive combined biomarker for prostatic inflammation induced LUTS and could be further used as the LUTS patient stratification. Overall, this study found urine  metabolomics and proteomics to be an informative and noninvasive method for candidate biomarkers determination and etiologies classification of LUTS induced by inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
2.1 Eoli-induced prostatic inflammation mouse model  All animal procedures were approved by the University of Wisconsin-Madison Animal Care and Use Committee. 12-week old male C57BL/6J mice were used for this study (Jackson Lab, Bar Harbor, MA). E. coli 1677 (1x108 bacteria /ml, 20 µl) was instilled into the bladders of anesthetized mice (n=4) via a transurethral catheter, as previously described [14], [22], [23]. Control mice (n=4) were inoculated with an equal volume of PBS. 27.2µg/g Nitrofurantoin (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) was injected into both the study group and the control group via subcutaneous twice daily. The administration of nitrofurantoin (3.4 mg/kg, sc, twice daily) was begun one day prior to transurethral instillation and continued until the end of the experiment. Urine was collected 7 days after instillation from each animal via metabolic cage [13] for a two-hour period. All samples were stored at -80 °C until further processing.  2.2 Mice urine sample preparation  Urine samples (110 μL) were thawed on ice and mixed well before centrifugation (10,000 ×g, 10 min, 4 °C). Clarified supernatant (100 μL) was aliquoted from each sample and loaded on to pre-rinsed [16] centrifugal filters (3 kDa, Millipore Amicon Ultra, Burlington, MA). The fluid went through centrifugal filters during centrifugation (14,000 ×g, 30 min, 4 °C) and was collected as metabolites fraction (<3 kDa). Two rinses with Milli-Q water (200 μL; same centrifugation) were followed and combined the went through volume together. The contents left on the membrane of centrifugal filters were rinsed with 200 μL Milli-Q water and equilibrated for 5 mins, and then flipped over the filters and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 2 mins to collect the contents as protein fraction (>3 kDa).  2.3 Metabolite fraction sample preparation  Osmolality was used to normalize all the metabolite fraction to 50 mOsmoles/kg H2O [24]. Aliquoted, lyophilized, and stored all the samples at -80 °C until labeling. Eight channels were randomly chosen from twelve-plex isobaric labeling reagents. Four channels (117a, 117 c, 118a, and 118b) were used to label E.coli-treated metabolite samples and four channels (115b, 116a, 116b, 116c) to label control samples. Isobaric labeling was performed as previously described [17]. Then equal ratios of eight labeled samples were combined and excess DiLeu reagents were removed from the pooled sample via SCX Ziptips (OMIX-SCX, Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) [18]. After lyophilization, the pooled metabolite sample was stored at -80 °C until analysis.  2.4 Protein fraction sample preparation  The protein fraction was lyophilized and resuspended in 8 M urea lysis buffer. The total protein concentration of each urine sample was determined by the BCA assay (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo, Waltham, MA) [25]. An equal amount of protein (200 μg) was aliquoted from each sample and reduced the disulfide bonds from cysteine residues with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h at room temperature. Then alkylated the free thiol groups with 15 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min and quenched the reaction by 5 mM DTT. Diluted the protein sample with 50 mM Tris solution (pH = 8) to a concentration of urea less than 1 M. Trypsin was used for the protein digestion (protein/enzyme ratio 50:1) at 37 °C for 17 h. The digestion was quenched by 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a pH lower than 2. Then, the digested proteins were desalted with Sep-Pak C18 (Sep Pak C18 Cartridges, Waters, Milford, MA), lyophilized and stored at -80 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
2.5 Metabolomics and Proteomics LC-MS Acquisition  For the metabolite fraction, the pooled sample was reconstituted in 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water before injection. UPLC-MS/MS analysis was conducted using a Thermo Dionex UltiMateTM 3000 nanoLC system coupled to a Thermo Q ExactiveTM HF Orbitrap MS. The analytical column was self-made with an integrated emitter tip and dimensions of 75 μm inner diameter × 15 cm length, packed with 1.7 μm, 150 Å, BEH C18 material (Waters, Milford, MA). Mobile phase A was 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (Optima Solvents, Thermo, Waltham, MA). Flow rate was 0.3 μL/min and the 70 min gradient was as follows: 0-16 min, 3% solvent B; 16-20 min, 3-25% B; 20-30 min, 25-45% B; 30-50 min, 45-70% B; 50-56 min, 70-95% B; 56-60 min 95% B; 60-60.5 min, 95-3% B; 60.5-70 min, 3% B. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 180 to 1000 at a resolution of 60 K, automatic gain control (AGC) at 1 × 106, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The top 20 precursors were selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation tandem mass spectrometry (HCD MS2) analysis with an isolation window of 1 m/z, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30, resolving power of 60k, AGC target of 1 × 105, maximum injection time of 30 ms, and a lower mass limit of 110 m/z.  For the protein fraction, the same LC-MS platform was applied. Except, optimized 142 min gradient used was as follows: 0-16 min, 3% solvent B; 16-107 min, 3-30% B; 107-107.5 min, 30-75% B; 107.5-117 min, 75% B; 117-117.5 min, 75-95% B; 117.5-127 min 95% B; 127-127.5 min, 95-3% B; 127.5-142 min, 3% B. Full MS scans were acquired from m/z 300 to 1500 at a resolution of 60 K, AGC at 1 × 106, and maximum injection time (IT) of 100 ms. The top 15 precursors were then selected for higher-energy C-trap dissociation  tandem mass spectrometry (HCD MS2) analysis with an isolation window of 1.4 m/z, a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30, a resolving power of 15 K, an AGC target of 1 × 105, a maximum injection time of 100 ms, and a lower mass limit of 120 m/z.  2.6 Metabolomics and Proteomics Data Analysis  For the metabolomics data analysis, Metandem [19] was used to batch-process three technical replicates of pooled sample for metabolite identification and quantification. Accurate mass of report ions was obtained by averaging across several MS/MS spectra and mass tolerance for metabolite identification was 20 ppm. DiLeu label purity was predetermined and correction for each channel was performed as previously described [16]. Average precursor mass shift due to labeling was 145.1280 Da. Data analysis parameters, such as reporter ion mass tolerance, batch mass tolerance, and retention time tolerance were optimized using the parameter optimization graphs in the Metandem software. Output files with reporter ion information were merged and median-normalized. Two tails Student’s t-test (unequal variance), which helps to tell the significant difference between E. coli-treated group and control group, was used to compare metabolite abundance between groups. Metabolites were considered significantly modulated when fold changes >1.5 and p-values were <0.05 (t-test). MetaboAnalyte 4.0 software [25] and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database [26] were used for metabolic pathway analysis. Pathway was considered dysregulated when p-value was <0.05 (Fisher’s exact test).  For the proteomics data analysis, the . raw data files from the Orbitrap MS analysis were searched against a mouse proteome database from Uniprot (April 2017, entry number 24977) [27] with PEAKS STADIO 8.5 software [28]. A precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da were allowed. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and  max missed cleavages were two. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and oxidation (M) was set as variable modifications and three maximum PTM were allowed per peptide. Parameters for confident peptide identification were Ascore (PTM site confidence) higher than 20, FDR lower than 1%, and the presence of at least one unique peptide. The threshold for the quantification of significant proteins was the same as metabolites with t-test. DAVID [25] was used for gene ontology (GO) annotation of identified proteins. Candidate biomarkers and dysregulated pathways and biology process were compared with prior human patient analyses and other previous reports.

### Publication Abstract
Lower urinary tract symptoms (LUTS) are common among aging men. Since prostatic inflammation is one of its etiologies, it is plausible that urinary metabolite and protein biomarkers could be identified and used to diagnose inflammation-induced LUTS. We characterized the urine metabolome and proteome in a mouse model of bacterial-induced prostatic inflammation. Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based multi-omics analysis was employed to discover urinary protein and metabolite-based biomarkers. The investigation of isobaric dimethylated leucine (DiLeu) labeling on metabolites allowed metabolomics and proteomics analysis on the same liquid chromatography (LC)-MS platform. In total, 143 amine-containing metabolites and 1058 urinary proteins were identified and quantified (data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD018023); among them, 14 metabolites and 168 proteins were significantly changed by prostatic inflammation. Five metabolic pathways and four inflammation-related biological processes were potentially disrupted. By comparing our findings with urinary biomarkers identified in a mouse model of genetic-induced prostate inflammation and with those previously found to be associated with LUTS in older men, we identified creatine, haptoglobin, immunoglobulin kappa constant and polymeric Ig receptor as conserved biomarkers for prostatic inflammation associated with LUTS. These data suggest that these putative biomarkers could be used to identify men in which prostate inflammation is present and contributing to LUTS.

### Keywords
Urine, Metabolomics, Label free., Proteomics, Prostatic inflammation, Isobaric labeling, Mass spectrometry, Lower urinary tract symptoms, Metandem

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin Madison
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin Madison Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin Madison

### Submitter
Pingli Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin Madison Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin Madison


