### Accession
PXD004195

### Title
Proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling of ErbB2-dependent signalling

### Description
The mechanisms of ErbB2 signalling and the effects of its overexpression are not fully understood. Herein, SILAC expression profiling and phosphopeptide enrichment of a relevant, non-transformed, immortalized human mammary luminal epithelial cell model were used to profile ErbB2-dependent differences in protein expression and phosphorylation events triggered via EGFR (EGF treatment) and ErbB3 (HRGbeta1 treatment) in the context of ErbB2 overexpression. Bioinformatics analysis was used to infer changes in cellular processes and signalling events. We demonstrate the complexity of the responses to oncogene expression and growth factor signalling and identify protein changes relevant to ErbB2-dependent altered cellular phenotype, in particular cell cycle progression and hyper-proliferation, reduced adhesion and enhanced motility. Numerous novel sites of growth factor-regulated phosphorylation were also identified that were enhanced by ErbB2 overexpression and we putatively link these to altered cell behaviour. Moreover, we have defined a novel mechanism by which ErbB signalling suppresses basal interferon signalling that would promote the survival and proliferation of mammary luminal epithelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
For protein expression profiling, cells for comparison (HMLECs HB4a and its ErbB2 overexpressing derivative C3.6)were grown in either light or heavy SILAC media until complete (>98%) heavy labelling was achieved. Cells were lysed and equal amount of heavy and light-labelled proteins were mixed in a duplicate reciprocal labelled manner. Proteins were separated by standard SDS-PAGE and fifty gel slices cut from each duplicate lane (A1-A50 and B1-B50). Bands were digested with trypsin and peptides extracted for analysis by LC-MS/MS. For phosphoproteomic profiling, heavy and light SILAC-labelled HB4a and C3.6 cells were serum-starved for 48 hrs in SILAC media and treated with either 4nM EGF or 4nM HRGbeta1 for 10 min or left untreated. Cells were lysed in 8M urea, 20mM HEPES pH 8.0 and phosphopeptides enriched from equal mixtures of heavy and light SILAC-labelled lysates; the heavy sample was one of each of the 6 conditions (HB4a or C3.6, unstimulated, EGF or HRG) and the light sample was a common reference comprising equal amounts of protein from all 6 conditions to enable inter-experimental comparison. Samples were diluted, concentrated and digested with trypsin prior to phosphopeptide enrichment using a sequential strong cation exchange, IMAC and TiO2 strategy, generating 15 fractions per experimental condition for MS analysis (A1-3, B1-3, C1-3, D1-3, E1-3). Peptides samples were analysed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ Orbitrap XL connected to an Ultimate 3000 nLC system. Samples were injected onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column(5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) and washed for 3 minutes with 90% buffer A (0.1% (v/v) FA) at a flow rate of 25 µL/min. Reversed-phase chromatographic separation was performed on an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 Nano LC column with a linear gradient of 10-50% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The length of the gradient was 40 min for protein expression determination and 90 min for phosphopeptide analysis. Survey full scan MS spectra (from m/z 400-2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 400. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode selecting the 6 most intense ions for CID. For phosphopeptide analysis, multi-stage activation for neutral loss of masses 97.97, 48.985 and 32.65667 was enabled. Target ions selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 60 sec. For accurate mass measurement, the lock mass option was enabled using the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ion (m/z 455.12003) as an internal calibrant.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were processed and analysed using MaxQuant V1.1.1.25 and searched against human IPI database V3.77 (89,422 sequences + 248 known contaminants) and a concatenated IPI database for determination of FDR using the Andromeda search engine. Search parameters were: MS tolerance 6 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.5Da, 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length 6 amino acids, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modification: oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-terminal), deamidation (Q/N), 13C6 lysine, 13C615N4 arginine and 13C515N1 proline. For the phosphopeptide analyses, 3 missed cleavages were permitted and the variable modifications carbamylation (peptide N-terminal) and phosphorylation (serine, threonine or tyrosine) were also included. Identified peptides were filtered with an FDR of 1% using the posterior error probability. Protein grouping was enabled. Proteins were required to contain at least two peptides, of which one was group unique. Peptide ratios were calculated as the median of all evidences of a SILAC peptide pair and were normalised to correct for unequal protein loading so that the median of the logarithmised ratios was 0. Protein ratios were calculated as the median of normalised razor and unique peptides and a minimum of 3 ratio counts were required for quantification. The significance of differential protein expression was determined using Perseus software V1.1.1.21. Proteins were accepted as being significantly up/down-regulated with a significance B value of <0.05. Phosphorylation sites were assigned with a modified version of the post-translational modification (PTM) score and filtered with a site FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Most breast cancers arise from luminal epithelial cells, and 25-30% of these tumors overexpress the ErbB2/HER2 receptor that correlates with disease progression and poor prognosis. The mechanisms of ErbB2 signaling and the effects of its overexpression are not fully understood. Herein, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC), expression profiling, and phosphopeptide enrichment of a relevant, non-transformed, and immortalized human mammary luminal epithelial cell model were used to profile ErbB2-dependent differences in protein expression and phosphorylation events triggered via EGF receptor (EGF treatment) and ErbB3 (HRG1&#x3b2; treatment) in the context of ErbB2 overexpression. Bioinformatics analysis was used to infer changes in cellular processes and signaling events. We demonstrate the complexity of the responses to oncogene expression and growth factor signaling, and we identify protein changes relevant to ErbB2-dependent altered cellular phenotype, in particular cell cycle progression and hyper-proliferation, reduced adhesion, and enhanced motility. Moreover, we define a novel mechanism by which ErbB signaling suppresses basal interferon signaling that would promote the survival and proliferation of mammary luminal epithelial cells. Numerous novel sites of growth factor-regulated phosphorylation were identified that were enhanced by ErbB2 overexpression, and we putatively link these to altered cell behavior and also highlight the importance of performing parallel protein expression profiling alongside phosphoproteomic analysis.

### Keywords
Erbb2; breast cancer; lc-ms/ms; silac; phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
University College London

### Submitter
John Timms

### Lab Head
Dr John Francis Timms
University College London


