### Accession
PXD010211

### Title
Biofilm formation displays intrinsic offensive and defensive features of Bacillus cereus

### Description
Biofilm formation is a strategy of many bacterial species to adapt to a variety of stresses and has become a part of infections, contaminations or beneficial interactions. In this study, we demonstrate that profound physiological changes permit Bacillus cereus to switch from a floating to a sessile lifestyle, to undergo further maturation of the biofilm, and to differentiate into offensive or defensive populations. The rearrangement of nucleotides, sugars, amino acids and energy metabolism lead to changes promoting reinforcement of the cell wall, rigidity of the membrane, activation of ROS detoxification or secondary metabolite production, all contributing to defend biofilm cells from external aggressions. However, floating cells maintain a fermentative metabolic status that ensures a higher aggressiveness against hosts, evidenced by the production of toxins and other virulent factors. Our findings argue in favor of the metabolic versatility of B. cereus and the fine tuning of these gene expression which grant this species to move to any of these two distinct subpopulations, necessary to face changeable environmental conditions.

### Sample Protocol
For digestion, 40 µg of protein from each condition was precipitated by methanol/chloroform method. Protein pellets were resuspended and denatured in 20 µl 7 M Urea/2M Thiourea/100mM TEAB, pH 7.5, reduced with 2 µL of 50mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP, SCIEX), pH 8.0, at 37°C for 60 min and followed by 1 µL of 200mM cysteine-blocking reagent (methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS, Pierce) for 10 min at room temperature. Samples were diluted up to 140 µL to reduce urea concentration with 25mM TEAB. Digestions were initiated by adding 2 µg sequence grade-modified trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) to each sample in a ratio 1:20 (w/w), which were then incubated at 37°C overnight on a shaker. Sample digestions were evaporated to dryness in a vacuum concentrator. The resulting peptides were subsequently labelled using TMT-sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions as follows: 126: 1B-24h; 127: 1B-48h; 128: 1B-72h; 129: 1P-24h; 130: 11B-24h; 131: 13B-72h. After labelling, the samples were pooled, evaporated to dryness and storaged at -20°C until the LC−MS analysis. A 1 µg aliquot of labelled mixture was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, SCIEX, Foster City, CA) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) with a Nanospray III source. Peptides were separated using a 250 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were exported to mgf format using Peak View v1.2.0.3 and searched using Mascot Server 2.5.1, OMSSA 2.1.9, X!TANDEM 2013.02.01.1, and Myrimatch 2.2.140 against a composite target/decoy database built from the 5240 Bacillus cereus (ATCC 14579) sequences at Uniprot Knowledgebase (November 2016), together with commonly occurring contaminants. An initial 25 ppm X!TANDEM search was used to recalibrate the precursor ion mass measurements in all MS/MS spectra. Search engines were then configured to match potential peptide candidates with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites and a maximum isotope error (13C) of 1, considering fixed MMTS modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine, pyroglutamic acid from glutamine or glutamic acid at the peptide N-terminus, and modification of lysine and peptide N-terminus with TMT 6-plex reagents.

### Publication Abstract
Biofilm formation is a strategy of many bacterial species to adapt to a variety of stresses and has become a part of infections, contaminations, or beneficial interactions. In this study, we demonstrate that profound physiological changes permit <i>Bacillus cereus</i> to switch from a floating to a sessile lifestyle, to undergo further maturation of the biofilm and to differentiate into the offensive or defensive features. We report that floating and biofilm cells are populations that differentiate metabolically, with members of each subpopulation developing different branches of certain metabolic pathways. Secondly, biofilm populations rearrange nucleotides, sugars, amino acids, and energy metabolism. Thirdly, this metabolic rearrangement coexists with: the synthesis of the extracellular matrix, sporulation, reinforcement of the cell wall, activation of the ROS detoxification machinery and production of secondary metabolites. This strategy contributes to defend biofilm cells from competitors. However, floating cells maintain a fermentative metabolic status that ensures a higher aggressiveness against hosts, evidenced by the production of toxins. The maintenance of the two distinct subpopulations is an effective strategy to face different environmental conditions found in the life styles of <i>B. cereus</i>.

### Keywords
Antimicrobials, Planktonics, Bacillus, Biofilm, Attack defence, Cereus, Toxins

### Affiliations
Spanish National Center for Biotechnology
Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea ‘‘La Mayora’’ –Departamento de Microbiología, Universidad de Málaga, Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31 (Campus Universitario de Teatinos), 29071 Málaga, Spain

### Submitter
Sergio Ciordia

### Lab Head
Dr Diego Romero
Instituto de Hortofruticultura Subtropical y Mediterránea ‘‘La Mayora’’ –Departamento de Microbiología, Universidad de Málaga, Bulevar Louis Pasteur 31 (Campus Universitario de Teatinos), 29071 Málaga, Spain


