### Accession
PXD016330

### Title
Trichodesmium single colony metaproteomes field station Tricolim_19

### Description
Metaproteomes of individual Trichodesmium colonies collected from a single location in the Carribbean sea (65.22W, 17.02N) at 17:00 local time. Some colonies were associated with auto-fluorescent mineral particles. Their proteomes were analyzed individually to investigate the effect of the minerals on colony physiology.

### Sample Protocol
Individual colonies were hand-collected from a 130um surface plankton net, rinsed in 0.2um filtered surface seawater and visualized with a fluorescent microscope. They were classified as mineral containing or not. Then they were decanted individually onto 0.2um supor filters and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen. Colonies were lysed in SDS detergent and trypsin digested in small tube gels. They were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion with a 120min chromatography gradient.

### Data Protocol
Peptide to spectrum matches were performed with SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The sequence database consisted of all the proteins identified in triplicate bulk metaproteomes, each integrating 50-100 colonies, from the same location. Validation was performed in Scaffold at the 1% protein and peptide FDR levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbe, Cyanobacterium, Metaproteomes, Single colony, Ocean, Trichodesmium

### Affiliations
Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution

### Submitter
Noelle Held

### Lab Head
Dr Mak Saito
Department of Marine Chemistry and Geochemistry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution


