### Accession
PXD004193

### Title
A compendium of RNA-binding proteins that regulate microRNA biogenesis

### Description
During microRNA-biogenesis, stem-loop structured precursors are processed in two endonucleolytic steps, giving rise to mature microRNAs (miRNAs). This process is not only regulated at the level of transcription but also posttranscriptionally by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Here we have used a proteomics-based pull-down approach to map and characterize the interactome of 72 pre-miRNAs in eleven cell lines. We identify over 150 RBPs that interact specifically with distinct pre-miRNAs. To demonstrate their functional relevance, we used RNAi knockdown and CRISPR/Cas-mediated knockout experiments and analyzed changes in miRNA levels. Indeed, a large number of the investigated candidates have effects on miRNA-processing under our experimental conditions, including several C3H-zinc-finger proteins. Ultimately, we show that TRIM71/Lin41 is a potent regulator of miR-29a processing and its inactivation directly affects miR-29a targets. In summary, we provide an extended database of RBPs that interact with pre-miRNAs in different cell types helping to elucidate posttranscriptional regulation of miRNA biogenesis on a global scale.

### Sample Protocol
For each pulldown sample 100 µl of magnetic streptavidin beads were washed with lysis buffer and coupled to 4 µg of a biotinylated 2-O-methyl-RNA adaptor (5-AGGCUAGGUCUCCC-3´) for 1 h at 4°C in 500 µl lysis buffer. After two washing steps with lysis buffer, half of the adaptor-coupled beads were removed and stored at 4°C for preclearing. The second half was incubated with 10 µg of the bait-RNA-hairpin in 500 µl lysis buffer overnight at 4°C and washed twice with lysis buffer directly before adding the cell lysate. For the preparation of cell lysate, two 15 cm-plates of confluent cells were harvested, resuspended in 1 ml lysis buffer and lysed by sonication. Insoluble matter was removed by centrifugation and the supernatant subjected to a preclearing step by adding the adaptor-coupled beads and rotating for 3-4 hours at 4°C. After removal of the beads, the supernatant was used for the pulldown experiment. To capture binders of the miRNA-baits, the RNA-coupled beads were incubated with the precleared lysate at 4°C overnight while rotating. The beads were then washed successively with 1 ml of washbuffer I, 1 ml of washbuffer II and 1 ml lysis buffer. Beads were resuspended in 35 µl LDS Sample Buffer. After separating the binding proteins on SDS-PAGE, each lane was cut into slices, in-gel digested and then pooled into 4 fractions. Each fraction was then analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
MS results were searched against human protein database using Mascot search engine. All the resulting Mascot .dat files were loaded to Scaffold software for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
During microRNA (miRNA) biogenesis, two endonucleolytic reactions convert stem-loop-structured precursors into mature miRNAs. These processing steps can be posttranscriptionally regulated by RNA-binding proteins (RBPs). Here, we have used a&#xa0;proteomics-based pull-down approach to map and&#xa0;characterize the interactome of a multitude of pre-miRNAs. We identify &#x223c;180 RBPs that interact specifically with distinct pre-miRNAs. For functional validation, we combined RNAi and CRISPR/Cas-mediated knockout experiments to analyze RBP-dependent changes in miRNA levels. Indeed, a large number of the investigated candidates, including splicing factors and other mRNA processing proteins, have effects on miRNA processing. As an example, we show that TRIM71/LIN41 is a potent regulator of miR-29a processing and its inactivation directly affects miR-29a targets. We provide an extended database of RBPs that interact with pre-miRNAs in extracts of different cell types, highlighting a widespread layer of co- and posttranscriptional regulation of miRNA biogenesis.

### Keywords
Microrna, Rna-protein interaction, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
MPI for Biophysical Chemistry
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany 2. Bioanalytics, University Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Kuan-Ting Pan

### Lab Head
Dr Henning Urlaub
1. Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Group, Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 Göttingen, Germany 2. Bioanalytics, University Medical Center, Robert-Koch-Straße 40, 37075 Göttingen, Germany


