### Accession
PXD021772

### Title
The trypanosome Variant Surface Glycoprotein mRNA is stabilized by an essential unconventional RNA-binding protein

### Description
Salivarian trypanosomes cause human sleeping sickness and economically important livestock diseases, transmitted by Tsetse flies and replicating extracellularly throughout the life cycle. The surface of "bloodstream forms", which live within mammals, is coated by a monolayer of a Variant Surface Glycoprotein (VSG). Switching of the expressed VSG gene enables the parasites to evade adaptive immunity. Up until now, the mechanism by which VSG mRNA stability is maintained was unknown. To identify proteins specifically interacting with VSG mRNA (and alpha tubulin as control), we performed RNA-antisense purifications (RAP) following instructions published by McHugh et al. 2018 with some modifications.

### Sample Protocol
Cells at mid-log phase were collected, resuspended into vPBS (PBS supplemented with 10 mM glucose and 46 mM sucrose, pH 7.6) and then crosslinked on ice using two rounds of 0.18 J/cm-2 of UV at 254 nm in a UV Crosslinker (Analytik Jena). Cells were then collected, washed once with PBS, pelleted by centrifugation at 1,100g for 5 min, and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen for storage at -80 °C. For the purifications we used total cellular lysates prepared in the following manner. We lysed batches of 8-9 109 cells by completely resuspending frozen cell pellets in 25 ml ice cold urea-based cell Hybridization Buffer (25 mM Tris pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.25% dodecyl maltoside, 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, EDTA 5 mM, TCEP 2.5 mM and urea 4M). Next, the cell sample was passed ~10 times through a 27-gauge needle attached to a 25 ml syringe in order to disrupt the pellet and shear genomic DNA. At this point lysates were kept at -80 °C or incubated at 65 °C for 10 min before clearing by centrifugation for 10 min at 10,000g.  For the first purification, frozen cell pellets were resuspended in 8 ml ice cold detergent-based cell Lysis Buffer (10 mM Tris pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 0.5% dodecyl maltoside, 0.2% sodium dodecyl sulphate, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate, 1 × Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free, and 900 U of Murine RNase Inhibitor (New England Biolabs), and cell sample passed 10-15 times through a 27-gauge needle attached to a 25 ml syringe in order to disrupt the pellet and shear genomic DNA. The samples were then treated for 10 min at 37 °C adding 1X DNAse salt solution (2.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5 mM CaCl2), and 900 U of DNase I (Roche) to digest DNA. Samples were returned to ice and the reaction was immediately terminated by the addition of 16 ml 1.5X cold Hybridization Buffer to stop reaction.   For each sample, 1 ml of hydrophilic streptavidin magnetic beads (New England Biolabs) were washed 5 times with equal volume of Hybridization Buffer. Lysate samples were pre-cleared by incubation with the washed magnetic beads at 37 °C for 30 min with intermittent shaking at 1,100 r.p.m. on an Eppendorf Thermomixer C (30 s mixing, 30 s off). Streptavidin beads were then magnetically separated from lysate samples using a Dynal magnet (Invitrogen). The beads used for pre-clearing lysate were discarded and the lysate sample was transferred to fresh tubes twice to remove all traces of magnetic beads. Biotinylated 90-mer DNA oligonucleotide probes specific for the RNA target of interest were heat-denatured at 85 °C for 3 min and then snap-cooled on ice. Probes and pre-cleared lysate were mixed and incubated at 65 °C using an Eppendorf thermomixer with intermittent shaking (30 s shaking, 30 s off) for 1.5 h to hybridize probes to the capture target RNA. Hybrids of biotinylated DNA probes and target RNA were then bound to C1 streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by incubating each sample with washed Streptavidin coated magnetic beads at 65 °C for 2.5h on an Eppendorf Thermomixer C with intermittent shaking as above. Beads with captured hybrids were washed 5 times with Hybridization Buffer at 65 °C for 5 min to remove non-specifically associated proteins. Then, samples were washed twice with DNAse Buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 300 mM LiCl, 0.5% NP40, 0.1% NLS and 1X DNAse salt solution) and incubated with intermittent shaking (30 s shaking, 30 s off) for 15 min with 15 units of DNAse I (Roche) to remove DNA traces. Around 2% of the total beads were removed and transferred to a fresh tube after the final wash to examine RNA captures by RT-qPCR (see Elution and analysis of RNA samples). The remaining beads were resuspended in Benzonase Elution Buffer (20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 2 mM MgCl2, 0.05% NLS, 0.5 mM TCEP) for subsequent processing of the protein samples. Elution of captured proteins from streptavidin beads was achieved by digesting all nucleic acids using 125 U of Benzonase nonspecific RNA/DNA nuclease for 2 h at 37 °C. Beads were then magnetically separated from the sample using a Dynal magnet (Invitrogen) and the supernatant containing eluted proteins were first partially concentrated in a Speedvac and finally methanol/chloroform precipitated.  Proteins from RAP-MS captures were subjected to denaturing SDS-PAGE and analysed by the ZMBH Core facility for mass spectrometry and proteomics. Gel pieces were cut out and digested with Trypsin using the Digest Pro Robotic System from Intavis. Peptides were then separated on an in-house packed C18 reversed-phase column of 9 cm (replicates 1 and 2) or 25 cm length (replicate 3) using a 25 min gradient from 3% to 36% ACN and directly injected to a Orbitrap XL (replicates 1 and 2) or Q-Exactive HF (replicate 3) mass spectrometers.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out by MaxQuant (version 1.6.8.0). In total 962 proteins were identified by MSMS based on an FDR cutoff of 0.01 on peptide level and 0.01 on protein level. Match between runs option was enabled to transfer peptide identifications across Raw files based on accurate retention time and m/z. Quantification was done using a label free quantification approach based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (see Cox J.et al., Accurate Proteome-wide Label-free Quantification by Delayed Normalization and Maximal Peptide Ratio Extraction, Termed MaxLFQ. Mol Cell Proteomics, 2014, 13, pp 2513-2526).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bloodstream forms, Trypanosomes, Vsg

### Affiliations
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie (ZMBH), Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics


