### Accession
PXD042286

### Title
Bull sperm SWATH-MS-based proteomics reveals link between  high fertility and energy production, motility structures, and sperm-oocyte interaction. Quantitation

### Description
Prediction of male or semen fertility potential remains a persistent challenge that has yet to be fully resolved. This work analyzed several in vitro parameters and proteome of spermatozoa in bulls cataloged as high (HF; n=5) and low field (LF; n=5) fertility after more than a thousand artificial inseminations. Sperm motility was evaluated by Computer-Assisted Sperm Analysis. Sperm viability, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP), and reactive oxygen species (mROS) of spermatozoa were assessed by flow cytometry. Proteome was evaluated by SWATH-MS procedure. Spermatozoa of HF bulls showed significantly higher total motility than the LF group (41.4% vs. 29.7%). Rates of healthy sperm (live, high MMP, and low mROS) for HF and LF bull groups were 49% and 43%, respectively (p > 0.05). Spermatozoa of HF bulls showed higher presence of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) related to both energy production (COX7C), mainly OXPHOS pathway, and to the development of structures linked with the motility process (TPPP2, SSMEM1 and SPAG16). Furthermore, we observed that EQTN, together with other DAPs related to the interaction with the oocyte, were overrepresented in HF bull spermatozoa. The biological processes related to protein processing, catabolism, and protein folding were found to be overrepresented in LF bull sperm in which the HSP90AA1 chaperone was identified as the most DAP

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Protein of sperm samples were extracted in 50 µL of 1.5X Laemmli Sample buffer (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, United States).  The combination was mixed for 30 min, sonicated 5 min, and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min. The Supernatant with total protein extract were quantified using Macherey‐Nagel quantification reagent (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions.   In-gel digestion processing To build the spectral library, aliquots with an equal amount (2.5 µg/sample) of all samples from the HF and LF group were mixed and charged into one dimensional sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (1D SDS-PAGE) (total amount 12.5 µg/well). Each individual lane was cut into two pieces, and the contained proteins were reduced for 30 min at 60ºC in dithiothreitol and digested overnight at 37ºC with 250 ng of trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, United States) following the protocol used by Shevchenko et al. 38. The digestion was stopped with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1%; after double extraction with acetonitrile (ACN), the peptide mixtures were dried in a speed vacuum and resuspended with 15 µl of 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. For the SWATH analysis of individual samples, a protein extract (7.5 µg) of each sample (n=5 for HF and LF group) was loaded in a 1D SDS-PAGE. After cutting each individual lane, the proteins were digested, and the peptides were extracted following the same protocol described above.   Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses  For the spectral library building, 5 µl of the digested peptide mixture samples were examined by liquid chromatography (LC) using an Ekspert nanoLC 425 (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) which was directly connected to a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (6600 plus TripleTOF, AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). Samples were loaded onto a trap column (3µ C18‐CL 120 Ᾰ, 350 mm x 0.5mm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 µl/min for 3 min. The peptides were then loaded onto an analytical column (3µ C18‐CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) equilibrated in 7% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). The elution was carried out with a linear gradient from 7 to 40 % B in A for 60 min. (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The sample was ionized in an Optiflow source < 1 μL Nano applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 200ºC., and the analysis was carried out in a data‐dependent mode (DDA) with survey MS1 scans from 350–1400 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘LOW” for MS2 experiments, which were acquired from 100–1500 m/z for 25 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. The following switch criteria were used: charge: 2+ to 4+; minimum intensity; 250 counts per second (cps). Up to 100 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15 s. The rolling collision energies equations were for all ions as for +2, according to the following equation: |CE|= (0.049) x (m/z) + (2).  Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Spectra (SWATH) analysis of individual samples For the SWATH LC-MS/MS analysis, digested samples were individually analysed operating the TripleTOF 6600plus in SWATH mode. In this way, 5 µl of each sample was randomly loaded onto a 3 µm C18-CL trap column (350 µm x 0.5 mm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 5 μl/min for 3 min. The peptides were then eluted onto an analytical column (3 μm C18‐CL 120 Ᾰ, 0.075 x 150 mm; Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA), equilibrated with 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA, and resolved over a 60 min linear gradient from 7 to 37 % B in A (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Eluted peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (6600 plus TripleTOF, SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). The samples were ionized in an Optiflow source < 1 µl Nano applying 3.0 kV to the spray emitter at 200 ºC. The tripleTOF was operated in swath mode, in which a 0.050‐s TOF MS scan from 350–1250 m/z was performed. After, 0.080‐s product ion scans in 100 variable windows from 400 to 1,250 m/z were acquired throughout the experiment. The total cycle time was 2.79 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification  ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA) were used to process the resulting SCIEX.wiff data files resulting after the LC-MS/MS. The paragon algorithm 39 of proteinPilot v5.0 was used to search against B. taurus database with the following parameters: IAM cys-alkylation, trypsin specificity, taxonomy not restricted, and the search effort set to rapid with FDR correction. The SCIEX.wiff data-files obtained from the SWATH experiment were analysed by PeakView® (v 2.2, AB SCIEX, Framingham, MA, USA). The processing settings used to quantify one peptide were: (1) a peptide confidence threshold of 95%; (2) six transitions per peptide; and (3) a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1%. The identified proteins were grouped using the Protein-Pilot Group™ algorithm. In order to avoid the same spectral evidence for more than one protein, based on the MS/MS spectra and independently of the assigned peptide sequence, the protein that could explain the spectral data with the highest confidence was represented as the main protein in each category. Total protein was calculated measuring the area under the curve (AUC) of the extracted ion chromatograms. AUCs were normalized using the total sum of protein quantity, and the sum of all areas was made equal for all samples. The sum of all areas was equalized for the entire sample

### Publication Abstract
The prediction of male or semen fertility potential remains a persistent challenge that has yet to be fully resolved. This work analyzed several <i>in vitro</i> parameters and proteome of spermatozoa in bulls cataloged as high- (HF; <i>n</i> = 5) and low-field (LF; <i>n</i> = 5) fertility after more than a thousand artificial inseminations. Sperm motility was evaluated by computer-assisted sperm analysis. Sperm viability, mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) and reactive oxygen species (mROS) of spermatozoa were assessed by flow cytometry. Proteome was evaluated by the SWATH-MS procedure. Spermatozoa of HF bulls showed significantly higher total motility than the LF group (41.4% vs 29.7%). Rates of healthy sperm (live, high MMP, and low mROS) for HF and LF bull groups were 49% and 43%, respectively (<i>p</i> &gt; 0.05). Spermatozoa of HF bulls showed a higher presence of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) related to both energy production (COX7C), mainly the OXPHOS pathway, and the development of structures linked with the motility process (TPPP2, SSMEM1, and SPAG16). Furthermore, we observed that equatorin (EQTN), together with other DAPs related to the interaction with the oocyte, was overrepresented in HF bull spermatozoa. The biological processes related to protein processing, catabolism, and protein folding were found to be overrepresented in LF bull sperm in which the HSP90AA1 chaperone was identified as the most DAP. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042286.

### Keywords
Flow cytometry; computer-assisted sperm analysis; sperm; bull; fertility; proteome

### Affiliations
Departamento de Biología Celular, Biología Funcional y Antropología Física, Universitat de València, 46100 Valencia, Spain
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Miguel A. Silvestre
Departamento de Biología Celular, Biología Funcional y Antropología Física, Universitat de València, 46100 Valencia, Spain


