### Accession
PXD016620

### Title
Human synovial fluid proteomics reveals potential early-diagnostic biomarkers for ankylosing spondylitis

### Description
[Background]  Ankylosing spondylitis (AS), affecting 0.5% of the population, is a chronic inflammatory rheumatic disease affecting the axial skeleton and peripheral joints. The etiology of this disease is  still poorly understood, but it may be involved with the interaction of genetic and environmental factors. Our aim was to identify differentially expressed protein mediators in synovial fluid (SF) of AS.  [Methods] A Total of 40 SF samples from 10 AS and each 10 controls [Osteoarthritis (OA), Rheumatoid Arthritis (RA), gouty arthritis (Gout)] were collected. Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) were used to identify differentially expressed proteins based on the label free quantification (MaxLFQ). Among the 9 proteins with fold changes of > 1.5, the 8 proteins were verified with the exception of the abundant protein Haptoglobin (HP). Matrix metalloproteinase-1(MMP1) and Matrix metalloproteinase-3(MMP3) were used as a positive control, and the remaining 6 proteins were subjected to western blot analysis.  [Results] We identified 9 proteins that were found to be more than 1.5-fold differentially expressed in SF of AS patients compared to control groups. Proteins such as HP, MMP1, MMP3, Serum amyloid P-component(APCS), Complement factor H-related protein 5(CFHR5), Fumarylacetoacetase(FAH), Mannose-binding lectin 2(MBL2), Complement component C9(C9) and Complement C4-A(C4A) were found to be upregulated in the SF of AS patients. CFHR5 and C9 were reported in previous studies with AS serum. APCS was reported in SF as well as serum. However, FAH, C4A and MBL2 were newly discovered through this analysis. We were able to verify the unique expression level of C9 and CFHR5 in AS sample using western blot analysis compared to the other three diseases.  [Conclusions] We performed quantitative proteomic analysis of the respective SF sample from 4 diseases,i.e., AS, OA, RA, and GOUT, by LC-MS/MS. The systematic comparative proteomic analysis of the four groups together was carried out for the first time, leading to several differentially expressed proteins in AS. Among them, we expect C9 and CFHR5, which expression level were confirmed by western blot analysis and will be further validated by ELISA, can be a potential biomarkers for AS.

### Sample Protocol
Immunodepletion of abundant proteins with MARS cartridge To remove high abundant proteins (albumin, IgG, antitrypsin, IgA, transferrin, haptoglobin) which occupy about 70% of total proteins, we used MARS spin cartridge (Agilent; Santa Clara, CA, USA). First of all, the membrane filter 0.22 μm (Agilent; Santa Clara, CA, USA) was used to remove particulates of fluid samples (500 μg) by performing centrifugation at 16,000 x g for 1.5 min. Flow-through was mingled with Buffer A LOAD/WASH (Agilent; Santa Clara, CA, USA) and depleted according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Agilent Technologies, USA). During the depletion, flow-through was collected up to 600 μL, and protein concentration was quantified by BCA assay.  The column was routinely regenerated by eluting bound high-abundance proteins with buffer B and, subsequently, the column was neutralized with buffer A before further use. The acquired proteins was directly digested for total proteomic analysis.  Peptide sample preparation The sample preparation including in-solution tryptic digestion and peptide cleanup were simultaneously proceeded in 96-well plate for high reproducibility. 8M Urea in 100 mM Ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) added in to the depleted sample. Blended sample was incubated for 20 min in RT. Vortexing and sonication were performed 3 times in incubating time. 10 mM DTT was added into the sample for reduction and allow the reaction to occur at RT for 1 hour. In succession, 30 mM of IAA was added to sample for alkylation and place in dark for 30 min till the reaction ends. After Alkylation, sample was diluted with 100mM ABC which makes the urea concentration below 1M. Then, Trypsin was added to the sample (1:50 = trypsin:sample) and incubated in 37℃ for overnight. Remaining activated trypsin was acidified with 0.4% TFA. The acidified digests was immediately processed through the Peptide Cleanup Protocol using Sep-Pak C18 96-well plate (100 mg Sorbent per well, Waters). The eluted peptides with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) were dried by speed vacuum.   LC-MS/MS experiments In this study, we performed a label free quantification-based proteomics study using comprehensive LC-MS/MS to identify proteins specifically expressed in AS synovial fluid. LC−MS/MS analysis of 40 peptide samples was carried by Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometry (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a nanoACQUITY UPLC (Waters, Milford, MA) equipped with an in-house-packed trap (150 μm i.d. × 3 cm) and analytical column (75 μm i.d. × 100 cm) using 3 μm of Jupiter C18 particle (Phenomenex). For the proteome profiling analysis, the gradient was as follows: from 5% to 40% of solvent B for 130 min, from 40% to 80% of solvent B for 5 min, holding at 80% of solvent B for 10min, and equilibrating the column at 1% of B for 30min. Full MS data were acquired in a scan range of 375–1,575 Th at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, with an automated gain control (AGC) target value of 4.0×105  and a maximum ion injection of 50ms. The maximal ion injection time for MS/MS was set to 50 ms at a resolution of  15,000 and an AGC target value of 5 x 104. Dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. A total of 40 raw files were qualified and quantified using MaxLFQ provided by Maxquant software.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis  The MS2 spectra were searched with the MaxQuant (v. 1.5.1.2) [20] (PMID : 21254760) against the Uniprot human database (released in June, 2018). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification and N-acetylation and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications were used for each search. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied at the peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels. An initial precursor mass deviation up to 4.5 ppm and a fragment mass deviation up to 20 ppm were allowed. Protein identification required at least one peptide using the ‘razor plus unique peptides’ setting in MaxQuant. Proteins were quantified using the XIC-based label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm in MaxQuant [21] (PMID : 24942700). The ‘match between runs’ option was used for nonlinear retention time alignment. The match time window was 0.7min, and the alignment time window was 20min. Further statistical and bioinformatics analysis was performed by Perseus software (v. 1.5.3.2). We uploaded modified ‘proteingroups.txt’ file produced from MaxQuant. Before loaded LFQ intensities data, hits to the reverse database, contaminants and proteins only identified by sites were eliminated. Additionally, proteins which don’t have 3 valid values in each group were not used for quantification. After loading the data, AS LFQ intensity (n=10), OS LFQ intensity (n=10), Gout LFQ intensity (n=10) and RA LFQ intensity (n=10) were grouped separately. Each LFQ intensities were transformed log2 values. Statistical quantification analysis of log-transform data was performed using 2 samples T test (p value < 0.05). Additionally, in case missing value was existed, we performed the relative quantification of proteins extracted from one group which have a missing value and average of other group which have no missing value. Consequently, proteins with expression greater than ±1.5 fold change were selected as DEPs. The resulting significant differentially expressed proteins were analyzed for further annotation enrichments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Synovial fluid, Biomarker, Proteomics, Ankylosing spondylitis

### Affiliations
Yonsei University
Yonsei university

### Submitter
Jaehun Jung

### Lab Head
Dr Jae Hun Jung
Yonsei university


