### Accession
PXD006647

### Title
SQSTM1/p62-directed metabolic reprogramming is essential for normal neurodifferentiation

### Description
Neurodegenerative disorders are an increasingly common and irreversible burden on society, often affecting the ageing population, but their aetiology and disease mechanisms are poorly understood. Studying monogenic neurodegenerative diseases, with known genetic cause, provides an opportunity to understand cellular mechanisms also affected in more complex disorders. We recently reported that loss-of-function mutations in the autophagy adaptor protein, SQSTM1/p62, lead to a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disease presenting in childhood. To further elucidate the neuronal involvement, we studied the cellular consequences of loss of p62 in a neuroepithelial stem (NES) cell model and differentiated neurones, derived from reprogrammed p62 patient cells, or by CRISPR/Cas9-directed gene editing in NES cells. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses suggest that p62 is essential for neuronal differentiation by controlling the metabolic shift from aerobic glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation required for neuronal maturation. This shift is blocked by the failure to sufficiently downregulate lactate dehydrogenase expression due to the loss of p62, possibly through impaired Hif-1α downregulation and increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. The findings implicate an important role for p62 in neuronal energy metabolism and particularly in the regulation of the shift between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation, required for normal neurodifferentiation.

### Sample Protocol
NES cells (passage 15 to 50) were cultured on 100 μg/ml poly-ornithine / 2 μg/ml laminin-coated culture dishes (both (Sigma-Aldrich)), in DMEM/F-12 Glutamax (Thermo Fisher Scientific) media containing 17 mM glucose, 100 units/ml penicillin-streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific), N-2 (1:100) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), B27 (1:1000) (Thermo Fisher Scientific), 10 ng/μl bFGF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 10 ng/μl EGF (Peprotech) at 37° in a 5% CO2 atmosphere. Three-forths of the media was exchanged daily. Cells were trypsinised using TrypLE Express 1x (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were lysed by the addition of ProteaseMax/Urea and sonicated. Peptides were separated on a homemade C18 column, 25 cm (Silica Tip 360 μm OD, 75 μm ID, New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) with a 120 min gradient at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The gradient went from 5-26% of buffer B (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 120 min and up to 95% of buffer B in 5 min and injected onto the LC-MS/MS system (UltimateTM 3000 RSLCnano chromatography system and Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Proteomics analysis was performed by the Karolinska Institute proteomics core facility.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were analysed using MaxQuant Version 1.5.6.5, see the parameters file for a detailled run description.

### Publication Abstract
Neurodegenerative disorders are an increasingly common and irreversible burden on society, often affecting the aging population, but their etiology and disease mechanisms are poorly understood. Studying monogenic neurodegenerative diseases with known genetic cause provides an opportunity to understand cellular mechanisms also affected in more complex disorders. We recently reported that loss-of-function mutations in the autophagy adaptor protein SQSTM1/p62 lead to a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disease presenting in childhood. To further elucidate the neuronal involvement, we studied the cellular consequences of loss of p62 in a neuroepithelial stem cell (NESC) model and differentiated neurons derived from reprogrammed p62 patient cells or by CRISPR/Cas9-directed gene editing in NESCs. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses suggest that p62 is essential for neuronal differentiation by controlling the metabolic shift from aerobic glycolysis to oxidative phosphorylation required for neuronal maturation. This shift is blocked by the failure to sufficiently downregulate lactate dehydrogenase expression due to the loss of p62, possibly through impaired Hif-1&#x3b1; downregulation and increased sensitivity to oxidative stress. The findings imply an important role for p62 in neuronal energy metabolism and particularly in the regulation of the shift between glycolysis and oxidative phosphorylation required for normal neurodifferentiation.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Mitochondria, Sqstm1, Neurodifferentiation, Neuronal development, Hypoxia, Neuroepithelial-like stem cells, Mitophagy, P62

### Affiliations
Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institute, Retziusväg 8, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden
MMK, Karolinska Institute

### Submitter
Florian Schober

### Lab Head
Dr Anna Wredenberg
Division of Molecular Metabolism, Karolinska Institute, Retziusväg 8, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden


