### Accession
PXD014501

### Title
Molecular basis of b-adrenergic regulation of cardiac calcium current

### Description
Increased cardiac contractility during fight-or-flight response is caused by b-adrenergic augmentation of CaV1.2 channels. It is assumed that this iconic regulation involves phosphorylation of CaV1.2 a1/b-subunits. In transgenic murine hearts expressing fully PKA phosphorylation-deficient mutant a1C/b, this regulation persists, however, suggesting involvement of extra-channel factors. We here show that PKA up-regulates cardiac CaV1.2 channels by phosphorylating the small G-protein Rad, relieving constitutive inhibition of CaV1.2. Peroxidase-catalyzed labeling in mice hearts expressing ascorbate peroxidase conjugated-a1C or b2b with multiplexed quantitative proteomics allowed tracking of thousands of proteins in proximity of CaV1.2.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated non-transgenig (NTG) ventricular cardiomyocytes were exposed to isoproterenol or vehicle. Cells were lysed by homogenization (QIAshredder cartriges) in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris pH 7.4).  Lysates were reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes in the dark, alkylation reactions quenched with freshly prepared DTT added to a concentration of 50 mM and proteins precipitated by methanol/chloroform precipitation. Digests were carried out in 1M urea freshly prepared in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 in presence of 2% acetonitrile (v/v) with LysC for 3 hours at room temperature and after subsequent addition of trypsin over night at 37C. Missed cleavage rate was assayed from a small aliquot by mass spectrometry. For whole proteome analysis, digests containing approximately 60 ug of peptide material were directly labeled with TMT reagents. Labeling efficiency and TMT ratios were assayed by mass spectrometry, while labeling reactions were stored at -80C. After quenching of TMT labeling reactions with hydroxylamine, TMT labeling reactions were mixed, solvent evaporated to near completion and TMT labeled peptides purified and desalted by acidic reversed phase C18 chromatography. Peptides were then fractionated by alkaline reversed phase chromatography into 96 fractions and combined into 24 samples.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the m. musculus proteome with added common contaminant proteins. For this, spectra were first converted to mzXML. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. We searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da). We applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans.

### Publication Abstract
Increased cardiac contractility during the fight-or-flight response is caused by &#x3b2;-adrenergic augmentation of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 voltage-gated calcium channels<sup>1-4</sup>. However, this augmentation persists in transgenic murine hearts expressing mutant Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 &#x3b1;<sub>1C</sub> and &#x3b2; subunits that can no longer be phosphorylated by protein kinase A-an essential downstream mediator of &#x3b2;-adrenergic signalling-suggesting that non-channel factors are also required. Here we identify the mechanism by which &#x3b2;-adrenergic agonists stimulate voltage-gated calcium channels. We express &#x3b1;<sub>1C</sub> or &#x3b2;<sub>2B</sub> subunits conjugated to ascorbate peroxidase<sup>5</sup> in mouse hearts, and use multiplexed quantitative proteomics<sup>6,7</sup> to track hundreds of proteins in the proximity of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2. We observe that the calcium-channel inhibitor Rad<sup>8,9</sup>, a monomeric G protein, is enriched in the Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2 microenvironment but is depleted during &#x3b2;-adrenergic stimulation. Phosphorylation by protein kinase A of specific serine residues on Rad decreases its affinity for &#x3b2; subunits and relieves constitutive inhibition of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.2, observed as an increase in channel open probability. Expression of Rad or its homologue Rem in HEK293T cells also imparts stimulation of Ca<sub>V</sub>1.3 and Ca<sub>V</sub>2.2 by protein kinase A, revealing an evolutionarily conserved mechanism that confers adrenergic modulation upon voltage-gated calcium channels.

### Keywords
Alkaline reversed phase peptide fractionation, B-adrenergic regulation, Non-transgenic, Cardiomyocytes, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Quantitative mass spectrometry, Sps ms3, Isoproterenol

### Affiliations
Department of Systems Biology, Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, 02115
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Marian Kalocsay

### Lab Head
Dr Marian Kalocsay
Department of Systems Biology, Laboratory of Systems Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston MA, 02115


