### Accession
PXD003380

### Title
Restoration of defective nuclear-mitochondrial DNA damage signaling suppresses neuropathology and extends healthspan in Ataxia telangiectasia across species

### Description
Ataxia-telangiectasia (A-T) is a disease characterized by genomic instability and severe neurodegeneration. It is caused by mutation in Ataxia-telangiectasia mutated gene (ATM) which encodes ATM, a key player in DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair.  While many major symptoms of A-T (including hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation) are readily explained by its deficiency in repair of DSBs, the causes for the devastating cerebellar degeneration are still elusive. Here we report that in A-T, persistent unrepaired DNA damage signals from the nucleus to mitochondria (NM signaling) causing mitochondrial dysfunction leading to neurodegeneration. We find that depletion of NAD+ in A-T across species is likely due to persistent PARylation as inhibition of PARP1 restores NAD+levels.. NAD+ depletion affects the NAD+/SIRT1-PGC1α axis causing accumulation of damaged mitochondria through inhibition of mitophagy. Restoration of NAD+/SIRT1 activity through PARP1 inhibition, NAD+ supplementation or SIRT1 activation rescued the pathological and behavioral defects in A-T, suggesting a conserved role of the NAD+/SIRT1 pathway in inhibiting disease pathology. Notably, increasing the NAD+ levels extends lifespan and rescues A-T-specific behavioral defects in both C. elegans and mouse models of A-T. This is through induction of PINK1-DCT1-regulated mitophagy and DNA-PKcs-associated NHEJ DNA repair. Our results underscore the unified role of SIRT1 (Sir2.1) in mitochondrial health and highlight how Sir2.1 not only regulates mitochondrial biogenesis, but also induces PINK1-DCT1-dependent mitophagy. Our data support a model where by the two major theories on aging, DNA damage accumulation and mitochondrial dysfunction, conspire to promote neurodegeneration in A-T animal models and suggest that therapeutic interventions are possible in A-T and other untreatable DNA repair-deficient disorders.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extracts from C.elegans were digested with trypsin in-solution, LC-ESI-Ms using Q Exactive with 4h LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Data were acquired using Xcalibur v2.5.5 and raw files were processed to generate peak list in Mascot generic format (.mgf) using ProteoWizard release version 3.0.331. Database searches were performed using Mascot in-house version 2.4.0 to search the SwissProt database (Caenorhabditis elegans, 19.05.2015, 26156 proteins) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, at maximum one missed cleavage site, fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da, parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm and oxidation of methionine, acetylation of the protein N-terminus as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability.

### Publication Abstract
Ataxia telangiectasia (A-T) is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by progressive neurodegeneration and cerebellar ataxia. A-T is causally linked to defects in ATM, a master regulator of the response to and repair of DNA double-strand breaks. The molecular basis of cerebellar atrophy and neurodegeneration in A-T patients is unclear. Here we report and examine the significance of increased PARylation, low NAD<sup>+</sup>, and mitochondrial dysfunction in ATM-deficient neurons, mice, and worms. Treatments that replenish intracellular NAD<sup>+</sup> reduce the severity of A-T neuropathology, normalize neuromuscular function, delay memory loss, and extend lifespan in&#xa0;both animal models. Mechanistically, treatments that increase intracellular NAD<sup>+</sup> also stimulate neuronal DNA repair and improve mitochondrial quality via mitophagy. This work links two major theories on aging, DNA damage accumulation, and mitochondrial dysfunction through nuclear DNA damage-induced nuclear-mitochondrial signaling, and demonstrates that they are important pathophysiological determinants in premature aging of A-T, pointing to therapeutic interventions.

### Keywords
Aging, Liquid chromatography, Mass spectrometry, C.elegans

### Affiliations
University of Oslo

### Submitter
Ravi Chand Bollineni

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Thiede
University of Oslo


