### Accession
PXD003573

### Title
The Rab-binding profiles of Legionella effectors

### Description
Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaire’s disease, uses its type IV secretion system to translocate over 300 effector proteins into host cells. These effectors subvert host cell signaling pathways to ensure bacterial proliferation. Despite their importance for pathogenesis, the roles of most of the effectors are yet to be characterized. Key to understanding the function of effectors is the identification of host proteins they bind during infection. We previously developed a novel tandem-affinity purification (TAP) approach using hexahistidine and BirA-specific biotinylation tags for isolating translocated effector complexes from infected cells whose composition were subsequently deciphered by mass spectrometry. Here we further advanced the workflow for the TAP approach and determined the infection-dependent interactomes of the effectors SidM and LidA, which were previously reported to promiscuously bind multiple Rab GTPases in vitro. In this study we defined a stringent subset of Rab GTPases targeted by SidM and LidA during infection, comprising of Rab1A, 1B, 6 and 10; in addition, LidA targets Rab14 and 18. Taken together, this study illustrates the power of this approach to profile the intracellular interactomes of bacterial effectors during infection.

### Sample Protocol
Infected cells were lysed in lysis buffer (typically 50mM Na2HPO4 pH7.3, 150mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100 (v/v), EDTA-free complete protease inhibitors and Benzonase). Cells were scraped and insoluble fraction removed by centrifugation. Soluble His6-Bio-tagged protein complexes were enriched using Ni2+-NTA and Neutravidin resin sequentially. Proteins were digested on-bead by addition of trypsin and overnight incubation at 37°C. Tryptic peptides were desalted by Stage-Tip method and dimethyl labelled on Stage-Tip. Bio and K/A samples were light (+28Da) and heavy (+32Da) dimethyl labelled respectively.  LCMS/MS analysis was performed using an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column of 50 cm × 75 μm inner diameter (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% aqueous formic acid at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Easy nLC-1000 was coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer via an easy-spray source (all Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 75,000 at m/z 200 (transient time 256 ms). Up to ten of the most abundant isotope patterns with charge +2 or higher from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 3.0 m/z and fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 25. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans (acquired with a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200) were 20 and 120 ms, respectively. The ion target value for MS was set to 10^6 and for MS/MS to 10^5, and the intensity threshold was set to 8.3 × 10^2.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.25) and peptides were identified by matching MS/MS spectra with reference human (Uniprot, downloaded on 19/01/2015) and L. pneumophila strain 130b (ORF extraction of draft genome, ftp://ftp.sanger.ac.uk/pub/pathogens/Legionella/pneumophila/130b/ )  proteomes using Andromeda search engine. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as variable modifications. No fixed modifications were set. Reference proteomes were in silico digested using the trypsin/P setting whereby cleavages were allowed after arginine/lysine residues but only if it is not followed by a proline. Light (+28Da) and heavy (+32Da) dimethyl labelled lysines and N-termini were used for quantification by a built-in algorithm in MaxQuant. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptides, proteins and sites. All other parameters were as pre-set for the software.

### Publication Abstract
Legionella pneumophila, the causative agent of Legionnaire's disease, uses its type IV secretion system to translocate over 300 effector proteins into host cells. These effectors subvert host cell signaling pathways to ensure bacterial proliferation. Despite their importance for pathogenesis, the roles of most of the effectors are yet to be characterized. Key to understanding the function of effectors is the identification of host proteins they bind during infection. We previously developed a novel tandem-affinity purification (TAP) approach using hexahistidine and BirA-specific biotinylation tags for isolating translocated effector complexes from infected cells whose composition were subsequently deciphered by mass spectrometry. Here we further advanced the workflow for the TAP approach and determined the infection-dependent interactomes of the effectors SidM and LidA, which were previously reported to promiscuously bind multiple Rab GTPases in vitro. In this study we defined a stringent subset of Rab GTPases targeted by SidM and LidA during infection, comprising of Rab1A, 1B, 6, and 10; in addition, LidA targets Rab14 and 18. Taken together, this study illustrates the power of this approach to profile the intracellular interactomes of bacterial effectors during infection.

### Keywords
Rab gtpase, Legionella, Effector

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, UK

### Submitter
Ernest So

### Lab Head
Dr Gad Frankel
MRC Centre for Molecular Bacteriology and Infection, Department of Life Sciences, Imperial College London, UK


