### Accession
PXD031777

### Title
Proteogenomic analysis of hemolymph from Gammarus fossarum

### Description
Proteome profiles of hemolymph from Gammarus fossarum established by next-generation proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted and loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, treated with chemical reagents for fixing the cysteine modification or untreated, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed, spectral counts and NSAF were extracted and compared.

### Publication Abstract
Proteogenomic methodologies have enabled the identification of protein sequences in wild species without annotated genomes, shedding light on molecular mechanisms affected by pollution. However, proteomic resources for sentinel species are limited, and organ-level investigations are necessary to expand our understanding of their molecular biology. This study presents proteomic resources obtained from proteogenomic analyses of key organs (hepatopancreas, gills, hemolymph) from three established aquatic sentinel invertebrate species of interest in ecotoxicological/ecological research and environmental monitoring: Gammarus fossarum, Dreissena polymorpha, and Palaemon serratus. Proteogenomic analyses identified thousands of proteins for each species, with over 90% of them being annotated to putative function. Functional analysis validated the relevance of the proteomic atlases by revealing similarities in functional annotation of catalogues of proteins across analogous organs in the three species, while deep contrasts between functional profiles are delimited across different organs in the same organism. These organ-level proteomic atlases are crucial for future research on these sentinel animals, aiding in the evaluation of aquatic environmental risks and providing a valuable resource for ecotoxicological studies.

### Keywords
Crustacea, Gammarus fossarum, Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Hemolymph, Amphipoda

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


