### Accession
PXD033393

### Title
Fungal-bacterial co-infection of macrophages reveals global reprogramming and adaptation during infection

### Description
In this study, we use mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to define the host response under single and dual infection states of macrophages with C. neoformans and K. pneumoniae to define critical responses of each biological system. This high-resolution comparative analysis illustrates how protein abundance deviates during a transition from an acute to chronic infectious state with exposure to additional microbial stimuli. We reveal global changes upon infection followed by pathogen-specific host response signatures. Additionally, we define regulatory changes within C. neoformans as the fungi adapts to the host environment and stabilizes prior to further disruption in the presence of chronic bacterial infection. We validate our findings with host cytokine detection and phenotypic profiling of the fungi throughout the host and bacterial exposures. Overall, our study provides an in-depth analysis of cross-kingdom protein level changes during macrophage infection. This information provides new insight into fungal modulation of the immune response, including a stabilization and adaptation of the host and fungi during a chronic infection, which is disrupted upon chronic co-infection with a bacterial pathogen.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as we previously described (Ball et al., 2019). Briefly, samples were collected in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) containing a protease inhibitor cocktail tablet, followed by addition of sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS, 2% final concentration) and probe sonication (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Dithiothreitol (DTT, 10 mM final concentration) and iodoacetamide (IAA, 5.5 mM final concentration) was added followed by acetone precipitation overnight at -20˚C. Samples were collected, washed, and resuspended in 8 M urea/40 mM HEPES for protein concentrations measurement using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) tryptophan assay. Samples were diluted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, normalized to 50 µg and digested with LysC/trypsin (Promega, protein:enzyme ratio, 50:1). To stop digestion, 10% v/v trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added, and peptides were purified using C18 Stop And Go Extraction (STAGE) tips. Experiment performed in biological quadruplicate. Digested peptides were resuspended in buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) and analyzed on a Orbitrap Exploris 240 hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC™ 1200 High-Performance Liquid Chromatography (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-line 75 µm x 50 cm PepMap RSLC EASY-Spray column filled with 2 µm C18 reverse-phase silica beads (ThermoFisher Scientific). Separated peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer with a linear gradient of 3 to 20% Buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% acetic acid) over a 3 h gradient, followed by a wash with 100% Buffer B with a 250 nl/min flow rate. The mass spectrometer switched between one full scan and MS/MS scans of abundant peaks. Full scans (m/z 40–6,000) were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 240,000 at 200 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of mass spectrometry raw data files were performed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.26). The search was completed using the incorporated Andromeda search engine against the reference C. neoformans var. grubii serotype A (strain H99/ATCC 208821) proteome (7430 sequences; Jan. 31, 2020) and K. pneumoniae K52 serotype (5126 sequences; May 21, 2020), and Mus musculus (55462 sequences; June 1, 2020) from Uniprot. Parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity with max two missed cleavages; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids; fixed modifications – carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications – methionine oxidation and N-acetylation of proteins, and split by taxonomic ID. Peptide spectral matches were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery (FDR) of 1% with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification. Relative label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs was enabled; the MaxLFQ algorithm used a minimum ratio count of one.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Co-infection, Cryptococcus neoformans, Pathogenesis, Macrophages, Klebsiella pneumoniae

### Affiliations
University of Guelph
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1

### Submitter
Jennifer Geddes-McAlister

### Lab Head
Dr Jennifer Geddes-McAlister
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario, Canada, N1G 2W1


