### Accession
PXD006168

### Title
Analysis of total-proteome change following MST3/4 depletion

### Description
To assess changes in protein expression levels following loss of MST3/4, we co-depleted MST3 and MST4 and quantified the changes in total protein levels by using SILAC.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC heavy and light labelled HeLa cells were seeded and transfected with a total of 10nM MST3 + MST4 (heavy), or non-targeting control (light) siRNAs, using Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After 60hrs, cells were lysed in 2% SDS, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, sonicated for 10 sec, before measurement of the protein concentrations using BCA assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of the heavy and light labelled lysates were then mixed together and reduced by addition of DTT to a final concentration of 100mM followed by heating to 95̊C for 10mins. Trypsin digestion was performed using Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009). A total of ~1mg of mixed lysate was digested. The digest was cleaned up using a Sep-pak Plus C18 cartridge (Waters), according to manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides were then resolved by isoelectric focusing on a short IPG strip (pH 3–10), using an OFF-gel fractionator (Agilent), as described before (Kumper et al., 2016). Twelve fractions were collected and each fraction was subjected to a final clean-up using Ziptip C18 pipette tips (Millipore), before being dried and reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a Thermo Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer coupled with an HP1200 platform (Agilent, Wokingham, UK) as described previously (Mardakheh et al., 2015). 40% of each fraction were analysed as 6µL injections. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by CID and analysed. MS/MS was acquired for selected precursor ions with a single repeat count followed by dynamic exclusion with a 10ppm mass window for 45s, based on a maximal exclusion list of 500 entries.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were searched and quantified using Maxquant (Cox & Mann, 2008). Searches were performed against the Human Uniprot database. Mass tolerance filters of 6ppm and 0.5Da were used for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. Re-quantify, second-peptide search, and match between runs (2 minutes window) options were enabled. Methionine oxidation and N-terminal Acetylation were considered as variable modifications, while Carbamidomethylation was considered as a fixed modification. A maximum of 2 tryptic missed cleavages were allowed. An FDR rate of 1% was used. All subsequent data analyses on the search results were performed by Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016), using the Maxquant ‘ProteinGroups’ output file as input.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mst3; mst4; ccm3; gckiii; fam65a

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute
Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Faraz Mardakheh

### Lab Head
Dr Faraz Mardakheh
Centre for Molecular Oncology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London EC1M 6BQ, The United Kingdom.


