### Accession
PXD039324

### Title
Dose and route of administration determine the efficacy of prophylactic immunotherapy for peanut allergy in a Brown Norway rat model

### Description
MS/MS analysis of the peanut protein extract (PPE) confirmed the presence of the four major peanut allergens and identified the presence of Ara h 1 isotypes, Ara h 2 isotypes, Ara h 3 isotypes, Ara h 6 isotypes and Ara h 7 isotypes. Allergen-specific immunotherapy (IT) is emerging as a viable option for treatment of peanut allergy. Yet, prophylactic IT remains unexplored despite early introduction of peanut in infancy was shown to prevent allergy. There is a need to understand how allergens interact with the immune system depending on the route of administration, and how different dosages of allergen may protect from sensitisation and a clinical active allergy. Here we compared peanut allergen delivery via the oral, sublingual (SL), intragastric (IG) and subcutaneous (SC) routes for the prevention of peanut allergy in Brown Norway (BN) rats. BN rats were administered PBS or three different doses of PPE via either oral IT (OIT), SLIT, IGIT and SCIT followed by intraperitoneal (IP) injections of PPE to assess the protection from peanut sensitisation. The development of IgE and IgG1 responses to PPE and the major peanut allergens were evaluated by ELISAs. The clinical response to PPE was assessed by an ear swelling test (EST) and proliferation was assessed by stimulating splenocytes with PPE. Low and medium dose OIT (1 and 10 mg) and all doses of SCIT (1, 10, 100 µg) induced sensitisation to PPE, whereas high dose OIT (100 mg), SLIT (10, 100 or 1000 µg) or IGIT (1, 10 and 100 mg) did not. High dose OIT and SLIT as well as high and medium dose IGIT prevented sensitisation from the following IP injections of PPE and suppressed PPE-specific IgE levels in a dose-dependent manner. Hence, administration of peanut protein via different routes confers different risks for sensitisation and protection from peanut allergy development. Overall, the IgE levels toward the individual major peanut allergens followed the PPE-specific IgE levels. Collectively, this study showed that the preventive effect of allergen-specific IT is determined by the interplay between the specific site of PPE delivery for presentation to the immune system, and the allergen quantity, and that targeting and modulating tolerance mechanisms at specific mucosal sites may be a prophylactic strategy for prevention of peanut allergy.

### Sample Protocol
All reagents for protein preparation were of analytical reagent grade. All reagents for MS sample preparation and analyses were of MS grade. The lyophilised PPE sample was re-suspended in PBS (137 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 8 mM Na2HPO4, 1 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.2) at 2.4 µg/µL. Fifty microliters of this sample was precipitated overnight at -20°C in 250 µL of ethanol/acetone/formic acid at a 49.95: 49.95:0.1 ratio. The resultant pellet was washed separately in 100% (v/v) acetone and 75% (v/v) ethanol and dried by centrifugal evaporation. The pellet was reconstituted in 180 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 126 µL water and 18 µL of 100 mM dithiothreitol and heated to 95°C, for 5 min. The protein was alkylated by adding 36 µL of 100 mM of iodoacetamide and incubated at room temperature (RT) in the dark for 20 min. The sample was digested by adding 12 µL of 100 ng/µL Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS grade (Thermo Scientific) and incubated at 37°C for 1 h. A further 12 µL of 100 ng/µL Trypsin was added and samples incubated at 30°C overnight. Ninety-six µL of the digested sample (equivalent to 30 µg of the PPE sample) was eluted from a Pierce C18 spin column (Thermo Scientific) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were frozen at -80°C prior to lyophilisation by centrifugal evaporation and the dried samples were resuspended in 30 µL of 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. One-dimensional (1D) microscale liquid chromatography separation of tryptic peptides (2 µL injection) was performed, in duplicate (2 technical replicates), with an UltiMate 3000 RSL® liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Hypersil Gold C18 1.9 μm, 100 × 1 mm analytical reversed phase column (Thermo Scientific). Mobile phase A consisted of water containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid, whilst mobile phase B was 100% (v/v) acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The sample was injected on-column and peptides were eluted from the analytical column and separated using a gradient of 2–40% mobile phase B over 60 min at a flow rate of 60 µL/min. The analytical column temperature was maintained at 35°C. Mass spectrometric analysis utilised a Q Exactive Plus™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ MS (Thermo Scientific) in the data-dependent acquisition mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400, whereas the target value for the fragment ion spectra was set to resolution of 17,500 at m/z 400. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge 2 to 4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 1.5 Thomsons and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalised collision energies of 27. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 100 and 60 ms, respectively, and the ion target value for scan modes were set to 1E6 and 2E5, respectively. Repeat sequencing of peptides was kept to a minimum by dynamic exclusion of the sequenced peptides for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
Peaks version 8.5 software was used to process all data-dependent acquisition mass spectral data. Protein identifications were obtained by searching a database of peanut allergens and isoforms (outlined in Apostolovic et al. (3)) and the downloaded reference proteome of peanut. The following data analysis parameters were used: tryptic rules; no mis-cleavages; carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of hydroxyproline as a variable modification; parent mass error tolerance of 2 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance of 0.05 Da; FDR of 1%; charge states of +2, +3 and +4 accepted.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Food allergy, Peanut, Arachis hypogaea, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, NE, United States
University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
Justin Marsh

### Lab Head
Dr Philip Johnson
Institute of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, NE, United States


