### Accession
PXD011071

### Title
Defining the RNA Interactome by Total RNA-Associated Protein Purification

### Description
UV crosslinking can be used to identify precise RNA targets for individual proteins, transcriptome-wide. We sought to develop a technique to generate reciprocal data, identifying precise sites of RNA-binding proteome-wide. The resulting technique, total RNA-associated protein purification (TRAPP), relies on SILAC labelling to quantify RNA-associated protein recovery in the presence and absence of irradiation. We utilised TRAPP to study alterations in RNA-protein interactions upon exposure to weak acid stress in yeast. In addition, as UV irradiation induces short distance crosslinks between proteins and nucleic acids, the identity of crosslinked amino acids reveals the exact protein-RNA interacting interface. Precise sites of crosslinking at the level of individual amino acids (iTRAPP) were identified following phospho-peptide enrichment combined with a bioinformatic pipeline (Xi).

### Sample Protocol
Detailed sample processing protocols and analysis are described in the associated publication.

### Data Protocol
Detailed sample processing protocols and analysis are described in the associated publication.

### Publication Abstract
The RNA binding proteome (RBPome) was previously investigated using UV crosslinking and purification of poly(A)-associated proteins. However, most cellular transcripts are not polyadenylated. We therefore developed total RNA-associated protein purification (TRAPP) based on 254&#xa0;nm UV crosslinking and purification of all RNA-protein complexes using silica beads. In a variant approach (PAR-TRAPP), RNAs were labelled with 4-thiouracil prior to 350&#xa0;nm crosslinking. PAR-TRAPP in yeast identified hundreds of RNA binding proteins, strongly enriched for canonical RBPs. In comparison, TRAPP identified many more proteins not expected to bind RNA, and this correlated strongly with protein abundance. Comparing TRAPP in yeast and <i>E.&#xa0;coli</i> showed apparent conservation of RNA binding by metabolic enzymes. Illustrating the value of total RBP purification, we discovered that the glycolytic enzyme enolase interacts with tRNAs. Exploiting PAR-TRAPP to determine the effects of brief exposure to weak acid stress revealed specific changes in late 60S ribosome biogenesis. Furthermore, we identified the precise sites of crosslinking for hundreds of RNA-peptide conjugates, using iTRAPP, providing insights into potential regulation. We conclude that TRAPP is a widely applicable tool for RBPome characterization.

### Keywords
Trapp rna-protein uv

### Affiliations
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Scotland
Edinburgh University

### Submitter
Vadim Shchepachev

### Lab Head
Dr David Tollervey
Wellcome Centre for Cell Biology, University of Edinburgh, Scotland


