### Accession
PXD029284

### Title
Metaproteomic analysis of gut microbiota from 30 samples of cystic fibrosis infants

### Description
The link between human gut microbiota (a complex group of microorganisms including not only bacteria but also fungi, viruses, etc.,) and the physiological state is nowadays unquestionable. Metaproteomic has emerged as a useful technique to characterize this microbial community, not just taxonomically, but also focusing on specific biological processes carried out by gut microbiota that may have an effect in the host health or pathological state. Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease in which the microbiota of the respiratory tract determines the patient's survival and differences in composition of gut microbiota of cystic fibrosis patients respect to healthy infants have been reported. In order to characterize this host-microbiota inter-relation, we carried out the metaproteomic study of 30 stool samples from infants with cystic fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty stool samples were processed according to previous works, with modifications (Tanca, Palomba, Pisanu, Addis, & Uzzau, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018). Briefly, 10 mL of PBS was added to 0.1-0.3 g of stool sample and shaken 45 min at 4 ºC in a tube rotator. The samples were then centrifuged at 500 g, 4 ºC for 5 min. Supernatant was collected and this process was repeated twice. All three collected supernatants were centrifuged at 14 000 g, for 20 min at 4ºC and the pellet was washed one time with PBS (centrifugation 14 000 g, 4ºC for 20 min). The pellet was resuspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (4 % SDS, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) and incubated at 95 ºC for 10 min. After cooling and once the lysates had been transferred to a 2-mL screwcap tube, 4 sonications (30 s each with 1 min interval on ice) with amplitude of 40% were carried out. Five rounds of bead beating were carried out after adding 0.3 g glass beads (0.5-0.75 mm) to the lysate. Cell debris and beads were removed through centrifugation at 16 000 g, 4ºC for 10 min and finally, the supernatant was subjected to another centrifugation (16 000 g, 4 ºC for 10 min). Proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (75 µm i.d. x 20 mm, 3 µm C18 resin with 100 Å pore; Thermo Scientific) using a 250 nL/ min flow rate, and then separated onto a C18 analytical column (75 µm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm and 100 Å pore size. Thermo Scientific Easy Spray Column) using a 240 min gradient (2-40% Buffer B (0.1 % FA in 100 % ACN) in Buffer A (0.1 % FA)). Mass spectra were acquired in a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a Full-MS data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in a positive mode with Xcalibur 4.1 software. MS scans were acquired at m/z range of 350 to 2 000 Da followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan (with a threshold of 0.01) of the 15 most abundance precursors with charges of 2-4 in MS scans for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 10 s and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra (.raw files) were processed using Metalab (Cheng et al., 2017)  using the human microbial gene catalog (Li et al., 2014) to generate a reduced, sample-specific protein database. MaxQuant version 1.6.9.0 was used for characterization (using Andromeda search engine) and quantitative analysis (using maxLFQ algorithm) of microbial peptides. For human peptide identification, Uniprot (UniProt., 2018) human database was downloaded (downloaded 02.18.20 with 74 451 entries) and used as ‘Host database’ in Metalab search. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed

### Publication Abstract
Newborn screening for cystic fibrosis (CF) can identify affected but asymptomatic infants. The selection of omic technique for gut microbiota study is crucial due to both the small amount of feces available and the low microorganism load. Our aims were to compare the agreement between 16S rRNA amplicon sequencing and metaproteomics by a robust statistical analysis, including both presence and abundance of taxa, to describe the sequential establishment of the gut microbiota during the first year of life in a small size sample (8 infants and 28 fecal samples). The taxonomic assignations by the two techniques were similar, whereas certain discrepancies were observed in the abundance detection, mostly the lower predicted relative abundance of <i>Bifidobacterium</i> and the higher predicted relative abundance of certain <i>Firmicutes</i> and <i>Proteobacteria</i> by amplicon sequencing. During the first months of life, the CF gut microbiota is characterized by a significant enrichment of Ruminococcus gnavus, the expression of certain virulent bacterial traits, and the detection of human inflammation-related proteins. Metaproteomics provides information on composition and functionality, as well as data on host-microbiome interactions. Its strength is the identification and quantification of <i>Actinobacteria</i> and certain classes of <i>Firmicutes</i>, but alpha diversity indices are not comparable to those of amplicon sequencing. Both techniques detected an aberrant microbiota in our small cohort of infants with CF during their first year of life, dominated by the enrichment of <i>R. gnavus</i> within a human inflammatory environment. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> In recent years, some techniques have been incorporated for the study of microbial ecosystems, being 16S rRNA gene sequencing being the most widely used. Metaproteomics provides the advantage of identifying the interaction between microorganisms and human cells, but the available databases are less extensive as well as imprecise. Few studies compare the statistical differences between the two techniques to define the composition of an ecosystem. Our work shows that the two methods are comparable in terms of microorganism identification but provide different results in alpha diversity analysis. On the other hand, we have studied newborns with cystic fibrosis, for whom we have described the establishment of an intestinal ecosystem marked by the inflammatory response of the host and the enrichment of Ruminococcus gnavus.

### Keywords
Gut microbiota, Human proteins, Metaproteomics, Cystic fibrosis, Microbial functions

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


