### Accession
PXD029585

### Title
NeonGreen-POLQ knock-in in Human embryonic kidney 293 cells VS Human embryonic kidney 293 cells

### Description
Replication stress (RS) can lead to the formation of DNA double strand breaks (DSBs) and threatens genomic stability. Homologous recombination (HR) pathway is essential to prevent RS and repairs associated DSBs. Upon excessive RS or HR deficiency, DSBs can persist in mitosis, wherein DNA damage response and DSB repair are inhibited. Thus, the fate of DSBs remaining or arising in mitosis remains poorly understood. Here we unwind two distinct roles of the polymerase theta (Polθ) in the maintenance of genomic stability. First, by mass spectrometry and foci screening we show that, in interphase, Polθ interacts with HR proteins and its recruitment to IR-induced DSBs is highly dependent of HR pathway. Secondly, we identify a novel role of the Polθ in counteracting the deleterious effect of DSBs in mitosis. Contrariwise to its interphase recruitment, Polθ recruitment to mitotic DSBs is HR-independent and triggered by mitotic kinases activities. In response to RS or HR deficiency, Polθ localizes to DSBs throughout mitosis and forms nuclear bodies in the G1 daughter cells. In addition, Polθ localizes to centromeres and acentric fragments and activates the mitotic checkpoint. Conversely, Polθ deficiency leads to premature anaphase onset, resulting in an accumulation of mitotic abnormalities. Strikingly, the specific inhibition of Polθ in mitosis kills HR-deficient cells, identifying mitotic Polθ function as its key role in maintaining genome integrity. Our results pinpoint to the mitotic Polθ-mediated replication stress response pathway as a unique vulnerability of cancer cells, with great potential for further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei from HEK NeonGreen-POLQ cells were obtained after cells lysis with Nuclei extract buffer (Buffer A: 10 mM Hepes pH 7.5, 10 mM KCl, 1,5 mM MgCl2, 34 mM Sucrose, 10% Glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% TritonX100 and protease inhibitor (cOmplete™ Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche)). Cells lysates were incubated 5 minutes on ice and centrifuged 5 minutes at 1300g. Nuclei (Insoluble fraction) were lysed in 300mM RIPA lysis buffer (300 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HcL, pH 7.5, 0.2 mM EDTA, pH 8.0 and 1% NP-40) for 40 minutes on ice, benzonase was added during the final 7 minutes of incubation. Extracts were spin 20 minutes at 20 000g and protein concentration was determined using BCA kit. Protein lysates were diluted to 150mM NaCl and 5 mg of proteins extract was used for immunoprecipitation (IP). Lysates were incubated with mNeonGreen-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads (Chromotek) for 2 hours at 4°C and beads were washed twice with 150mM NaCl buffer. NeonGreen-Trap Magnetic Agarose beads incubated in HEK native cell extracts were used as controls. Beads were washed 3 times in 25 mM sodium bicarbonate buffer, then resuspended in 100 µL of this buffer before digestion by adding 0.2 μg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 CH3CN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (10µL of 0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens UP000005640 database (downloaded 12/2019 containing 20364 entries) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v.3.9.3 (PMID: 17610305). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102) and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label-free quantification was performed by peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ v.2.2.21 (PMID: 21751374). XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=3). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) are deleterious lesions that challenge genome integrity. To mitigate this threat, human cells rely on the activity of multiple DNA repair machineries that are tightly regulated throughout the cell cycle<sup>1</sup>. In interphase, DSBs are mainly repaired by non-homologous end joining and homologous recombination<sup>2</sup>. However, these pathways are completely inhibited in mitosis<sup>3-5</sup>, leaving the fate of mitotic DSBs unknown. Here we show that DNA polymerase theta<sup>6</sup> (Pol&#x3b8;) repairs mitotic DSBs and thereby maintains genome integrity. In contrast to other DSB repair factors, Pol&#x3b8; function is activated in mitosis upon phosphorylation by Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1). Phosphorylated Pol&#x3b8; is recruited by a direct interaction with the BRCA1 C-terminal domains of TOPBP1 to mitotic DSBs, where it mediates joining of broken DNA ends. Loss of Pol&#x3b8; leads to defective repair of mitotic DSBs, resulting in a loss of genome integrity. This is further exacerbated in cells that are deficient in homologous recombination, where loss of mitotic DSB repair by Pol&#x3b8; results in cell death. Our results identify mitotic DSB repair as the underlying cause of synthetic lethality between Pol&#x3b8; and homologous recombination. Together, our findings reveal the critical importance of mitotic DSB repair in the maintenance of genome integrity.

### Keywords
Polθ binding partners in human cells

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


