### Accession
PXD009746

### Title
Label-free Proteomic Analysis of Exosomes Secreted from THP-1-Derived Macrophages in the Absence or Presence of Interferon-α

### Description
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles that function in intercellular communication. We have previously reported that exosomes play a role in the transmission of antiviral molecules during interferon-α (IFN-α)-mediated immune responses. In this study, the protein contents of THP-1-derived macrophages with or without interferon-α treatment and of the exosomes secreted from these cells were analyzed by the label-free LC-MS/MS quantitation technologies. A total number of 1845 and 1550 protein groups were identified in the THP-1 macrophages and the corresponding exosomes, respectively. Treating the cells with IFN-α resulted in the differential abundance of 110 proteins in cells and 260 proteins in exosomes (greater than 2.0-fold), among which 35 proteins were both up-regulated in the IFN-α treated cells and corresponding exosomes while 139 proteins were specifically up-regulated in exosomes but not in the donor cells. GO and KEGG analysis of the protein function categories suggested that IFN-α promoted the abundance of proteins involved in “defense response to virus” in both exosomes and cells, and proteins related to “RNA processing” only in exosomes. Functional analysis further indicated that exosomes from IFN-α-treated cells exhibited potent antiviral activity that restored the impaired antiviral response of IFN-α in hepatitis B virus-replicating hepatocytes. These results have deepened the understanding of the exosome-mediated transfer of IFN-α-induced antiviral molecules and may provide new basis for therapeutic strategies to control viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
MS Sample Preparation and Tryptic Digestion IFN-α treated or non-treated THP-1 derived macrophages and their derived exosomes were lysed in sample buffer (30 mM Tris, 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.5), and the protein concentration was determined using the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA). A protein amount of 5 µg or 10 µg per sample, for exosome or cell samples respectively, was loaded on an 18% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel (Anamed Elektrophorese, Groß-Bieberau, Germany) and allowed to run slightly into the gels (15 min, 100 V). The protein bands were stained with Coomassie dye and cut from the gels. Trypsin digestion of proteins was performed overnight at 37 °C (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) and the peptides were extracted from digested bands with 20 μL of 50% ACN in 0.1% TFA (1:1), vacuum dried and subsequently dissolved in 0.1% TFA. The peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis as previously described.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both from Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). 300 ng of peptide sample were injected and pre-concentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 300 μm×5 mm, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å; flow rate 30 μL/min). Subsequently, the peptides were separated on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 75 μm×50 cm, nano Viper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å) by a gradient from 5% to 40% solvent B over 120 min (solvent A: 0.1% FA, solvent B: 0.1% FA, 84% ACN; flow rate 400 nL/min; column oven temperature 60 °C). The instrument was operated in a data-dependent mode. Full scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer and the tandem mass spectra were measured in the linear ion trap. The 20 most abundant precursor ions detected in the full MS survey scan (m/z range of 350−2000, R = 60 000) were isolated with a 2 m/z mass window for further Collision-induced dissociation (CID) MS/MS analysis. The default charge state was set as 2. For MS/MS, precursor ions were activated using 35% normalized collision energy and an activation time of 10 ms.  Mass spectrometric data analysis  Ion intensity based label-free quantification technique allows the determination of precursor ion abundances at MS level across samples. The peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer Software (ver. 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, U.S.A.). The mass spectra were searched against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (2014_10; 546,790 entries) restricted to Homo sapiens (20,194 sequences) using Mascot (ver. 2.3.0.2, Matrix Science Ltd., London, UK). For each of the database searches, the mass tolerance was set to 5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.4 Da for fragment ions. One tryptic miscleavage was considered as well as variable modification of methionine (oxidation) and cysteine (propionamide). The Target Decoy PSM Validator function implemented in Proteome Discoverer was used to estimate peptide confidence and only peptides which passed a false discovery rate < 1% were considered for analysis. Protein grouping function (strict maximum parsimony principle) was enabled in Proteome Discoverer. Protein groups identified with a minimum of two peptides (at least one unique peptide) were considered for further analysis. The peptide quantification was performed using Progenesis QI software (ver. 2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.). Equal amount of peptides (25 ng) from the 12 samples (6 replicates×2 groups) were mixed before LC-MS/MS analysis and the resulted data were used as reference in Progenesis analysis. All runs were aligned to the reference run and a master list of features considering m/z values and retention times was generated. In Progenesis QI, peptide ions were filtered using the criteria as below: delete matching peptide ions with 2 isotopes or less, retain peptide ions with a charge state of 2 to 7. Then the peptide identifications exported from Proteome Discoverer were imported into Progenesis QI software where they were matched to the respective features. Those matching peptides with mass error (ppm) greater than 5ppm were deleted. The remaining matching peptides were used for proteins quantification analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Exosomes are extracellular vesicles that function in intercellular communication. We have previously reported that exosomes play an important role in the transmission of antiviral molecules during interferon-&#x3b1; (IFN-&#x3b1;) treatment. In this study, the protein profiles of THP-1-derived macrophages with or without interferon-&#x3b1; treatment and the exosomes secreted from these cells were analyzed by label-free liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry quantitation technologies. A total of 1845 and 1550 protein groups were identified in the THP-1 macrophages and the corresponding exosomes, respectively. Treating the cells with IFN-&#x3b1; resulted in the differential abundance of 94 proteins in cells and 67 proteins in exosomes (greater than 2.0-fold), among which 23 proteins were up-regulated in both the IFN-&#x3b1; treated cells and corresponding exosomes, while 14 proteins were specifically up-regulated in exosomes but not in the donor cells. GO and KEGG analysis of the identified proteins suggested that IFN-&#x3b1; promoted the abundance of proteins involved in the "defense response to virus" and "type I interferon signaling pathway" in both exosomes and cells. Functional analysis further indicated that exosomes from IFN-&#x3b1;-treated cells exhibited potent antiviral activity that restored the impaired antiviral response of IFN-&#x3b1; in hepatitis B virus-replicating hepatocytes. These results have deepened the understanding of the exosome-mediated transfer of IFN-&#x3b1;-induced antiviral molecules and may provide a new basis for therapeutic strategies to control viral infection.

### Keywords
Ifn-α; exosomes; macrophages; label-free quantification; isgs

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center (MPC), Ruhr-Universität Bochum, Germany
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum 44801 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Dominik Andre Meger

### Lab Head
Dr Dominik Andre Megger
Medizinisches Proteom-Center Ruhr-Universität Bochum 44801 Bochum Germany


