### Accession
PXD002405

### Title
Quantitative profiling of the enzymatic activity of the protein lysine mono-methyltransferase SMYD2 using SILAC-based proteomics

### Description
The significance of non-histone lysine methylation in cell biology and human disease is an emerging area of research exploration, and small molecule inhibitors that selectively and potently target “writers” and “erasers” of methyl-lysine, such as the protein lysine mono-methyltransferase SMYD2, are active areas of drug discovery. It is therefore essential to clarify the substrates of these enzymes in cellular contexts in order to advance and to correctly understand the cellular mechanism(s) of action of these targets. Here, using stable isotopic labelling of amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled with immunoaffinity enrichment of mono-methyl-lysine (Kme1) peptides and mass spectrometry, we report the most comprehensive and large-scale proteomic study of protein mono-methylation, comprising a total of 1032 Kme1 sites identified in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells and 1861 Kme1 sites in ESCC cells overexpressing SMYD2. Among these sites was a subset of 35 robust Kme1 sites that were potently down-regulated by both shRNA-mediated knockdown of SMYD2 and LLY-507, a small molecule inhibitor of SMYD2. In addition, we report specific protein sequence motifs that were enriched in Kme1 sites and that were also directly regulated by endogenous SMYD2 activity, indicating that the diversity of SMYD2 substrate specificity of SMYD2 exceeds previous expectations. Furthermore, we reveal that BTF3 and PDAP1 are novel and direct substrates of SMYD2, as well as AHNAK and AHNAK2, two large and highly-repetitive proteins directly and extensively mono-methylated by SMYD2 at several lysine residues. Collectively, our findings provide novel quantitative and insights into the cellular activity and substrate recognition of SMYD2 as well as the global landscape and regulation of protein mono-methylation in cells.

### Sample Protocol
KYSE150 cell line grown in heavy SILAC media (K8R10) was treated by protein lysine methyltransferase SMYD2 inhibitor LLY507 and shRNA knockdown, and then mixed at 1:1 ratio with the control cells grown in light SILAC media (K0R0) at the protein level, respectively. The mixed proteins were subjected to proteases Lys-C and trypsin digestion, strong cation-exchanged (SCX) fractionation, affinity enticement of mono-methyl lysine (Kme1) peptides, and then mass spectrometry identification and quantification. We also performed an additional experiment in which cells lysates were mixed at a 1:1 ratio and separated by subcellular fractionation prior to protease digestion and Kme1 peptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
pFind studio package was used for database searching and for data analysis. Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy version of the UniProt human protein database consisting of forward and reversed protein sequences. Three trypsin miss-cleavage sites were allowed, and the precursor ion and fragment ion tolerances were set to 5ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.0215) was set as a static modification, with lysine mono-methylation (+14.0156) and methionine oxidation (+15.9949) set as dynamic modifications. SILAC quantification module was enabled with lysine (+8.0142) and arginine (+10.0083). A peptide-level false discovery rate (FDR) of 1.0%  was applied to filter the searching result. Quantification ratios of methylation sites were acquired by the median values of all ratios of  Peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs)  containing the same methylation sites, and normalized by the ratio distributions of the total digested samples.

### Publication Abstract
The significance of non-histone lysine methylation in cell biology and human disease is an emerging area of research exploration. The development of small molecule inhibitors that selectively and potently target enzymes that catalyze the addition of methyl-groups to lysine residues, such as the protein lysine mono-methyltransferase SMYD2, is an active area of drug discovery. Critical to the accurate assessment of biological function is the ability to identify target enzyme substrates and to define enzyme substrate specificity within the context of the cell. Here, using stable isotopic labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) coupled with immunoaffinity enrichment of mono-methyl-lysine (Kme1) peptides and mass spectrometry, we report a comprehensive, large-scale proteomic study of lysine mono-methylation, comprising a total of 1032 Kme1 sites in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) cells and 1861 Kme1 sites in ESCC cells overexpressing SMYD2. Among these Kme1 sites is a subset of 35 found to be potently down-regulated by both shRNA-mediated knockdown of SMYD2 and LLY-507, a selective small molecule inhibitor of SMYD2. In addition, we report specific protein sequence motifs enriched in Kme1 sites that are directly regulated by endogenous SMYD2 activity, revealing that SMYD2 substrate specificity is more diverse than expected. We further show direct activity of SMYD2 toward BTF3-K2, PDAP1-K126 as well as numerous sites within the repetitive units of two unique and exceptionally large proteins, AHNAK and AHNAK2. Collectively, our findings provide quantitative insights into the cellular activity and substrate recognition of SMYD2 as well as the global landscape and regulation of protein mono-methylation.

### Keywords
Lysine methyltransferase, Smyd2, Silac, Methylation, Immunoaffinity enrichment

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA

### Submitter
XIng-Jun Cao

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin A. Garcia
Epigenetics Program, Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA


