### Accession
PXD027872

### Title
Nuclear pore complexes interactome dissection

### Description
We purified the different types of NPCs in yeast using a differential affinity purification strategy and analyzed their respective compositions and interactomes by mass spectrometry. Therefore, we compared the relative abundancies of specific nuclear factors and NPCs associated factor between all pores, basket-less pores, basket-containing pores, and pores upon MLP1/2 deletion

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification. Affinity purifications (AP) were performed in triplicate per conditions as previously described (Oeffinger et al., 2007b). In brief, cells were grown to late log phase, frozen by immersion in liquid nitrogen, and mechanically ground using a planetary ball mill (Retsch). For each AP, 1 g of cell powder was thawed in 9 ml of extraction buffer (1X tributyltin, 50 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT, 0.5 % Triton X-100, 1X protease inhibitor cocktail [4 mg/mL pepstatin A (Sigma), 180 mg/mL PMSF (Sigma)], antifoam B (Sigma, 1:5000), and 40U/mL RNAsin (Promega)), homogenized with a Polytron for 25 s, and cleared by centrifugation at 4,000 g for 5 min. 10mM glutaraldehyde was added for 5 min and samples were gently agitated on ice before the reaction was quenched with Tris-HCl pH8 to a final concentration of 100mM. Lysates were incubated with either IgG (anti-rabbit IgG, Sigma) or GFP-nanobody (expressed from pDZ580-pET28a-GBP and purified as described in-conjugated magnetic beads (Dynabeads M-280) for 30 min (Rothbauer et al., 2008). After removal of the super-natant, beads were extensively washed in extraction buffer, then detergents removed by washing the bead-bound complexes in 0.1 M NH4OAc/0.1 mM MgCl2 before a final was and resuspension in 50l of 20-mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Isolated proteins were digested on-bead at 37°C with 1 g trypsin (Pierce Trypsin Protease, MS Grade) for 16 h (Trahan et al., 2016). The digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to a final concentration of 2%.   For differential APs, the flow-through was incubated with GFP-nanobody-conjugated magnetic beads for 30 min and the beads then treated as describe above.  Peptide preparation for injection in mass spectrometer. Tryptic peptides were cleaned using C18 ZipTips as per supplier recommendations (Milli-pore). Samples were injected to near saturation of the signal, while an equivalent volume of their respective negative controls were injected. Liquid chromatography was performed using a PicoFrit fused silica capillary column (15 cm × 75 μm i.d; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA), self-packed with C-18 reverse-phase resin (Jupiter 5 um particles, 300 Å pore size; Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using a high-pressure packing cell on the Easy-nLC II system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) and coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nanoelectrospray Flex ion source. 0.2% formic acid (Solvent A) and 100% acetonitrile/0.2% formic acid (Solvent B) were used for chromatography and peptides were loaded on-column at a flowrate of 600 nl/min and eluted with a three-slope gradient at a flowrate of 250 nl/min. Solvent B was first increased from 2 to 25% over 20 min, then from 25 to 45% over 40 min, and finally from 45 to 80% B over 10 min.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. The peak list files were generated with Proteome Discoverer the following as described in (Aguilar et al, 2020). Protein database searching was performed with Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) against the NCBI - S.cerevisiae protein database (20160802). The mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were set to 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin was used as the enzyme allowing for up to 1 missed cleavage. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Data analysis was performed using Scaffold (version 4.8.4). Mass spectrometry data analysis. Protein and peptide identification thresholds in Scaffold™ was set to 95% which resulted in decoy false discovery rate of 6%. Exclusive spectrum counts (ESC) were used for semi-quantification of protein preys, and mass spectrometry results were analyzed. Briefly, only Exclusive Spectral Counts (ESCs) above background detected in controls were retained. In silico digestion using MS digest (http://prospector.ucsf.edu) was performed for each protein to take protein size and predicted cleavage sites into accounts. Values were normalized against the average values of the proteins associated with the bait proteins in the different APs: Mlp2 for Mlp1-PrA and Y complex nucleoporins (Nup84, Nup85, Nup120 Nup145C) for Nup133-GFP. This allowed normalization of the data sets against proteins with a similar size, stoichiometry, and segregation behavior without the need to consider the none-pore associated fraction of bait proteins.

### Publication Abstract
To determine which transcripts should reach the cytoplasm for translation, eukaryotic cells have established mechanisms to regulate selective mRNA export through the nuclear pore complex (NPC). The nuclear basket, a substructure of the NPC protruding into the nucleoplasm, is thought to function as a stable platform where mRNA-protein complexes (mRNPs) are rearranged and undergo quality control prior to export, ensuring that only mature mRNAs reach the cytoplasm. Here, we use proteomic, genetic, live-cell, and single-molecule resolution microscopy approaches in budding yeast to demonstrate that basket formation is dependent on RNA polymerase II transcription and subsequent mRNP processing. We further show that while all NPCs can bind Mlp1, baskets assemble only on a subset of nucleoplasmic NPCs, and these basket-containing NPCs associate a distinct protein and RNA interactome. Taken together, our data point toward NPC heterogeneity and an RNA-dependent mechanism for functionalization of NPCs in budding yeast through nuclear basket assembly.

### Keywords
Nuclear pore heterogeneity, Affinity purification, Mrna maturation

### Affiliations
Institut de recherches cliniques Montreal (IRCM)
Universite de Montreal
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal Department of Biochemistry, University of Montreal Department of Medicine, Division ofExperimental Medicine

### Submitter
Marlene Oeffinger

### Lab Head
Dr Marlene Oeffinger
Institut de Recherches Cliniques de Montréal Department of Biochemistry, University of Montreal Department of Medicine, Division ofExperimental Medicine


