### Accession
PXD038917

### Title
Polarized Endothelial Cell-Derived Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Proteomics was performed on extracellular vesicles secreted bidirectionally (apical vs. basolateral surfaces) from in vitro cultures of activated and quiescent human endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide samples were analyzed by data dependent acquisition on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer fronted with an EASY-Spray Source (heated at 45˚C), and coupled to an Easy-nLC1000 HPLC pump (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were subjected to a dual column set-up: an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 trap column, 75 µm X 20 mm (pre-column), and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column, 75 µm X 250 mm (Thermo Scientific). The analytical gradient was run at 300 nl/min, with Solvent A composed of water/0.1% formic acid and Solvent B composed of 95% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid). The analytical gradient was run from 5-21% Solvent B for 50 minutes, followed by 10 minutes of 30% Solvent B. All reagents were MS-grade. The Orbitrap analyzer was set to 120K resolution, and the top N precursor ions in 3 seconds cycle time within a scan range of 400-1500 m/z (60 seconds dynamic exclusion enabled with a repeat count of 1) with a standard AGC target and maximum injection time of 25ms were subjected to higher energy collision induced dissociation (HCD; stepped collision energy 24, 26, 28%; isolation window, 1.2 m/z) at a resolution of 60k.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data from complete media controls were queried against the bovine (UP000009136; downloaded April 12, 2022), yeast (UP000002311; downloaded June 16, 2022), and E. coli (UP000000625; downloaded June 16, 2022) UniProt databases simultaneously, using the HT-SEQUEST search algorithm, via the Proteome Discoverer (PD) Package (version 2.5, Thermo Scientific) in order to generate a complete media exclusion list. MS/MS data from EV samples were then queried against the human UniProt database (UP000005640; downloaded January 18, 2022) and complete media exclusion list simultaneously in PD2.5 as above. Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme while allowing up to two miss-cleavages, using 10 ppm precursor tolerance window and 0.02 Da fragment tolerance window. Oxidation of methionine and N-terminus acetylation were set as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. The peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated using Percolator provided by PD and peptides were filtered based on a 1.0% FDR based on decoy results. Quantification utilized unique peptides only (those assigned to a given Master protein group and not present in any other protein group). A minimum of two unique peptides were required for a protein to be included in each dataset. To quantify peptide precursors detected in the MS1 but not sequenced from sample to sample, we enabled the ‘Feature Mapper’ node. Chromatographic alignment was done with a maximum retention time (RT) shift of 10 minutes and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Feature linking and mapping settings were: RT tolerance minimum of 0 minutes, mass tolerance of 10 ppm and signal-to-noise minimum of 5. Precursor peptide abundance quantification was based on chromatographic intensities and total peptide amount was used for normalization.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Polarization, Endothelial cell, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School
University Health Network, Division of Vascular Surgery, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Division of Biomedical Research; Department of Surgery, University of Toronto; Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Mark Blaser

### Lab Head
Dr Kathryn L Howe
University Health Network, Division of Vascular Surgery, Toronto General Hospital Research Institute, Division of Biomedical Research; Department of Surgery, University of Toronto; Toronto, Canada


