### Accession
PXD018794

### Title
Precise temporal regulation of post-transcriptional repressors is required for an orderly Drosophila maternal-to-zygotic transition

### Description
In animal embryos the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) hands developmental control from maternal to zygotic gene products. We show that the maternal proteome represents over half of the protein coding capacity of the Drosophila melanogaster genome and that 2% of this proteome is rapidly degraded during the MZT. Cleared proteins include the post-transcriptional repressors Cup, Trailer hitch (TRAL), Maternal expression at 31B (ME31B), and Smaug (SMG). While the ubiquitin-proteasome system is necessary for clearance of all four repressors, distinct E3 ligase complexes target them: the C-terminal to Lis1 Homology (CTLH) complex targets Cup, TRAL and ME31B for degradation early in the MZT; the Skp/Cullin/F-box-containing (SCF) complex targets SMG at the end of the MZT. Deleting the C-terminal 233 amino acids of SMG makes the protein immune to degradation. We show that artificially persistent SMG downregulates the zygotic re-expression of mRNAs whose maternal contribution is cleared by SMG. Thus, clearance of SMG permits an orderly MZT.

### Sample Protocol
GFP IP-MS  For GFP-tagged proteins, 0–2 hour old embryos were collected from flies expressing either GFPSLMB, GFP-Muskelin or from non-transgenic Canton S flies as control. Embryos were dechorionated for 30 seconds in 12% sodium hypochlorite and lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM sodium chloride, 1% NP-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate and protease inhibitor mix, by homogenization with a pestle on ice. The extract was cleared by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C), frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. The lysate was treated with RNase A (100 μg/ml) for 10 min at room temperature, cleared again by centrifugation (20000 x g, 4°C) and diluted 1:5 with GFP wash buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM EDTA). The diluted extract was incubated with GFP-Trap matrix (Chromotek, equilibrated in GFP wash buffer) for 1 h at 4°C. The matrix was washed 3 times with GFP wash buffer and resuspended in 8 M urea/ 0.4 M ammonium bicarbonate. Bound proteins were reduced with DTT (7.5 mM, 30 min at 50°C), alkylated with chloroacetamide (20 μL 100 mM per 120 μL reduced sample, 30 min at room temperature), digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, 1:50 w/w trypsin to protein ratio) at 37°C overnight. Digests were stopped by addition of TFA, samples were concentrated by speedvac and analyzed by LC/MS/MS using an U3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap QExactive Plus mass spectrometer with NanoFlex ionization source (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded on a trap column (PepMap RP-C18, 300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm, 100 A, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.1 % TFA at a flow rate of 30 μL/min. After 15 min, peptides were eluted via an in-house packed separation column (self-pack PicoFrits, 75 μm x 50 cm, 15 μm tip, New Objective, packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH). For peptide separation, a linear 180-min gradient was applied (3 % - 40 % eluent B; eluent A: 0.1 % formic acid in water, eluent B: 0.08 formic acid in acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min. Data were acquired using a data-dependent top10 strategy (one MS survey scan, followed by 10 MS/MS scans of the 10 most abundant signals). MS data (m/z range 375-1800) were recorded with R = 140,000 at m/z 200, MS/MS data (HCD, 28% normalized collision energy) with R = 17,500 at m/z 200.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analyzed with MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 with label-free quantification. The modification parameter was set depending on the alkylation reagent used, iBAQ values were reported and the different runs of an experiment were matched if applicable.

### Publication Abstract
In animal embryos, the maternal-to-zygotic transition (MZT) hands developmental control from maternal to zygotic gene products. We show that the maternal proteome represents more than half of the protein-coding capacity of Drosophila melanogaster's genome, and that 2% of this proteome is rapidly degraded during the MZT. Cleared proteins include the post-transcriptional repressors Cup, Trailer hitch (TRAL), Maternal expression at 31B (ME31B), and Smaug (SMG). Although the ubiquitin-proteasome system is necessary for clearance of these repressors, distinct E3 ligase complexes target them: the C-terminal to Lis1 Homology (CTLH) complex targets Cup, TRAL, and ME31B for degradation early in the MZT and the Skp/Cullin/F-box-containing (SCF) complex targets SMG at the end of the MZT. Deleting the C-terminal 233 amino acids of SMG abrogates F-box protein interaction and confers immunity to degradation. Persistent SMG downregulates zygotic re-expression of mRNAs whose maternal contribution is degraded by SMG. Thus, clearance of SMG permits an orderly MZT.

### Keywords
C-terminal to lis1 homology (ctlh) complex, Ubiquitin ligase, Skp/cullin/f-box-containing (scf) complex, Rna-binding protein, Smaug

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology  Charles Tanford Protein Center  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Germany
MLU Halle, Inst. f. Pharmacy

### Submitter
Christian Ihling

### Lab Head
Dr Elmar Wahle
Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology  Charles Tanford Protein Center  Martin Luther University Halle-Wittenberg Germany


