### Accession
PXD041347

### Title
Bacillus subtilis YtpP and thioredoxin A are new players in the CoA-mediated defense mechanism against cellular stress

### Description
Coenzyme A is an important cellular metabolite critical for metabolic processes and the regulation of gene expression. The recent discovery of its antioxidant role has highlighted its protective function that leads to the formation of a mixed-disulfide bond with protein cysteines, termed protein CoAlation. To date, more than 2,000 CoAlated bacterial and mammalian proteins have been identified in cellular response to oxidative stress with the majority being involved in metabolic pathways (60%). In vitro and cellular studies have shown that protein CoAlation is a widespread post-translational modification, which modulates the activity and conformation of the modified proteins. The induction of protein CoAlation by oxidative stress was found to be rapidly reversed after the removal of oxidizing agents from the medium of cultured cells. In this study, we developed an ELISA-based deCoAlation assay to detect deCoAlation activity from B. subtilis and B. megaterium lysates. We then used a combination of ELISA-based assay and purification strategies to show that deCoAlation is an enzyme-driven mechanism. Using mass-spectrometry and deCoAlation assays (anti-CoA WB), we identified B. subtilis YtpP (thioredoxin-like protein) and thioredoxin A (TrxA) as enzymes that can remove CoA from different substrates. With mutagenesis studies, we identified YtpP and TrxA catalytic cysteine residues and proposed a possible deCoAlation mechanism for MsrA and PRDX5, which results in the release of both CoA and the reduced form of MsrA or PRDX5. Overall, this paper reveals deCoAlation activity of YtpP and TrxA, and opens doors to future studies on the CoA-mediated redox regulation of CoAlated proteins under various cellular stress conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Excised gel bands were destained with acetonitrile (MeCN), and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 7.8), in the dark at RT. Gel bands were digested overnight with 7 ng/μL of trypsin (Promega, UK) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM IAM, at 37 °C. Peptides were extracted initially with 2% formic acid (FA), followed by 30% MeCN/0.5% FA. Prior to LC/MS analysis, the combined peptide mixtures were partially dried down in a Speed Vac (Savant, Fischer Scientific) to remove the MeCN. Proteins from diamide-treated HEK293/Pank1β lysates were precipitated with 90% methanol (−20 °C) by vortexing and pelleted by centrifugation at 5000×g for 20 min at 4 °C. The protein pellet was homogenised for 30 s at RT in 1.5 mL of 90% methanol with a tissue tearor to remove free CoA, CoA esters, LMW thiols, and adenine nucleotides. 50 μL of the homogenate was aliquoted and resolubilised with 100 mM Tris-HCL pH 7.5, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% SDS, 6 M urea to determine the protein concentration using BCA assay. The remaining homogenate was centrifuged at 18,000×g for 3 min at RT before partial-drying with a Speed Vac for 6 min. The protein pellet was digested for 90 min at 30 °C with enzyme/protein ratio 1:200 of LysC (mass-spec grade, Promega, UK) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate supplemented with 6.4 mM IAM and further digested with 7 ng/μL of trypsin at 30 °C for 10 h. The trypsinised samples were heat-inactivated, followed by the incubation with anti-CoA monoclonal antibodies, which were cross-linked to Protein G-Sepharose. Immunoprecipitated peptides were eluted from beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and dried completely in a speed vac concentrator. The resulting pellet was resolubilised in 20 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. 2.3 μL of 50 mM MgCl2 and 1 μL of Nudix 7 (1.7 μg) were added and incubated at 37 °C for 30 min. The peptide mixtures were acidified and desalted using home-made C18 (3 M Empore) stage tip that contained 1.5 μL of poros R3 (Applied Biosystems) resin. Bound peptides were eluted sequentially with 15 μL 30%, 50% and 80% acetonitrile in 0.5% FA, and partially dried down to less than 10 μL. Then, 100 μL of Iron (III)-immobilized metal ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) binding buffer (30% acetonitrile/0.25 M acetic acid) was added to the samples, ready for IMAC enrichment. Peptide mixtures were separated by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS using an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA) to deliver a flow of approximately 300 nL/min. A C18 Acclaim PepMap100 5 μm, 100 μm × 20 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA), trapped the peptides prior to separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 3 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm nanoViper (ThermoScientific Dionex, San Jose, USA). The column was developed with an acetonitrile gradient, consisting of buffer A (2% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% MeCN, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides from solution digests were eluted using a gradient of 3 to 10% B in 49 min, 10–35% in 70 min and 35–90% in 7 min, while gel bands digest were eluted with a gradient of 6–45% B in 31 min and 45–90% B in 15 min. The analytical column outlet was directly interfaced via a nano-flow electrospray ionisation source, with a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer either a Velos (solution digest) or Q Exactive Plus (gel bands digest) (ThermoScientific, San Jose, USA). The Velos mass spectrometer was operated in standard data dependent mode, performing survey full-scans (m/z 3500–1600) with a resolution of 60,000 at m/z = 400, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 20 most intense ions in the LTQ ion trap. The Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer was also operated in data dependent mode, performing MS1 full scans (m/z = 380–1600) with a resolution of 70,000, followed by MS2 acquisitions of the 15 most intense ions with a resolution of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
For solution digested samples, the acquired MS/MS raw files were processed using MaxQuant with the integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.5.2.8) as standard LC/MS identification. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Human UniProt Fasta database. Carbamidomethylation, N-ethylmaleimide, CoA_765, CoA_356 and CoA_338 of cysteines, and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, with a maximum of two missed cleavages allowed. CoAlated peptides identified were filtered using default settings of a minimum score of 40 for accepting an MS/MS identification for modified peptides. The Andromeda score is calculated as ~10 times the logarithm of the probability of matching at least k out of the n theoretical masses by chance, where k = number of matching ions in a spectrum and n = total number of theoretical ions. The default score of a minimum of >40 was applied, hence, scores higher than 40 are considered confident assignments.  For gel bands, the acquired raw data files were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, v2.4) against a UniProt Fasta database. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed for a trypsin digest search. Variable modifications were set as carbamidomethylation of cysteines, N-terminal protein acetylation and oxidation of methionine. Scaffold (version 4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. The Normalised Total Spectral Count is determined in Scaffold by a) finding the total number of spectra in each BioSample. b) The average number of spectra across all BioSamples is calculated. c) Scaffold then multiplies each spectrum count by the average over the total for each BioSample.

### Publication Abstract
Coenzyme A (CoA) is an important cellular metabolite that is critical for metabolic processes and the regulation of gene expression. Recent discovery of the antioxidant function of CoA has highlighted its protective role that leads to the formation of a mixed disulfide bond with protein cysteines, which is termed protein CoAlation. To date, more than 2000 CoAlated bacterial and mammalian proteins have been identified in cellular responses to oxidative stress, with the majority being involved in metabolic pathways (60%). Studies have shown that protein CoAlation is a widespread post-translational modification which modulates the activity and conformation of the modified proteins. The induction of protein CoAlation by oxidative stress was found to be rapidly reversed after the removal of oxidizing agents from the medium of cultured cells. In this study, we developed an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based deCoAlation assay to detect deCoAlation activity from <i>Bacillus subtilis</i> and <i>Bacillus megaterium</i> lysates. We then used a combination of ELISA-based assay and purification strategies to show that deCoAlation is an enzyme-driven mechanism. Using mass-spectrometry and deCoAlation assays, we identified <i>B. subtilis</i> YtpP (thioredoxin-like protein) and thioredoxin A (TrxA) as enzymes that can remove CoA from different substrates. With mutagenesis studies, we identified YtpP and TrxA catalytic cysteine residues and proposed a possible deCoAlation mechanism for CoAlated methionine sulfoxide reducatse A (MsrA) and peroxiredoxin 5 (PRDX5) proteins, which results in the release of both CoA and the reduced form of MsrA or PRDX5. Overall, this paper reveals the deCoAlation activity of YtpP and TrxA and opens doors to future studies on the CoA-mediated redox regulation of CoAlated proteins under various cellular stress conditions.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Bacillus subtilis, Mixed-disulfide, Coenzyme a, Antioxidant, Protein coalation, Protein decoalation, Bacillus megaterium

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Mark Skehel

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Gout
Department of Structural and Molecular Biology, University College London, London, United Kingdom


