### Accession
PXD003023

### Title
Phycobilisome mutant variants in Synechocystis species PCC 6803

### Description
Quantitative proteome analysis of progressive phycobilisome mutant variants CB, CK, and PAL to understand systematic alterations in protein expression profiles.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS Processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
In cyanobacteria such as Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, large antenna complexes called phycobilisomes (PBS) harvest light and transfer the energy to the photosynthetic reaction centers. Modification of the light harvesting machinery in cyanobacteria has widespread consequences, causing changes in cell morphology and physiology. In the current study, we investigated the effects of PBS truncation on the proteomes of three Synechocystis 6803 PBS antenna mutants. These range from the progressive truncation of phycocyanin rods in the CB and CK strains, to full removal of PBS in the PAL mutant. Comparative quantitative protein results revealed surprising changes in protein abundances in the mutant strains. Our results showed that PBS truncation in Synechocystis 6803 broadly impacted core cellular mechanisms beyond light harvesting and photosynthesis. Specifically, we observed dramatic alterations in membrane transport mechanisms, where the most severe PBS truncation in the PAL strain appeared to suppress the cellular utilization and regulation of bicarbonate and iron. These changes point to the role of PBS as a component critical to cell function, and demonstrate the continuing need to assess systems-wide protein based abundances to understand potential indirect phenotypic effects.

### Keywords
Mutant study, Phycobilisome, Ck, Proteome, Pal, Itraq, Cb

### Affiliations
Washington University in St. Louis, USA
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Himadri Pakrasi
Washington University in St. Louis, USA


