### Accession
PXD031623

### Title
Proteomic and Antibody Profiles Reveals Antigenic Composition and Signatures of Bacterial Ghost Vaccine of Brucella abortus A19

### Description
Brucellosis is an important zoonotic disease that causes great economic losses. Vaccine immunisation is the main strategy for the prevention and control of Brucellosis. Although live attenuated vaccines play important roles in the prevention of this disease, they also have several limitations, such as residual virulence and difficulty in the differentiation of immunisation and infection. We developed and evaluated a new bacteria ghost vaccine of Brucella abortus A19 by a new double inactivation method. The results showed that the bacterial ghost vaccine of Brucella represents a more safe and efficient vaccine for Brucellosis. We further characterised the antigenic components and signatures of the vaccine candidate A19BG. Here, we utilised a mass spectrometry-based label-free relative quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the global proteomics changes in A19BGs compared to its parental A19. The proteomic analysis identified 2014 proteins, 1116 of which were differentially expressed compared with those in A19. The common immunological proteins of OMPs (Bcsp31, Omp25, Omp10, Omp19, Omp28, and Omp2a), HSPs (DnaK, GroS, and GroL), and SodC were enriched in the proteome of A19BG. By protein micro array- based antibody profiling, significant differences were observed between A19BG and A19, and a number of signature immunogenic proteins were identified. Two of these proteins, BMEII0032 and BMEI0892, were confirmed to be differential diagnostic antigens for the A19BG vaccine candidate. In conclusion, using comparative proteomics and antibody profiling, protein components and signature antigens were identified for the ghost vaccine candidate A19BG, which are valuable for further developing the vaccine and its monitoring assays.

### Sample Protocol
A single positive colony was selected and cultured using the shake-culture technique in a 10 mL Brucella broth medium (BD, USA) containing 100 µg/ml kanamycin at 28°C, 150 r/min for 48 h. Then, 2 mL of the bacterial suspension was re-inoculated into the 200 mL Brucella broth medium containing kanamycin (100 μg/mL) and incubated up to the logarithmic growth period (OD600 = 0.6–0.8) at 28°C. Next, the culture temperature was elevated to 42 ℃ and culturing was performed  for 72h. The bacteria pellet was collected,   washed  three times with deionised water, and resuspended in 2.5 mL of deionised water, followed by the addition of 7.5 mL of lysis solution and  autoclaving before being sent to Jingjie Biological Company. Protein extraction and sample preparation  Briefly, 1% protease inhibitor was added to samples followed by  ultrasonic lysis and centrifugation. The supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube, and the protein concentration was measured with a BCA kit. An equal amount of each sample was taken for enzymatic hydrolysis, and the volume was adjusted to the same with the lysis solution. One volume of pre-cooled acetone was added following mixing, and then  four volumes of pre-cooled acetone were added before precipitation at -20°C for two h. The precipitate was collected after centrifuging at 4500 g for 5 min and washing twice with pre-cooled acetone. TEAB was added to the pellet to a final concentration of 200 mM after drying and then ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m), and hydrolysed overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and incubated  at 56°C for 30 min. Next,  iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to make a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. The samples before and after lysis at 42°C were used as two control groups. LC-MS/MS analysis  The peptides were separated by  Ultra-High Performance Liquid system,  injected into the nano-electrospray ionisation (NSI) ion source for ionisation, and then entered into the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 mass spectrometer for analysis. The ion source voltage was set to 2.3 kV, the FAIMS compensation voltage (CV) was set to -45V and  -65V, and then peptide precursor ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analysed by high-resolution Orbitrap. The scanning range of the primary mass spectrum was set to 400-1200 m/z, and the scanning resolution was 60000; the fixed starting point of the scanning range of the secondary mass spectrum was 110 m/z, the secondary scanning resolution was set to 15000, and TurboTMT was set to Off. The data acquisition mode was cycled time-based data-dependent scanning (DDA) ; that is, the peptide precursor ions were selected according to the order of signal intensity from high to low within a cycle of 1.0 s, and then entered the HCD collision cell using 27% fragmentation. The energy was fragmented, and the second-stage mass spectrometry analysis was also carried out sequentially. In order to improve the effective utilisation of the mass spectrometer, the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 100%, the signal threshold was set to 5E4 ions/s, the maximum injection time was set to Auto, and the dynamic rejection time of the tandem mass spectrometry scan was set to 20s to avoid repetitive scan of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the mass spectrometer were imported into the database search software Proteome Discoverer (v2.4.1.15) for retrieval. The dataset was Brucella_abortus_biovar_1_strain_9941_262698_Brucella_abortus_strain_2308_359391_PR_20210301_combine_20210508.fasta (6100 sequences). Anti-database was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The common pollution database was added to eliminate the influence of contaminating proteins in the medium. The restriction digestion method was set to Trypsin (Full). The number of missed cleavage sites was set to 2. The minimum length of the peptide was set to 6 amino acid residues. The maximum modification number of the peptide was set to 3. The mass error tolerance of the precursor ions and the secondary fragment ion was set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Carbamidomethyl was specified as a fixed modification, while oxidation, acetyl (N-terminus), met-loss, and met-loss+acetyl were specified as variable modifications. The FDR for protein, peptide, and PSM identification was set to 1%. Bioinformatic analysis  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of proteins was based on  three categories: molecular function, biological process , and cellular component. GO annotation was executed via eggnog-mapper software (v2.0) based on the eggnog database. Kyoto Encyclopaedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was employed to annotate the pathways in which differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) are involved. Clusters of Orthologous Groups (COG) database was used to assign the distribution of DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
Brucellosis is an important zoonotic disease that causes great economic losses. Vaccine immunisation is the main strategy for the prevention and control of brucellosis. Although live attenuated vaccines play important roles in the prevention of this disease, they also have several limitations, such as residual virulence and difficulty in the differentiation of immunisation and infection. We developed and evaluated a new bacterial ghost vaccine of <i>Brucella abortus</i> A19 by a new double inactivation method. The results showed that the bacterial ghost vaccine of <i>Brucella</i> represents a more safe and efficient vaccine for brucellosis. We further characterised the antigenic components and signatures of the vaccine candidate A19BG. Here, we utilised a mass spectrometry-based label-free relative quantitative proteomics approach to investigate the global proteomics changes in A19BGs compared to its parental A19. The proteomic analysis identified 2014 proteins, 1116 of which were differentially expressed compared with those in A19. The common immunological proteins of OMPs (Bcsp31, Omp25, Omp10, Omp19, Omp28, and Omp2a), HSPs (DnaK, GroS, and GroL), and SodC were enriched in the proteome of A19BG. By protein micro array-based antibody profiling, significant differences were observed between A19BG and A19 immune response, and a number of signature immunogenic proteins were identified. Two of these proteins, the BMEII0032 and BMEI0892 proteins were significantly different (P &lt; 0.01) in distinguishing between A19 and A19BG immune sera and were identified as differential diagnostic antigens for the A19BG vaccine candidate. In conclusion, using comparative proteomics and antibody profiling, protein components and signature antigens were identified for the ghost vaccine candidate A19BG, which are valuable for further developing the vaccine and its monitoring assays.

### Keywords
Brucellosis, Vaccine, Comparative proteomics, Bacteria ghost, Antibody profiling

### Affiliations
Tecon Biological Co., Ltd.

### Submitter
he chuanyu

### Lab Head
Dr Chuanyu he
Tecon Biological Co., Ltd.


