### Accession
PXD023229

### Title
Proteomic dataset of eggs of high and low quality in pikeperch, Sander lucioperca.

### Description
Gamete quality is one of the most important element of successful aquaculture. This especially applies to a newly domesticated fish species, such as pikeperch (Sander lucioperca) in which lowered and/or variable egg quality is one of the biggest obstacles toward rapid production expansion. However, mechanisms underlying pikeperch egg developmental competences remain unknown. Therefore, a quantitative proteome study was performed with high (HQ) and low (LQ) quality domesticated pikeperch eggs using a label free LC-MS/MS approach.

### Sample Protocol
Eggs were homogenised for 10 sec using a homogenizer (Art-Miccra D-8, Miccra GmbH, Heitersheim, Germany) at a speed 23,500 rpm and by centrifugation through QIAshredder devices (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). Samples were then 1:1 diluted with 8 M Urea/0.4 M NH4HCO3 and the protein concentrations were determined with a Bradford assay [Bradford et al.]. Prior to digestion, proteins were reduced for 30 min at 37°C using dithioerythritol at a final concentration of 5 mM and carbamidomethylated with iodoacetamide (final concentration 15mM) for 30 min at room temperature. Samples of 10 µg total protein were digested for 4 using 100 ng LysC (FUJIFILM Wako Pure Chemicals, Osaka, Japan). After dilution of the samples with water to give 1M urea, a second overnight digestion step using 500 ng modified porcine trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was performed at 37°C. 1 µg of peptide was injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC chromatography system connected to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Samples were transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 5 µl/min using mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid and 1% acetonitrile in water). For separation, an EASY-Spray column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Scientific) at a flowrate 250 nl/min was used. As chromatography method, a two-step gradient from 3 % mobile phase B (0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25 % B in 160 min and from 25% to 40 % B in 10 min was used. Spectra were acquired in the data dependent mode with a maximum of 15 MS/MS spectra per survey scan.

### Data Protocol
For data analysis and label-free protein quantification, MaxQuant (v.1.6.1.0) and the Sander lucioperca of the NCBI database was used.

### Publication Abstract
The aim of this study was to investigate the respective contribution of maternally-inherited mRNAs and proteins to egg molecular cargo and to its developmental competence in fish using pikeperch as a model. Our study provides novel insights into the understanding of type-specific roles of maternally-inherited molecules in fish. Here we show, for the first time, that transcripts and proteins have distinct, yet complementary, functions in the egg of teleost fish. Maternally-inherited mRNAs would shape embryo neurodevelopment, while maternally-inherited proteins would rather be responsible for protecting the embryo against pathogens. Additionally, we observed that processes directly preceding ovulation may considerably affect the reproductive success by modifying expression level of genes crucial for proper embryonic development, being novel fish egg quality markers (e.g., smarca4 or h3f3a). These results are of major importance for understanding the influence of external factors on reproductive fitness in both captive and wild-type fish species.

### Keywords
Pikeperch, Sander lucioperca, Egg quality, Eggs

### Affiliations
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn Tuwima 10 10-748 Olsztyn Poland
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis
Gene Center Munich
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität Munich (LMU)
Feodor-Lynen-Str. 25
81377 Munich
Germany

### Submitter
Thomas Fröhlich

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Żarski
Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research Polish Academy of Sciences in Olsztyn Tuwima 10 10-748 Olsztyn Poland


