### Accession
PXD040506

### Title
Salicylic acid treatment and its effect on seed yield and seed molecular composition of Pisum sativum under abiotic stress

### Description
Pisum sativum (cv. Kudrnac) seeds were obtained from SEMO a.s., Smržice, Czechia. All plants used for the study grew in the experimental field plot at Veletiny, Czechia (49°02'N 17°33'E; 195 m a.s.l.). Sowing was done after the rainfall on June 1, 2022, and plants were grown in a natural environment without any additional treatment. After 35 days, the field was divided into three blocks (mock, SAt1, SAt2), each containing approxi-mately 100 plants. For five weeks, plants were weekly sprayed with 1.5 L water solution supplemented with 0.025% (v/v) Silwet L-77 (mock; K), or 100 µM salicylic acid and Silwet (final concentration as for the mock; SA-a). The third set was treated as the mock for two weeks, followed by four weeks with salicylic acid treatment (SA-b).

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 100 mg of homogenized tissue were extracted for omics analyses as described previously, and portions of samples corresponding to 5 µg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system, and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS Pro Interface (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, MA, USA). All samples were analyzed using FAIMS compensation voltages of -40, -50, and -75 V, and a pooled sample was screened across compensation voltages using a 5V step gradient.

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the P. sativum protein database (GCA_900700895, [47]) and common contaminants databases using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo, algorithms SEQUEST and MS Amanda [48]). The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization (total area) and calculation of relative peptide/protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
The reproductive stage of plant development has the most critical impact on yield. Flowering is highly sensitive to abiotic stress, and increasing temperatures and drought harm crop yields. Salicylic acid is a phytohormone that regulates flowering and promotes stress resilience in plants. However, the exact molecular mechanisms and the level of protection are far from understood and seem to be species-specific. Here, the effect of salicylic acid was tested in a field experiment with <i>Pisum sativum</i> exposed to heat stress. Salicylic acid was administered at two different stages of flowering, and its effect on the yield and composition of the harvested seeds was followed. Plants treated with salicylic acid produced larger seed pods, and a significant increase in dry weight was found for the plants with a delayed application of salicylic acid. The analyses of the seed proteome, lipidome, and metabolome did not show any negative impact of salicylic treatment on seed composition. Identified processes that could be responsible for the observed improvement in seed yields included an increase in polyamine biosynthesis, accumulation of storage lipids and lysophosphatidylcholines, a higher abundance of components of chromatin regulation, calmodulin-like protein, and threonine synthase, and indicated a decrease in sensitivity to abscisic acid signaling.

### Keywords
Seed development, Seed, Phytohormone, Pea

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


