### Accession
PXD025220

### Title
Crosslinking mass spectrometry of the unconventional kinetoplastid kinetochore proteins KKT16-KKT17-KKT18

### Description
The kinetochore is the macromolecular protein machine that drives chromosome segregation in eukaryotes. Here we performed crosslinking mass spectrometry of the Trypanosoma brucei KKT16 complex that consists of KKT16, KKT17, and KKT18 kinetochore proteins.

### Sample Protocol
BS3 crosslinker (bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was equilibrated at room temperature for 2 hr and then resuspended to 0.87 mM in distilled water. Immediately after, 2 μl of the crosslinker was mixed with 18 μl of 0.5 mg/ml recombinant KKT16-17-18 protein (purified from E. coli) in 25 mM sodium phosphate, pH 7.5, 250 mM NaCl, and 5% glycerol, 125 mM imidazole, and 0.25 mM TCEP. The crosslinking reaction was incubated on ice for 60 min. Following the incubation, the sample was boiled for 10 min and resolved on a NuPAGE 4–12% gradient polyacrylamide gel (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The gel was stained using SimplyBlue (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and bands corresponding to crosslinked species were cut out and subjected to mass spectrometry as described previously (Ludzia et al., bioRxiv 2020: https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.10.14.337170). Gel bands were destained by cycles of incubation with 50% acetonitrile in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 100% acetonitrile. Subsequently, dried gel bands were incubated with 10 mM TCEP in 100 mM TEAB for 30 min at room temperature followed by centrifugation, and supernatant was removed. Subsequently, 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide in 100 mM TEAB was added to the gel and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Gel bands were subsequently washed with 100% acetonitrile 3 times followed by addition of 100 ng of trypsin and digested overnight at 37°C. Subsequently, the supernatant was extracted. The gel pieces were then washed with 5% formic acid and then acetonitrile. Both washes were combined with the initial supernatant and the mixture was then dried down. Peptides were resuspended in 5% formic acid and 5% DMSO and analysed by LC-MS with an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) coupled to an QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) through an EASY-Spray nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific) at the Advanced Proteomics Facility in University of Oxford. The peptides were trapped on a C18 PepMap 100 pre-column (300 μm i.d. x 5 mm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water). The peptides were separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm i.d. x 50 cm packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, 120 Å, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a linear gradient (length: 45 min, 15% to 50% solvent B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid)). Acquisition was performed in data-dependent mode (DDA). Full scan MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (scan range 350–1,500 m/z, resolution 70,000, AGC target 3 x 10E6, maximum injection time 50 ms) followed by 10 MS/MS events at 30% NCE (resolution 17,500, AGC target 5 x 10E4, maximum injection time 120 ms, isolation window 1.5 m/z) with first fixed mass at 180 m/z. Charge exclusion was selected for unassigned 1+ and 2+ ions.

### Data Protocol
MS data were converted into mgf format using pParse and searched by the pLink software (Chen et al., 2019) (version 2.3.5) using FASTA databases containing KKT1–4, 6, 7–12, 14–18, 20, and KKIP1. Search parameters were as follows: maximum number of missed cleavages = 3, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl-Cys, variable modification = Oxidation-Met.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kinetochore, Kinetoplastid, Trypanosoma brucei

### Affiliations
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Bungo Akiyoshi

### Lab Head
Dr Bungo Akiyoshi
University of Oxford


