### Accession
PXD025600

### Title
Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 2 (GFPT2) is upregulated in breast epithelial-mesenchymal transition and involved in oxidative stress regulation.

### Description
Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is a diverse and dynamic biological process which is involved in cancer progression. It is important for carcinoma cells during invasion and metastasis. EMT has been in the spotlight for cancer cells to disseminate to distant organs by gaining partial EMT phenotype. Cancer cells with partial EMT are believed to be more cancerogenic/invasive than cells that have undergone complete EMT. The proteomic changes that occur following EMT in breast epithelial cells and how these relate to changes in cellular metabolism are incompletely understood. To study metabolic reprogramming in different mesenchymal states, we analyzed proteomic changes following EMT in the breast epithelial cell model D492, with single-shot LFQ supported by SILAC proteomic approach. The D492 EMT cell model contains three isogenic cell lines: epithelial D492 cells, mesenchymal D492M cells, and partial mesenchymal, HER2 overexpressing, tumorigenic D492HER2 cells. Proteomic analysis positioned the D492 and D492M cells as basal-like while D492HER2 as claudin-low. Further comparison of the non-tumorigenic D492 and D492M cells to tumorigenic D492HER2 differentiated the metabolic EMT markers of migration from those of invasion. Among these were markers of glycan metabolism. We identified glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase [isomerizing] 2 (GFPT2) as the top dysregulated enzyme in glycan metabolism and found increased GFPT2 expression was a characteristic of claudin-low breast cancer. siRNA knockdown of GFPT2 influenced both cell growth and invasion in vitro and was accompanied by lowered flux through the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP). Knockdown of GFPT2 decreased cystathionine and sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase (SQOR) in the transsulfuration pathway which regulates H2S production and mitochondrial homeostasis. Moreover, GFPT2 expression was regulated by the level of reduced glutathione (GSH) and suppressed by the oxidative stress regulator, GSK3-β. Our results demonstrate that GFPT2 is a marker for oxidative stress. It is upregulated and controls growth and invasion in the D492 EMT model and is associated with claudin-low and poor prognosis in breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Protein and peptide sample preparation Cells were cultured in T75 flasks in triplicates (three flasks per cell line), and the seeding density was around 600,000 cells per flask. Proteins were harvested at 90 % confluence, and 72 hours after seeding, cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and lysed by 450 µl lysis buffer containing 4% Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS, MP Biomedicals™) in 100mM Tris (Sigma). Flasks were kept on ice for 10 min. The cell lysis was transferred to 1.5 ml Eppendorf tubes. After five freeze (-80˚C)/thaw (room temperature) cycles, the sample was spun at 20,718 rcf for 20 minutes at 4˚C. The supernatant was collected and aliquoted in new tubes and stored at -80˚C. Protein quantification was measured with BCA protein assay (PierceTM).  For Filter-Aided Sample Preparation (FASP), an equivalent of 300 µg of proteins in 150 µl from each sample were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), and samples were then processed using FASP protocol (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). Proteins on the filters were then digested twice at 30 °C with trypsin (3 µg x2), first overnight and then for another 6h in a final volume of 200 µl.  The resulting peptides were desalted using a C18 solid-phase extraction cartridge (Empore, Agilent technologies). Peptides were resuspended in 50 µl 1% formic acid and quantified using pierce quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (product 23275, Thermo Scientific).  LC-MS/MS analysis Trypsin-digested peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Scientific) nanoflow LC system. Around 130 ng of protein was loaded with a constant flow of 5 µl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 nanoViper C18 trap column (100 µm inner-diameter, 2 cm; Thermo Scientific). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å column (75 µm, 50 cm; Thermo Scientific) with a linear gradient of 2–35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile with 0.08% formic acid, Solvent A – 0.1% formic acid) over 124 min with a constant flow of 300 nl/min and column temperature of 50 °C. The HPLC system was coupled to a linear ion trap Orbitrap hybrid mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Scientific) via an easyspray ion source (Thermo Scientific). The spray voltage was routinely set to 1.8 kV, and the temperature of the heated capillary was set to 250 °C. Full-scan MS survey spectra (m/z 335–1800) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy, 35%; activation Q, 0.250; and activation time, 10 ms) in the LTQ after the accumulation of 5,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 1,000 ms for the full scans and 150 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled, and all unassigned charge states, as well as singly charged species were rejected. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy (Olsen et al., 2005). Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectrometric data files obtained for each experiment were collated into a single quantitated data set using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the Andromeda search engine software (Cox et al., 2011). Enzyme specificity was set to that of trypsin, allowing for cleavage N-terminal to proline residues and between aspartic acid and proline residues. Other parameters used were: (i) variable modifications- methionine oxidation, protein N-acetylation, gln → pyro-glu, Phospho (STY), deamidation (NQ); (ii) fixed modifications, cysteine carbamidomethylation; (iii) database: Uniprot-human-up5640 (160516); (iv) LFQ: min ratio count, 2 (v) MS/MS tolerance: FTMS- 10ppm , ITMS- 0.6 Da; (vi) maximum peptide length, 6; (vii) maximum missed cleavages, 2; (viii) maximum of labelled amino acids, 3; and (ix) false discovery rate (FDR), 1%. LFQ intensities were reported individually for each sample and were given as a relative protein quantitation across all samples. LFQ intensities were represented by a normalized intensity profile which was generated by algorithms described by Cox (Cox et al., 2014). They form a matrix with number of samples and number of protein groups as dimensions. The same setups were applied for the iBAQ quantification in the LFQ experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer cells that have undergone partial epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) are believed to be more invasive than cells that have completed EMT. To study metabolic reprogramming in different mesenchymal states, we analyzed protein expression following EMT in the breast epithelial cell model D492 with single-shot LFQ supported by a SILAC proteomics approach. The D492 EMT cell model contains three cell lines: the epithelial D492&#xa0;cells, the mesenchymal D492M&#xa0;cells, and a partial mesenchymal, tumorigenic variant of D492 that overexpresses the oncogene HER2. The analysis classified the D492 and D492M&#xa0;cells as basal-like and D492HER2 as claudin-low. Comparative analysis of D492 and D492M to tumorigenic D492HER2 differentiated metabolic markers of migration from those of invasion. Glutamine-fructose-6-phosphate transaminase 2 (GFPT2) was one of the top dysregulated enzymes in D492HER2. Gene expression analysis of the cancer genome atlas showed that GFPT2 expression was a characteristic of claudin-low breast cancer. siRNA-mediated knockdown of GFPT2 influenced the EMT marker vimentin and both cell growth and invasion in&#xa0;vitro and was accompanied by lowered metabolic flux through the hexosamine biosynthesis pathway (HBP). Knockdown of GFPT2 decreased cystathionine and sulfide:quinone oxidoreductase (SQOR) in the transsulfuration pathway that regulates H<sub>2</sub>S production and mitochondrial homeostasis. Moreover, GFPT2 was within the regulation network of insulin and EGF, and its expression was regulated by reduced glutathione (GSH) and suppressed by the oxidative stress regulator GSK3-&#x3b2;. Our results demonstrate that GFPT2 controls growth and invasion in the D492 EMT model, is a marker for oxidative stress, and associated with poor prognosis in claudin-low breast cancer.

### Keywords
Oxidative stress, Proteomics, Gfpt2, Breast cancer, Metabolism, Emt, Claudin-low

### Affiliations
University of Iceland
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.

### Submitter
Qiong Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Óttar Rolfsson
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology & The Center for Systems Biology University of Iceland Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik  Iceland.


