### Accession
PXD031319

### Title
Novel assays monitoring direct GR protein activity exhibit high predictive power for ligand activity on endogenous GR gene targets

### Description
Exogenous glucocorticoids are widely used in the clinic for the treatment of inflammatory disorders and auto-immune diseases. Unfortunately, their use is hampered by many side effects and therapy resistance. Efforts to find more selective glucocorticoid receptor (GR) agonists and modulators (called SEGRAMs), able to separate anti-inflammatory effects via gene suppression from metabolic effects via gene activation, have been unsuccessful so far. In this study, we characterized a set of functionally diverse GR ligands in A549 cells, first using a panel of luciferase-based reporter gene assays evaluating GR-driven gene activation and gene suppression. We expanded this minimal assay set with novel luciferase-based read-outs monitoring GR protein levels, GR dimerization and GR Serine 211 (Ser211) phosphorylation status and compared their outcomes with compound effects on the mRNA levels of known GR target genes in A549 cells and primary hepatocytes. We found that luciferase reporters evaluating GR-driven gene activation and gene repression were not always reliable predictors for effects on endogenous target genes. Remarkably, our novel assay monitoring GR Ser211 phosphorylation levels proved to be the most reliable predictor for compound effects on almost all tested endogenous GR targets, both driven by gene activation and repression. The integration of this novel assay in existing screening platforms may therefore increase chances to find novel GR ligands with an improved therapeutic benefit.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture Hek293T cells and all A549-derived cell lines were kept in culture at 37 °C (5% CO2), in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM, Invitrogen 41966-021) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). A549 cells expressing stably integrated (NF-ĸB)3_Luc, GRE_Luc, collagenase3_Luc or luciferase driven by a constitutive promoter (Const_Luc) were previously described [16]. The A549 (NF-ĸB)3_Luc GR knock-out (KO) cell line was generated from the A549 (NF-ĸB)3_Luc cell line via the CRISPR/Cas9 system targeting exon 3 (CATTATGGAGTCTTAACCTTG) [16]. A549 and cell line variants were, 24 h after cell seeding and 18 h before compound treatment, serum-deprived overnight for all experiments. Primary hepatocyte isolation Primary hepatocytes were isolated from male 10-week old C57BL/6 mice by collagenase perfusion, as previously described [22]. 200,000 cells were seeded in collagen-coated 12-well plates. Two hours later, six-hours long compound treatments were started. Sample preparation for LC-MS/MS 1.5 x 106 A549 cells were seeded in 10-cm plates, and pre-treated with compounds for 1 h before adding mTNFα (2,000 IU/mL) for 5 h. Cells were collected by scraping in DPBS (with Ca2+ and Mg2+) and cell pellets were snap-frozen in liquid N2 and stored at -80 °C until further use. Pellets were lysed in 100 µL 10% SDS and 100 mM TEAB (pH 8.5), sonicated for 3 times for 10 s with 30 s on ice in between and centrifuged for 15 min at 20,000 g. Protein concentrations were determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay (ThermoFisher) and samples were diluted to 2 mg/mL. 100 µg protein material (50 µL) was consecutively incubated with 15 mM DTT (30 min at 55 °C), 30 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, 15 min at room temperature (RT) in the dark) and acidified to pH 1 by adding 10 µL 12% phosphoric acid. Next, 350 µL 90% methanol (MeOH) in 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.55 was added, samples were transferred to an S-trap plate and centrifuged for 2min at 1,500 g. The plate was washed 3 times with 200 µL 90% methanol in 100 mM TEAB pH 7.55, followed by a 2-min centrifugation at 1,500 g, and proteins were subsequently digested overnight at 37 °C by adding 1 µg trypsin in 125 µL 50 mM TEAB. The next day, peptides were consecutively washed with 8 µL 50 mM TEAB, 80 µL 0.2% formic acid and 80 µL 50% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid, each time followed by a 2-min centrifugation at 1,500 g. Finally, peptides were transferred to a mass spectrometry vial, dried in a SpeedVacTM vacuum concentrator and stored at -20 °C until further use. Right before injection, each sample was solubilized in 20 µL loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water:acetonitrile (ACN) (98:2, v:v)).  LC/MS-MS and data analysis 2 µg peptide material was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). The peptides were separated on a 50 cm µPAC™ Gen2 column (C18-endcapped functionality, 300 µm wide channels, 2.5 µm porous-shell pillars, inter pillar distance of 1.25 µm and a depth of 3 µm; PharmaFluidics, Belgium). It was kept at a constant temperature of 50 °C. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 250 nL/min by a linear gradient starting from solvent A, reaching 5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) after 10 min, 22.5% solvent B after 109 min and 30.5% solvent B at 135 min, 55% solvent B at 153 min, 70% solvent B at 155 min, followed by a 5-minutes wash at 70% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition in TopSpeed mode with a cycle time of 3s. Full-scan MS spectra (300-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target AGC value of 200,000 with a maximum injection time of 250ms. The precursor ions were filtered for charge states (2-7 required), dynamic exclusion (60 s; ± 10 ppm window) and intensity (minimal intensity of 5E3). The precursor ions were selected in the ion routing multipole with an isolation window of 1.2 Da and accumulated to an AGC target of 12E3 or a maximum injection time of 40 ms and activated using HCD fragmentation (34% normalized collision energy (NCE)). The fragments were analyzed in the Ion Trap Analyzer at normal scan rate. The polysiloxane peak at m/z 445.12003 was used as an internal lock mass.

### Data Protocol
All data are expressed as mean ± SEM and are the result of at least three biological replicates. Statistical analysis of all luciferase-based and qPCR data was performed in GraphPad Prism 9.2. Significant differences between compound treatments were evaluated via 1-way or 2-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s multiple comparisons test. Heteroscedasticity was evaluated via Brown-Forsythe test, and normality of the residuals was evaluated via Anderson-Darling, D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus, Shapiro-Wilk and Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests. Data were log2-transformed when necessary to obtain a normally distributed, homoscedastic data population. Calculations of Pearson correlations and principal component analysis were both conducted in GraphPad Prism 9.2.  Data searching was done with the MaxQuant software (v1.6.11.0) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the human SwissProt proteome database (version of January 2021). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 20 ppm and 4.5 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also when followed by a Pro residue, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of the protein N-terminus. A minimum of one razor or unique peptide was required for identification. Matching between runs was enabled with a 20-min alignment window and a matching time window of 0.7 min. Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the software, with the fastLFQ switched off and a minimum ratio count of 2 unique or razor peptides. Further data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (v.1.6.2.1) using the ProteinGroups table from the MaxQuant search output. Potential contaminants and proteins identified in a reverse database were removed, as well as proteins that were only identified by site. The protein LFQ intensities were log2-transformed to obtain a normal distribution, and proteins with less than 70% valid values across all samples were removed. The biological replicates were grouped by their treatment. Two sample t-tests were performed versus solvent condition, with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1 for truncation. The results were visualized as volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glucocorticoids, Glucocorticoid receptor, Assay development, Inflammation, Drug discovery, Segram

### Affiliations
VIB Proteomics Core
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology (CMB), Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium

### Submitter
Delphi Van Haver

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology (CMB), Ghent, Belgium Department of Biomolecular Medicine, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


