### Accession
PXD043999

### Title
MHC peptidome analysis of HLA DQβ0603:DQα0103 proteins

### Description
Identification of Peptides associated with HLA-Class 2 protein, DQβ0603:DQα0103, from two different EBV transfromed B cell lines, 9060 and 9062.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were loaded on 1ml C18 packed columns. Wash with 20ml 0.1% TFA. Elute with 2ml 50%ACN in 0.1% TFA. Dry down for LC-MS/MS. A dissolved peptide sample is then analyzed by a NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS system. NanoLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis of peptide samples is carried out by a high pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) system (Agilent) with a 75 micrometer inner diameter 8cm in length reverse phase C18 column. The particle size of the C18 is 3uM with pore size of 300 Ä. The injection time is 20 minute. The HPLC Solvent A is 97.5% water, 2% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. HPLC Solvent B is 9.5% water, 90% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid. The gradation time was 60 minutes from 2% Solvent B to 90% solvent B, plus 20 minutes for sample loading and 20 minutes for column washing. The column flow rate is around 800 nanoliter per minute after splitting. Typical injection volume is 3 ul. The HPLC system is on-line coupled with an ion trap mass spectrometer (QE, Thermo) in a way a sample eluted from HPLC column is directly ionized by an electrospray ionization (ESI) process and enter into the mass spectrometer. The ionization voltage is often optimized each time and normally in a range of 1.2kv-1.8kv. The capillary temperature is set at 110C. The mass spectrometer is set at the data-dependent mode to acquire MS/MS data via a low energy collision induced dissociation (CID) process. The default collision energy is 33% and the default charge state is 3.One full scan with 1 microscan with a mass range of 350 amu to 1100 amu is acquired, followed by one MS/MS scan of the most intense ion with a full mass range and three microscans. The dynamic exclusion feature is set as following: repeat count of 1 within 0.3 min and exclusion duration of 0.4min. The exclusion width is 4Da.

### Data Protocol
As default, the mass spectrometric data is used to search against the most recent non-redundant protein database (NR database, NCBI) with ProtTech’s ProtMody software suite. The output from the database search was manually validated by a Sr. scientist before reporting. The parameters of the data acquisition and data processing are as following: Data acquisition parameters: Instrument: LTQ Software: Xcalibur 2.0 Centroid mode Minimum MS signal for Precursor-ion: 5x104 counts Processing parameters: Software: ProtMody 2.0 Signal-to-noise: >=5 De-isotoped: Yes Filtered: Yes Modifications: Cys 0 Database: protein database from UniProt Database

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Hla class ii, Mhc peptidome, Dq

### Affiliations
Terasaki Innovation Center, United States
Terasaki Innovation Center

### Submitter
JAR-HOW LEE

### Lab Head
Dr Jar-How Lee
Terasaki Innovation Center, United States


