### Accession
PXD022873

### Title
A novel chemical biology high-content strategy for the identification of novel HMT inhibitors reveals a crosstalk between DOT1L and CARM1

### Description
Epigenetic regulation is a dynamic and reversible process that controls gene expression. Abnormal function results in downregulation or upregulation of pathways leading to diseases, such as cancer. The enzymes that establish and maintain epigenetic marks, such as histone methyltransferases (HMTs), are therapeutic targets as their and, importantly, the epigenetic modifications are reversible. Noteworthy, HMTs, as the other epigenetic enzymes and readers, form together multiprotein complexes that in concert regulate histone marks. To probe the epigenetic protein complexes in a biological system, we developed a reliable chemical biology high-content imaging strategy to screen compound libraries on multiple histone marks inside cells simultaneously. The advantage is double: (1) it identifies directly a drug that is active in cells on a specific histone mark and (2) it reveals the crosstalk between the epigenetic marks. By this approach, we identified that compound 4, a published CARM1 (PRMT4) inhibitor, inhibits both histone mark H3R2me2a (regulated by CARM1) and H3K79me2 (regulated by DOT1L) pointing out a synergistic interaction between the two HMTs. The results obtained by the screening assay were validated by mass spectrometry and other techniques confirming the crosstalk between the two marks and HMTs. Prompted by the interaction between CARM1 and DOT1L we combined compound 4 and DOT1L inhibitor EPZ-5676 resulting in a stronger cell proliferation inhibition and apoptosis, indicating that our approach provides also a novel strategy to identify effective synergistic drug combinations for cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
Exponentially growing U2OS cells were seeded at 6500 cells/well in 2mL in a 6-well plate (Costar 3516) and incubated at 37°C and in 5% CO2 for 2 hours. Compound 4 or EPZ5676 was added to reach a 3.2µM concentration and cells were incubated for 8 days, the control was treated with 0.1% DMSO. Culture media and drugs were replaced every 2-3 days. After incubation, cells were lysed on ice in nuclear extraction buffer (10 mM Tris‐HCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 25 mM KCl, 1% Triton X‐100, 8.6% Sucrose and Roche protease inhibitor tablet 1836145), followed by centrifuge at 800 x g, 5 minutes at 4°C. Pellets were collected and histones were extracted for one hour with 0.4N cold sulfuric acid. Histones were quantified using the BCA protein assay (Pierce 23225).  50 g of crude histones purified from cells were run on a precast NuPAGE 4-12% bis-tris acrylamide gradient gel (Invitrogen) with MES buffer and stained with Instant Blue (Sigma). Gel bands corresponding to H2A and H3 histones were cut and destained overnight in 50% acetonitrile and 50mM NH4HCO3. Gel slices were then treated at 37°C for 1h with 100µL of 30% propionic anhydride in methanol and 40µL of 50mM NH4HCO3. Then, samples were washed 2 times 10 minutes in 100mM NH4HCO3, one wash in 50% acetonitrile and 100mM NH4HCO3, and then, one wash in acetonitrile(Robin et al., 2007). The slices were then dried and stored in a 2mL Eppendorf tube. Dried gel slices were digested overnight at 37°C using 0.4µg of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega)(Addi et al., 2020). The digests were then acidified in 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid, lyophilized, samples were re-suspended in 40µL of 50mM NH4HCO3, and propionylated again in 100µL of 30% propionic anhydride in methanol at 37°C for 1h. Finally, samples were lyophilized and re-suspended in 20 µL of 0.1% of formic acid(Robin et al., 2007).

### Data Protocol
Data were fully analyzed using PEAKS Studio 7.0 (Ma et al., 2003). De novo sequencing of peptides was performed with common parameter settings such as trypsin digestion, parent mass tolerance 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethylation (C) was add as fixed modification. Multiple variable modifications were also added: Oxidation (M), Methylation (KR), Dimethylation (KR), Trimethylation (KR), Acetylation (K, Nter), Propionylation (K) and Propionyl methyl (K). A customized database was used for the search (H2/H3 histone database, 60 entries) and a label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using the PEAKS Q quantification module. A cutoff of 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was applied at the peptide and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Epigenetic regulation is a dynamic and reversible process that controls gene expression. Abnormal function results in human diseases such as cancer, thus the enzymes that establish epigenetic marks, such as histone methyltransferases (HMTs), are potentially therapeutic targets. Noteworthily, HMTs form multiprotein complexes that in concert regulate gene expression. To probe epigenetic protein complexes regulation in cells, we developed a reliable chemical biology high-content imaging strategy to screen compound libraries simultaneously on multiple histone marks inside cells. By this approach, we identified that compound 4, a published CARM1 inhibitor, inhibits both histone mark H3R2me2a, regulated also by CARM1, and H3K79me2, regulated only by DOT1L, pointing out a crosstalk between CARM1 and DOT1L. Based on this interaction, we combined compound 4 and DOT1L inhibitor EPZ-5676 resulting in a stronger inhibition of cell proliferation and increase in apoptosis, indicating that our approach identifies possible effective synergistic drug combinations.

### Keywords
Histone methyltransferases

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institu Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr Matondo Mariette
Institu Pasteur


