### Accession
PXD010040

### Title
Comparative interactome analyses of wild-type and P301L MAPT in two human neuronal cell lines

### Description
Protein interactions of the tau protein are of interest in efforts to decipher the mechanisms of cell death in Alzheimer Disease (AD), a subset of frontotemporal dementias (FTD) and other tauopathies. We recently reported on extensive interactions of tau with the ribonucleoproteome and chaperones. A confounder of this prior work was that it probed steady-state interactions of plasmid-encoded four-repeat (4R) tau in dividing cells. Since then, we genome-edited a genomic safe harbor locus in two human neuronal cell lines, namely IMR-32 and ReNcell VM, creating inducible EGFP tagged wild-type and P301L tau models. We expressed balanced levels of 3R- and 4R-tau and interrogated tau protein interactions at specific times following its induction. In addition to its association with the ribonucleoproteome, tau was observed to interact in these models with proteins that escaped prior investigations.

### Sample Protocol
Each interactome analysis was performed on a multiplexed sample containing three biological replicates of wild type Tau-EGFP-expressing clones and three biological replicates of P301L Tau-EGFP-expressing clones as well as one (IMR-32) or two (ReNcell VM) biological replicates of EGFP-expressing clones. Tau expression was induced by doxycycline addition to the cell culture medium for at least 12 hours before cell harvest.  Cells were lysed in 0.5% NP-40, 0.25% deoxycholate, 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 5 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaF, 1 mM orthovanadate, 1 mM PMSF, 1x cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (catalog number 11836170001, Roche) and 1x PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (catalog number 4906837001, Roche).  Lysate from each biological replicate was centrifuged at 3,000 g for 5 min at 4 degrees Celsius and the supernatants were added to 20 microliter volumes of agarose-conjugated GFP nanotrap slurry (catalog number gta-10, Chromotek, Planegg-Martinsried, Germany).  The mixture of lysate and slurry was agitated on a turning wheel at 4 degrees Celsius for 2 hours then washed twice in buffer consisting of 450 mM NaCl and 150 mM Tris-HCl, then once in buffer consisting of 150 mM NaCl and 150 mM Tris-HCl, then once in 25 mM HEPES, then and once in 10 mM HEPES.  Samples were eluted from the slurry with 20% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid. Immunoprecipitates were dried under vacuum then diluted in 9 M deionized urea.  Reduction with tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine at 60°C was followed by room temperature sulfhydryl group alkylation with 4-vinylpyridine.  The urea concentration was lowered to 1.25 M in 500 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate prior to the addition of mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (catalog number 90057; Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Digestion occurred at 37°C overnight.  Trypsin treated samples were covalently modified with 8plex isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) (catalog number 4390811; Sciex) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, then mixed. All sample mixtures were analyzed over a four hour reversed phase 300 nl/minute gradient on an EASY-nLC 1000-Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer platform (Thermo).  The analytical column was a 25 cm long Acclaim PepMap RSLC 100 of 75 micrometer inner diameter with 2 micrometer C18 particles having 100 Å pores.  Each liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry run was divided into scan cycles up to 3 seconds long, each including one Orbitrap precursor ion MS scan and as many linear ion trap product ion (MS2) scans and Orbitrap MS3 scans as possible.  Collision induced dissociation (CID) and higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) were used for MS2 and MS3 respectively. The Orbitrap resolution was set to 60,000 for both MS and MS3.

### Data Protocol
All MS2 data was converted to protein sequence information with Proteome Discoverer version 1.4.0.288 using the Mascot and Sequest HT search algorithms.  Up to two missed cleavages were allowed per peptide.  The allowed peptide mass range was 400-6000 Da with a precursor ion mass tolerance of 20 ppm and product ion mass tolerance of 0.4 Da.  Variable modifications allowed were asparagine and glutamine deamidation, methionine oxidation as well as serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation.  Cysteine pyridylethylation as well as iTRAQ 8plex reagent labeling of peptide N-termini and lysine were defined as fixed modifications.  False discovery rate estimation based on q-Value was performed with the Percolator algorithm.  Protein quantification was produced from MS3 data by the Reporter Ions Quantifier built into Proteome Discoverer based on the most confident centroid under a mass tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Protein interactions of Tau are of interest in efforts to decipher pathogenesis in Alzheimer's disease, a subset of frontotemporal dementias, and other tauopathies. We CRISPR-Cas9 edited two human cell lines to generate broadly adaptable models for neurodegeneration research. We applied the system to inducibly&#xa0;express balanced levels of&#xa0;3-repeat and 4-repeat wild-type or P301L mutant&#xa0;Tau. Following 12-h induction, quantitative mass spectrometry revealed the Parkinson's disease-causing protein DJ-1 and non-muscle myosins as Tau&#xa0;interactors&#xa0;whose binding to Tau was profoundly influenced by the presence or absence of the P301L mutation. The presence of wild-type Tau stabilized non-muscle myosins at higher steady-state levels. Strikingly, in human differentiated co-cultures of neuronal and glial cells, the preferential interaction of non-muscle myosins to wild-type Tau depended on myosin ATPase activity. Consistently, transgenic P301L Tau mice exhibited reduced phosphorylation of regulatory myosin light chains known to activate this ATPase. The direct link of Tau to non-muscle myosins corroborates independently proposed roles of Tau in maintaining dendritic spines and mitochondrial fission biology, two subcellular niches affected early in tauopathies.

### Keywords
Human, Inducible expression, Neuron, Alzheimer disease, Interactome, Tau, Orbitrap, Tauopathy, Frontotemporal dementia, Mapt

### Affiliations
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr Gerold Schmitt-Ulms
Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto


