### Accession
PXD024127

### Title
Structural, biochemical and functional characterization of the essential host factor SETD3 in complex with the enterovirus CV-B3 2A protease

### Description
Enteroviruses cause a number of medically relevant and widespread human diseases with no approved antiviral therapies currently available. We have previously identified the actin histidine methyltransferase SETD3 as critically important for enterovirus infection through a protein-protein interaction with the viral protease 2A. Here, we report the cryo-EM structure of SETD3 in complex with coxsackievirus B3 2A at 3.5 Å resolution. 2A interacts with two distinct interfaces on SETD3, one in the SET domain that overlaps with the actin binding interface, and one in the RSB domain. Structure-function analysis revealed that mutations of key residues in the SET interaction interface resulted in severely reduced binding to 2A and a complete protection from enteroviral infection. Altogether, our findings provide key structural insights into the interaction between SETD3 and 2A and provide a framework for the rational design of host targeted therapeutics against this class of viruses.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of FLAG-tagged proteins. HEK293T cells cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with Fetal bovine serum and Pen-Strep were plated 20-24 hours prior to transfection. For each single-step purification, cells were transiently transfected using PolyJet Transfection Reagent (SignaGen Laboratories) at a 1:3 ratio of plasmid to transfection reagent. Affinity purifications (AP) were performed based on previous descriptions (Jäger et al., 2011a, 2011b). In brief, about 40 hours post-transfection cells were harvested and lysed in cold lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA supplemented with 0.5% Nonidet P 40 Substitute (NP40; Fluka Analytical), complete mini EDTA-free protease and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche) and incubated for 30 minutes. The lysate was incubated with 30 µl equilibrated anti-FLAG M2 Affinity Gel beads (Sigma-Aldrich) for 2h at 4°C. The beads were washed three times with lysis buffer containing 0.05% Nonidet P40, followed by one wash with lysis buffer without detergent. Proteins were eluted with 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA containing 100 µg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (ELIM) and 0.05% RapiGest (Waters). For mass spectrometry (MS) analysis the AP eluates were reduced with 1 mM DTT at 37ºC for 30 minutes, then alkylated with 3 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes at room temperature, followed with quenching by addition of 3 mM DTT for 15 min. The samples were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37ºC. The resulting peptides were cleaned up for MS analysis using Ultra Micro Spin C18 columns (The Nest Group). The final peptide sample was resuspended in 0.1% formic acid.   Sequential FLAG-Strep purifications (Double affinity purifications). Sequential purifications followed the procedure for single-step FLAG AP (described above) followed by a Strep purification. Alterations as follows: For each purification, five dishes were co-transfected and subsequently combined and lysed in proportional volumes of buffer about 40 hours post-transfection. Cell lysates were divided to perform five separate FLAG purifications. Following wash steps, FLAG beads were combined and proteins were incubated for 30 minutes with 0.1 mg/ml 3xFLAG peptide (ELIM)  in a buffer containing Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA supplemented with 0.38% NP40 to elute proteins. After removing eluted protein, FLAG beads were rinsed with the same buffer for an additional elution which was combined with the initial peptide elution and incubated with MagStrep “type 3” magnetic bead suspension (IBA Lifesciences) for 2h at 4°C. After binding and washing beads, proteins were eluted using 0.1 M Glycine pH 2.5 for 30 minutes. Eluates were neutralized with 1 M Tris pH 9.0 and subjected to trypsin digestion followed by desalting as described above for the single-step FLAG-based AP (see above).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched against the SwissProt Human protein sequences (provided), combined with viral sequences. Peptide and protein identification searches, as well as label-free quantitation were performed using the MaxQuant data analysis algorithm (version 1.5.2.8 and version 1.6.12.0) (Cox and Mann, 2008), and all peptide and protein identifications were filtered to a 1% false-discovery rate. Variable modifications were allowed for methionine oxidation and protein N-terminus acetylation. A fixed modification was indicated for cysteine carbamidomethylation. Full trypsin specificity was required. The first search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 20 parts per million (ppm) and the main search was performed with a mass accuracy of +/- 4.5 ppm. A maximum of 5 modifications were allowed per peptide. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. The maximum charge allowed was 7+. Individual peptide mass tolerances were allowed. For MS/MS matching, a mass tolerance of +/- 20 ppm was allowed and the top 12 peaks per 100 Da were analyzed. MS/MS matching was allowed for higher charge states, water and ammonia loss events. The data were filtered to obtain a peptide, protein, and site-level false discovery rate of 0.01. The minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids.  The Maxquant results from the SETD3 affinity purifications were scored for specific protein-protein interactions (PPIs) using the SAINTexpress (Significance Analysis of INTeractome) algorithm (Choi et al., 2011, 2012), with spectral counts as the quantifying feature of the data. HEK293T cells transfected with an empty vector (not expressing any affinity tagged bait) were used as control condition, and were processed and analyzed in parallel with the bait protein expressing cells in order to avoid batch effects. Protein spectral counts for each sample were calculated as the sum from the peptide spectral counts for one protein in a given sample. To discriminate bona fide protein interactors of SETD3 in the presence and absence of CV-B3 2A for each infection condition from the control, we set a Bayesian False Discovery Rate (BFDR)  threshold of 0.05. To generate an overall list of candidate interactors for SETD3, we combined the proteins with an BFDR below 0.05 for both conditions (+/- CV-B3 2A expression). MSstats was used for statistical analysis comparing proteins with differential abundance in SETD3 affinity purification in the presence and absence of CV-B3 2A expression (Choi et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Enteroviruses cause a number of medically relevant and widespread human diseases with no approved antiviral therapies currently available. Host-directed therapies present an enticing option for this diverse genus of viruses. We have previously identified the actin histidine methyltransferase SETD3 as a critical host factor physically interacting with the viral protease 2A. Here, we report the 3.5&#x2009;&#xc5; cryo-EM structure of SETD3 interacting with coxsackievirus B3 2A at two distinct interfaces, including the substrate-binding surface within the SET domain. Structure-function analysis revealed that mutations of key residues in the SET domain resulted in severely reduced binding to 2A and complete protection from enteroviral infection. Our findings provide insight into the molecular basis of the SETD3-2A interaction and a framework for the rational design of host-directed therapeutics against enteroviruses.

### Keywords
Setd3, Ap-ms, 2a protease, Enterovirus, Host-pathogen interactions

### Affiliations
UCSF

### Submitter
Ruth Huttenhain

### Lab Head
Dr Nevan Krogan
UCSF


