### Accession
PXD039282

### Title
SENSITIVE ANALYSIS OF RECOMBINANT HUMAN ERYTHROPOIETIN GLYCOPEPTIDES BY ON-LINE PHENYLBORONIC ACID SOLID-PHASE EXTRACTION CAPILLARY ELECTROPHORESIS-MASS SPECTROMETRY

### Description
In this study, several chromatographic sorbents: porous graphitic carbon (PGC), aminopropyl-hydrophilic interaction (aminopropyl-HILIC) and phenylboronic acid (PBA) were assessed for the analysis of glycopeptides by on-line solid-phase extraction capillary electrophoresis-mass spectrometry (SPE-CE-MS). As PBA sorbent provided the most promising results, a PBA-SPE-CE-MS method was developed for the selective and sensitive preconcentration of glycopeptides from enzymatic digests of glycoproteins. Recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) was selected as model glycoprotein and subjected to enzymatic digestion with several proteases. The tryptic O126 and N83 glycopeptides from rhEPO were targeted to optimize the methodology. Under the optimized conditions, repeatabilityintraday precision, linearity, limits of detection (LODs) and microcartridge lifetime were evaluated, obtaining improved results compared to a previously reported TiO2-SPE-CE-MS method, especially for LODs of N-glycopeptides (up to 500 times lower than by CE-MS and up to 200 times lower than by TiO2-SPE-CE-MS). Moreover, rhEPO Glu-C digests were also analyzed by Finally, the PBA-SPE-CE-MS method was applied to the analysis of rhEPO glycopeptides from Glu-C digests to better characterize N24 and N38 glycopeptidessites. Finally, the established method was used to analyze two rhEPO biosimilars (EPOCIM and NeuroEPO plus), demonstrating its applicability in biopharmaceutical analysis. The sensitivity of the proposed PBA-SPE-CE-MS method improves the existing CE-MS methodologies for glycopeptide analysis and shows a great potential in glycoprotein analysis to deeply characterize protein glycosites even at low concentrations of protein digest.

### Sample Protocol
rhEPO produced in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cell lines was provided by the European Pharmacopoeia as a chemical reference substance (CRS-batch 1). Each sample vial contained 100 µg rhEPO (EPO-CRS; a mixture of epoetin alpha and beta), 0.1 mg Tween-20, 30 mg trehalose, 3 mg arginine, 4.5 mg NaCl, and 3.5 mg Na2HPO4. The content of each vial was dissolved in water to obtain a 1,000 mg•L-1 solution of rhEPO. Two biosimilars produced in CHO cell lines were provided by the Center of Molecular Immunology: EPOCIM® (batch 1) and NeuroEPO plus (batch 1). EPOCIM vials contained 963 mg•L-1 of rhEPO and 0.02% Tween-20 in citrate buffer at pH 6.9. NeuroEPO plus vials contained 1,090 mg•L-1 of rhEPO and 0.02% Tween-20 in phosphate buffer at pH 6.3. Excipients of low-molecular mass were removed from rhEPO samples by centrifugal filtration with Microcon-10kDa centrifugal filters (Millipore, Molsheim, France) as described in a previous work. Samples were centrifuged at room temperature in a Mikro 20 centrifuge (Hettich, Tuttligen, Germany). The filter membrane was initially washed with water at 13,000 g for 10 min. Then, the sample was centrifuged and the residue was washed three times with an appropriate volume of water under the same centrifugal conditions. Finally, the residue was recovered from the upper reservoir by centrifugation upside down into a new vial (3 min at 1,000 g) and sufficient water was added to adjust rhEPO concentration to 1,000 mg•L-1. Aliquots were evaporated to dryness in a Savant SPD-111V SpeedVac concentrator (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) and stored at -20 ºC until enzymatic digestion. rhEPO samples were firstly reduced and alkylated to facilitate digestion. Briefly, an aliquot of 50 µg of dried glycoprotein was dissolved in 50 µL of digestion buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3, pH 7.9) and 2.5 µL of 0.5 M DTT in digestion buffer was added. The mixture was incubated in a thermoshaker at 56ºC for 30 min. Then, alkylation was carried out by adding 7 µL of 50 mM IAA in digestion buffer and shaking for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Low-molecular mass reagents were removed with Microcon YM-10 centrifugal filters as described above. The final glycoprotein residue was dissolved in digestion buffer to obtain a final concentration of 1,000 mg•L-1. Aliquots of 50 µL of reduced and alkylated rhEPO solution were digested in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:40 (m/m) and incubated at 37 ºC for 18h (trypsin digestion) and of 1:20 (m/m) and incubated at 25 ºC for 18h (Glu-C digestion). Digestions were stopped by heating at 100 ºC for 10 min and samples were dried in a SpeedVac before storage at -20 ºC until analysis. A double-frit particle packed fused-silica microcartridge (0.7 cm LT × 250 µm ID × 360 µm OD) filled with SPE sorbent was inserted at 7.5 cm from the inlet of a CE-MS separation capillary as described in our previous works. PBA found in Bond Elut PBA (Agilent Technologies)was used as sorbent.

### Data Protocol
Prior to data analysis, a database with the exact monoisotopic mass of the different glycopeptide glycoforms of rhEPO was created using Excel. To calculate the monoisotopic mass of each glycopeptide glycoform, first, it was necessary to calculate the elemental composition. The elemental composition of each glycopeptide glycoform is calculated as the sum of the elemental composition of each monosaccharide that forms the glycan plus the mass of the peptide. Ionsource webpage was used to obtain the elemental composition of each monosaccharide. Finally, the molecular formula of each possible glycoform was obtained and thus, the monoisotopic mass with four decimals. Afterwards, the mass-to-charge values (m/z) for each glycoform are calculated up to a z value of 5 considering proton adducts (i.e. [M+H]+, [M+2H]2+, [M+3H]3+, [M+4H]4+ and [M+5H]5+) Finally, the data analysis is carried out using the software MassHunter Qualitative (Agilent Technologies). All the previously calculated m/z values for each glycopeptide glycoform are extracted together to obtain an extracted ion chromatogram (EIC) of that glycoform specie. If one of the extracted masses is detected in one chromatographic peak of the EIC, the presence of the corresponding glycan can be confirmed.

### Publication Abstract
In this study, several chromatographic sorbents: porous graphitic carbon (PGC), aminopropyl hydrophilic interaction (aminopropyl-HILIC), and phenylboronic acid (PBA) were assessed for the analysis of glycopeptides by on-line solid-phase extraction capillary electrophoresis mass spectrometry (SPE-CE-MS). As the PBA sorbent provided the most promising results, a PBA-SPE-CE-MS method was developed for the selective and sensitive preconcentration of glycopeptides from enzymatic digests of glycoproteins. Recombinant human erythropoietin (rhEPO) was selected as the model glycoprotein and subjected to enzymatic digestion with several proteases. The tryptic O<sub>126</sub> and N<sub>83</sub> glycopeptides from rhEPO were targeted to optimize the methodology. Under the optimized conditions, intraday precision, linearity, limits of detection (LODs), and microcartridge lifetime were evaluated, obtaining improved results compared to that from a previously reported TiO<sub>2</sub>-SPE-CE-MS method, especially for LODs of N-glycopeptides (up to 500 times lower than by CE-MS and up to 200 times lower than by TiO<sub>2</sub>-SPE-CE-MS). Moreover, rhEPO Glu-C digests were also analyzed by PBA-SPE-CE-MS to better characterize N<sub>24</sub> and N<sub>38</sub> glycopeptides. Finally, the established method was used to analyze two rhEPO products (EPOCIM and NeuroEPO plus), demonstrating its applicability in biopharmaceutical analysis. The sensitivity of the proposed PBA-SPE-CE-MS method improves the existing CE-MS methodologies for glycopeptide analysis and shows a great potential in glycoprotein analysis to deeply characterize protein glycosites even at low concentrations of the protein digest.

### Keywords
Capillary electrophoresis; glycopeptides; mass spectrometry; in-line solid-phase extraction; on-line solid-phase extraction; phenylboronic acid

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, Institute for Research on Nutrition and Food Safety (INSA·UB), University of Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1-11, 08028 Barcelona, Spain
University of Barcelona

### Submitter
Montserrat Mancera Arteu

### Lab Head
Dr Estela Giménez López
Department of Chemical Engineering and Analytical Chemistry, Institute for Research on Nutrition and Food Safety (INSA·UB), University of Barcelona, Martí i Franquès 1-11, 08028 Barcelona, Spain


