### Accession
PXD024084

### Title
Autocatalytic activation of a malarial egress protease is druggable and requires a protein cofactor

### Description
Malaria parasite egress from host erythrocytes (RBCs) is regulated by discharge of a parasite serine protease called SUB1 into the parasitophorous vacuole (PV). There, SUB1 activates a PV-resident cysteine protease called SERA6, enabling host RBC rupture through SERA6-mediated degradation of the RBC cytoskeleton protein beta-spectrin. Here we show that activation of Plasmodium falciparum SERA6 involves a second, autocatalytic step that is triggered by SUB1 cleavage. Unexpectedly, autoproteolytic maturation of SERA6 requires interaction in multimolecular complexes with a distinct PV-located protein cofactor, MSA180, that is itself a SUB1 substrate. Genetic ablation of MSA180 mimics SERA6 disruption, producing a fatal block in beta-spectrin cleavage and RBC rupture. Drug-like inhibitors of SERA6 autoprocessing similarly prevent beta-spectrin cleavage and egress in both P. falciparum and the emerging zoonotic pathogen P. knowlesi. Our results elucidate the egress pathway and identify SERA6 as a target for a new class of antimalarial drugs designed to prevent disease progression.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen schizont preparations were subjected to 3 freeze-thaw cycles in the presence of cOmplete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) and 10 mM EDTA. Whole lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 16,000g for 10 min at 4degC, filtered through 0.45 μm Costar Spin-X centrifuge tube filters (Corning), supplemented with 25 mM CHAPS (3-((3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio)-1-propanesulfonate) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then incubated with Pierce Anti-HA Magnetic Beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 4degC for 2 h. Sample processing followed the manufacturer’s protocol. Protein complexes were eluted from beads by addition of reduced 1× SDS sample buffer. Samples were fractionated on 5-15% SDS–PAGE gels, stained with colloidal Coomassie and selected protein bands excised and washed. Reduced and alkylated proteins were in-gel digested with 100 ng trypsin (modified sequencing grade, Promega) or elastase overnight at 37°C. Supernatants were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 1-10 μL of digested protein acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% TFA was loaded at 15 ul/min onto a 2mm × 0.3mm Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column (Thermo Scientific) on an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC HPLC (Thermo Scientific), prior to the trap being switched to elute at 0.25ul/min through a 50cm × 75 um EasySpray C18 column. A 90 min gradient of 9%−25% B over 37 min, then 25%-40% B over 18 min was used followed by a short gradient to 100% B and back down to 9% B followed by a 20 min equilibration in 9% B (buffer A: 2%ACN, 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 80%ACN, 0.1% formic acid). The Orbitrap was operated in “Data Dependent Acquisition” mode with a survey scan at a resolution of 120,000 from m/z 300-1500, followed by MS/MS in “TopS” mode. Dynamic exclusion was used with a time window of 20 sec. The Orbitrap charge capacity was set to a maximum of 1e6 ions in 10 ms, whilst the LTQ was set to 1e4 ions in 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using Maxquant 1.3.0.5 and Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a recent version of PlasmoDB (www.plasmodb.org). A decoy database of reversed sequences was used to filter false positives, at a peptide false detection rate of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Malaria, Sera6, Protease, Sub1

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute
Senior Group Leader Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory Francis Crick Institute London NW1 1AT

### Submitter
Steven Howell

### Lab Head
Dr Mike Blackman
Senior Group Leader Malaria Biochemistry Laboratory Francis Crick Institute London NW1 1AT


