### Accession
PXD015536

### Title
LC-MS of S. cerevisiae scale-down cultivations

### Description
Chemostat cultivation mode imposes selective pressure on cells, which may result slow adaptation in the physiological state over time. We applied a two-compartment scale-down chemostat system simulating glucose gradients to characterize the long-term (100’s of hours) response of S. cerevisiae to fluctuating glucose concentrations. A wild-type strain and a recombinant strain, expressing an insulin precursor, were cultured in the scale-down system, and analyzed at the physiological and proteomic level. Phenotypes of both strains were compared to those observed in a well-mixed single chemostat system.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein extract from S. cerevisiae was done as previously described in Bonde et al. (2016). Liquid chromatography was performed on a Cap-LC system (Thermo scientific) coupled to an 75 µm x 15 cm 2µm C18 easy spray column (Thermo Scientific). The flow rate was set to 1.2 ul and using a stepped gradient, going from 4% to 40% acetonitrile in water over 50 minutes, the samples were sprayed into an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS-level scans were performed with Orbitrap resolution set to 60,000; AGC Target 1.0e6; maximum injection time 50 ms; intensity threshold 5.0e3; dynamic exclusion 25 sec. Data dependent MS2 selection was performed in Top 12 mode with HCD collision energy set to 28% (AGC target 1.0e4, maximum injection time 22 ms).

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were analyzed using Proteome Discover 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Massachusetts, US) with the following settings: Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C). Varible modifications: oxidation of methionine residues. First search mass tolerance 20 ppm and a MS/MS tolerance of 20 ppm. Trypsin was selected as enzyme and allowing one missed cleavage. FDR was set at 0.1%. Data was searched against the S. cerevisiae database retrieved from Uniprot with proteome ID AUP000002311.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Scale-down, Proteome, Fermentation, Glucose gradients, S. cerevisiae

### Affiliations
DTU
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Building 220, Kemitorvet, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark

### Submitter
Naia Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Herrgard
The Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability, Technical University of Denmark, Building 220, Kemitorvet, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark


