### Accession
PXD002628

### Title
Bodo saltans proteomics -  Kinetoplastid Phylogenomics Reveals the Evolutionary Innovations Associated with the Origins of Parasitism

### Description
The evolution of parasitism is a recurring event in the history of life and a core question in evolutionary biology. Trypanosomatids are important parasites including the human pathogens Trypanosoma brucei, T. cruzi and Leishmania spp., which have evolved complex life cycles to exploit a series of defined host environments after diverging from free-living, phagotrophic bodonids. However, the origins of genomic adaptations for transmission, disease and pathogenesis remain obscure because there has been no genomic comparison of parasitic and free-living species. Addressing this absence, we have produced a genome sequence for Bodo saltans, the closest known non-parasitic relative of trypanosomatids. Here we show how genomic reduction and innovation contributed to the character of trypanosomatid genomes. We find that despite a genetic ‘streamlining’ of diverse physiological functions, including macromolecular degradation and cellular homeostasis, the origin of trypanosomatid parasitism did not lead to a substantial reduction in genome function. Instead, we observe dramatic elaboration of gene families that facilitate host-parasite interactions and pathogenesis. We also show how parasite-specific proteins that characterize the enigmatic cell surfaces of Trypanosoma and Leishmania were derived from the same ancestral proteins, still represented in B. saltans. Our new evidence distinguishes adaptive innovations of trypanosomatids that post-date their parasitic origin from essentially kinetoplastid legacies of a free-living past. It shows that when the labile environment of a phagotrophic ancestor was replaced by the defined conditions of their various hosts, trypanosomatid physiology was reoriented towards host interaction, and ancestral structures were radically transformed to provide adaptations for obligate parasitism.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomics  To solubilise protein, B.saltans cell pellets were sonicated in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Sigma-Aldrich) and 0.1% (w/v) Rapigest (Waters, Elstree, UK) on ice. Samples were then incubated at 80 °C for 10 min and reduced with 3 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60°C for 10 minutes then alkylated with 9 mM iodoacetimde at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteomic-grade trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at a protein:trypsin ratio of 50:1, and samples were incubated at 37 °C overnight before removal of Rapigest by trifluoroacetic acid precipitation.  Strong anion exchange peptide fractionation and peptide analysis by online nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer was performed as previously described (Darby et al., 2014). For samples run on the Q-Exactive platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were loaded on a 50cm Easy-Spray column with an internal diameter of 75µm, packed with 2µm C18 particles, fused to a silica nano-electrospray emitter (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Reversed phase liquid chromatography was performed using the Thermo EASY-nLC 1000 with a binary buffer system consisting of 0.1% formic acid (buffer A) and 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (buffer B). The peptides were separated by a linear gradient of 3.8 – 50% buffer B over 247 min at a flow rate of 300nl/min. The column was operated at a constant temperature of 35°C.The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode with survey scans acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200. Up to the top 10 most abundant isotope patterns with charge states +2, +3 and/or +4 from the survey scan were selected with an isolation window of 2.0Th and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energies of 30. The maximum ion injection times for the survey scan and the MS/MS scans were 250 and 100ms, respectively, and the ion target value was set to 1E6 for survey scans and 1E4 for the MS/MS scans.    Membrane protein enrichment  Protein extraction and Triton X-114 partitioning was performed as described by Cordero et al (2009). Acetone precipitated proteins were resuspended in SDS-PAGE reducing sample buffer and were run approximately 1 cm into a NuPAGE® (Life Technologies) precast 4-12% gel Tris-Bis gradient gel and the proteins were stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G-250 (Simply BlueTM, Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The entire gel lane was excised and cut into smaller pieces (approx. 1mm3) and in-gel tryptic digestion performed as described elsewhere (Shevchenko et al 2006).   Glycoprotein enrichment  B.saltans cell pellets were solubilised in 8M urea, 4.5 M thiourea, 2.5 % (w/v) CHAPS, 50mM Tris-HCL pH 7.4, 66mM DTT. N-linked glycan enrichment was performed using Concanavilin A spin columns (Thermo Scientific Pierce Glycoprotein Isolation Kit) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Eluate containing glycans was precipitated by incubation with 30% Trichloroacetic acid (w/v) in acetone for 2 hours on ice and the pellet was resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer. SDS-PAGE and in-gel tryptic digestion was performed as above.

### Data Protocol
Spectral data were analysed using the PEAKS studio 7 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada). Tandem MS data were searched against the predicted protein set of the B. saltans reference genome sequence (Sanger, 2012) Search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.8 Da or 0.01 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. The false discovery rate was set at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The evolution of parasitism is a recurrent event in the&#xa0;history of life and a core problem in evolutionary biology. Trypanosomatids are important parasites and include the human pathogens Trypanosoma brucei, Trypanosoma cruzi, and Leishmania spp., which in humans cause African trypanosomiasis, Chagas disease, and leishmaniasis, respectively. Genome comparison between trypanosomatids reveals that these parasites have evolved specialized cell-surface protein families, overlaid on a well-conserved cell template. Understanding how these features evolved and which ones are specifically associated with parasitism requires comparison with related non-parasites. We have produced genome sequences for Bodo saltans, the closest known non-parasitic relative of trypanosomatids, and a second bodonid, Trypanoplasma borreli. Here we show how genomic reduction and innovation contributed to the character of trypanosomatid genomes. We show that gene loss has "streamlined" trypanosomatid genomes, particularly with respect to macromolecular degradation and ion transport, but consistent with a widespread loss of functional redundancy, while adaptive radiations of gene families involved in membrane function provide the principal innovations in trypanosomatid evolution. Gene gain and loss continued during trypanosomatid diversification, resulting in the asymmetric assortment of ancestral characters such as peptidases between Trypanosoma and Leishmania, genomic differences that were subsequently amplified by lineage-specific innovations after divergence. Finally, we&#xa0;show how species-specific, cell-surface gene families (DGF-1 and PSA) with no apparent structural similarity are independent derivations of a common ancestral form, which we call "bodonin." This new evidence defines the parasitic innovations of trypanosomatid genomes, revealing how a free-living phagotroph became adapted to exploiting hostile host environments.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Bodo saltans

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Julian A. Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK.


