### Accession
PXD023244

### Title
Bioinformatic analysis of the wound peptidome reveals potential biomarkers and antimicrobial peptides

### Description
Peptidomic analysis and methodological development of characterization of low molecular weight peptidome of human wound fluids. Wounds are dynamic environments with high proteolytic activity. Therefore, the study of peptides, being the degradational product of proteins, are of interest when diagnosing infection as well as understanding wound physiology. Three types of wound fluids are studied: acute (sterile), infected and non- infected (unsterile from facial skin graft surgery). We have provided a methodology for sample preparation and analysis, as well as the first quantification of wound fluid peptidomes using LC-MS/MS data, sorting algorithms and 3 rd party software. Furthermore, we visualize the differences between the abovementioned peptidomes and create a methodology for peptidomic analysis of LC-MS/MS data. We report several findings regarding the general characteristics, protease environment and P1-P1’/P4-P4’ prominence in the various fluids. Additionally, we find that there is an abundance of antimicrobial peptides derived from hemoglobin subunit beta in infected wounds. Furthermore, we crosscheck our data with existing literature, quantifying abundance of potential biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen plasma and/or sterile acute wound fluids were defrosted and mixed with 3 parts freshly made 8 M urea (in 10 mM tris, pH 7.4, yielding a final urea concentration of 6 M) alone or supplemented with RapiGest SF (0.05% final concentration; Waters, USA) or trifluoroacetic acid (0.1% final concentration; Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature (RT) followed by size exclusion. For this purpose, centrifugal filters with 30 kDa cut-off (Microcon 30, regenerated cellulose, Millipore, Ireland) were first rinsed with 100 μL buffer and centrifuged at 14000 g for 15 min at RT, then loaded with the incubated sample mixtures, followed by 30 min centrifugation (14000 g at RT) and a final filter washing step with 100 μL of extraction buffer (5 min, 14000 g). Due to large variations in protein content of the dressing extracts (between 2.8-16.5 mg/mL), protein concentrations were standardized. For this purpose, 10 mM Tris was added to 280 μg of each fluid to obtain a sample volume of 100 μl in total, which was then incubated with 300 μl 8 M urea supplemented with RapiGest SF for 30 min, followed by the size exclusion steps as described above. For all samples, the two filtrates containing the peptides were pooled and analysed by SDS-gel electrophoresis directly or stored at -20 °C before analysis by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with PEAKS software. UniProt Human was used with nonspecific cleavage; 5 ppm precursor tolerance and 0.5 Da fragment tolerance were used for the experiments conducted with the Fusion instrument and 0.02 Da for the fragments when the HFX was used. Oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ) were treated as dynamic modification. Search result were filtered by using 1% FDR for the wound fluids, or a 23 score for the plasma samples, and at least 2 unique peptides for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Peptidomics wound fluid

### Affiliations
Lund University
Division of clinical sciences (IKVL), Department for infectious diseases, BMC D13, Lund University

### Submitter
Anahita Bakochi

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Kjellström
Division of clinical sciences (IKVL), Department for infectious diseases, BMC D13, Lund University


