### Accession
PXD017086

### Title
Proteomic characterization of probiotics

### Description
The manufacturing processes of commercial probiotic strains may be affected in different ways in the attempt to optimize yield, costs, functionality, or stability, influencing gene expression, protein patterns, or metabolic output. Aim of this work was to compare different samples of a high concentration (450 billion bacteria) multispecies (8 strains) formulation produced at two different manufacturing sites, USA (US) and Italy (IT), by applying functional proteomics analyses. Several protein-profile differences were detected between IT- and US-made products, with Lactobacillus paracasei, Streptococcus thermophilus, and Bifidobacteria being the main affected probiotics/microorganisms. Integration of omics platforms with in vivo analysis emerged as a powerful tool to assess manufacturing procedures.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analysis, 20 mg of each VSL#3 capsule batch were separately resuspended in 300 µl of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 30 mM HEPES, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride) containing Roche complete protease inhibitors cocktail. Samples were vigorously vortexed, sonicated on ice (5 cycles of 20 s each with 30 s of cooling between each on ice), and centrifuged at 16.800 × g for 30 min at 4°C. Protein quantification of supernatants was performed by Bradford assay. Each sample (~50 µg) was reduced, alkylated and trypsin digested, as described in [14]. Resulting tryptic peptides were fractionated, by strong cationic exchange (SCX), into two fractions (50 mM and 500 mM ammonium bicarbonate), which were then desalted, by Stage tip protocol using C18 reversed-phase resin, speed-vac dried and finally resuspended in 60 µl 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometry analysis.  Nano LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on a quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive Plus; Thermo Fisher) coupled with a nano-UPLC system (ThermoFisher) equipped with a reversed phase C18 nanocapillary analytical column (75 μm i.d. x 15 cm) (Thermo). Three technical replicates were run for each fraction.

### Data Protocol
MS data were analysed by means of MaxQuant software (v. 1.6.0.1, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry). After their search against common contaminant and reversed decoy databases, MS/MS spectra were analyzed selecting the following parameters: two allowed missed-cleavages for trypsin, methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification. FDR of the identification was set to 1% at protein and peptide levels. “Match between runs” feature (2 min time window) allowed identification transfer across experiments to minimize missing values. Protein quantifications were based on the identified “razor + unique peptides”. The intensity values were also normalized by LFQ algorithm to account for potential differences in sample loading. The derived LFQ Intensity was used for further proteome comparison. Statistical analyses were performed with Perseus software (v. 1.6, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry).

### Publication Abstract
The manufacturing processes of commercial probiotic strains may be affected in different ways in the attempt to optimize yield, costs, functionality, or stability, influencing gene expression, protein patterns, or metabolic output. Aim of this work is to compare different samples of a high concentration (450 billion bacteria) multispecies (8 strains) formulation produced at two different manufacturing sites, United States of America (US) and Italy (IT), by applying a combination of functional proteomics, metabolomics, and in vivo analyses. Several protein-profile differences were detected between IT- and US-made products, with <i>Lactobacillus paracasei</i>, <i>Streptococcus thermophilus</i>, and Bifidobacteria being the main affected probiotics/microorganisms. Performing proton nuclear magnetic spectroscopy (<sup>1</sup>H-NMR), some discrepancies in amino acid, lactate, betaine and sucrose concentrations were also reported between the two products. Finally, we investigated the health-promoting and antiaging effects of both products in the model organism <i>Caenorhabditis elegans</i>. The integration of omics platforms with in vivo analysis has emerged as a powerful tool to assess manufacturing procedures.

### Keywords
Probiotic quality assessment, Functional proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences
University of L'Aquila

### Submitter
Benedetta Mattei

### Lab Head
Dr Benedetta Mattei
Department of Life, Health and Environmental Sciences


