### Accession
PXD035834

### Title
SPROX full curve on E. coli lysate

### Description
To probe the thermodynamic stability of proteins within the E. coli proteome through proteomic technique SPROX.

### Sample Protocol
The LC-MS/MS analyses for the E. coli metal-induced precipitation and SPROX samples were performed on a Thermo Easy nanoLC 1200 coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer system. The dried peptide material generated from each experiment was reconstituted in 1% TFA, 2% acetonitrile in H2O. Aliquots of 2 μ (1 μg peptide) were injected in triplicate into the UPLC system. The peptides were first trapped on a Thermo Acclaim PepMap 100 75 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper 2Pk C18, 3 μm, 100 A trapping column. The analytical separation was performed using an PepMap RSLC C18 2 μm, 100 A, 75 μm x 25 cm column (Thermo); the column temperature was set to 45 °C. Peptide elution was performed using a 95 min linear gradient of 4-40 %B (80:20 acetonitrile:water, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min.The MS data was collected using a top 20 data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method which included MS1 at 120k and MS2 at 45k resolution. The MS1 normalized AGC target was set to 300%. For MS2, the normalized AGC target was set to 300% with a max injection time of 105 ms. The collision energy was set to 36%, and the scan range was 375-1500 m/z. The isolation window was 1.2 and the dynamic exclusion duration was 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data generated in the protein expression experiments was searched using fixed MMTS modification on cysteine; TMT10-plex labeling of lysine side chains and peptide N-termini; variable oxidation of methionine; variable deamidation of asparagine and glutamine; and variable acetylation of the protein N-terminus. Trypsin (full) was set as the enzyme, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. For peptide and protein quantification, reporter abundance was set as intensity, and normalization mode and scaling mode were each set as none. All other settings were left as the default values. Data was exported at the protein-level for quantitation. Only proteins with FDR confidence labeled as "high" or “medium” (i.e., FDR < 1% or < 5%), PSMs ≥ 2, and having no TMT-tag abundances of zero were used for subsequent analyses. The data was normalized as previously described in reference Stickland et al. To fit individual protein SPROX curves, chemical denaturation data sets were fitted to a fourparameter sigmoidal equation, eq 1, using a Mathematica-based program (developed in house). SPROX midpoint values of the curves were exported for further statistical analyses as well as fitting p-values for variables “b” and “c”. Proteins with poorly fitted curves (fitting p-values < 0.01) were removed before further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Metal cations have been exploited for their precipitation properties in a wide variety of studies, ranging from differentiating proteins from serum and blood to identifying the protein targets of drugs. Despite widespread recognition of this phenomenon, the mechanisms of metal-induced protein aggregation have not been fully elucidated. Recent studies have suggested that copper's (Cu) ability to induce protein aggregation may be a main contributor to Cu-induced cell death. Here, we provide the first proteome-wide analysis of the relative sensitivities of proteins across the Escherichia coli proteome to Cu-induced aggregation. We utilize a metal-induced protein precipitation (MiPP) methodology that relies on quantitative bottom-up proteomics to define the metal concentration-dependent precipitation properties of proteins on a proteomic scale. Our results establish that Cu far surpasses other metals in promoting protein aggregation and that the protein aggregation is reversible upon metal chelation. The bulk of the Cu bound in the protein aggregates is Cu1+, regardless of the Cu2+ source. Analysis of our MiPP data allows us to investigate underlying biophysical characteristics that determine a protein's sensitivity to Cu-induced aggregation, which is independent of the relative concentration of protein in the lysate. Overall, this analysis provides new insights into the mechanism behind Cu cytotoxicity, as well as metal cation-induced protein aggregation.

### Keywords
Stability, Sprox, E. coli

### Affiliations
Duke University
Chemistry, Fitzgerald, Duke University, USA

### Submitter
grace bertles

### Lab Head
Dr Michael C. Fitzgerald
Chemistry, Fitzgerald, Duke University, USA


