### Accession
PXD024359

### Title
Proteomic Clustering Reveals the Kinetics of Disease Biomarkers in Bovine and Human Models of Post-Traumatic Osteoarthritis

### Description
Objectives: In this study, we applied a clustering method to two proteomic data sets from bovine (PRIDE PXD020756) and human models (this repository) of post-traumatic osteoarthritis (PTOA) to distinguish distinct clusters of proteins based on their kinetics of release from cartilage and examined these clusters for PTOA biomarker candidates. We quantified the effects of dexamethasone (Dex) on the kinetics of release of the cartilage media proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Human explants were harvested from the tibial plateau of a 74-year old male donor (Collins Grade 1081) obtained postmortem through the Gift of Hope Organ and Tissue Donor Network (Itasca, IL). After harvesting, explant disks were pre-equilibrated in serum-free phenol-red 111free Dulbecco’sModified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM, 4.5 g/L glucose, ThermoFisher Scientific) supplemented with 10 mM HEPES buffer (Gibco), 0.1 mM nonessential amino acids (Sigma), 0.4 mM proline (Sigma), 20 μg/ml ascorbic acid (Sigma), 100 units/ml penicillin G, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 0.25 μg/ml amphotericin B (Sigma), and 1% insulin-transferrin-selenium (10 μg/ml, 5.5 μg/ml, and 5 ng/ml, respectively.  Explant treatments: After pre-equilibration, samples were treated for 21days: no treatment(N), continuous culture with inflammatory cytokines (100 ng/mL TNF-α, 50 ng/mL IL-6, 250 ng/mL sIL-6R; treatment C), cytokines with a single mechanical impact injury at day 0 (for human, 60% final strain at 300%/s strain rate; followed by immediate release at the same rate; treatment IC), and the receiving 100nM Dex (treatments CD and ICD). Culture medium was collected every three days and stored at -20°C until analysis. Data sets were collected originally with an injury alone treatment condition with or without Dex, which is also included, however only as two replicates.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analysis Culture medium (50μL) was prepared for discovery mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Label-free quantification was performed on medium samples using a quadrupole Orbitrap benchtop mass Commented spectrometer (Q-Exactive, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Identification was performed using the UniProt human (UP000005640) sequence databases with Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific). The protein false discovery rate (FDR) was 0.01. Label-free protein abundance quantification was obtained by summing peak area intensities from multiple unique peptides for each protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Explant model, Human cartilage, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden
Lund University

### Submitter
Patrik Onnerfjord

### Lab Head
Dr Patrik Onnerfjord
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Sweden


