### Accession
PXD011991

### Title
The host factor: proteomic comparison of excretion/1 secretion products in Fasciola hepatica newly excysted juveniles (NEJ) derived from Lymnaea viatrix or Pseudosuccinea columella

### Description
The characteristics of parasitic infections are often tied to host behavior. Although most studies have investigated definitive hosts, intermediate hosts can also play a role in shaping the distribution and accumulation of parasites. This is particularly relevant in larval stages, where intermediate host behavior could potentially interfere in the molecules secreted by the parasite into the next host during infection. To investigate this hypothesis we used a proteomic approach to analyze excretion/secretion products (ESP) from Fasciola hepatica newly excysted juveniles (NEJ) derived from two intermediate host species, Lymnaea viatrix and Pseudosuccinea columella. The two analyzed proteomes showed differences in identity, abundance, and functional classification of the proteins. Based on the differences identified between NEJ ESP samples, we can conclude that the intermediate host is a factor influencing the proteomic profile of ESP in F. hepatica

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were digested in solution with trypsin. Samples were diluted in 8 M urea/0.1 M Tris, pH 8.5, reduced with 5 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride, and alkylated with 25 mM iodoaceamide. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C in 2 M urea/0.1M Tris pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2 with trypsin at a final ratio of 1:20 (w/w) (enzyme: substrate). Digestion reactions, at a final protein concentration of 0.15 µg/mL, were quenched with formic acid (5 % final concentration) and centrifuged at 17,000 g for 5 min at 4 ºC for removal of debris.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoflow LC-MS using an Easy NanoLC II coupled to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Solutions A and B consisted of 5 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid and 80 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid, respectively. The flow rate was set to 400 nL/min. Protein samples (1.5 µg per injection) were separated in 155-min chromatographic runs, as follows: 1-10 % B in 10 min, 10-40 % B in 100 min, 40-50 % B in 10 min, and 50-90 % B in 10 min. The column was held at 90 % B for 10 min, then brought to 1 % B and re-equilibrated prior to the next injection. Peptides eluted from the analytical column were electrosprayed directly into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 400 to 1,200 m/z at 70,000 resolution and AGC target of 1 x 106. The 10 most abundant ions in each scan were selected for MS/MS at 17,500 resolution, with AGC target of 2 x 105, and an underfill ratio of 0.1 %. Maximum fill times were 20 ms and 120 ms for MS and MS/MS scans, respectively, with dynamic exclusion of 15 s. Normalized collision energy was set to 25.

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Thermo RAW files using RawExtract 1.9.9.290, and searched with ProLuCID91 against a non-redundant database containing coding sequences from Fasciola hepatica genome92 (33,454 entries), concatenated with a Bos taurus Uniprot reference database (23,804 entries), in addition to reverse sequences of all entries. Searches were done using Integrated Proteomics Pipeline (IP2, http://www.integratedproteomics.com). The search space included all fully-tryptic and half-tryptic peptide candidates. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was used as static modification. Data were searched with 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and 20-ppm fragment ion tolerance. The validity of the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) generated by ProLuCID was assessed using Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module from PatternLab for Proteomics platform93. ProLuCID XCorr, DeltaCN, DeltaMass, Z-score, number of matched peaks, and secondary rank values were used to generate a Bayesian discriminating function. A cut-off score was established to accept a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % based on the number of decoys. A minimum sequence length of six residues per peptide was required. Results were post-processed to only accept PSMs with precursor mass error < 10 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Here we present the proteomic profile datasets of two <i>Fasciola hepatica</i> NEJ isolates derived from different snail hosts: <i>Lymnaea viatrix</i> and <i>Pseudosuccinea columella</i>. The data used in the analysis are related to the article 'A proteomic comparison of excretion/secretion products in <i>Fasciola hepatica</i> newly excysted juveniles (NEJ) derived from <i>Lymnaea viatrix</i> or <i>Pseudosuccinea columella</i>' (Di Maggio et&#xa0;al., 2019).

### Keywords
Fasciola hepatica, Intermediate host, Secretome, Parasite-host interaction

### Affiliations
Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
Centro de Biotecnologia Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul

### Submitter
Itabajara Vaz Jr.

### Lab Head
Dr Itabajara da Silva Vaz Junior
Centro de Biotecnologia Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul


