### Accession
PXD026936

### Title
Analysis of human brain tissue derived from DBS surgery

### Description
The implantation of deep brain stimulation (DBS) electrodes into the human brain is a neurosurgical treatment for, e.g., movement disorders. We describe a novel approach to collecting brain tissue from DBS surgery-guiding instruments for liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry and RNA sequencing analyses. Proteomics and transcriptomics showed that the approach is useful for obtaining disease-specific expression data. A comparison between our improved and the previous approaches and related datasets was performed. BioStudies:https://www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/studies/S-BSST667 and Publication: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.06.18.448926v1

### Sample Protocol
Surgical instruments used to install DBS electrodes were sampled by rinsing with PBS, and the tissue was pelleted by centrifugation. Sample preparation involved protein denaturation with urea, reduction with DTT, carbamidomethylation with IAA, and digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were C18 purified, followed by bottom-up LC-MS proteomics analysis with DDA.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were done with MaxQuant/Andromeda using the recommended settings. A reviewed human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot proteome was used. LFQ intensity without further normalisation was used as an estimate of protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Brain, Deep brain stimulation

### Affiliations
Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, Systems Biology/Pathology Research Group, University of Helsinki, Finland
University of Helsinki

### Submitter
Jaakko Teppo

### Lab Head
Dr Markku Varjosalo
Institute of Biotechnology, Helsinki Institute of Life Science, Systems Biology/Pathology Research Group, University of Helsinki, Finland


