### Accession
PXD038474

### Title
Pol II preferentially regulates ribosomal protein expression by trapping disassociated subunits

### Description
Pol II has been recognized as a passively regulated holoenzyme. However, whether Pol II plays specific regulatory roles remain unclear. Here, fractions containing disassociated RPB3 (dRPB3) were identified by size exclusion chromatography in various cells. Through a unique strategy, Specific Degradation of Disassociated Subunits (SDDS), we demonstrated that dRPB3 functions as a regulatory component of Pol II to enable the preferential control of 3’ end processing of ribosomal protein genes directly through its N-terminal domain. Machine learning analysis of large-scale genomic features revealed that the little elongation complex helps to specialize the functions of dRPB3. Mechanistically, dRPB3 facilitates CBC-PCF11 axis activity to increase the efficiency of 3’ end processing. Furthermore, RPB3 is dynamically regulated during development and diseases. These findings suggest that Pol II gains specific regulatory functions by trapping disassociated subunits.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with expression constructs encoding RPB3-GFP. Two days after transfection, HEK293T cells were lysed in IP buffer for 30 min at 4℃. The cell lysate was spun down at 12,000 g for 10 min at 4℃, and the supernatant was collected and incubated with GFP-Trap beads at 4℃ overnight. GFP-Trap beads were washed 3 times using IP buffer and then washed twice using high-salt wash buffer Then, the GFP-Trap beads were resuspended in 30 μl protein loading buffer and heated at 100°C for 10 min. After SDS-PAGE gel electrophoresis, the gel was stained in the Coomassie Blue staining solution overnight, and destained several times. Then gel bands were cut into 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 pieces and dehydrated using ACN. Then treated the gels with DTT and iodoacetamide to reduce and alkylate proteins, followed by trypsin digestion. The tryptic peptides were desalted using ZipTip-C18 (Millipore) pipette tip columns. The sample was first loaded into Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data collected were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek293t rpb3 ptm

### Affiliations
Peking University
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.

### Submitter
wenjia duan

### Lab Head
Dr Xiong Ji
Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation of the Ministry of Education, School of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China.


