### Accession
PXD021712

### Title
Hepatitis B Core Protein is Posttranslationally Modified through K29-linked Ubiquitination

### Description
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) core protein (HBc) plays many roles in the HBV life cycle such as regulation of transcription, RNA encapsidation, reverse transcription and viral release. To accomplish these functions, HBc interacts with many host proteins and undergoes different posttranslational modifications (PTMs). One of the most common PTM is ubiquitination that was shown to change function, stability, and intracellular localization of different viral proteins, but the role of HBc ubiquitination in the HBV life cycle remains unknown. Here, we found that HBc protein is posttranslationally modified through K29-linked ubiquitination. We performed a series of co-immunoprecipitation experiments with wild type HBc, lysine to arginine HBc mutants and wild type ubiquitin, single lysine to arginine ubiquitin mutants or single ubiquitin-accepting lysine constructs. We observed that HBc protein could be modified by ubiquitination in transfected as well as infected hepatoma cells. In addition, ubiquitination predominantly occurred on HBc lysine 7 and the preferred ubiquitin chain linkage was through ubiquitin-K29. Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses detected UBR5 as a potential E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in K29-linked ubiquitination. These findings emphasize that ubiquitination of HBc may play an important role in HBV life cycle.

### Sample Protocol
HepG2-NTCP cells grown to 90% confluence in three T225 flasks were transiently transfected with the HBc-HA plasmid (or empty vector pcDNA3.1) using LipofectamineTM 3000 transfection reagent (Fisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer's instructions. HA-tagged HBc was expressed for 38 h, and cells were harvested in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Hepes, 100mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 0.5% Nonidet P40, pH 7.9 (Co-IP buffer). The cells were lysed in Co-IP buffer for 1 h at 4°C. Cellular debris was removed by centrifugation for 10 min at 15,000 × g at 4°C. HBc-HA was immunoprecipitated using 120 μl of anti-HA magnetic beads at 4°C. Immunoprecipitates were washed three times with Co-IP buffer and three times with Co-IP buffer containing no detergents. HA-tagged HBc and its interacting proteins were eluted by HA peptide (0.5 mg/ml) in 100 μl, and the supernatant was separated from the beads and digested with trypsin overnight at pH 8.5. Experiments in HEK293T were done in the same way except for using five 100mm plates per sample, X-tremeGENE HP DNA reagent (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland) for transfection and cells were harvested 24h post-transfection. The resulting peptides were separated on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Mass Spectrometer Orbitrap Fusion and Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were trapped and desalted with 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 5 μl/min on an Acclaim PepMap100 column (5 μm, 5 mm by 300-μm internal diameter [ID]; Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMap100 analytical column (2 μm, 50-cm by 75-μm ID; Thermo Fisher Scientific). The 125-min elution gradient at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min was set to 5% phase B (0.1% formic acid in 99.9% acetonitrile) and 95% phase A (0.1% formic acid) for the first 1 min. Then, the content of acetonitrile was increased gradually. The orbitrap mass range was set from m/z 350 to 2000, in the MS mode, and the instrument acquired fragmentation spectra for ions of m/z 100 to 2000.  To identify E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases potentially interacting with ubiquitin variants, Huh7 cells were transiently transfected with an empty vector (pcDNA3.1), HA-tagged Ub-WT, Ub-K29, or Ub-K29R using GenJetTM transfection reagent according to the manufacturer's recommendation. Seventy-two hours after transfection, the cells were harvested in RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 1.0% IGEPAL CA-630, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. The cells were lysed on ice for 20 min at 4°C and harvested. The samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 15,000 x g at 4°C and precipitated with anti-HA magnetic beads (3 mg of total protein/ 50 µl magnetic beads for each reaction) overnight. On the next day, the samples were washed four times with 10 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.0. The immunoprecipitated complexes were analyzed by MS as described above. The processing of samples varied by changing two parameters, i.e., using a 70-min elution gradient and the database of sequences Swiss-Prot human proteins for analysis. Data files - 200304_pcDNA, 200304_UBI_K29, 200304_UBI_K29R,200304_UBI_WT - are result of affinity purification of Huh7 cells.  Data files - 200612_HAC_pep, 200612_CTRL_pep, 200626_HA_CA, 200626_HA_CTRL - are result of affinity purification of HEK293T cells. Data files - cE1, cE2, cE3, ctrl-E1, ctrl-E2, ctrl-E3 - are result of affinity purification of HepG2-hNTCP cells.

### Data Protocol
A Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification using Sequest and Amanda as search engines and databases of sequences of HA-tagged HBc, Swiss-Prot human proteins (downloaded on 15 February 2016), and common contaminants. The data were searched also with MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4)and the same set of protein databases in order to obtain peptide and protein intensities applied at label-free quantification (LFQ) step. Perseus software (version 1.650) was used to perform LFQ comparing three biological replicates of HA-tagged HBc cells and three biological replicates of cells transfected with empty vector

### Publication Abstract
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) core protein (HBc) plays many roles in the HBV life cycle, such as regulation of transcription, RNA encapsidation, reverse transcription, and viral release. To accomplish these functions, HBc interacts with many host proteins and undergoes different post-translational modifications (PTMs). One of the most common PTMs is ubiquitination, which was shown to change the function, stability, and intracellular localization of different viral proteins, but the role of HBc ubiquitination in the HBV life cycle remains unknown. Here, we found that HBc protein is post-translationally modified through K29-linked ubiquitination. We performed a series of co-immunoprecipitation experiments with wild-type HBc, lysine to arginine HBc mutants and wild-type ubiquitin, single lysine to arginine ubiquitin mutants, or single ubiquitin-accepting lysine constructs. We observed that HBc protein could be modified by ubiquitination in transfected as well as infected hepatoma cells. In addition, ubiquitination predominantly occurred on HBc lysine 7 and the preferred ubiquitin chain linkage was through ubiquitin-K29. Mass spectrometry (MS) analyses detected ubiquitin protein ligase E3 component N-recognin 5 (UBR5) as a potential E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in K29-linked ubiquitination. These findings emphasize that ubiquitination of HBc may play an important role in HBV life cycle.

### Keywords
Hepatitis b virus; hbc; posttranslational modifications; ubiquitination; ubiquitin; e3 ubiquitin-protein ligase

### Affiliations
Institute of Organic Chemistry and Biochemistry, Czech Academy of Science
Institute of Organic Chemistry an Biochmeistry, CAS, Prague, The Czech Republic

### Submitter
Martin Hubalek

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Hubalek
Institute of Organic Chemistry an Biochmeistry, CAS, Prague, The Czech Republic


