### Accession
PXD031711

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of truncated FGFR2, a clinically actionable oncogene in multiple cancers

### Description
Somatic hotspot mutations and structural amplifications and fusions affecting fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) occur in multiple cancer types. However, clinical responses to FGFR inhibitors (FGFRi) have remained variable, emphasizing a need to better understand which FGFR2 alterations are oncogenic and targetable. Here we applied transposon-based screening and tumor modelling in mice to uncover truncation of exon (E) 18 of Fgfr2 as a potent driver mutation. Human oncogenomic datasets revealed a diverse set of FGFR2 alterations, including rearrangements (REs), E1-E17 partial amplifications, and E18 nonsense and frameshift mutations, each causing transcription of E18-truncated FGFR2 (FGFR2deltaE18). Somatic modelling in mice and human tumor cell lines using a compendium of FGFR2deltaE18 and full-length variants identified FGFR2deltaE18-truncation as potent single-driver alteration in cancer. Here we show the phosphoproteomic landscape of FGFR2 variants in murine epithelial cell (MEC) lines and mouse tumors. Global (STY) phosphoproteomics using IMAC and phosphotyrosine phosphoproteomics using pTyr IP’s are combined with DIA protein expression data to uncover oncogenic signaling of clinically-relevant FGFR2 variants.

### Sample Protocol
NmuMG cells were cultured to 80-90% confluency in 15 cm dishes.For protein isolation, 2 dishes (pTyr IP experiment 3 dishes) of cells per replicate were washed twice with 10 ml PBS lysed in 3 ml lysis buffer (9 M urea, 20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM beta-glycerophosphate), followed by three cycles (pTyr IP experiment 1 cycle) of sonication (MSE soniprep 150) Afterwards, samples were cleared by centrifugation (4500 x g, 20 min, room temperature). Fresh frozen FGFR2 variant tumor samples were mounted with Milli-Q water and processed using a cryotome. Several 40 µm sections were collected to a final wet weight of 0.07 – 0.26 g and lysed in 2.8 – 10.4 ml urea lysis buffer (40x wet weight). Tumor lysates were then treated with 1 – 4 cycles of sonication and cleared by centrifugation (2800 x g, 15 min, room temperature).  In order to create a spectral library for the protein expression analysis of FGFR2 variant cell and tumor samples, a 10-band in-gel-digestion experiment was performed for each setting. For cell lysates, 45 µg total protein was loaded per sample from each cell line.  Tumor lysates were prepared in 6 pools, consisting of 4 – 7 individual samples each and 60 µg total protein was loaded per pool. The samples were combined depending on the FGFR2 variant.   For solution protein digestion and desalting for global phosphoproteomics and pTyr IP experiments an equivalent of 500 µg total protein (pTyr IP cells: 5 mg, pTyr IP tumors: 4 mg) was used. Reduction with DTT and alkylation with IAA followed and after dilution to 2 M urea, samples were digested with trypsin overnight and then acidified by addition of TFA. The digests were desalted using Oasis HLB columns (10 or 500 mg capacity, Waters) and eluted in 0.1 % TFA, 80% ACN solution. Immunoprecipitation of phosphotyrosine-containing peptides (pTyr IP) was essentially performed according to instructions of Cell Signaling Technologies. For global phosphoproteomic experiments of FGFR2 variant cells and tumors, phosphopeptide enrichment was performed on the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies) by using 5 µl Fe(III)-NTA IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) cartridges (Agilent # G5496-60085) starting from 200 µg desalted peptides in 0.1% TFA, 80% ACN. Phosphopeptides were eluted in 25 µl 5% NH4OH / 30% ACN.  For phosphopropteomic experiments of FGFR2 variant cells and tumors, peptides were separated using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC-MS/MS system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a 50 cm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap (C18, 1.9 μm) column. After injection, peptides were trapped at 3 μl/min on a 10 mm × 75 μm ID Acclaim Pepmap trap at 2% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1% formic acid (Fisher Scientific), buffer B: 80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and separated at 300 nl/min in a 10–40% buffer B gradient in 110 min (140 min inject-to-inject) at 35°C. Eluting peptides were ionized at a potential of +2 kVa into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Intact masses were measured from m/z 350-1400 at resolution 120.000 (at m/z 200) in the Orbitrap using an AGC target value of 3E6 charges and a maxIT of 100 ms. The top 15 for peptide signals (charge-states 2+ and higher) were submitted to MS/MS in the HCD (higher-energy collision) cell (1.4 amu isolation width, 26% normalized collision energy). MS/MS spectra were acquired at resolution 15000 (at m/z 200) in the orbitrap using an AGC target value of 1E6 charges, a maxIT of 64 ms, and an underfill ratio of 0.1%, resulting in an intensity threshold for MS/MS of 1.3E5. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion time of 30 s.  For protein expression analysis in DIA-MS, peptides (1 µg total peptides, desalted) were separated using the same LC-MS setup as above. The DIA-MS method consisted of an MS1 scan from 350 to 1400 m/z at 120,000 resolution (AGC target of 3E6 and 60 ms injection time). For MS2, 24 variable size DIA segments were acquired at 30,000 resolution (AGC target 3E6 and auto for injection time). The DIA-MS method starting at 350 m/z included one window of 35 m/z, 20 windows of 25 m/z, 2 windows of 60 m/z and one window of 418 m/z, which ended at 1400 m/z. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. The spectra were recorded in centroid mode with a default charge state for MS2 set to 3+ and a first mass of 200 m/z. Spectral library data files were acquired with the same acquisition settings as the phosphoproteomics experiments.

### Data Protocol
For FGFR2 variant cells and tumors, MS/MS spectra derived from data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode of the in-gel digestion experiment were searched against the Swissprot Mus musculus reference proteome (downloaded October 2021, canonical and isoforms, 25374 entries, same FASTA file in all searches) using MaxQuant 2.0.3.0 software and its default settings. The msms.txt file generated by MaxQuant was then used to generate a spectral library via Spectronaut software (version 15.4.210913, Biognosys).  Spectra derived from single sample measurements in data independent acquisition (DIA) mode were first analyzed library-free in Spectronaut (directDIA) using Biognosys factory settings and a second spectral library was created with the results. For the final search of DIA data in Spectronaut, both libraries were assigned. Settings were default, the protein LFQ method was set to MaxLFQ, imputation option was switched off and normalization strategy set to automatic. Upon completion of the search, protein group level results were saved as Spectronaut report for further analysis and q-value, review and decoy filters were applied during export. For tumor samples, two separate MaxQuant derived libraries were assigned. For phosphoproteomic experiments with cells and tumors phosphosite quantification was performed using MaxQuant software. For experiments with cells, version 1.6.10.43 and Swissprot Mus musculus reference proteome (downloaded February 2018, canonical and isoforms, 25131 entries) was used. For phosphoproteomic experiments with FGFR2 variant tumors, analyses were performed with MaxQuant version 2.0.3.0 and Swissprot Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded in October 2021 (canonical and isoforms, 25374 entries). Cysteine carboxamidomethylation (Cys, +57.021464 Da) was treated as fixed modification and serine, threonine and tyrosine phosphorylation (+79.966330 Da), methionine oxidation (Met,+15.994915 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (N-terminal, +42.010565 Da) as variable modifications. Peptide precursor ions were searched with a maximum mass deviation of 4.5 ppm and fragment ions with a maximum mass deviation of 20 ppm. Peptide, protein and site identifications were filtered at an FDR of 1% using the decoy database strategy. The minimal peptide length was 7 amino-acids and the minimum Andromeda score for modified peptides was 40 and the corresponding minimum delta score was 17. Peptide identifications were propagated across samples using the match between runs option checked.

### Publication Abstract
Somatic hotspot mutations and structural amplifications and fusions that affect fibroblast growth factor receptor 2 (encoded by FGFR2) occur in multiple types of cancer<sup>1</sup>. However, clinical responses to FGFR inhibitors have remained variable<sup>1-9</sup>, emphasizing the need to better understand which FGFR2 alterations are oncogenic and therapeutically targetable. Here we apply transposon-based screening<sup>10,11</sup> and tumour modelling in mice<sup>12,13</sup>, and find that the truncation of exon 18 (E18) of Fgfr2 is a potent driver mutation. Human oncogenomic datasets revealed a diverse set of FGFR2 alterations, including rearrangements, E1-E17 partial amplifications, and E18 nonsense and frameshift mutations, each causing the transcription of E18-truncated FGFR2 (FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup>). Functional in vitro and in vivo examination of a compendium of FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup> and full-length variants pinpointed FGFR2-E18 truncation as single-driver alteration in cancer. By contrast, the oncogenic competence of FGFR2 full-length amplifications depended on a distinct landscape of cooperating driver genes. This suggests that genomic alterations that generate stable FGFR2<sup>&#x394;E18</sup> variants are actionable therapeutic targets, which we confirmed in preclinical mouse and human tumour models, and in a clinical trial. We propose that cancers containing any FGFR2 variant with a truncated E18 should be considered for FGFR-targeted therapies.

### Keywords
Imac, Phosphoproteomics, Mouse model, Ptyrip, Label-free, Cancer, Fgfr2

### Affiliations
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
Amsterdam UMC

### Submitter
Sander Piersma

### Lab Head
Dr Connie Jimenez
AmsterdamUMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Medical Oncology, Cancer Center Amsterdam, OncoProteomics Laboratory, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


