### Accession
PXD016992

### Title
Shot-gun proteomic analysis of S Cerevisiae, Candidatus Accumulibacter and Clostridium sacch.

### Description
Shot-gun whole cell lysate proteomics data from pure and enriched microbes were de-novo sequenced using PEAKS de Novo. The obtained peptide sequence lists serves as a test data for the peptide-centric taxonomy database Unipept.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation and analysis: Whole cell lysate was protein precipitated using TCA protein pellet was re-dissolved in 200 mM ammonium bicarbonate/6M Urea, reduced using 10 mM DTT, and alkylated using 20 mM IAA. The solution was diluted to below 1 M Urea and digested using Trypsin. Before analysis, Peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB solid phase extraction cartridges (Waters corporation) according to the manufacturer protocols. An aliquot of each sample was analysed using a nano-liquid-chromatography system consisting of an EASY nano LC 1200, equipped with an Acclaim PepMap RSLC RP C18 separation column (50µm x 150mm, 2µm), and an QE plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo). Solvent A was H2O containing 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 80% acetonitrile in H2O and 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate was maintained at 300 nL/min over the whole gradient. The Orbitrap was operated in (top 10) data depended acquisition mode, acquiring peptide signals form 350-1400 m/z at 70K resolution in MS1 with an AGC target of 3e6 and 100 max IT.  For yeast, approx. 250ng protein digest was analysed with a short linear gradient from 4 to 30% B over 32.5 minutes, and further to 70% B over 12.5 minutes. MS2 acquisition parameters were set to 17.5K resolution, with an AGC target of 2e5, and a max IT of 54ms, at a NCE of 28. Unassigned, singly charged and 7, 8 and >8 charged signals were excluded.  For bacterial samples, approx. 100ng protein digest was analysed over a linear gradient from 5-30% B over 85 minutes and further to 75% B over additional 25 minutes. MS2 acquisition parameters were 17.5K resolution, with an AGC target of 1e5, and a max IT of 54ms, at a NCE of 30. Unassigned, singly charged and 8 and >8 times charged signals were excluded.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw data were processed using PEAKS Studio X (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Canada) for de-novo sequencing, which was performed allowing 15 ppm parent ion and 0.015 Da fragment mass error tolerance, carbamidomethylation as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptide sequence lists were exported including ALC scores ≥0%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microbial cells, Shot-gun proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biotechnology, TNW, TU Delft, The Netherlands.
TUD

### Submitter
Martin Pabst

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Pabst
Department of Biotechnology, TNW, TU Delft, The Netherlands.


