### Accession
PXD010611

### Title
Proteomic profiling of human prostate cancer-associated fibroblasts identifies LOXL2 promotes tumour migration in the extracellular matrix

### Description
In prostate cancer (PC), cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) exhibit contrasting biological properties to non-malignant prostate fibroblasts (NPFs) and promote tumorigenesis. Resolving intercellular signaling pathways between CAFs and prostate tumor epithelium may offer novel opportunities for research translation. To this end, the proteome and phosphoproteome of four pairs of patient-matched CAFs and NPFs were characterized to identify discriminating proteomic signatures. Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with a hyper-reaction monitoring data-independent acquisition (HRM-DIA) workflow. Proteins that exhibited a significant increase in CAFs versus NPFs were enriched for the functional categories ‘cell adhesion’ and the ‘extracellular matrix’. The CAF phosphoproteome exhibited enhanced phosphorylation of proteins associated with the ‘spliceosome’ and ‘actin binding’.  STRING analysis of the CAF proteome revealed a prominent interaction hub associated with collagen synthesis, modification, and signaling. It contained multiple collagens, including the fibrillar types COL1A1/2 and COL5A1; the receptor tyrosine kinase discoidin domain-containing receptor 2 (DDR2), a receptor for fibrillar collagens; and lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2), which promotes collagen crosslinking. Increased activity and/or expression of LOXL2 and DDR2 in CAFs were confirmed by enzymatic assays and Western blot analyses. Pharmacological inhibition of CAF-derived LOXL2 perturbed extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and decreased cell migration in wound-healing assays. Furthermore, it significantly impaired the motility of co-cultured RWPE2 prostate tumor epithelial cells. These results indicate that CAF-derived LOXL2 is an important mediator of intercellular communication within the PC tumor microenvironment and a potential therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Human prostate specimens were obtained following radical prostatectomy (RP) with the following human research ethics committee approvals: Cabrini Institute (03-14-04-08), Epworth HealthCare (34306 and 53611) and Monash University (2004/145). RWPE-2 cells (ATCC) were maintained in keratinocyte serum free medium (KSF-M; Gibco) supplemented with 5ng/mL epidermal growth factor (EGF; Gibco), 50mg/mL bovine pituitary extract (BPE; Gibco) and P/S) at 37ºC, 5% CO2, with media changes every 2-3 days. CAFs and NPFs were directly isolated from patient tissue as previously described (11). Briefly, benign and tumor regions were identified and excised by a trained pathologist. Whole tissue was enzymatically digested to release cells into suspension and cultured in fibroblast media (RPMI 1640 (School of Biomedical Sciences, Media and Prep Services, Monash University) supplemented with phenol red, 5 % heat inactivated HyClone fetal bovine serum (HI-FBS; GE Healthcare), 1 nM testosterone (Sigma-Aldrich), 10 ng/mL basic fibroblast growth factor (bFGF; Merck Millipore), 100 U/mL penicillin and 100 mg/mL streptomycin (P/S; Sigma-Aldrich). Cells were maintained at 37 °C in 5 % CO2, 5 % O2 atmosphere, with media changes every 2-3 d. Matched CAF and NPF cell lines were established from cancer and benign tissue pieces respectively and verified via IHC at passage 4 to show homogenous expression of the fibroblast markers vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin and the absence of epithelial cytokeratins (21).  Prior to use in this study, matched CAF and NPF pairs were validated using in vivo tissue recombination experiments whereby CAFs, but not NPFs, promoted tumorigenicity of non-tumorigenic benign prostate cells. Given that CAF and NPF are a primary, patient-derived line, early passage (3-6) CAF and NPF were used in this study unless otherwise stated. Cells were lysed in 8M urea buffer with phosphatase inhibitors, acetone precipitated, and pre-cleared via centrifugation. Total protein was measured using the Bicinchoninic acid protein assay (Bio-Rad). Protein extracts (100 µg) were denatured with 6 M urea in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate before reduction with 5 mM TCEP at 37 °C for 1 h and alkylation with 32 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 1 h. Alkylation was stopped by addition of 27 mM DTT. PNGase F (5000 U) was added to the sample mixture and incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. The samples were then diluted 1:10 with ammonium bicarbonate and digested with a 1:50 modified trypsin (Promega) to protein weight at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic digests were acidified with 10% TFA to pH 2-3, desalted with a C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and eluted with 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/40 % acetonitrile (ACN). Peptides were dried with a SpeedVac and re-suspended in 2 % ACN/0.1 % formic acid (FA) prior to mass spectrometry analysis.  Phosphopeptide enrichment For phosphopeptide enrichment, following desalting, 2 mg of peptides were enriched for 1 h with 2.5 mg of TiO2 (GL Science, Japan). Phosphopeptides were eluted with 150 ul of 0.3 M NH4OH, acidified with TFA to pH 2-3, and desalted immediately with a C18 column. Phosphopeptides were eluted manually with 50 ul of 0.1 % FA/80 % ACN and evaporated to dryness in a SpeedVac. The dried peptides were reconstituted in 2 % ACN/0.5 % FA.   Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were analyzed on an UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano LC system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded via an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, nanoViper, C18, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) and subsequent peptide separation was on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific). For each liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, approximately 1 µg of peptides was loaded on the precolumn with microliter pickup. Peptides were eluted using a 2 h linear gradient of 80 % ACN/0.1 % FA flowing at 250 nL/min using a mobile phase gradient of 2.5-42.5 % ACN. The eluting peptides were interrogated with an Orbitrap mass spectrometer. The HRM DIA method consisted of a survey scan (MS1) at 35,000 resolution (automatic gain control target 5e6 and maximum injection time of 120 ms) from 400 to 1,220 m/z followed by tandem MS/MS scans (MS2) through 19 overlapping DIA windows increasing from 30 to 222 Da. MS/MS scans were acquired at 35,000 resolution (automatic gain control target 3e6 and auto for injection time). Stepped collision energy was 22.5 %, 25 %, 27.5 % and a 30 m/z isolation window. The spectra were recorded in profile type.

### Data Protocol
HRM-DIA data analysis The DIA data were analyzed with Spectronaut 8, a mass spectrometer vendor-independent software from Biognosys. The default settings were used for the Spectronaut search. Retention time prediction type was set to dynamic iRT (correction factor for window 1). Decoy generation was set to scrambled (no decoy limit). Interference correction on MS2 level was enabled. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1 % at peptide level. For generation of the spectral libraries, DDA measurements of each sample were performed. The DDA spectra were analyzed with the MaxQuant Version 1.5.2.8 analysis software using default settings. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, minimal peptide length of 6, and up to 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification; oxidation of methionine; acetyl (protein N terminus); and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 4.5 ppm and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The DDA files were searched against the human UniProt fasta database (v2015-08, 20,210 entries) and the Biognosys HRM calibration peptides. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. The spectral library was generated in Spectronaut and normalized to iRT peptides. A peptide identification required at least 3 transitions in quantification. Quantification was based on the top 3 proteotypic peptides for each protein and exported as an excel file with Spectronaut 8 software (32).   Mass spectrometry statistical analysis Log2 intensities of the peptides were summarized across all the samples in a linear mixed model implemented in the R package MSstats (33) for pairwise comparison for each protein or phosphopeptide. The p values were adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Horchberg method (34) with a FDR <0.05 and a fold change of >1.5 was required for differential expression.

### Publication Abstract
In prostate cancer, cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) exhibit contrasting biological properties to non-malignant prostate fibroblasts (NPF) and promote tumorigenesis. Resolving intercellular signaling pathways between CAF and prostate tumor epithelium may offer novel opportunities for research translation. To this end, the proteome and phosphoproteome of four pairs of patient-matched CAF and NPF were characterized to identify discriminating proteomic signatures. Samples were analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) with a hyper reaction monitoring data-independent acquisition (HRM-DIA) workflow. Proteins that exhibited a significant increase in CAF <i>versus</i> NPF were enriched for the functional categories "cell adhesion" and the "extracellular matrix." The CAF phosphoproteome exhibited enhanced phosphorylation of proteins associated with the "spliceosome" and "actin binding." STRING analysis of the CAF proteome revealed a prominent interaction hub associated with collagen synthesis, modification, and signaling. It contained multiple collagens, including the fibrillar types COL1A1/2 and COL5A1; the receptor tyrosine kinase discoidin domain-containing receptor 2 (DDR2), a receptor for fibrillar collagens; and lysyl oxidase-like 2 (LOXL2), an enzyme that promotes collagen crosslinking. Increased activity and/or expression of LOXL2 and DDR2 in CAF were confirmed by enzymatic assays and Western blotting analyses. Pharmacological inhibition of CAF-derived LOXL2 perturbed extracellular matrix (ECM) organization and decreased CAF migration in a wound healing assay. Further, it significantly impaired the motility of co-cultured RWPE-2 prostate tumor epithelial cells. These results indicate that CAF-derived LOXL2 is an important mediator of intercellular communication within the prostate tumor microenvironment and is a potential therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Loxl2, Phosphoproteome, Fibroblast, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
Monash University Molecular Biology and Biochemistry
Monash University

### Submitter
Elizabeth  Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Daly
Monash University Molecular Biology and Biochemistry


