### Accession
PXD002998

### Title
DIA LC-MSMS of MCF-7 Breast Cancer Cells

### Description
The breast cancer cell line MCF-7 was treated with doxorubicin. Protein expression differences between treated and non-treated cells were semiquantitatively determined using the precursor acquisition independent from ion count (PAcIFIC) mass spectrometric method. The acquired proteomic data sets were searched for regulated Reactome pathways and Gene Ontology annotation terms using a new algorithm (SetRank). Using this approach, we described significantly changed pathways (p-value of 0.05 or less) already known to be influenced by chemotherapeutic drugs, such as chromatin organization, DNA binding, embryo development, condensed chromosome, sequence-specific DNA binding, response to oxidative stress and response to toxin. Additionally, we found pathways such as central nervous system neuron differentiation, neuron projection membrane and SNAP receptor activity explaining side-effects of doxorubicin chemotherapy, characterized as ‘chemo brain’, on a molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in 75 cm2 cell culture flasks until 90% confluence. Cells were washed with pre-warmed tris buffered saline (TBS) and treated with fresh medium in the presence or absence of 1 μM doxorubicin for 17 h. The medium was subsequently discarded, and cells were washed 10 times with pre-warmed TBS. Cells were scrapped from the dishes in 1.8 ml cold lysis buffer, containing 8 M urea, 50 mM TRIS/HCl, 10 mM NaF, 2 mM Na3VO4 and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche). The cell suspensions were transferred to new tubes and cells were sonicated in an ice-water bath for 10 min. Cell debris were removed by centrifugation at 16,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatant was transferred to a new tube. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with the Bradford method. Samples with a protein concentration of 1 mg/ml were reduced at 37°C with 0.1 M dithiothreitol and alkylated at 37°C in the dark with 0.5 M iodoacetamide. Next, the reduced and alkylated proteins were precipitated by adding cold acetone (−20°C) to a final concentration of 80% and incubated at −20°C overnight. The protein sample was then centrifuged at 16,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet was washed twice with cold acetone. After washing, the protein pellet was dried in ambient air for 15 min and subsequently reconsituted with 8 M urea and sonicated in an ice-water bath for 10 min. This solution was diluted with 20 mM TRIS/HCl, 2 mM CaCl2 (pH=8) to a final urea concentration of 2 M. Proteins were digested by trypsin at a ratio of 50:1 at 37°C overnight. Digestion was stopped by addition of 20% (v/v) TFA to a final concentration of 1%. Peptide aliquots corresponding to 500 ng protein were loaded onto a PepMap100 trapping column (100 Å C18, 20 mm ×75 μm ID) on a Thermo Ultimate 3000 system at a flow rate of 5 μl/min with 0.1% TFA in water. Peptides were eluted to and separated on an analytical column (150 mm × 75 μm ID, packed with 100 Å Magic C18 material) using a flow rate of 400 nl/min as follows (%A/%B): 95:5 hold for 6 min, ramp to 60:40 over 60 min, ramp to 40:60 over 2 min, ramp to 20:80 over 1 min, hold for 5 min, ramp to 95:5 over 1 min followed by column re-equilibration under the same condition. Mobile phases A and B were composed of water/acetonitrile at a ratio of 98:2 and 5:95, respectively, containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  Peptides were analyzed on a Velos LTQ Iontrap using a data-independent acquisition method (PAcIFIC) with the following parameters: the maximum injection time was set to 100ms and the target ion population was 104. A total of 26 consecutive PAcIFIC runs were performed as follows:  In the first injection, 25 MSMS scans with m/z isolations at 400, 401.5, 403, 404.5, 406, 407.5, 409, 410.5, 412, 413.5, 415, 416.5, 418, 419.5, 421, 422.5, 424, 425.5, 427, 428.5, 430, 431.5, 433, 434.5, 436 m/z units and an isolation width set to 2.5 Da with a relative collision energy set to 30% was repeated over the entire run. The subsequent run covered the m/z range from 437.5 to 473.5, followed by the next injection covering the next m/z range of 36 units, etc. until m/z of 1400 was reached, 26 injections in total.

### Data Protocol
The RAW file of each PAcIFIC run was converted to MGF files with ProteomeDiscoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher) entering each fragment spectrum twice with the charge state set at +2 and +3, respectively. Data were searched with EasyProt against the Uniprot_SwissProt human protein database. The precursor tolerance was set to 3.5 Da with carbamylation of cysteine as the fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as the variable. The filter criteria (double-, and triple-charged peptides) were adjusted, keeping the empirically determined protein false discovery rate (FDR) below 1.0%. The FDR is automatically calculated by EasyProt using the number of peptide spectra matches (PSM) in the reversed database divided by the number of peptides found in the forward and reversed database. Protein identifications were accepted when more than one unique peptide, with minimal length of six amino acids, were identified.

### Publication Abstract
In the present article, we report on the semi-quantitative proteome analysis and related changes in protein expression of the MCF-7 breast cancer cell line following treatment with doxorubicin, using the precursor acquisition independent from ion count (PAcIFIC) mass spectrometry method. PAcIFIC represents a cost-effective and easy-to-use proteomics approach, enabling for deep proteome sequencing with minimal sample handling. The acquired proteomic data sets were searched for regulated Reactome pathways and Gene Ontology annotation terms using a new algorithm (SetRank). Using this approach, we identified pathways with significant changes (&#x2264;0.05), such as chromatin organization, DNA binding, embryo development, condensed chromosome, sequence-specific DNA binding, response to oxidative stress and response to toxin, as well as others. These sets of pathways are already well-described as being susceptible to chemotherapeutic drugs. Additionally, we found pathways related to neuron development, such as central nervous system neuron differentiation, neuron projection membrane and SNAP receptor activity. These later pathways might indicate biological mechanisms on the molecular level causing the known side-effect of doxorubicin chemotherapy, characterized as cognitive impairment, also called 'chemo brain'. Mass spectrometry data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002998.

### Keywords
Mcf-7, Lc-msms, Pacific, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Manfred Heller
Department of Clinical Research, University of Bern


