### Accession
PXD021785

### Title
Enhancing the chondrogenic potential of chondrogenic progenitor cells by deletion of RAB5C

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent chronic joint disease that affects a majority of the elderly. Chondrogenic progenitor cells (CPCs) reside in late stage OA cartilage tissue, producing a fibrocartilagenous extra-cellular matrix and can be manipulated in-vitro, to deposit proteins of healthy articular cartilage. CPCs are under control of SOX9 and RUNX2 and in order to enhance their chondrogenic potential, we found that RUNX2 plays a pivotal role in chondrogenesis. In another approach, CPCs carrying a knockout of RAB5C, a protein involved in endosomal trafficking, demonstrated elevated expression of various chondrogenic markers including the SOX trio and displayed an increased COL2 deposition, whereas no changes of COL1 deposition was observed.   We report RAB5C as an attractive target for future therapeutic approaches to increase the COL2 content in the diseased joint.

### Sample Protocol
SWATH-MS CPCs of patients were differentiated towards the chondrogenic lineage. On day 27, medium was changed to FCS free chondrogenic medium. SDS Page, in-gel trypsin digestion, extraction and MS was performed according to (Batschkus et al., 2017). For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 150 µg, dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 0.1% TFA. The pool was then separated into 14 fractions by reversed phase chromatography (1.0 mm ID x 150 mm, Hypersil Gold C18 aq, 5 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 5-40 % acetonitrile/0.01M ammonium hydroxide (pH 8.0) at 200 µl min-1 and a staggered pooling scheme (1+15+29). For mass spectrometric analysis, peptide samples were reconstituted in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (v:v) and spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment (iRT Standard, Schlieren, Schweiz). Analysis on a nanowflow chromatography system hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer followed as extensively described in (Erdmann et al., 2019).  Pulldown and LC-MS/MS HEK293T cells were transfected with or pPM-hSOX9-His (PV132789, ABM) using PolyFect®. After 48 hours, cells were lysed and the released his-tagged protein was purified and incubated with HisPur Ni-NTA Magnetic beads in equilibrium buffer. Subsequently, the beads were washed and incubated with lysate of CPCsiRUNX2 (Koelling et al., 2009) O/N at 4C while rotating. Finally, the beads were washed, the protein complexes eluated and precipitated with ethanol. SDS Page, in-gel trypsin digestion and extraction and MS were performed according to Batschkus et al. (2017) with following alterations: Each lane was cut into 11 equidistant slices. Peptides were separated using a 37 min linear gradient (5-35%) and analyzed with a Top 10 method.

### Data Protocol
SWATH-MS Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. The combined qualitative analyses were searched against the UniProtKB human reference proteome (revision 04-2018, 93,609 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to identify proteins at a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction was achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1% (Lambert et al., 2013). The resulting peak areas were then summed to peptide and ﬁnally protein area values per injection, which were used for further statistical analysis. Cell lines were grouped together (CPC677 and CPC241hT, CPC674 and CPC674hT, CPC678 and CPC678hT), proteins were compared using Mann-Whitney U test with false discovery rate (FDR) correction. Significant proteins were selected by thresholding at p value < 0.05, divided into up- and down-regulated by fold difference (primary or immortalized).  Pulldown and LC-MS/MS Peak list were extracted from raw data with Raw2MSM (version v1.10) and analyzed using Mascot (vers 2.4.1) searching against SwissProt Database Version 2014_08 and validated with Scaffold 4.3.4. Total spectrum count for semiquantitative quantification of isotope free labeling was performed (Lundgren et al., 2010). Spectrum counts were normalized between the different samples using the DESeq method (Anders et al., 2013, Anders and Huber, 2010). Interacting proteins were identified by a two-stage Poisson model, specifically adapted for spectral count data including a biological and variance filter (Fischer et al., 2014). Differential binding between treatment and control group was quantified by log fold change using a FDR of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
Osteoarthritis (OA) is the most prevalent chronic joint disease that affects a large proportion of the elderly population. Chondrogenic progenitor cells (CPCs) reside in late-stage OA cartilage tissue, producing a fibrocartilaginous extracellular matrix; these cells can be manipulated <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> to deposit proteins of healthy articular cartilage. CPCs are under the control of SOX9 and RUNX2. In our earlier studies, we showed that a knockdown of RUNX2 enhanced the chondrogenic potential of CPCs. Here we demonstrate that CPCs carrying a knockout of RAB5C, a protein involved in endosomal trafficking, exhibited elevated expression of multiple chondrogenic markers, including the SOX trio, and increased COL2 deposition, whereas no changes in COL1 deposition were observed. We report RAB5C as an attractive target for future therapeutic approaches designed to increase the COL2 content in the diseased joint.

### Keywords
Chondrogenic progenitor cells; rab5c; osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Goettingen, Institute of Clinical Chemistry


