### Accession
PXD030372

### Title
Sod1 Integrates Oxygen Availability to Redox Regulate NADPH Production and the Thiol Redoxome

### Description
Redox proteomics identifies additional putative targets of Sod1 redox regulation. The high abundance and broad cellular distribution of Sod1 suggests that it may function as a redox regulator of a broad variety of substrates in addition to GAPDH. To test this, we conducted a high-powered quantitative redox proteomics screen of WT and sod1Δ yeast to identify Sod1-dependent redox substrates. We used a combined SILAC-TMT approach, whereby sod1Δ-dependent changes in protein abundance are quantified through Stable Isotope Labeling with Amino acids in Cell culture (SILAC) and changes in reversible cysteine oxidation are quantified through cysteine-reactive Iodoacetyl Tandem Mass Tags (iodo-TMT) before and after reduction with DTT. Consequently, the study reveals a broad range of proteins that undergo significant changes in abundance, cysteine oxidation, or both. Focusing first on the effects of SOD1 deletion on proteome-wide protein abundance, we independently analyzed the SILAC MS data. A total of 4,409 proteins were confidently detected and quantified, and ~9% of these (373) exhibited significant differences in abundance between the two strains. Of these, 114 (30.6%) exhibit a significant decrease in protein abundance in sod1Δ cells compared to 259 (69.4%) proteins that exhibit a significant increase in abundance. Overall, we revealed a larger network of cysteine-containing proteins that are oxidized in a Sod1- dependent manner using mass spectrometry-based redox proteomics approaches.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC labeling and cell lysis, three biological replicates were analyzed each for WT and sod1Δ cells. For each replicate, lys1Δ and lys1Δ SOD1::KANMX4 single colonies were inoculated in 3mL starter cultures and grown to saturation in synthetic complete (SC). The following day, starter cultures were diluted to ~0.1 OD600 in 10mL dropout SC media to reach 0.8 OD600/mL and then seeded at an OD600 0.0075 in 50mL SC media containing heavy (WT) or light (sod1Δ) lysine, respectively. Culture growth was stopped after ~10 doublings by adding 100% cold TCA to a final concentration of 10%. The cells were incubated on ice in 10%TCA for 1h and pelleted for 10 minutes at 4,000 rpm, 4ºC. The cell pellets were then washed in 20% TCA and pelleted for 10 minutes at 16,000 G, 4ºC. After discarding the supernatant, the pellets were stored at -80ºC. To prepare extracts, the SILAC-labelled cell pellets were separately thawed on ice and resuspended in 20% TCA followed by vortexing with glass beads for 10 min at 4 °C. Lysates were transferred to new centrifuge tubes followed by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 min at 4 °C. Pellets were washed with ice cold acetone followed by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 5 min at 4 °C. Pellets were resuspended in freshly prepared 6 M urea, 200 mM Tris pH 8.0, 2% SDS, 10 mM EDTA, 10 μM neocuproine. Protein concentrations for both WT and sod1Δ resuspensions were determined by DC protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and mixed equivalently generating 400 μg total.   For Iodo-TMT labeling, the combined SILAC-labeled protein samples (heavy/light) were labeled using iodo-TMT six-plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer specifications. Each bio-replicate was labeled with two different iodo-TMT labels (either 126/129, 127/130, or 128/131). For pre-reduction iodo-TMT-labeling, each replicate was labeled overnight followed by removal of unreacted TMT label by chloroform-methanol precipitation as previously described (16). Following the first labeling reaction, oxidized thiols were reduced in 50 mM DTT at 37 °C for 1 hr followed by excess DTT removal by chloroform-methanol precipitation. Post-reduction iodo-TMT-labeling and cleanup was carried out as described for pre-reduction labeling. Each replicate was washed with ice cold acetone followed by resuspension in 100 mM Tris pH 8.0, 1 M ABC, 6 M urea and incubation at 37 °C for 1 hr. Lys-C protease (Thermo) was added to each replicate sample (1:20; enzyme:protein) followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C with shaking at 600 rpm.   The SILAC-TMT labeled peptides were pre-fractionated by high-pH reverse phase liquid chromatography using an Agilent 1100 HPLC system with Gemini C18 reverse phase column (2 × 150 mm, 5 μM, 110 Å; Phenomenex Inc.) with solvents A (10 mM ammonium formate) and B (10 mM ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile) adjusted to pH 10 using ammonium hydroxide. A gradient method (from 0% to 70% B in 150 min, then from 70% to 0% in 20 min) was applied at a flow rate of 100 μl/min. Fractions were collected every 5 min and frozen at -80 °C followed CentriVap lyophilization. The peptide fractions were analyzed by LCMS using a Q-Exactive Plus orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with Dionex UltiMate 3000 LC system (Thermo). The lyophilized fractions were resuspended in 0.1% FA in 5% ACN and loaded onto a trap column, 75 μm I.D. x 2 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 3 μm, 100Å (set of 2) nanoViper and resolved through an analytical column, 75 μm I.D. x 15 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 2 μm, 100Å, nanoViper at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min with a gradient solvent A (0.1% FA in 2% ACN) and a gradient solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% ACN) for 150 minutes. MS analysis was conducted in a data dependent manner with full scans in the range from 200 to 1800 m/z using an Orbitrap mass analyzer set as follows: MS1: resolution = 70,000, AGC target = 3e6, Max IT = 100ms; MS2: resolution = 17,500, AGC target 1e5, Max IT = 50ms. The top fifteen most intense precursor ions were selected for MS2 with an isolation window of 4 m/z. Isolated precursors were fragmented by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with normalized collision energies (NCE) of 28, 31, and 33 for each analytical replicate. This resulted in acquisition of 3 analytical replicates for each bio replicate for a grand total of 9 detection attempts per fraction.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis. MS data were searched using PD 2.0 using the SEQUEST algorithm with the following parameters: Uniprot Yeast proteome database (UP000002311), 10 ppm MS1 precursor mass tolerance, 0.02 Da MS2 fragment mass tolerance, 0.01 false discovery rate. This resulted in identification of 33,289 peptides across 3 biological replicates analyzed across each of the 3 different NCEs. Of these, 32,630 peptides remained after exclusion of transposable elements. Protein SILAC ratios (sod1ΔLight / WTHeavy) were calculated as the ratio of integrated MS1 peak areas for light and heavy peptides (area ratio). Statistical significance in the difference between WT and sod1Δ data were determined using the Response Screening program in JMP 15.0 wherein up to 9 average responses per protein per yeast strain (18 total across WT and sod1Δ) were possible. Cases in which only one channel of a SILAC pair was present (heavy or light) were processed separately and were reported as +/- infinite change in protein abundance.

### Publication Abstract
Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (Sod1) is a highly conserved and abundant antioxidant enzyme that detoxifies superoxide (O<sub>2</sub><sup>&#x2022;-</sup>) by catalyzing its conversion to dioxygen (O<sub>2</sub>) and hydrogen peroxide (H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>). Using <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i> and mammalian cells, we discovered that a major aspect of the antioxidant function of Sod1 is to integrate O<sub>2</sub> availability to promote NADPH production. The mechanism involves Sod1-derived H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> oxidatively inactivating the glycolytic enzyme, GAPDH, which in turn reroutes carbohydrate flux to the oxidative phase of the pentose phosphate pathway (oxPPP) to generate NADPH. The aerobic oxidation of GAPDH is dependent on and rate-limited by Sod1. Thus, Sod1 senses O<sub>2</sub> via O<sub>2</sub><sup>&#x2022;-</sup> to balance glycolytic and oxPPP flux, through control of GAPDH activity, for adaptation to life in air. Importantly, this mechanism for Sod1 antioxidant activity requires the bulk of cellular Sod1, unlike for its role in protection against O<sub>2</sub><sup>&#x2022;-</sup> toxicity, which only requires &lt;1% of total Sod1. Using mass spectrometry, we identified proteome-wide targets of Sod1-dependent redox signaling, including numerous metabolic enzymes. Altogether, Sod1-derived H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub> is important for antioxidant defense and a master regulator of metabolism and the thiol redoxome.

### Keywords
Redox signailng, Oxygen sensing, Pentose phosphate pathway, Glycolysis, Superoxide dismutase

### Affiliations
School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Matthew Torres

### Lab Head
Dr Matthew Phillip Torres
School of Biological Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332


