### Accession
PXD006532

### Title
Characterization of seminal vesicle proteome of cactus field mouse (Peromyscus eremicus) in hydrated and dehydrated conditions

### Description
ABSTRACT: The cactus mouse (Peromyscus eremicus) is a desert-specialized rodent that experiences both chronic and acute dehydration in the Southwestern United States.  Our previous research has generated substantial transcriptomic data on P. eremicus kidneys, testes, epididymis, and vas deferens in individuals exposed to hydrated and dehydrated conditions; however, the study described here is the first to describe a seminal vesicle proteome for this species.  We have produced a seminal vesicle proteome from P. eremicus with free access to water and mice that were acutely dehydrated to generate a dataset that is comprehensive for both alternative water-availability states experienced by this species.  We have also provided gene ontologies for this proteome using PANTHER. This proteome will provide a crucial resource for future studies characterizing the genetic and proteomic responses of reproductive tissues to drought in this rodent.  Furthermore, an enhanced understanding of survival and reproductive responses (and adaptations) to dehydration is particularly relevant to clinical work aiming to minimize adverse human impacts as climate change continues to increase the incidence of drought.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal vesicle tissue samples from 3 dehydrated cactus field mice and 3 hydrated cactus field mice were extracted using Qproteome kit from Qiagen.  The samples were separated on SDS-PAGE, and the entire lanes was in-gel digested with trypsin.  The extracted peptides were analyzed by LCMS-MS on a Thermo LTQ Orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using PAVA from the raw files (.raw).  These files were then uploaded to UCSF Protein Prospector, and searched against the Peromyscus eremicus database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reproduction, Proteomics, Desert mouse, Dehydration

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Science, University of New Hampshire
University of New Hampshire

### Submitter
Donna Hogan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Matt MacManes
Department of Molecular, Cellular, and Biomedical Science, University of New Hampshire


