### Accession
PXD017209

### Title
A mouse SWATH-MS reference spectral library enables deconvolution of species-specific proteomic alterations in human tumour xenografts


### Description
SWATH-MS enables accurate and reproducible label-free quantification of proteomes including in extensively studied model organisms such as the mouse. Here we present a comprehensive mouse reference spectral library (MouseRefSWATH) that allows quantification of up to 10,597 proteins (62.2% of mouse proteome) by SWATH-MS. We exploit MouseRefSWATH to develop an analytical pipeline for species-specific deconvolution of proteomic alterations in human tumour xenografts (XenoSWATH). This method overcomes the challenge of high protein sequence similarity between the mouse and human, facilitating the study of host microenvironment-tumour interactions from ‘bulk tumour’ measurements. We apply XenoSWATH to characterise a xenograft model of breast ductal carcinoma in-situ and uncover complex regulation of cell migration pathways that is not restricted to the tumour cells but also operates in the mouse stromal upon progression to invasive disease. MouseRefSWATH and XenoSWATH opens new possibilities for in-depth proteomic assessment to address wide-ranging biological questions involving this important model organism.

### Sample Protocol
a suspension of 5 × 104 MCF10DCIS.com-Luc cells was injected intraductally into mammary gland ducts of 6-10 week-old SCID-beige female mouse (n=7-8). Luminescence of the lesions was measured by in-vivo imaging assay (IVIS) on IVIS Illumina II (Perkin Elmer) to monitor tumour growth. Whole mammary glands with tumour were collected after 4, 6 or 10 weeks post injection, washed in cold PBS and fresh frozen. For each condition, 4 biological replicates were further processed and analysed by SWATH-MS. Whole mammary glands with tumour cells were homogenized in high salt homogenization buffer, proteins were precipitated with ice-cold acetone at -20 ºC, centrifuged and the resulting pellet was resuspended in 0.3 ml of urea buffer. 20µg of total protein was digested in solution by trypsin as described above, desalted on OMIX tips as per manufacturer’s instructions and dried in a SpeedVac concentrator. Dried samples were resuspended in 20µl of buffer A and analysed in SWATH-MS mode on an Agilent HPLC coupled to TripleTOF 5600+ mass spectrometer. 1 µg of sample was spiked with 0.1 µl of iRT peptides and loaded onto a 0.3 x 5 mm ZORBAX C18 (Agilent Technologies) trap column. Peptides were separated on a 75 µm x 15 cm analytical column packed with Reprosil Pur C18AQ beads, 3 µm, 120 Å (Dr. Maisch, GmbH) with a manually pulled integrated spraying tip. A linear gradient of 2-40% of buffer B in 120 min and flow rate of 250 nl/min was used for peptide separation. All data were acquired in positive ion mode in SWATH mode using cycles comprising of one 100ms profile MS scan over the m/z mass range of 340-1500, followed by 60 SWATH fragmentation windows with a fixed width of 12 Da over the m/z range of 380-1100 and filling time of 50 ms.

### Data Protocol
A combined FASTA file was generated in NotePad text editor from individual FASTA files containing human (20,316 protein sequences), mouse (16,997 protein sequences) and iRT peptides. The human and mouse FASTA files were downloaded from SwissProt (downloaded on 26/10/2018) and the FASTA file with iRT sequences was downloaded from Biognosys website (https://www.biognosys.com/shop/irt-kit#SupportMaterials). The acquired MIND model SWATH-MS data were processed in Spectronaut using the MouseRefSWATH reference spectral library, the published pan-Human reference spectral library [15] and the combined FASTA file. A two-step analysis was performed: In the first step, the SWATH-MS data was searched using the MouseRefSWATH library. Using the combined FASTA file, Spectronaut selects only the mouse species discriminating proteotypic peptides from the MouseRefSWATH library for the quantification of murine proteins. In the second step, the same approach was repeated with pan-Human library for the quantification of human species discriminating proteotypic peptides. All searches were performed with 1% FDR threshold on peptide and protein level (detailed Spectronaut settings are shown in Supplementary methods). In this manner, two separate proteomic datasets were obtained, one for the tumour component (human) and the other for the host stromal compartment (mouse).

### Publication Abstract
SWATH-mass spectrometry (MS) enables accurate and reproducible proteomic profiling in multiple model organisms including the mouse. Here, we present a comprehensive mouse reference spectral library (MouseRefSWATH) that permits quantification of up to 10,597 proteins (62.2% of the mouse proteome) by SWATH-MS. We exploit MouseRefSWATH to develop an analytical pipeline for species-specific deconvolution of proteomic alterations in human tumour xenografts (XenoSWATH). This method overcomes the challenge of high sequence similarity between mouse and human proteins, facilitating the study of host microenvironment-tumour interactions from 'bulk tumour' measurements. We apply the XenoSWATH pipeline to characterize an intraductal xenograft model of breast ductal carcinoma <i>in situ</i> and uncover complex regulation consistent with stromal reprogramming, where the modulation of cell migration pathways is not restricted to tumour cells but also operates in the mouse stroma upon progression to invasive disease. MouseRefSWATH and XenoSWATH open new opportunities for in-depth and reproducible proteomic assessment to address wide-ranging biological questions involving this important model organism.

### Keywords
Swath-ms; breast cancer; dcis; mouse; human; xenograft model

### Affiliations
The Institute of Cancer Research
Division of Molecular Pathology Molecular and Systems Oncology Team The Institute of Cancer Research 237 Fulham Road, SW3 6JB London United Kingdom

### Submitter
Lukas Krasny

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Huang
Division of Molecular Pathology Molecular and Systems Oncology Team The Institute of Cancer Research 237 Fulham Road, SW3 6JB London United Kingdom


