### Accession
PXD041635

### Title
Mouse psd95 coimmunoprecipitation from excitatory or inhibitory neurons and mass spectrometry

### Description
We used a psd95-GFP cre dependent KI mouse to label PSD95 with GFP specifically in excitatory (CaMK) or inhibitory (vGAT) neurons. PSD95 was pulled down with a GFP nanobody and the resulting complex was used for massspectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
GFP-immunoisolation samples were reduced with DTT, alkylated with IAA and TCA/Acetone precipitated with x8 volume overnight at 37C. Samples were then re-constituted in 12uL 500mM TEAB, 48uL water and 25ng/uL trypsin/LysC added. Samples were proteolyzed at 37C overnight. Peptides were desalted on Qasis U-HLB plates, eluted with 60% acetonitrile/0.1%TFA, and dried. Desalted peptides, 10% and 20% were analyzed by nano-LC/MS/MS on QExactive Plus at resolution 140K on precursor and 35K on fragment, using 85min gradient from 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid to 98% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Injected peptides showed abundant base peak chromatographs

### Data Protocol
Database search: FilesRC option was applied and MSMS spectra were searched with Mascot 6.1 via Proteome Discovere 2.3 against RefSeq2017_83_mouse and a small database with added enzymes, bovine serum albumin (our standard). Mass tolerance 4ppm for precursor, 0.01Da for fragment variable modifications: carbamidomethylation on Cys, oxidation on M, deamidation NQ. Peptides validated with Percolator. Mascot .dat files compiled in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Synapses in the brain exhibit cell-type-specific differences in basal synaptic transmission and plasticity. Here, we evaluated cell-type-specific specializations in the composition of glutamatergic synapses, identifying Btbd11 as an inhibitory interneuron-specific, synapse-enriched protein. Btbd11 is highly conserved across species and binds to core postsynaptic proteins, including Psd-95. Intriguingly, we&#xa0;show that Btbd11 can undergo liquid-liquid phase separation when expressed with Psd-95, supporting the idea that the glutamatergic postsynaptic density in synapses in inhibitory interneurons exists in&#xa0;a&#xa0;phase-separated state. Knockout of Btbd11 decreased glutamatergic signaling onto parvalbumin-positive interneurons. Further, both in&#xa0;vitro and in&#xa0;vivo, Btbd11 knockout disrupts network activity.&#xa0;At&#xa0;the&#xa0;behavioral level, Btbd11 knockout from interneurons alters exploratory behavior, measures of&#xa0;anxiety, and sensitizes mice to pharmacologically induced hyperactivity following NMDA receptor antagonist challenge. Our findings identify a cell-type-specific mechanism that supports glutamatergic&#xa0;synapse function in inhibitory interneurons-with implications for circuit function and animal behavior.

### Keywords
Psd95, Synapse, Mouse, Co-ip

### Affiliations
Johns Hopkins University
Tufts University

### Submitter
Alexei Bygrave

### Lab Head
Dr Richard Huganir
Johns Hopkins University


