### Accession
PXD001930

### Title
Copper stress-induced changes in leaf soluble proteome of Cu-sensitive and tolerant Agrostis capillaris L. populations

### Description
Changes in leaf soluble proteome were explored in 3-month-old plants of Cu-tolerant (metallicolous, M) and sensitive (non-metallicolous, NM) Agrostis capillaris L. populations exposed to increasing Cu concentrations (1-50 µM). Aims of the study were to investigate (1) differential protein expression in NM and M leaves under increasing Cu exposure, and (2) molecular mechanisms underlying higher Cu tolerance in M plants. Plants were cultivated on perlite (CuSO4 spiked-nutrient solution); fresh leaf aliquots were frozen in liquid nitrogen. Soluble leaf proteins were extracted by the trichloroacetic acid/acetone procedure, and separated with 2-DE (linear 4-7 pH gradient). Analysis of CCB-stained gels (PDQuest) reproducibly detected 214 spots, of which 107 were analyzed using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted following a trichloroacetic acid/acetone procedure, modified by Gion et al., (2005). Soluble proteins were re-solubilized in “TCT” buffer (i.e. 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.4% v/v Triton X-100, 4% w/v CHAPS detergent, 10 mM DTT, and 1% v/v IPG buffer). For the IEF step, 450 µg of total soluble proteins (into 470 µL of “TCT” solution) on 24 cm IPG strips (linear pH 4-7 gradient). IPGphor system program: 30 (12h), 500 (1h), 1000 (1h) then 8000 V/h to achieve a total of 64 000 V/h. Strips equilibrated with solutions of 50mM TRIS-HCl, 6 M urea, 2% SDS, 30% glycerol, bromophenol blue, containing DTT (50 mM), then iodoacetamide (125 mM). SDS-PAGE carried out on batches of 6 or 12 gels in a buffer (25 mM Tris, 0.2 M glycine, 0.1% SDS) at 30W for 30min, then at 90W until complete migration. Gels stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue (G-250) and analysed using PDQuest Advanced. Spots excised using “Spotcutter”, rinsed twice in ultrapure water, and shrunk in ACN for 10 min. After ACN removal, gel pieces were dried at room temperature, rehydrated in 10 ng/µL trypsin solution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37°C. Hydrophilic peptides extracted with 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 10% ACN, and hydrophobic ones, with 47% v/v ACN and 5% v/v formic acid (repeated twice). Supernatants were pooled together, concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge, and acidified with 0.1% formic acid before nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by on-line capillary nanoHPLC (LC Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) coupled to a nanospray LCQ Deca XP ion trap mass spectrometer (ThermoFinnigan, San Jose, CA, USA). 10 µL of each peptide extract were loaded on a 300 µm ID x 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (LC Packings, Dionex, USA) at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 5min desalting, peptides were online separated on a 75 µm internal diameter x 15 cm C18 PepMapTM column (LC Packings, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) with a 5-40% linear gradient of solvent B in 48min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in 5% ACN, and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN). The separation flow rate was set at 200 nL/min. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode at a 1.8kV needle voltage and a 34V capillary voltage. Data acquisition was performed in a data-dependent mode alternating in a single run, a MS scan survey over the range m/z 300–1700 and three MS/MS scans with Collision Induced Dissociation (CID) as activation mode. MS/MS spectra were acquired using a 2 m/z unit ion isolation window, a 35% relative collision energy, and a 0.5 min dynamic exclusion duration.

### Data Protocol
Mascot and Sequest algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.) were used for protein identification in batch mode by searching against two databases. The first was constructed with Agrostis spp. ESTs (A. capillaris, A. stolonifera, A. stolonifera var. palustris and A. scabra Willd.) from NCBI (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/), and resulted in 123,605 sequences translated in six reading frames by TRANSEQ software (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/emboss/transeq/). The second database contained all protein sequences from Viridiplantae UniProt Database (31,395 entries, release 2013_09, http://www.uniprot.org/). Two missed enzyme cleavages were allowed. Mass tolerances in MS and MS/MS were set to 2 Da and 1 Da. Oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethylation on cysteine were respectively searched as variable and fixed modifications. Peptide validation was performed using Percolator algorithm. Only “high confidence” peptides were retained, corresponding to a 1% False Positive Rate at peptide level and a minimum of two different peptides was considered for protein validation. EST annotations were identified by searching with a protein Viridiplantae index from Swiss-Prot (BLASTX) and TrEMBL (BLASTX) database using UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org).

### Publication Abstract
Changes in leaf soluble proteome were explored in 3-month-old plants of metallicolous (M) and nonmetallicolous (NM) Agrostis capillaris L. populations exposed to increasing Cu concentrations (1-50&#xa0;&#x3bc;M) to investigate molecular mechanisms underlying plant responses to Cu excess and tolerance of M plants. Plants were cultivated on perlite (CuSO4 spiked-nutrient solution). Soluble proteins, extracted by the trichloroacetic acid/acetone procedure, were separated with 2-DE (linear 4-7 pH gradient). Analysis of CCB-stained gels (PDQuest) reproducibly detected 214 spots, and 64 proteins differentially expressed were identified using LC-MS/MS. In both populations, Cu excess impacted both light-dependent (OEE, cytochrome b6-f complex, and chlorophyll a-b binding protein), and -independent (RuBisCO) photosynthesis reactions, more intensively in NM leaves (ferredoxin-NADP reductase and metalloprotease FTSH2). In both populations, upregulation of isocitrate dehydrogenase and cysteine/methionine synthases respectively suggested increased isocitrate oxidation and enhanced need for S-containing amino-acids, likely for chelation and detoxification. In NM leaves, an increasing need for energetic compounds was indicated by the stimulation of ATPases, glycolysis, pentose phosphate pathway, and Calvin cycle enzymes; impacts on protein metabolism and oxidative stress increase were respectively suggested by the rise of chaperones and redox enzymes. Overexpression of a HSP70 may be pivotal for M Cu tolerance by protecting protein metabolism. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with the dataset identifier PXD001930 (http//proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001930).

### Keywords
Plant proteomics; lc-ms/ms; agrostis capillaris; cu-tolerance; photosynthesis; heat-shock protein

### Affiliations
Plateforme Proteome Centre Genomique Fonctionnelle Bordeaux 146 rue Leo Saignat 33076 Bordeaux Cedex France
Plateforme Proteome

### Submitter
Stephane Claverol

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Bonneu
Plateforme Proteome Centre Genomique Fonctionnelle Bordeaux 146 rue Leo Saignat 33076 Bordeaux Cedex France


