### Accession
PXD013209

### Title
Homeostatic and Interferon-induced gene expression represent different states of promoter-associated transcription factor ISGF3

### Description
Host defense by the innate immune system requires the establishment of antimicrobial states allowing cells to cope with microorganisms before the onset of the adaptive immune response. Interferons (IFN) are of vital importance in the establishment of cell-autonomous antimicrobial immunity.  Speed is therefore an important attribute of the cellular response to IFN. With much of the antimicrobial response being installed de novo, this pertains foremost to gene expression, the rapid switch between resting-state and active-state transcription of host defense genes. Mechanisms to meet this demand on the relevant molecular machinery include remodeling of chromatin but also changes in transcription factor interaction prior and during the IFN response. Our results show how distinct transcription factor complexes, determine the responsiveness of Interferon stimulated genes to different IRF9-containing complexes. Raw 264.7 macrophages expressing a doxycycline-inducible, myc-tagged versions of each IRF9-BirA*, STAT2-BirA* and STAT1-BirA* fusion genes were used to study complex formation in vivo. Furthermore, we extended the BioID proximity labeling by coupling it to parallel reaction monitoring to determine the degree and quantity of association between IRF9 and STATs in resting and interferon-treated macrophages.

### Sample Protocol
BioID was performed according to a published protocol in three independent biological replicates per construct and condition. mycBioID was a gift from Kyle Roux (Addgene plasmid 35700). 5 x 106 stable Raw 264.7 cells were seeded on 15 cm dishes and treated with 0.2 µg/ml doxycycline for 24h. 50 µM biotin was added for 18 additional hours. Cells were either left untreated or stimulated for 2 h with IFN-β or IFN- or for 18 h with IFN-β. Untreated controls were harvested at corresponding time points. Cells were washed and lysed at room temperature (lysis Buffer: 50 mMTris pH7.4; NaCL 500 mM; 0.2% SDS; EDTA 5mM + 1x protease inhibitors). Triton X-100 and 50 mMTris pH7.4 were added and the protein lysates were sonicated 2x for 30 seconds. Lysates were centrifuged for 5 minutes at full speed and supernatant were transferred to a new tube. Magnetic Pierce Streptavidin beads #88817 were washed 3x with lysis buffer. 105 µl beads were incubated with 1.3 mg of protein lysate over night at 4°C. 21 µl beads were kept for western blot analysis, the rest of the beads was used for the analysis with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry. Beads were washed at room temperature with wash buffer 1(2% SDS in H2O), wash buffer 2 (0.1% deoxycholic acid; 1% TritonX-100, 1mM EDTA, 500 mM NaCl, 50 mM HEPES; H2O) and wash buffer 3 (0.5% deoxycholic acid; 0,5% NP-40; 1 mM EDTA; 250 mM LiCl, 10 mM Tris pH7.4;H2O).  Beads were washed 5 times with 50 mM Tris pH 7.4 and another two times with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and then resuspended in 24 µL of 1 M urea in 50 mM ABC. 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature before adding 20 mM iodoacetamide and incubating for another 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Remaining iodoacetamide was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and the proteins were digested with 300 ng (Trypsin Gold, Promega) at 37°C overnight. After stopping the digest by addition of 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and washing the beads with 30 µL 0.1% TFA, the supernatants were were loaded onto C18 stagetips to desalt the peptides prior to LC-MS. Peptides were separated on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-flow chromatography system (Thermo-Fisher), using a pre-column for sample loading (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 cm × 0.1 mm, 5 μm, Thermo-Fisher), and a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 50 cm × 0.75 mm, 2 μm, Thermo-Fisher), applying a segmented linear gradient from 2% to 35% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; solvent A 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 230 nL/min over 120 minutes for shotgun acquisition and  60 minutes for targeted acquisition. Eluting peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher), which was coupled to the column with a customized nano-spray EASY-Spray ion-source (Thermo-Fisher) using coated emitter tips (New Objective). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, survey scans were obtained in a mass range of 375-1500 m/z with lock mass activated, at a resolution of 120k at 200 m/z and an AGC target value of 3E6. The 8 most intense ions were selected with an isolation width of 1.6 m/z with 0.2 m/z offset, fragmented in the HCD cell at 28% collision energy and the spectra were recorded at a target value of 1E5 with a maximum injection time of 250 ms at a resolution of 30k. Peptides with unassigned, +1 and >+6 charge were excluded from fragmentation, the peptide match feature was set to preferred, the exclude isotope feature was enabled, and selected precursors were dynamically excluded from repeated sampling for 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.6.0.16) and the Uniprot mouse reference proteome (www.uniprot.org) as well as a database of most common contaminants. The search was performed with full trypsin specificity and a maximum of two missed cleavages at a protein and peptide spectrum match false discovery rate of 1%. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. For label-free quantification the “match between runs” feature and the LFQ function were activated - all other parameters were left at default.

### Publication Abstract
Cells maintain the balance between homeostasis and inflammation by adapting and integrating the activity of intracellular signaling cascades, including the JAK-STAT pathway. Our understanding of how a tailored switch from homeostasis to a strong receptor-dependent response is coordinated remains limited. Here, we use an integrated transcriptomic and proteomic approach to analyze transcription-factor binding, gene expression and in vivo proximity-dependent labelling of proteins in living cells under homeostatic and interferon (IFN)-induced conditions. We show that interferons (IFN) switch murine macrophages from resting-state to induced gene expression by alternating subunits of transcription factor ISGF3. Whereas preformed STAT2-IRF9 complexes control basal expression of IFN-induced genes (ISG), both type I IFN and IFN-&#x3b3; cause promoter binding of a complete ISGF3 complex containing STAT1, STAT2 and IRF9. In contrast to the dogmatic view of ISGF3 formation in the cytoplasm, our results suggest a model wherein the assembly of the ISGF3 complex occurs on DNA.

### Keywords
Bioid, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Austria
Mass Spectrometry Facility, Max Perutz Labs, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Dr. Bohr-Gasse 3, 1030 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Thomas Gossenreiter

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Decker
Max F. Perutz Laboratories (MFPL), University of Vienna, Vienna Biocenter (VBC), Austria


