### Accession
PXD011927

### Title
A. nidulans STRIPAK -  Assembly of a heptameric STRIPAK complex is required for coordination of light-dependent multicellular fungal development with secondary metabolism in Aspergillus nidulans

### Description
Eukaryotic striatin forms striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complexes that control many cellular processes including development, cellular transport, signal transduction, stem cell differentiation and cardiac functions. However, detailed knowledge of complex assembly and its roles in stress responses are currently poorly understood. Here, we discovered six striatin (StrA) interacting proteins, which form a heptameric complex in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. The main components are: scaffold StrA (striatin), further components SipA (Mob3), SipB (SIKE-like), SipC (STRIP1/2), SipD (SLMAP), catalytic (SipE, PP2Ac) and regulatory (SipF, PP2AA) phosphatase subunits. The STRIPAK complex, which is established during vegetative growth and maintained during the early hours of light and dark development, is formed on the nuclear envelope in the presence of scaffold StrA. The loss of striatin revealed three STRIPAK subcomplexes: (I) SipA only interacts with StrA, (II) SipB-SipD is found as a heterodimer, (III) SipC, SipE and SipF exist as a heterotrimeric complex.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem affitiny purification (TAP) method was performed as previously described in detail by Bayram et al. (2012). Trypsin digestion protocol for TAP was performed as described in the manufacturer’s ProteaseMAX protocol (Promega, V5111). Trypsin digested magnetic beads were discarded, peptides were precipitated and concentrated using speedy-vac and lastly subjected to Zip-Tip C18 (ZTC18S096) purification as described in manufacturer’s protocol. Purified peptides were solubilized in Q-Exactive loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.5% TFA in dH2O) and sonicated for 2 min. Finally, samples were run in a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer to detect multiprotein complexes. To analyse multiprotein complexes, MS/MS data processing and identification was performed with Proteome Discoverer 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) and the Discoverer Daemon 1.3 (Thermo Scientific) proteomic software and organism-specific taxon-defined protein databases. AGB551 strain was used as a control to eliminate non-specific protein contaminants in HA and TAP purifications.

### Data Protocol
Protein samples were analysed using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Peptides were separated using a 2% to 40% gradient of acetonitrile (A: 0.1 % FA, B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA) over 65 min at a flow rate of 250nl/min. The Q Exactive was operated in the data dependent mode, collecting a full MS scan from 300–1650m/z at 70K resolution and an AGC target of 1e6. The 10 most abundant ions per scan were selected for MS/MS at 17.5K resolution and AGC target of 1e5 and intensity threshold of 1K. Maximum fill times were 10msec and 100msec for MS and MS/MS scans respectively with a dynamic exclusion of 60sec. Samples were analysed using 25 NCE (normalized collisional energy) with 20% stepped energy. Peptide identification using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 was performed using the Sequest HT (SEQUEST HT algorithm, licence Thermo Scientific, registered trademark University of Washington, USA) and searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: A. nidulans and A. flavus respectively). The following search parameters were used for protein identification: (1) peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, (2) MS/MS mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, (3) up to two missed cleavages were allowed, (4) carbamidomethylation set as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic striatin forms striatin-interacting phosphatase and kinase (STRIPAK) complexes that control many cellular processes including development, cellular transport, signal transduction, stem cell differentiation and cardiac functions. However, detailed knowledge of complex assembly and its roles in stress responses are currently poorly understood. Here, we discovered six striatin (StrA) interacting proteins (Sips), which form a heptameric complex in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans. The complex consists of the striatin scaffold StrA, the Mob3-type kinase coactivator SipA, the SIKE-like protein SipB, the STRIP1/2 homolog SipC, the SLMAP-related protein SipD and the catalytic and regulatory phosphatase 2A subunits SipE (PpgA), and SipF, respectively. Single and double deletions of the complex components result in loss of multicellular light-dependent fungal development, secondary metabolite production (e.g. mycotoxin Sterigmatocystin) and reduced stress responses. sipA (Mob3) deletion is epistatic to strA deletion by supressing all the defects caused by the lack of striatin. The STRIPAK complex, which is established during vegetative growth and maintained during the early hours of light and dark development, is mainly formed on the nuclear envelope in the presence of the scaffold StrA. The loss of the scaffold revealed three STRIPAK subcomplexes: (I) SipA only interacts with StrA, (II) SipB-SipD is found as a heterodimer, (III) SipC, SipE and SipF exist as a heterotrimeric complex. The STRIPAK complex is required for proper expression of the heterotrimeric VeA-VelB-LaeA complex which coordinates fungal development and secondary metabolism. Furthermore, the STRIPAK complex modulates two important MAPK pathways by promoting phosphorylation of MpkB and restricting nuclear shuttling of MpkC in the absence of stress conditions. SipB in A. nidulans is similar to human suppressor of IKK-&#x3b5;(SIKE) protein which supresses antiviral responses in mammals, while velvet family proteins show strong similarity to mammalian proinflammatory NF-KB proteins. The presence of these proteins in A. nidulans further strengthens the hypothesis that mammals and fungi use similar proteins for their immune response and secondary metabolite production, respectively.

### Keywords
A. nidulans, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
Dr.
Fungal genetics and secondary metabolism laboratory, Maynooth University, Biology Department, Callan Building, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland

### Submitter
Ozgur Bayram

### Lab Head
Dr Ozgur Bayram
Fungal genetics and secondary metabolism laboratory, Maynooth University, Biology Department, Callan Building, Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland


