### Accession
PXD030502

### Title
The Mitochondrial RNA Granule is Necessary for Parkinsonism-Associated Metal Toxicity

### Description
We measured the proteome of wild type HAP1 cells and cells mutant for the manganese transporter SLC30A10, PARK2, and the ADP-ATP mitochondrial translocator SLC25A4.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8M urea, 50mM Tris HCl, pH 8.0, 1X Roche Complete Protease Inhibitor and 1X Roche PhosStop in a Next Advance Bullet Blender using 1.0mm silica beads. Samples were labeled with TMT reagents

### Data Protocol
Data were processed through the MaxQuant software v1.6.0.16, which served for recalibration of MS data, filtering of database search results at the 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR), calculation of reporter ion intensities (TMT), isotopic correction of reporter ion intensities (TMT). Data were searched using Andromeda.

### Publication Abstract
Prolonged manganese exposure causes manganism, a neurodegenerative movement disorder. The identity of adaptive and nonadaptive cellular processes targeted by manganese remains mostly unexplored. Here we study mechanisms engaged by manganese in genetic cellular models known to increase susceptibility to manganese exposure, the plasma membrane manganese efflux transporter SLC30A10 and the mitochondrial Parkinson's gene PARK2. We found that SLC30A10 and PARK2 mutations as well as manganese exposure compromised the mitochondrial RNA granule composition and function, resulting in disruption of mitochondrial transcript processing. These RNA granule defects led to impaired assembly and function of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. Notably, cells that survived a cytotoxic manganese challenge had impaired RNA granule function, thus suggesting that this granule phenotype was adaptive. CRISPR gene editing of subunits of the mitochondrial RNA granule, FASTKD2 or DHX30, as well as pharmacological inhibition of mitochondrial transcription-translation, were protective rather than deleterious for survival of cells acutely exposed to manganese. Similarly, adult <i>Drosophila</i> mutants with defects in the mitochondrial RNA granule component <i>scully</i> were safeguarded from manganese-induced mortality. We conclude that impairment of the mitochondrial RNA granule function is a protective mechanism for acute manganese toxicity.

### Keywords
Slc30a10, Parkinson's, Mitochondria, Rna granule, Mitochondrial transcriptome, Manganism, Park2

### Affiliations
Emory University
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University

### Submitter
Victor Faundez

### Lab Head
Dr Victor Faundez
Professor Dept. Cell Biology  615 Michael Street Whitehead 446 Atlanta, GA, 30322 Emory University


