### Accession
PXD035695

### Title
African swine fever virus protein CP204L is involved in endosomal trafficking and interacts with the VPS39 subunit of the HOPS complex

### Description
African swine fever virus (ASFV) is a large DNA virus causing a highly contagious disease in domestic and wild boar, for which no treatment is available. ASFV vaccine development is hindered by large gaps in knowledge considering virus protein function and virus-host interaction. This study shows that the ASFV CP204L is a multifunctional protein engaged in endosomal trafficking and localizes to virus replication sites. Moreover, VPS39, a component of the HOPS complex, is a direct host interactor of CP204L. The virus CP204L binds the VPS39 domain responsible for its recruitment to the endosomal membrane, prevents its integration into the HOPS complex, and promotes the clustering of lysosomes. Additionally, we show that VPS39 is an important factor in the early phase of infection, as virus replication and protein synthesis in VPS39 knockout cells are delayed. These results uncover a novel function of viral protein CP204L and extend our understanding of complex interaction between virus and host, providing insights for developing a vaccine to prevent and control ASFV.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 5 x 106 WSL cells (stably expressing GFP, CP204L-GFP, or VPS39-GFP) were mock-infected or infected at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 2 PFU/cell. After 24 hours, cells were washed thrice with PBS and lysed in 1 ml cold immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer [(50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM MgCl2) supplemented with benzonase (25 U/ml, Sigma-Aldrich #E8263), 0.5% Nonidet P40 substitute (NP-40; Sigma-Aldrich #I8896) and cOmplete mini EDTA-free protease cocktail (Roche, #04693159001)]. Cells were lysed by sonication 3x30sec, 80% amplitude (Branson Digital Sonifier) and incubated on a tube rotator for 30 min at 4 °C and another 30 min on a thermomixer at 37 °C with constant shaking at 900 rpm. Lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 13,000 x g and 4 °C for 15 min. 50 µl of each lysate was removed for immunoblotting (whole cell lysate fraction). GFP-trap agarose beads (50 µl, Chromotek) were washed twice in IP buffer and incubated with the remaining lysate for 1 h with constant rotation at 4 °C. Beads were washed twice with 1 ml of IP buffer containing 0.05% NP-40 followed by two washes in detergent-free IP buffer. 10 µl bead slurry was removed for immunoblotting (IP fraction). Remaining 40 µl beads prepared in at least three independent biological replicates for each bait were kept for mass spectrometry analysis. After IP, beads were suspended in 300 µl freshly made UA buffer [8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8], loaded onto 10 kDa filter units (Millipore) and centrifuged at 12,000 x g at 20 °C for 30 min. Beads were washed twice with 300 µl UA buffer. After centrifugation at 12,000 x g at 20 °C for 30 min, proteins on the beads were incubated with 100 μl reduction-alkylation buffer [1 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA)] in the dark at room temperature for 45 min with constant shaking at 1,100 rpm followed by centrifugation. Next, beads were trypsinised in order to digest the baits and the interacting proteins in 100 μl of digest buffer [1 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, and 5 μg/mL Trypsin (Promega)]. Digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C with shaking. The next day, the flow-through containing peptides was collected, and the samples were inactivated for 10 min at 95 °C and removed from the BSL3 laboratory. Peptides were acidified with formic acid (1% final concentration) and desalted using C18 100 µl tips (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried under vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid prior to mass spectrometry. Digested peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonik), which was coupled online to a nanoElute nanoflow liquid chromatography system (Bruker Daltonik) via a CaptiveSpray nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides (corresponding to 100 ng) were separated on a reversed-phase C18 column (25 cm × 75 µm i.d., 1.6 µm, IonOpticks) with a binary buffer system of buffer A (water with 0.1% formic acid, v/v) and buffer B (acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, v/v). Peptides were separated running a gradient of 2% to 16% solvent B (0-60min), 15-24% solvent B (60-90min), 24%-34% solvent B (90min-105min), 35-95% solvent B (105-107min) and 95% solvent B (107-115min) at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min. The column temperature was controlled at 40 °C. MS analysis of eluting peptides was performed in ddaPASEF mode (1.1sec cycle time) recommended by the manufacturer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v.2.0.2.0) (1). A peptide search was performed against an ENSEMBL Sus scrofa proteome database (v.11.1.2021-11-10) and an NCBI ASFV Georgia (v.FR682468.2). The following modifications were included in the search parameters: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, protein N-terminal acetylation, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Mass error tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the full scan (MS1) and 10 ppm for MS/MS (MS2) spectra. False discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein level was set to 0.01, the minimum peptide length to seven amino acids, and the match between runs option was used with a 0.7 min match window and 20 min alignment time. The output files were analyzed using Perseus software (v.2.0.3.0) (2). Proteins were identified by site only, and reverse hits and contaminants were filtered out. Protein was considered identified if at least 2 unique peptides of this protein were identified in 50% replicates. Further filtering of proteins specifically binding to CP204L protein was achieved by comparing CP204L protein pulldowns with the negative GFP control. LFQ protein quantitation data were log2-transformed and filtered to contain minimum two valid values in at least one experiment. Missing values were imputed on the total matrix with default settings (width: 0.3, downshift 1.8). Potential interactors were considered CP204Lspecific if they were identified only in CP204L pulldowns or the log2 fold change (between control and CP204L) was greater than two, and the q-value of a two-sided t-test was <0.01.   1. Cox J, Mann M. 2008. MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat Biotechnol 26:1367–1372. doi:10.1038/nbt.1511. 2. Tyanova S, Temu T, Sinitcyn P, Carlson A, Hein MY, Geiger T, Mann M, Cox J. 2016. The Perseus computational platform for comprehensive analysis of (prote)omics data. Nat Methods 13:731–740. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3901.

### Publication Abstract
Virus replication depends on a complex interplay between viral and host proteins. In the case of African swine fever virus (ASFV), a large DNA virus, only a few virus-host protein-protein interactions have been identified to date. In this study, we demonstrate that the ASFV protein CP204L interacts with the cellular homotypic fusion and protein sorting (HOPS) protein VPS39, blocking its association with the lysosomal HOPS complex, which modulates endolysosomal trafficking and promotes lysosome clustering. Instead, CP204L and VPS39 are targeted to virus factories and localized at the periphery of the virus DNA replication sites. Furthermore, we show that loss of VPS39 reduces the levels of virus proteins synthesized in the early phase of infection and delays ASFV replication but does not completely inhibit it. Collectively, these results identify a novel virus-host protein interaction that modulates host membrane rearrangement during infection and provide evidence that CP204L is a multifunctional protein engaged in distinct steps of the ASFV life cycle. <b>IMPORTANCE</b> African swine fever virus (ASFV) was first identified over a hundred years ago. Since then, much effort has been made to understand the pathogenesis of ASFV. However, the specific roles of many individual ASFV proteins during the infection remain enigmatic. This study provides evidence that CP204L, one of the most abundant ASFV proteins, modulates endosomal trafficking during virus infection. Through protein-protein interaction, CP204L prevents the recruitment of VPS39 to the endosomal and lysosomal membranes, resulting in their accumulation. Consequently, CP204L and VPS39 become sequestered in the ASFV replication and assembly site, known as the virus factory. These results uncover a novel function of viral protein CP204L and extend our understanding of complex interaction between virus and host.

### Keywords
Cp204l, Virus-host ppi, Hops complex, Asfv, Vps39

### Affiliations
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut
Friedrich-Loeffler Institut

### Submitter
Katarzyna Dolata

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Karger
Friedrich-Loeffler-Institut


