### Accession
PXD025736

### Title
Dnmt1 has de novo activity targeted to transposable elements

### Description
DNA methylation plays a critical role in development, particularly in repressing  retrotransposons. The mammalian methylation landscape is dependent on the combined  activities of the canonical maintenance enzyme Dnmt1 and the de novo Dnmts, 3a and 3b.  Here we demonstrate that Dnmt1 displays de novo methylation activity in vitro and in vivo  with specific retrotransposon targeting. We used whole-genome bisulfite and long-read  Nanopore sequencing in genetically engineered methylation depleted embryonic stem cells  to provide an in-depth assessment and quantification of this activity. Utilizing additional  knockout lines and molecular characterization, we show that Dnmt1's de novo methylation  activity depends on Uhrf1 and its genomic recruitment overlaps with targets that enrich for  Trim28 and H3K9 trimethylation. Our data demonstrate that Dnmt1 can de novo add and  maintain DNA methylation, especially at retrotransposons and that this mechanism may  provide additional stability for long-term repression and epigenetic propagation  throughout development.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, 50 million cells were crosslinked with 1% methanol free formaldehyde for 8min followed by quenching with 125 mM glycine for 5 min. Crosslinked cells were lysed with 10 mLs Lysis Buffer 1 (50 mM HEPES-KOH, (pH 7.5), 140 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10% (vol/vol) glycerol, 0.5% (vol/vol) NP-40/Igepal CA-630 and 0.25% (vol/vol) Triton X-100) for 10 min at 4°C then  centrifuged to pellet the cells (5 min 2000g at 4°C ). The pellet was then dissolved in 10  mLs Lysis Buffer 2 (10 mM Tris-HCL (pH 8.0), 200 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and 0.5 mM EGTA) and incubated for 10 min at 4°C followed by another centrifugation with the same parameters. 1.5 mLs Lysis Buffer 3 (10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM EGTA, 0.1% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate and 0.5% (vol/vol) N-lauroylsarcosine) was used to resuspend the pellet. The cell suspension was sonicated for 25 min on a Covaris E220 Evolution (PIP = 140.0, Duty Factor = 5.0, Cycles/Burst = 200). Triton-X (10% vol/vol) was added and the lysate was centrifuged for 10 min at 20000g. Cleared lysate was removed and 10 ug anti-Flag antibody (M2, Sigma) precoupled to protein G beads (Invitrogen) was added. The solution was allowed to incubate overnight and washed 10x with RIPA buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.6), 1 mM EDTA, 0.7% (wt/vol) sodium deoxycholate, 1% (vol/vol) NP-40 and 0.5 M LiCl) the following day. This was followed by two washes with 100 mM AMBIC. Proteomics sample preparation was done according to a published protocol with minor modifications 1. In brief, three biological replicates of xy samples were lysed under denaturing conditions and sequentially digested with LysC and tryptsin (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Peptide desalting was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce C18 Tips, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). LC-MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific), as reported previously 2. Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 50 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID; New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) and searched against the mouse proteome database UniProtKB (UP000000589) with 22,286 entries, released in Dezember 2018.  For interactor identification, t-test-based statistics were applied on LFQ. First, the logarithm (log 2) of the LFQ values were taken, resulting in a Gaussian distribution of the data. This allowed the imputation of missing values by a normal distribution (width = 0.3, shift = 1.8), assuming these proteins were close to the detection limit.  Statistical outliers for the pull-down of UHRF1-FLAG were compared to untagged UHRF1 were  then determined using a two-tailed t-test. Multiple testing correction was applied by using a permutation-based false discovery rate (FDR) method in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
DNA methylation plays a critical role during development, particularly in repressing retrotransposons. The mammalian methylation landscape is dependent on the combined activities of the canonical maintenance enzyme Dnmt1 and the de novo Dnmts, 3a and 3b. Here, we demonstrate that Dnmt1 displays de novo methylation activity in vitro and in vivo with specific retrotransposon targeting. We used whole-genome bisulfite and long-read Nanopore sequencing in genetically engineered methylation-depleted mouse embryonic stem cells to provide an in-depth assessment and quantification of this activity. Utilizing additional knockout lines and molecular characterization, we show that the de novo methylation activity of Dnmt1 depends on Uhrf1, and its genomic recruitment overlaps with regions that enrich for Uhrf1, Trim28 and H3K9 trimethylation. Our data demonstrate that Dnmt1 can catalyze DNA methylation in both a de novo and maintenance context, especially at retrotransposons, where this mechanism may provide additional stability for long-term repression and epigenetic propagation throughout development.

### Keywords
Dnmt1, Retrotransposon, Dna methylation, Uhrf1

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Meissner
Department of Genome Regulation, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics, Berlin, Germany


