### Accession
PXD032667

### Title
Acute stress induces long-term metabolic, functional and structural remodeling of the heart

### Description
Takotsubo syndrome is a stress-induced cardiomyopathy with symptoms comparable to those of acute coronary syndrome but without coronary obstruction. Initially considered spontaneously reversible, the reversibility of takotsubo was challenged by epidemiological studies showing high morbi-mortality in the long term. Here we explore comprehensively cardiac metabolism, structure and function after a single acute stress. We show that a single pharmacological stress is sufficient to recapitulate the clinical signs of ventricular dysfunction of takotsubo and their apparent reversibility. Interestingly, myocardial glucose metabolic remodeling during the acute phase was also present throughout the late recovery phases. Metabolic stunning where high glucose uptake is derived from glycolysis into alternative non-oxidative pathways such as the hexosamine biosynthetic and polyol pathways parallels with irreversible tissue and vascular remodeling. This study evidences that stress-induced diversion of glucose metabolism is the cause of deleterious structural and functional sequelae in takotsubo hearts.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen hearts samples were individually ground under liquid nitrogen to yield a fine powder using a pestle and mortar. The tissue powder was quickly weighted and solubilized in 95°C lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0). Protein extracts were clarified by centrifugation at 21,000×G for 1 hour at 4°C. Protein concentration of the supernatant was estimated and normalized using image intensity integration of the Coomassie blue G250-colored SDS PAGE, loaded with the same volume of each lysate. Peptides were prepared by the Strap technique (ProtiFi, NY, USA) and desalted on C18 StageTips (ref publi: 10.1038/nprot.2007.261 ). After speed-vacuum drying, peptides were solubilized in 2% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and fractionated by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips. LC-MS analyses were performed on an U3000 RSLC nano-LC (Dionex) system coupled to a TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Germany). After drying, peptides from SCX StageTip, the fractions were solubilized in 10 μL of 0.1% TFA containing 2% acetonitrile (ACN). one μL was loaded, concentrated, and washed for 3min on a C18 reverse phase precolumn (3μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter, 2 cm length, from Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on an Aurora C18 reverse phase resin (1.6 μm particle size, 100Å pore size, 75μm inner diameter, 25cm length mounted to the CSI module, from IonOpticks; Australia) with a 120min run time and a gradient ranging from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid in milliQ-grade H2O, to 40% of solvent B containing 80% acetonitrile, 0.085% formic acid in mQH2O. The mass spectrometer acquired data throughout the elution process and operated in DDA PASEF mode with a 1.89 second/cycle, with Timed Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) mode enabled and a data-dependent scheme with full MS scans in PASEF mode. This enabled a recurrent loop analysis of a maximum of the 120 most intense nLC-eluting peptides which were CID-fragmented between each full scan every 1.89 second. Ion accumulation and ramp time in the dual TIMS analyzer were set to 166 ms each and the ion mobility range was set from 1/K0 = 0.6 Vs cm-2 to 1.6 Vs cm-2. Precursor ions for MS/MS analysis were isolated in positive polarity in the 100-1.700 m/z range by synchronizing quadrupole switching events with the precursor elution profile from the TIMS device. The cycle duty time was set to 100%, accommodating as many MSMS in the PASEF frame as possible. Singly charged precursor ions were excluded from the TIMS stage by tuning the TIMS using the Otof control software (Bruker Daltonik GmbH). Precursors for MS/MS were picked from an intensity threshold of 1000 arbitrary units (a.u.) and resequenced until reaching a ‘target value’ of 20,000 a.u, considering a dynamic exclusion gap of 0.40 minute.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.6.17 (Max Planck institute of Biochemistry, Germany). The database used was a concatenation of Rattus norvegicus sequences from the Uniprot and-Swissprot databases (release 2020-10) and a list of contaminant sequences from MaxQuant. The enzyme specificity was trypsin. The precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 20ppm. Carbamido-methylation of cysteins was set as permanent modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search was allowed, and minimal length of peptides was set at 7 amino acids. False discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% on both peptides and proteins. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides. At least 2 such peptides were required for LFQ. The “match between runs” (MBR) option was allowed with a match time 0.7min window and an alignment time window of 20min. For differential analysis, LFQ results from MaxQuant were imported into the Perseus software (version 1.6.14). Reverse and contaminant proteins were excluded from analysis. Data was analyzed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Inc, version 60467501). Significantly over-represented terms (canonical pathways, functions, upstream regulators) were identified with a right-tailed Fisher’s Exact Test that calculates an overlap p‐value. The z-score was also calculated. Its calculation assessed the activation (positive z-score) or repression (negative one) of each term.  Statistical analysis: For each experimental series, data are presented as means ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was performed with GraphPad Prism 9.2.0 (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA, USA). Statistical significance (p<0.05) for each variable was estimated by one-way or two-way ANOVA when group variances were equal (Bartlett test); if not we performed the non-parametric Kruskall-Wallis test.

Five samples/group post-ISO were performed. Although, two of the five 7d post-ISO LV apical samples were outliers (extended data 9B), in order to maintain homogeneous sample comparison groups of individuals, we chose not to eliminate the outliers as they showed no series effect nor were they detrimental to our observations of statistical evidence 
Overall, after excluding reverse and contaminant proteins from analysis, 4257 proteins were identified, among which 3203 proteins had at least one LFQ value across all samples. Before performing statistics, the data was transformed to a logarithmic scale (log2) and further filtered: 2618 proteins with at least 3 out of 5 valid LFQ values in at least one experimental group were used for comparison between groups (extended data 9A). Significant differential proteins were identified with a two-tailed Student’s t-test. Only proteins with p-value<0.05 and |fold change|>1.3 were kept for over-representation analysis using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (QIAGEN Inc, version 60467501). Proteins with missing values in all samples of one group (0/5) and at least 3 values in another group (3/5) were considered as appearance / disappearance and included in the dataset of 2618 proteins. A significant difference was observed in 1110 proteins, from the 6 comparison groups (in the apex: 0 vs. 2h, 7d vs. 0 and 7d vs. 2h; in the basal region: 0 vs. 2h, 7d vs. 0 and 7d vs. 2h). 


### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Tims tof pro, Mouse heart takotsubo model, Stress-induced cardiomyopathy, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
ICO Angers
Plateforme d’Imageries du Vivant, Université Paris Cité, PARCC, INSERM, F-75006 Paris, France

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Bertrand Tavitian
Plateforme d’Imageries du Vivant, Université Paris Cité, PARCC, INSERM, F-75006 Paris, France


