### Accession
PXD024123

### Title
A proteomics workflow reveals predictive autoantigens in idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (cohort 2)

### Description
Rationale: The diagnosis of idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) requires exclusion of an underlying autoimmune disease, as present in interstitial lung diseases associated with connective tissue diseases (CTD-ILD). The prevalence of autoantibodies in IPF patients is currently unknown. Objectives: An unbiased assay for de novo discovery of autoantigens can help characterizing autoreactivities in IPF patients beyond clinically established autoimmune panels.   Methods: We developed the proteomic Differential Antigen Capture (DAC) assay, capturing patient antibodies from plasma, followed by affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP-MS). The DAC assay quantifies the binding capacity of patient antibodies to proteins in a pooled native extract from lung explants (ILD explants n=41;  donor controls n=12). Plasma antibodies from patients with IPF (n=35), CTD-ILD (n=24) and age-matched controls (n=32) were analyzed and validated in an independent cohort (IPF: n=40; CTD-ILD: n=20). Plasma antibody binding profiles were associated with clinical meta-data including diagnosis, lung function and transplant free survival.  Measurements and Main Results: We identified 586 putative autoantigens in both study cohorts with a broad heterogeneity among disease entities and cohorts. On average, in IPF a mean±SD of 16±40 autoantigens and in CTD-ILD a mean±SD of 9±15 autoantigens were identified per patient. We identified 18 IPF-specific autoantigens validated in the second cohort. Interestingly, there was also a high number of shared autoantigens in IPF and CTD-ILD patients, with 17 being present in IPF and CTD-ILD of both cohorts. Presence of antibodies to Thrombospondin 1 (THBS1) and tubulin beta-1 chain (TUBB1) was associated with a significantly reduced survival in patients with IPF (p=0.002 and p=0.019, respectively). This signature was often associated with autoreactivity against talin-1 (TLN1), latent-transforming growth factor beta-binding protein 1 (LTBP1), epididymis secretory protein Li 112 (HEL-S-112), zyxin (ZYX), the LIM and senescent cell antigen-like-containing domain protein 1 (LIMS1) and caldesmon (CALD1).  Conclusions: Unbiased proteomic profiling reveals that the overall prevalence of autoantibodies is similar in IPF and CTD-ILD patients and identifies novel IPF specific autoantigens associated with patient survival.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation samples were subject to on-bead digest. Beads were incubated with 50 ul 8 M Urea Hepes pH8, 0.5µg LysC (Wako, #129-02541, 10 AU, in ABC), 10 mM DTT for 1 hour at room temperature in a shaker (600 rpm). Afterwards, 0.5µg Trypsin  (Trpysin from porcine pancreas: Sigma-Aldrich, T6567) was added in 200µl 50 mM ABC with 55 mM CAA and beads were again incubated for 1 hour at room temperature gently shaking (600rpm). 96 well filter plates were centrifuged at 100g for 1 minutes and digested peptides as flow-through were collected in clean 96 well plates. Filters were washed again with 50µl quenching buffer [2M Urea, 50 mM Thiourea, 2mM Hepes in 50 mM ABC (= 50mM NH4HCO3)] and centrifuged at 100g for 1 minutes. Digestion continued overnight at 37°C and 600rpm and stopped  Peptides were purified using stage-tips containing a poly(styrene-divinylbenzene) copolymer modified with sulfonic acid groups (SDB-RPS), as previously described (Schiller et al., 2015)(Kulak et al., 2014). Stage tips were first activated with 100µl ACN. For equilibration, we first ran 100µl 30%MeOH, 1% TFA over the stage tips and then 200µl 0.2% TFA. The samples were loaded in 1 % TFA. Afterwards, stage tips were first washed twice with 100µl isopropanol in 1% TFA and then again with 200µl 0.2% TFA. Finally, samples were eluted with 60µl of 5% Ammonia and 80% ACN. Afterwards, samples were evaporated at 30°C degree (Eppendorf Evaporater Plus). The final eluates were dissolved in 6 µl buffer A* under sonication.   Approximately 1 μg of peptides were separated in one hour gradients on a 50-cm long (75-μm inner diameter) column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Reverse-phase chromatography was performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was coupled to a Q-Exactive Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with buffer A (0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and eluted with a nonlinear 240-min gradient of 5–60% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 80% (v/v) acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. After each gradient, the column was washed with 95% buffer B and re-equilibrated with buffer A. Column temperature was kept at 50 °C by an in-house designed oven with a Peltier element (Thakur et al., 2011) and operational parameters were monitored in real time by the SprayQC software (Scheltema & Mann, 2012). MS data were acquired with a shotgun proteomics method, where in each cycle a full scan, providing an overview of the full complement of isotope patterns visible at that particular time point, is follow by up to ten data-dependent MS/MS scans on the most abundant not yet sequenced isotopes (top10 method) (Michalski et al, 2011a). Target value for the full scan MS spectra was 3 × 106 charges in the 300−1,650 m/z range with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 400. The resulting mass spectra were processed using the MaxQuant software (Cox and Mann, 2008), which enabled label free protein quantification (Tyanova et al., 2016). As previously described (Schiller et al, 2015), peak lists were searched against the human Uniprot FASTA database (November 2016), and a common contaminants database (247 entries) by the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011).

### Data Protocol
Statistical analysis of clinical data included t-test statistics, ANOVA tests, Fisher’s exact test and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis of lung transplantation-free survival using  the GraphPad Prism 5 software.   To identify the most commonly found autoantigens, we used a score based on the sums of the Student’s T-test statistics per patient per protein (sum score of significantly enriched antigens), ILD patients tested against control patients, of significantly enriched proteins (FDR<10%). Antigens were only included if they were identified in at least three patients in one of the four study groups and a cut-off sum score value >4 was used.  All other statistical and bioinformatics operations (such as normalization, data integration, annotation enrichment analysis, hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis), were run with the Perseus software package (version 1.5.3.0 and 1.6.1.1. and 1.6.10.50) (Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Autoantibodies, Clinical proteomics, Ctd-ild, Ipf, Lung fibrosis

### Affiliations
Institute of Lung Biology and Disease and Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, German
CPC/ILBD HemholtzZentrum München

### Submitter
Christoph Mayr

### Lab Head
Dr Herbert Schiller
Institute of Lung Biology and Disease and Comprehensive Pneumology Center, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Member of the German Center for Lung Research (DZL), Munich, German


