### Accession
PXD033343

### Title
Study on the proteomic response of 5mm sections of root tips to water-deficit stress in two contrasting genotypes of rice

### Description
In this study, we analysed the proteomic response of 5mm sections of root tips to water-deficit stress in two contrasting genotypes of rice: IR64, a lowland, drought-susceptible, and shallow-rooting genotype; and Azucena, an upland, drought-tolerant, and deep-rooting genotype. Using a Partial Least Square Discriminant Analysis, we identified statistically significant differentially abundant proteins across genotypes and conditions. Analysis of biological processes led to the identification of novel proteins involved in root elongation with specific expression patterns in Azucena.

### Sample Protocol
Plants were grown to 35 days and then half the plants were subject to drought stress by withholding water for 14 days, field capacity reduced to 25% – 35%. At the end of the water-stress treatment, seminal root tips (5mm) were dissected and collected into 1.5mL tubes, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and then stored at -80°C. Approximately 170 root tip sections were pooled as a biological replicate. Three biological replicates were analysed for each genotype/condition. Proteins were isolated from root tip tissue using Invitrogen Trizol Reagent, and then quantitative proteomics analysis was performed using tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling.  NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system.

### Data Protocol
NanoLC-MS/MS was performed on a Q Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC1000 nanoflow HPLC system. Peptide to spectrum matching was performed using proteome discoverer V2.1 against the most recent predicted protein database of Oryza sativa ssp. japonica cv. Nipponbare from RAP-DB (IRGSP-1.0.2019-08-29, 42260 predicted protein sequences).

### Publication Abstract
Drought is responsible for major losses in rice production. Root tips contain meristematic and elongation zones that play major roles in determination of root traits and adaptive strategies to drought. In this study we analysed two contrasting genotypes of rice: IR64, a lowland, drought-susceptible, and shallow-rooting genotype; and Azucena, an upland, drought-tolerant, and deep-rooting genotype. Samples were collected of root tips of plants grown under control and water deficit stress conditions. Quantitative proteomics analysis resulted in the identification of 7294 proteins from the root tips of IR64 and 6307 proteins from Azucena. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033343. Using a Partial Least Square Discriminant Analysis on 4170 differentially abundant proteins, 1138 statistically significant proteins across genotypes and conditions were detected. Twenty two enriched biological processes showing contrasting patterns between two genotypes in response to stress were detected through gene ontology enrichment analysis. This included identification of novel proteins involved in root elongation with specific expression patterns in Azucena, including four Expansins and seven Class III Peroxidases. We also detected an antioxidant network and a metallo-sulfur cluster assembly machinery in Azucena, with roles in reactive oxygen species and iron homeostasis, and positive effects on root cell cycle, growth and elongation.

### Keywords
Root, Proteome, Tmt, Drought, Rice

### Affiliations
Professor at School of Natural Sciences in Macquarie University
Macquarie university

### Submitter
Fatemeh Habibpourmehraban

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Haynes
Professor at School of Natural Sciences in Macquarie University


