### Accession
PXD012163

### Title
Phosphorylation of CENP-A on serine 7 does not control centromere function

### Description
CENP-A is the histone H3 variant necessary to specify the location of all eukaryoticcentromeres via its CENP-A targeting domain and either one of its terminal regions. In humans, several post-translational modifications occur on CENP-A, but their role in centromere function remains controversial. One of these modifications of CENP-A, phosphorylation on serine 7,has been proposed to control centromere assembly and function. Here, using gene targeting at both endogenous CENP-A alleles and gene replacement in human cells, we demonstrate that a CENP-A variant that cannot be phosphorylated at serine 7 maintains correct CENP-C recruitment, faithful chromosome segregation and long-term cell viability. Thus, we conclude that phosphorylation of CENP-A on serine 7 is dispensable to maintain correct centromere dynamics and function. 

### Sample Protocol
TAP-tagged complexes was purified from chromatin and soluble fraction as previously described (Nechemia-Arbely et al., JCB 2017) (Foltz 2009), respectively. Mass spectrometry was first performed following trypsin digestion. For that, samples were first denatured in 8 M urea and then reduced and alkylated with 10 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride [Roche Applied Science] and 55 mM iodoacetamide [Sigma-Aldrich] respectively. Samples were then diluted using 100 mM Tris pH 8.5 to a final concentration of 2 M urea and digested with trypsin [Promega] overnight at 37 degrees Celsius.  The protein digests were pressure-loaded onto 250 micron i.d. fused silica capillary [Polymicro Technologies] columns with a Kasil frit packed with 3 cm of 5 micron Partisphere strong cation exchange (SCX) resin [Whatman] and 3 cm of 5 micron C18 resin [Phenomenex]. After desalting, each bi-phasic column was connected to a 100 micron i.d. fused silica capillary [Polymicro Technologies] analytical column with a 5 micron pulled-tip, packed with 10 cm of 5 micron C18 resin [Phenomenex].Each MudPIT column were placed inline with an 1200 quaternary HPLC pump [Agilent Technologies] and the eluted peptides were electrosprayed directly into an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer [Thermo Scientific]. The buffer solutions used were 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (buffer A), 80% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (buffer B) and 500 mM ammonium acetate/5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (buffer C). A ten-step MudPIT, each step consisting of a 120 minute elution gradient, was run with salt pulses of 0%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 40%, 50%, 60%, 70% and 100% buffer C and 90% buffer C/10% buffer B. The MS/MS cycle consisted of one full scan mass spectrum (400-1600 m/z) at 60 K resolution followed by five data-dependent collision induced dissocation (CID) MS/MS spectra. Charge state exclusion was enabled with +1 and unassigned charge states rejected for fragmentation. Application of mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system. In a second experiment, phospho-peptides were enriched before mass spectrometry analysis. For that, samples were first digested with trypsin as in the first experiment. Digested peptides were subject to magnetic titanium dioxide phosphopeptide enrichment [Pierce] according to the manufacturer’s specifications. Briefly, acetonitrile was added to each sample at a final concentration of 80% prior to the addition of the titanium dioxide magnetic beads using a ratio of 1 microliter stock beads to 10 micrograms peptide digest. The magnetic beads were incubated four times in Binding Buffer and four times in Wash Buffer prior to elution of the phosphopeptides. The eluate was lyophilized and re-suspended in 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid (buffer A).Phosphopeptides were pressure-loaded as in the first experiment. Each split column were placed inline with an 1200 quaternary HPLC pump [Agilent Technologies] and the eluted peptides were electrosprayed directly into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer [Thermo Scientific]. Same buffer solutions A and B were used. A 180 minute elution gradient was run twice. The MS/MS cycle consisted of one full scan mass spectrum (400-1600 m/z) at 60 K resolution followed by 10 data-dependent collision induced dissocation (CID) MS/MS spectra. Charge state exclusion was enabled with +1 and unassigned charge states rejected for fragmentation. Application of mass spectrometer scan functions and HPLC solvent gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were extracted using RawXtract (version 1.9.9) (McDonald et al., 2004). MS/MS spectra were searched with the Sequest algorithm (Xu et al., 2015) against a human International Protein Index (IPI) database that was concatenated to a decoy database in which the sequence for each entry in the original database was reversed (Peng et al., 2003). The Sequest search was performed using no enzyme specificity (cleavage C-terminal to Arg or Lys residue) and static modification of cysteine due to carboxyamidomethylation (57.02146). The search results were assembled and filtered using the DTASelect (version 2.0) algorithm (Tabb et al., 2002). DTASelect assesses the validity of peptide-spectra matches using the cross-correlation score (XCorr) and normalized difference in cross-correlation scores (deltaCN). The search results are grouped by charge state and tryptic status and each sub-group is analyzed by discriminant analysis based on a non-parametric fit of the distribution of forward and reversed matches. A minimum of one peptide was required for each protein identification and peptides were required to be half tryptic. All peptide-spectra matches had less than 10 ppm mass error. The protein false positive rate was below one percent for all experiments.

### Publication Abstract
CENP-A is the histone H3 variant necessary to specify the location of all eukaryotic centromeres via its CENP-A targeting domain and either one of its terminal regions. In humans, several post-translational modifications occur on CENP-A, but their role in centromere function remains controversial. One of these modifications of CENP-A, phosphorylation on serine 7, has been proposed to control centromere assembly and function. Here, using gene targeting at both endogenous CENP-A alleles and gene replacement in human cells, we demonstrate that a CENP-A variant that cannot be phosphorylated at serine 7 maintains correct CENP-C recruitment, faithful chromosome segregation and long-term cell viability. Thus, we conclude that phosphorylation of CENP-A on serine 7 is dispensable to maintain correct centromere dynamics and function.

### Keywords
Centromere, Cell cycle, Phosphorilation, Cenp-a

### Affiliations
INSTITUT CURIE
Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR 144, 26 rue d’Ulm, F-75005, Paris, France.

### Submitter
ANDREA SCELFO

### Lab Head
Dr Daniele Fachinetti
Institut Curie, PSL Research University, CNRS, UMR 144, 26 rue d’Ulm, F-75005, Paris, France.


