### Accession
PXD000859

### Title
Genetic predisposition for beta cell fragility underlies type 1 and type 2 diabetes

### Description
Type 1 and type 2 diabetes (T1D and T2D) share pathophysiological characteristics, yet mechanistic links have remained elusive. T1D results from autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells, while beta cell failure in T2D is delayed and progressive. Here we find a new genetic component of diabetes susceptibility in T1D non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, identifying immune-independent beta cell fragility. Genetic variation in Xrcc4 and Glis3 alter the response of NOD beta cells to unfolded protein stress, enhancing the apoptotic and senescent fates. The same transcriptional relationships were observed in human islets, demonstrating the role for beta cell fragility in genetic predisposition to diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
To compare the influence of insHEL expression in B10 versus NOD mice on the proteome level, isolated proteomes were digested with endoLysC, resulting peptides were post-metabolically N-propionylated using either 12C3 or 13C3 propionate, equal amounts of the peptide samples were mixed, fractionated by RP-HPLC prior to analysis by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer. The MS/MS data were used to identify and quantify peptides and proteins using the Mascot software suite.

### Data Protocol
From the MS/MS data in each LC run, Mascot Generic Files were created using Distiller software (version 2.4.3.3, Matrix Science, www.matrixscience.com/Distiller). While generating these peak lists, grouping of spectra was allowed in Distiller with a maximal intermediate retention time of 30s and a maximum intermediate scan count of 5 was used where possible. Grouping was done with 0.005 Th precursor tolerance. A peak list was only generated when the MS/MS spectrum contained more than 10 peaks. There was no deisotoping and the relative signal to noise limit was set at 2. Peak lists were searched with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) using the Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4, Matrix Science). Spectra were searched against the Swiss-Prot database. Variable modifications were set to pyro-glutamate formation of amino terminal glutamine and acetylation of the N-terminus. Methionine oxidation was set as a fixed modification. Mass tolerance on peptide precursor ions was set to 10 ppm (with Mascot’s 13C option set to 1), mass tolerance on peptide fragment ions was set to 0.5 Da. The peptide charge was set to 1+,2+,3+ and the instrument setting was put on ESI-TRAP. The enzyme was set to endoproteinase Lys-C, allowing for 1 missed cleavage, also cleavage was allowed when lysine is followed by proline. Only peptides that were ranked first and scored above the corresponding Mascot threshold score, set at 99% confidence, were withheld. Identified peptides were quantified using Mascot Distiller Toolbox version 2.4.0 (MatrixScience) in the precursor mode. All data management was done by ms_lims {20058248}. Further data analysis was performed using R (http://www.R-project.org) embedded in Knime (http://www.knime.org). The data were further filtered by removing all peptides smaller than eight amino acids, and all protein identifications without two peptide identifications were removed.

### Publication Abstract
Type 1 (T1D) and type 2 (T2D) diabetes share pathophysiological characteristics, yet mechanistic links have remained elusive. T1D results from autoimmune destruction of pancreatic beta cells, whereas beta cell failure in T2D is delayed and progressive. Here we find a new genetic component of diabetes susceptibility in T1D non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice, identifying immune-independent beta cell fragility. Genetic variation in Xrcc4 and Glis3 alters the response of NOD beta cells to unfolded protein stress, enhancing the apoptotic and senescent fates. The same transcriptional relationships were observed in human islets, demonstrating the role of beta cell fragility in genetic predisposition to diabetes.

### Keywords
B10 mice, Nod mice, Inshel, Diabetes

### Affiliations
Biochemistry
University Ghent, VIB

### Submitter
Jonathan Vandenbussche

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
University Ghent, VIB


