### Accession
PXD020704

### Title
Open search strategy for inferring the masses of cross-link adducts

### Description
Development of new reagents for protein cross-linking is continually ongoing.  The chemical formulas of the linker adducts formed by these reagents are usually deduced from expert knowledge, and then validated by mass spectrometry.  Clearly, it would have been more rigorous if the adduct masses are inferred directly from the data without any prior assumption on the chemistries.  Unfortunately, the analysis tools that are currently available to detect chemical modifications on linear peptides are not applicable to the case of two cross-linked peptides.  Here we show that an adaptation of the open search strategy that works on linear peptides can be used to study cross-link modifications between pairs of peptides.  We benchmark our approach by correctly inferring the linker masses of two well-known reagents - DSS and formaldehyde - to accuracies of a few parts per million.  We then investigate the cross-linking chemistries of two poorly characterized reagents - EMCS and glutaraldehyde.  In the case of EMCS, we find that the expected cross-linking chemistry is accompanied by a competing chemistry that targets other amino acid types.  In the case of glutaraldehyde, we find that the chemical formula of the dominant linker is C5H4, which indicates a ringed aromatic structure.  These results demonstrate that, at very little effort, our approach can yield non-trivial insights to facilitate the studies of new cross-linkers.

### Sample Protocol
A mixture solution of three purified proteins was prepared by reconstituting lyophilized protein powder in PBS. The proteins were Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA), Ovotransferrin, and α-Amylase with respective final molarity in the mixture of 10 µM, 10 µM, and 20 µM. Proteins cross-linked with 2% Formaldehyde, 1mM DSS, 0.3mM EMCS or 0.01% Glutaraldehyde.  Quenching was done by adding ammonium bicarbonate to a final concentration of 30mM or by medium exchange. Next, proteins were precipitated in acetone at −80 °C for 1 h followed by centrifugation at 10,000 × g. The pellet was resuspended in 20 μl of 8 M urea with 10 mM DTT. After 30 min, iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 50 mM and the alkylation reaction proceeded for 30 min. The urea was diluted by adding 200 μl of digestion buffer (25 mM TRIS pH = 8.0; 10% acetonitrile), trypsin (Promega) was added at a 1:100 protease-to-protein ratio, and the protein was digested overnight at 37 °C under agitation. Following digestion, the peptides were desalted on C18 stage tips and eluted by 55% acetonitrile. The eluted peptides were dried in a SpeedVac, reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid, and measured in the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The RAW data files from the mass spectrometer were converted to MGF format by Proteome Discoverer (Thermo), which was the input format for our analysis applications.

### Publication Abstract
Development of new reagents for protein cross-linking is constantly ongoing. The chemical formulas for the linker adducts formed by these reagents are usually deduced from expert knowledge and then validated by mass spectrometry. Clearly, it would be more rigorous to infer the chemical compositions of the adducts directly from the data without any prior assumptions on their chemistries. Unfortunately, the analysis tools that are currently available to detect chemical modifications on linear peptides are not applicable to the case of two cross-linked peptides. Here, we show that an adaptation of the open search strategy that works on linear peptides can be used to characterize cross-link modifications in pairs of peptides. We benchmark our approach by correctly inferring the linker masses of two well-known reagents, DSS and formaldehyde, to accuracies of a few parts per million. We then investigate the cross-linking chemistries of two poorly characterized reagents: EMCS and glutaraldehyde. In the case of EMCS, we find that the expected cross-linking chemistry is accompanied by a competing chemistry that targets other amino acid types. In the case of glutaraldehyde, we find that the chemical formula of the dominant linker is C<sub>5</sub>H<sub>4</sub>, which indicates a ringed aromatic structure. These results demonstrate how, with very little effort, our approach can yield nontrivial insights to better characterize new cross-linkers.

### Keywords
Modifications, Glutaraldehyde, Cross-linking, Xl-ms, Emcs, Open search, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel (lab head)
Biochemistry department in the Hebrew University

### Submitter
Moriya Slavin

### Lab Head
Dr Nir Kalisman
Dept. of Biological Chemistry, Institute of Life Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel (lab head)


