### Accession
PXD041174

### Title
Smooth Muscle Cell Phenotypic Switch Induced by Cigarette Smoke Condensate

### Description
Cigarette smoke is a risk factor for inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis. Tobacco smoke interacts with inflammatory cytokines to produce endothelial dysfunction and induces pro-inflammatory and pro-atherosclerotic effects in vascular tissue. Smooth muscle cells (SMCs) are present in the media of human arteries, and are considered protective against atherosclerotic plaque destabilization. Contractile SMCs are the most prominent cell type in the healthy vessel wall. SMCs are not terminally differentiated, and retain the ability to undergo a phenotypic switch from a contractile to a dedifferentiated synthetic state to express inflammatory markers and a phagocytic activity in response to environmental cues. The aim of our study was to evaluate the effects in human SMCs of lipophilic component from cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) and of hydrophilic components of Electronic-cigarette, Tobacco heating products, or cigarette smoke.

### Sample Protocol
Human aortic SMCs (PCS-100-012) were cultured in ATCC Vascular Cell Basal Medium, 5% FBS, and 5 mL Penicillin-Streptomycin 100X.  Cells were treated with Cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) 30 ug/mL + 0.1% dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO),  0.1% DMSO (lipophilic negative control),  10% w/w Electronic cigarette extract, 10% w/w Tobacco heating product extract, or 10% w/w Traditional cigarette extract for 48h. For the preparation of total cell lysates, cells were washed with ice-cold PBS and lysed with lysis buffer and protease inhibitors. Relative quantitative Mass Spectrometry (MS) analysis through Label Free Quanti-fication (LFQ). Protein samples were reduced, alkylated, and then digested in 5mM Di-thiothreitol (DTT, at 55°C for 30 min), 15 mM 2-Iodoacetamide (IAA, at room tempera-ture for 20 min), and 0.1 µg/µL trypsin (overnight at 37°C), respectively. Protein samples were purified through C18 Reversed Phase Columns Zip-tip purification, concentrated in speedvac vacuum concentrator, and solved in 4 µL 0.1% v/v formic acid solution. Samples were analysed in triplicates using nano-liquid chromatog-raphy-high resolution mass spectrometry (nLC-HRMS) by Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-LC system (Sunnyvale CA, USA) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source. In particular, peptide mixtures were pre-concentrated onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 – 100 µm x 2 cm C18 (Thermo Scientific) and separated on EASY-Spray column ES802A, 25 cm x 75 µm ID packed with Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 3 µm, 100 Å. The peptides were eluted with gradient from 96% buffer W (0,1% formic acidto in water) to 95% buffer A (0,1% formic acid in 75% acetonitrile) at constant temperature (35°) and flow rate (300nL/min) for 144 minutes.

### Data Protocol
MS spectra were collected through data dependent mode over a m/z range of 375-1500 Da at 120,000 resolutions, and cycle timeof 3 sec between master scans. Higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) was performed with collision energy set at 35 eV and positive polarity. MS raw data were processed by MaxQuant v2.2. In particular, the set-tings to identify and quantify the proteins were: human taxonomy (UP000005640.fasta), trypsin digestion, cysteine carbamidomethylation (as fixed modification), methionin oxidation and N-term acetylation or Met-loss (as dynamic modifications). Only the proteins identified by two or more unique peptides, presenting Q-values lower than 0.05, and observed in 4 of 6 replicates at least in one condition were considered in the analysis. The LFQ values from technical replicates were aver-aged and then normalized using DEP R-package v.1.20.0.

### Publication Abstract
Cigarette smoke (CS) is a risk factor for inflammatory diseases, such as atherosclerosis. CS condensate (CSC) contains lipophilic components that may represent a systemic cardiac risk factor. To better understand CSC effects, we incubated mouse and human aortic smooth muscle cells (SMCs) with CSC. We evaluated specific markers for contractile [i.e., actin, aortic smooth muscle (<i>ACTA2</i>), calponin-1 (<i>CNN1</i>), the Kruppel-like factor 4 (<i>KLF4</i>), and myocardin (<i>MYOCD</i>) genes] and inflammatory [i.e., IL-1&#x3b2;, and <i>IL-6</i>, <i>IL-8</i>, and galectin-3 (<i>LGALS-3</i>) genes] phenotypes. CSC increased the expression of inflammatory markers and reduced the contractile ones in both cell types, with <i>KLF4</i> modulating the SMC phenotypic switch. Next, we performed a mass spectrometry-based differential proteomic approach on human SMCs and could show 11 proteins were significantly affected by exposition to CSC (FC &#x2265; 2.7, <i>p</i> &#x2264; 0.05). These proteins are active in signaling pathways related to expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and IFN, inflammasome assembly and activation, cytoskeleton regulation and SMC contraction, mitochondrial integrity and cellular response to oxidative stress, proteostasis control via ubiquitination, and cell proliferation and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. Through specific bioinformatics resources, we showed their tight functional correlation in a close interaction niche mainly orchestrated by the interferon-induced double-stranded RNA-activated protein kinase (alternative name: protein kinase RNA-activated; PKR) (EIF2AK2/PKR). Finally, by combining gene expression and protein abundance data we obtained a hybrid network showing reciprocal integration of the CSC-deregulated factors and indicating KLF4 and PKR as the most relevant factors.

### Keywords
Atherosclerosis; cigarette smoke; electronic cigarette; phenotypic switch; smooth muscle cells

### Affiliations
Università degli studi di Milano
University of Milan, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Science, 20133 Milan, ITALY

### Submitter
Stefano Bellosta

### Lab Head
Dr Stefano Bellosta
University of Milan, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacological and Biomolecular Science, 20133 Milan, ITALY


