### Accession
PXD044005

### Title
Self-anticoagulant sponges for whole blood auto-transfusion and its mechanism of coagulation factor inactivation

### Description
Clinical use of intraoperative auto-transfusion requires the removal of platelets and plasma proteins due to the pump-based suction and water-soluble anticoagulant administration, which causes dilutional coagulopathy. Herein, we develop a carboxylated and sulfonated heparin-mimetic polymer-modified sponge that could spontaneously adsorb blood (1.149 kg/m-2 s-1/2) along with instantaneous anticoagulation. We demonstrate that intrinsic coagulation factors (especially XI) are inactivated by adsorption to the sponge surface, while inactivation of thrombin in the sponge-treated plasma effectively inhibits the common coagulation pathway. Benefiting from the multiple inhibitory effects of sponge on coagulation enzymes and calcium depletion, the whole blood auto-transfusion in trauma-induced hemorrhage is unprecedentedly realized. The transfusion of collected blood favors faster recovery of hemostasis compared to traditional heparinized blood in an animal model. Our work not only develops a safe and convenient approach for whole blood auto-transfusion, but also provides the mechanism of action of self-anticoagulant heparin-mimetic polymer-modified surfaces.

### Sample Protocol
The sample was grinded with liquid nitrogen into powder and then transferred to a 5-mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes of lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the plasma powder, followed by sonication 3 times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz). The cellular debris from plasma sample was removed by centrifugation at 12,000  g at 4 °C for 10 min. Then, the supernatant was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. The top 14 high abundance proteins were removed by Pierce™ Top 14 Abundant Protein Depletion Spin Columns Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Finally, the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) to urea concentration less than 2 M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 hour-digestion. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 75/100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 4% to 20% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 96 min, 20% to 32% in 18 min and climbing to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.60 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in a parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.15.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20422 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database (http://uniprot.org; proteome ID: UP000005640; release numbers: 2021_01/2021_01). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in first search and 5 ppm in main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. Protein intensity (I) was the sum of all identified peptide intensities of the specific protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Anticoagulation; coagulation factor inactivation; whole blood auto-transfusion

### Affiliations
College of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, People’s Republic of China

### Submitter
Weifeng Zhao

### Lab Head
Dr Weifeng Zhao
College of Polymer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Polymer Materials Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu, 610065, People’s Republic of China


