### Accession
PXD004090

### Title
Quantitative proteome of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1

### Description
We investigated the anode-specific responses of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, an exoelectroactive ammaproteobacterium, using for the first time iTRAQ and 2D-LC MS/MS driven membrane proteomics to compare protein abundances in S. oneidensis when generating power in MFCs, and growing in a continuous culture.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of S. oneidensis were grown on media containing 0.4% (w/v) sodium lactate as a single carbon source and allowed to grow for 16 h at 28°C, 180 rpm. From each phenotype, insoluble and soluble proteins were extracted from 2 biological replicates each before an iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomic analysis was carried out

### Data Protocol
The protein identification and quantification processes were mainly carried out using Phenyx searching engine coupled with an in-house proteomic pepline.

### Publication Abstract
Anodophilic bacteria have the ability to generate electricity in microbial fuel cells (MFCs) by extracellular electron transfer to the anode. We investigated the anode-specific responses of Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, an exoelectroactive Gammaproteobacterium, using for the first time iTRAQ and 2D-LC MS/MS driven membrane proteomics to compare protein abundances in S. oneidensis when generating power in MFCs, and growing in a continuous culture. The regulated dataset produced was enriched in membrane proteins. Proteins shown to be more abundant in anaerobic electroactive anodic cells included efflux pump TolC and an uncharacterised tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) protein, whilst the TonB2 system and associated uncharacterised proteins such as TtpC2 and DUF3450 were more abundant in microaerobic planktonic cells. In order to validate the iTRAQ data, the functional role for TolC was examined using a &#x3b4;TolC knockout mutant of S. oneidensis. Possible roles for the uncharacterised proteins were identified using comparative bioinformatics. We demonstrate that employing an insoluble extracellular electron acceptor requires multiple proteins involved in cell surface properties. All MS and processed data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004090.

### Keywords
Shewanella oneidensis mr-1, Itraq, Microbial fuel cell (mfc) bioﬁlms, Membrane proteins

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, United Kingdom

### Submitter
Trong Khoa Pham

### Lab Head
Dr Trong Khoa Pham
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, The University of Sheffield, Mappin Street, Sheffield, S1 3JD, United Kingdom


