### Accession
PXD028039

### Title
The multivalency of the glucocorticoid receptor ligand-binding domain explains its manifold physiological activities

### Description
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor that controls metabolic and homeostatic processes essential for life. Although numerous crystal structures of the GR ligand-binding domain (GR-LBD) have been reported, the functional oligomeric state of the full-length receptor, which is essential for its transcriptional activity, remains disputed. Here we present five new crystal structures of agonist-bound GR-LBD, along with a thorough analysis of previous structural work. Biologically relevant homodimers were identified by studying a battery of GR point mutants including crosslinking assays in solution and quantitative fluorescence microscopy in live cells. Our results highlight the relevance of non-canonical dimerization modes for GR, especially of contacts made by loop L1-3 residues such as Tyr545. Our work unveils likely pathophysiologically relevant quaternary assemblies of the nuclear receptor with important implications for glucocorticoid action and drug design.

### Sample Protocol
Purified recombinant ancGR2-LBD (33 µM) was incubated with 100-fold molar excess of crosslinkers 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide hydrochloride (EDC, Pierce) for 1-2 hours at 37 ºC following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples of the reaction mixtures were boiled in the presence of reducing Laemmli sample buffer and resolved by SDS-PAGE. CBB-stained bands corresponding to monomeric, dimeric and tetrameric GR-LBD after crosslinking with EDC or DSBU were excised from the gels and subjected to in-gel digestion following standard protocols. Briefly, excised bands were reduced (10 mM DTT) in 50 mM bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.0, for 45 min at 56 ºC), alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer for 30 min at 25 ºC) and digested with either trypsin alone or followed by GluC treatment, or with chymotrypsin overnight at 37 ºC in 100 mM ammonium acetate buffer, pH 8 (Sequencing-grade endoproteases were from Promega). In the case of the Y545C mutant, proteins in the excised bands were directly alkylated without previous DTT treatment.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic peptides were diluted in 1% formic acid (FA) and loaded onto a 180 μm x 20 mm C18 Symmetry trap column (Waters) at a flow rate of 15 μl/min using a nanoAcquity Ultra Performance LCTM chromatographic system (Waters). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (BEH130 C18, 75 mm x 25 cm, 1.7 μm; Waters) with a 120-min run, comprising three consecutive linear gradients: from 1 to 35% B in 100 min, from 35 to 50% B in 10 min and from 50 to 85% B in 10 min (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo), which was operated in positive mode using the data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey MS scans were acquired in the FT-ICR cell with the resolution (defined at 400 m/z) set to 100,000. Up to six of the most intense ions per scan were fragmented and detected in the linear ion trap. The ion count target value was 1,000,000 for the survey scan and 50,000 for the MS/MS scan. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 30 s. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.70 kV. Capillary voltage and tube lens on the LTQ-FT were tuned to 40 and 120 V, respectively. The minimum signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 1,000 and activation Q value was set at 0.25. Singly charged precursors were rejected for fragmentation.

### Publication Abstract
The glucocorticoid receptor (GR) is a ubiquitously expressed transcription factor that controls metabolic and homeostatic processes essential for life. Although numerous crystal structures of the GR ligand-binding domain (GR-LBD) have been reported, the functional oligomeric state of the full-length receptor, which is essential for its transcriptional activity, remains disputed. Here we present five new crystal structures of agonist-bound GR-LBD, along with a thorough analysis of previous structural work. We identify four distinct homodimerization interfaces on the GR-LBD surface, which can associate into 20 topologically different homodimers. Biologically relevant homodimers were identified by studying a battery of GR point mutants including crosslinking assays in solution, quantitative fluorescence microscopy in living cells, and transcriptomic analyses. Our results highlight the relevance of non-canonical dimerization modes for GR, especially of contacts made by loop L1-3 residues such as Tyr545. Our work illustrates the unique flexibility of GR's LBD and suggests different dimeric conformations within cells. In addition, we unveil pathophysiologically relevant quaternary assemblies of the receptor with important implications for glucocorticoid action and drug design.

### Keywords
X-ray crystallography, Mutations, Glucocorticoids, Sectors, Glucocorticoid receptor, Quaternary structure, Homodimerization, Mass spectrometry, Ligand-binding domain, Fluorescence microscopy

### Affiliations
Institute for Research in Biomedicine
Structural Biology of Nuclear Receptors, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona (UB), 08028 Barcelona, Spain

### Submitter
Marina Gay

### Lab Head
Dr Eva Estébanez-Perpiñá
Structural Biology of Nuclear Receptors, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biomedicine, Faculty of Biology, University of Barcelona (UB), 08028 Barcelona, Spain


