### Accession
PXD042245

### Title
Protein profiling of four larval stages of Maruca vitrata

### Description
In this study, we sought to identify functionally important differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the four life stages of M. vitrata. That data can provide an insight into the biological processes involved in insect metamorphosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using a modified version of filter-aided sample preparation (FASP; Wiśniewski et al. 2009) as per the detailed procedure described earlier (Rathinam et al., 2020). In brief, samples were dissolved and denatured in 4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.2), 0.1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). Cysteine residues of denatured proteins were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. After several washing steps on a 0.5 ml Amicon 30000 MWCO concentrator (Millipore, MA, USA) with 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.2 and 0.5 M NaCl, the proteins were digested using trypsin in a 1:50 protein to trypsin ratio (Promega, WI, USA). Digestion was performed overnight at room temperature in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5). Peptides were harvested by centrifugation and acidified with trifluoracetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5%.Dissolved samples were injected using a trap/elute mode into Waters M-class UPLC equipment (Waters AG, GA, USA). A trap column made of Symmetry C18 (5 um, 180 um, and 20 mm, Waters AG) and a separation column made of HSS T3 C18 reverse phase (1.8 um, 75 um, and 250 mm, Waters AG) were employed. The columns were equilibrated with 99% solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and 1% solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). Trapping of peptides was performed at 15µl/min for 30sec and afterwards the peptides were eluted using the following gradient: 1-30% B in 120min; 30-98% B in 5min. The flow rate was constant 0.3µl/min and the temperature was controlled at 50 degrees Celsius. High accuracy mass spectra were cquired with an Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was operated in data dependent acquisition mode. A survey scan was followed by up to 12 MS2 scans. The survey scan was recorded using quadrupole transmission in the mass range of 350-1500m/z with an AGC target of 3E6, a resolution of 120’000 at 200m/z and a maximum injection time of 50ms. All fragment mass spectra were recorded with a resolution of 30’000 at 200m/z, an AGC target value of 1E5 and a maximum injection time of 50ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 28%. Dynamic exclusion was activated and set to 30sec.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative analyses the acquired (non-fractionated) raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann; 2008). Spectra were searched against the previously described protein database (75708 entries) concatenated with an in-house built contaminant database (262 entries). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variables. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P with a maximum of two missed-cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled and a 0.7 min window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file was kept separately in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Only proteins identified with at least 2 peptides were considered for follow up analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The spotted pod borer, Maruca vitrata (Lepidoptera: Crambidae) is a destructive insect pest that inflicts significant productivity losses on important leguminous crops. Unravelling insect proteomes is vital to comprehend their fundamental molecular mechanisms. This research delved into the proteome profiles of four distinct stages -three larval and pupa of M. vitrata, utilizing LC-MS/MS label-free quantification-based methods. Employing comprehensive proteome analysis with fractionated datasets, we mapped 75&#xa0;% of 3459 Drosophila protein orthologues out of which 2695 were identified across all developmental stages while, 137 and 94 were exclusive to larval and pupal stages respectively. Cluster analysis of 2248 protein orthologues derived from MaxQuant quantitative dataset depicted six clusters based on expression pattern similarity across stages. Consequently, gene ontology and protein-protein interaction network analyses using STRING database identified cluster 1 (58 proteins) and cluster 6 (25 proteins) associated with insect immune system and lipid metabolism. Furthermore, qRT-PCR-based expression analyses of ten selected proteins-coding genes authenticated the proteome data. Subsequently, functional validation of these chosen genes through gene silencing reduced their transcript abundance accompanied by a marked increase in mortality among dsRNA-injected larvae. Overall, this is a pioneering study to effectively develop a proteome atlas of M. vitrata as a potential resource for crop protection programs.

### Keywords
Lfq, Lc-ms/ms, Larval stages

### Affiliations
ICAR-NRCPB,  LBS Centre,  Pusa Campus,  IN-110012 New Delhi
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Bernd Roschitzki

### Lab Head
Dr Rohini Sreevathsa
ICAR-NRCPB,  LBS Centre,  Pusa Campus,  IN-110012 New Delhi


