### Accession
PXD021388

### Title
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 in nasal swabs using MALDI-MS

### Description
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 using RT–PCR and other advanced methods can achieve high accuracy. However, their application is limited in countries that lack sufficient resources to handle large-scale testing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we describe a method to detect SARS-CoV-2 in nasal swabs using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS) and machine learning analysis. This approach uses equipment and expertise commonly found in clinical laboratories in developing countries. We obtained mass spectra from a total of 362 samples (211 SARS-CoV-2-positive and 151 negative by RT–PCR) without prior sample preparation from three different laboratories. We tested two feature selection methods and six machine learning approaches to identify the top performing analysis approaches and determine the accuracy of SARS-CoV-2 detection. The support vector machine model provided the highest accuracy (93.9%), with 7% false positives and 5% false negatives. Our results suggest that MALDI-MS and machine learning analysis can be used to reliably detect SARS-CoV-2 in nasal swab samples.

### Sample Protocol
In brief, a nasopharyngeal patient swab was collected by inserting a swab into the nostril parallel to the palate. The swab was inserted to a location equidistant from the nostril and the outer opening of ear and was left in place for a few seconds to absorb secretions. The synthetic fiber swab with a plastic shaft was placed immediately into a sterile tube containing 3 ml of viral transport medium. The same samples of nasopharyngeal swab solutions employed for RT–PCR were used directly for MALDI-MS analysis without sample preparation. MALDI-MS analysis. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed with a MALDI time-of-flight instrument (Autoflex or Microflex, Bruker) with a pulsed nitrogen laser (337 nm), operating in positive-ion linear mode using a 19 kV acceleration voltage. The matrix solution was prepared with α-ciano-hydroxy-cinnamic acid (CHCA) at 1% in acetonitrile/0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (1:1). One microliter of each nasopharyngeal swab sample (previously used for RT–PCR analysis) was spotted on a MALDI steel plate followed by the addition of 1 μl of the matrix solution (CHCA) and air-drying. Before analyses in the mass spectrometer, the MALDI plates were finally irradiated by an ultraviolet lamp inside a biosecurity cabinet for at least 20 min to prevent any source of contamination to the mass spectrometrists. Spectra were generated by summing 500 single spectra (10 × 50 shots) in the range between 3 and 20 kDa by shooting the laser at random shots) in the range between positions on the target spot.

### Data Protocol
MALDI-MS fid files (Bruker) were converted to mzML with MSconvert (version 3.0.19039) from the ProteoWizard suit, and subsequently preprocessed in R (version 4.0.0) using the MALDIquant  and MALDIquantForeign  packages. All spectra were trimmed to a range from 3 to 15.5 kDa. Square root transformation was applied, and smoothing was realized by the Savitzky–Golay method. The baseline correction was performed using the TopHat algorithm, and the intensity was normalized using the total ion current calibration method. To correct the calibration differences between the samples obtained from Lab 2 measured with a Bruker Autoflex, and Lab 1 and Lab 3 measured with a Bruker Microflex, it was used the MALDIquant warpMassSpectra command. The applied calibration function was calculated using 14 high-intensity peaks obtained from Lab 1 and Lab 2 (Supplementary Table 8) affording the equation −(7 × 10^(−11))x^3 + (2 × 10^(−6))x^2 + 0.973x + 51.611. The selected peaks were manually verified to be the same. Peak detection was carried out applying a signal-to-noise ratio of 2 and a halfWindowSize of 10. Peaks were binned with the binpeaks command with a tolerance of 0.003. To avoid any additional calibration differences, the peak binning was carried out in two stages. First, SARS-CoV-2-positive and control group spectra for each laboratory were separately binned (six spectral subgroups); additionally at this stage peak filtration was performed, keeping only those peaks that were present in 80% of the spectra of each subgroup. Next, all peaks were binned together. The resulting matrix of peak intensities was used for FS, PCA and ML analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Detection of SARS-CoV-2 using RT-PCR and other advanced methods can achieve high accuracy. However, their application is limited in countries that lack sufficient resources to handle large-scale testing during the COVID-19 pandemic. Here, we describe a method to detect SARS-CoV-2 in nasal swabs using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (MALDI-MS) and machine learning analysis. This approach uses equipment and expertise commonly found in clinical laboratories in developing countries. We obtained mass spectra from a total of 362 samples (211 SARS-CoV-2-positive and 151 negative by RT-PCR) without prior sample preparation from three different laboratories. We tested two feature selection methods and six machine learning approaches to identify the top performing analysis approaches and determine the accuracy of SARS-CoV-2 detection. The support vector machine model provided the highest accuracy (93.9%), with 7% false positives and 5% false negatives. Our results suggest that MALDI-MS and machine learning analysis can be used to reliably detect SARS-CoV-2 in nasal swab samples.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Human, Covid-19, Maldi-ms

### Affiliations
Instituto de Química de Recursos Naturales, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile
Universidad de Talca

### Submitter
Leonardo Santos

### Lab Head
Dr L. S. Santos
Instituto de Química de Recursos Naturales, Universidad de Talca, Talca, Chile


