### Accession
PXD021720

### Title
Protein complexes involving haemolysin BL of Bacillus cereus

### Description
Bacillus cereus Hemolysin BL is a tripartite toxin responsible for a diarrheal type of food poisoning.We found distinct complexes of up to 600 kDa on native gels, whose structure and size were primarily defined by Hbl B. Hbl L1 and L2 were also identified in these complexes using Western blotting and an LC-MS approach. LC-MS also revealed that many other proteins secreted by B. cereus exist in complexes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of B. cereus culture supernatant and purified rHbl proteins were applied to native gels, Coomassie-stained and excised. Bands were destained with 30 % acetonitrile in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8), shrunk with 100 % acetonitrile, and dried in a vacuum concentrator (Concentrator 5301; Eppendorf, Germany). In-gel digestion was performed with 0.1 µg trypsin per gel band overnight at 37 °C in 0.1 M NH4HCO3 (pH 8). After removing the supernatant, peptides were extracted from the gel slices with 5 % formic acid, and extracted peptides were pooled with the supernatant. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective, USA) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm x 150 µm ID; New Objective, USA), self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany) and separated with a 30 min linear gradient from 3 % to 30 % acetonitrile and 0.1 % formic acid and a flow rate of 500 nl/min.  Both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 for MS scans and 7,500 for MS/MS scans. HCD fragmentation with 35 % normalized collision energy was applied. A Top Speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s was used. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 s singly charged precursors were excluded from selection. Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with a target value of 2e5 for MS scans and 5e4 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Mascot Distiller 2.7 (Matrix Science Ltd, UK) was used for raw data processing and for generating peak lists, essentially with standard settings for the Orbitrap Velos (high/high settings). Mascot Server 2.5 was used for database searching with the following parameters: peptide mass tolerance: 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, enzyme: “trypsin” with 3 missed cleavage sites allowed; variable modifications: Acetyl (protein N-term), Gln -> pyroGlu (N-term Q) and oxidation (M). Database searching was performed against UniProt Bacillus cereus Reference Proteome database (UP000001417), and the sequences of the Hbl proteins of B. cereus strain F837/76.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Bacillus cereus</i> Hemolysin BL is a tripartite toxin responsible for a diarrheal type of food poisoning. Open questions remain regarding its mode of action, including the extent to which complex formation prior to cell binding contributes to pore-forming activity, how these complexes are composed, and the properties of the pores formed in the target cell membrane. Distinct complexes of up to 600 kDa were found on native gels, whose structure and size were primarily defined by Hbl B. Hbl L1 and L2 were also identified in these complexes using Western blotting and an LC-MS approach. LC-MS also revealed that many other proteins secreted by <i>B. cereus</i> exist in complexes. Further, a decrease of toxic activity at temperatures &#x2265;60 &#xb0;C was shown, which was unexpectedly restored at higher temperatures. This could be attributed to a release of Hbl B monomers from tight complexation, resulting in enhanced cell binding. In contrast, Hbl L1 was rather susceptible to heat, while heat treatment of Hbl L2 seemed not to be crucial. Furthermore, Hbl-induced pores had a rather small single-channel conductance of around 200 pS and a probable channel diameter of at least 1 nm on planar lipid bilayers. These were highly instable and had a limited lifetime, and were also slightly cation-selective. Altogether, this study provides astonishing new insights into the complex mechanism of Hbl pore formation, as well as the properties of the pores.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Haemolysin bl, Bacillus cereus, Secretome

### Affiliations
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Schönleutnerstr. 8, 85764 Oberschleißheim, Germany
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München

### Submitter
Nadja Jessberger

### Lab Head
Dr Nadja Jessberger
Department of Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München, Schönleutnerstr. 8, 85764 Oberschleißheim, Germany


