### Accession
PXD006215

### Title
The Behçet’s Disease associated Hap10 variant of ERAP1 generates a low affinity HLA-B*51 peptidome through differential processing of two subpeptidomes

### Description
HLA-B*51, the main risk factor for Behçet’s disease (BD), binds two main subpeptidomes consisting of low affinity peptides with Ala as their second amino acid and higher affinity peptides with Pro at this position. A low activity variant of ERAP1, Hap10, is uniquely associated with BD susceptibility in epistasis with HLA-B*51. The peptidome presented by HLA-B*51:08 in a cell line expressing Hap10 was compared with the HLA-B*51:01 peptidome from a cell line expressing higher activity variants of ERAP1. The differences due to ERAP1 could be clearly distinguished from those due to subtype polymorphism. The latter should not affect disease susceptibility, since both HLA-B*51 subtypes are associated with BD. In the lower activity, BD-associated, ERAP1 context longer peptides were generated, the Pro2 subpeptidome was significantly reduced, and the Ala2 subpeptidome was correspondingly increased and showed a higher frequency of ERAP1-susceptible P1 residues. These effects are readily explained by the low activity of the disease-associated Hap10 variant, and together resulted in a significantly altered HLA-B*51 peptidome of lower affinity. The differences between both B*51 subtypes affected residue usage at various internal positions of the peptide ligands, including P3, where B*51:01 showed preference for aromatic residues whereas B*51:08 preferred smaller and polar ones. The profound effects of the BD-associated Hap10 haplotype on the nature and affinity of HLA-B*51/peptide complexes could significantly alter T-cell and NK cell recognition, providing a basis for the joint association of ERAP1 and HLA-B*51 to BD.

### Sample Protocol
The immunopurification of HLA-bound peptides from 109 BCH-30 cells was performed at  4ºC as in previously described [33] with minor modifications. Cells were lysed in 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 1% Igepal CA-630 (Sigma-Aldrich) and a mixture of protease inhibitors (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). After centrifugation, the supernatant was passed through a column containing 1mg W6/32 bound to CNBr-activated Sepharose 4B (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire UK) and washed with 40 column volumes each of 20 mM Tris-HCl,  pH 8.0containing: 1) 150 mM NaCl, 2) 400 mM NaCl, 3) 150 mM NaCl, and 4) 80 column volumes of buffer  without NaCl. Peptides were eluted with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (Sigma-Aldrich), filtered through Vivaspin 2, cutoff 5,000 Da (Sartorius Stedim Biotech, Gottingen, Germany), and concentrated in a SpeedVac. The peptide-containing fractions were pooled and dried. Three  preparations were independently obtained from the same cell amounts, to provide for  biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Each sample was analyzed in a Q-Exactive-Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher  Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). The peptides were resolved using 7-40% acetonitrile  gradients with 0.1% formic acid for 180 min and 0.15 µL/min on a capillary column pressure-packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua (Dr. Maisch, GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The  dynamic exclusion was set to 20 sec; the selected masses were fragmented from the survey scan of mass to charge ratio (m/z) 300-1,800 AMU at resolution of 70,000. MS/MS  spectra were acquired starting at m/z 200 with a resolution of 17,500. The target value  was set to 1x105 andthe isolation window to 1.8 m/z. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms and normalized collision energy to 25 eV. Peptide sequences were assigned using  the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) with the Andromeda search engine and  the human UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (release 2014_02, 20,270 entries) under the  following parameters: precursor ion mass and fragment mass tolerance 20 ppm, false  discovery rate (FDR) 0.01 and peptide-spectrum matching (PSM) FDR 0.05, oxidation (Met),  acetyl (protein N-terminus) and Gln to Pyro-Glu as variable modifications. Identifications derived from the reverse database and known contaminants were eliminated.

### Publication Abstract
A low-activity variant of endoplasmic reticulum aminopeptidase 1 (ERAP1), Hap10, is associated with the autoinflammatory disorder Beh&#xe7;et's disease (BD) in epistasis with HLA-B*51, which is the main risk factor for this disorder. The role of Hap10 in BD pathogenesis is unknown. We sought to define the effects of Hap10 on the HLA-B*51 peptidome and to distinguish these effects from those due to HLA-B*51 polymorphisms unrelated to disease. The peptidome of the BD-associated HLA-B*51:08 subtype expressed in a Hap10-positive cell line was isolated, characterized by mass spectrometry, and compared with the HLA-B*51:01 peptidome from cells expressing more active ERAP1 allotypes. We additionally performed synthetic peptide digestions with recombinant ERAP1 variants and estimated peptide-binding affinity with standard algorithms. In the BD-associated ERAP1 context of B*51:08, longer peptides were generated; of the two major HLA-B*51 subpeptidomes with Pro-2 and Ala-2, the former one was significantly reduced, and the latter was increased and showed more ERAP1-susceptible N-terminal residues. These effects were readily explained by the low activity of Hap10 and the differential susceptibility of <i>X</i>-Pro and <i>X</i>-Ala bonds to ERAP1 trimming and together resulted in a significantly altered peptidome with lower affinity. The differences due to ERAP1 were clearly distinguished from those due to HLA-B*51 subtype polymorphism, which affected residue frequencies at internal positions of the peptide ligands. The alterations in the nature and affinity of HLA-B*51&#xb7;peptide complexes probably affect T-cell and natural killer cell recognition, providing a sound basis for the joint association of ERAP1 and HLA-B*51 with BD.

### Keywords
Behçet's disease, Erap1, Hla-b*51, Antigen processing

### Affiliations
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
Technion

### Submitter
Eilon Barnea

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology


