### Accession
PXD018360

### Title
Ultrasonic-based filter aided sample preparation as the general method to sample preparation in proteomics

### Description
In this work, we propose a new high-throughput ultrafast method for large scale proteomics approaches by speeding the classic filter aided sample preparation protocol, FASP. The new US-FASP method matches the analytical minimalism roles as time, cost, sample requirement, reagent consumption, energy requirements and production of waste products are reduced to a minimum while maintaining high sample throughput in a robust manner as all the advantages of the filter aided sample preparation protocol are maintained.

### Sample Protocol
We evaluated different complex proteomes of E. coli , mouse liver and mouse brain. The different type of samples were processed using the standard overnight digestion FASP, ON-FASP and the ultrasound FASP, US-FASP. Furthermore, the digestion of the different methods were evaluated by label-free quantification using high resolution mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Relative label-free quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software V1.6.10.43. All raw files were processed in a single run with default parameters. Database searches were performed using Andromeda search engine with the UniProt - Proteome_UP000000625 which contains proteins from E. Coli and the sequences from the spiked proteins that were added to the fasta file . Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.5.0) with default settings.

### Publication Abstract
We propose a new high-throughput ultrafast method for large-scale proteomics approaches by speeding up the classic filter aided sample preparation protocol, FASP, from overnight to 2.5 h. Thirty-six samples can be treated in 2.5 h, and the method is scalable to 96-well plate-based pipelines. After a modification of the FASP-tube, the steps of protein reduction, protein alkylation, and protein digestion of complex proteomes are done in just 5.25 min, each one under the effects of an ultrasonic field (7 cycles: 30 s on and 15 s off). The new method was compared to the standard overnight digestion FASP protocol, and no statistical differences were found for more than 92.4%, 92%, and 93.3% of the proteins identified by studying the proteome of <i>E. coli</i>, mouse brain, and mouse liver tissue samples, respectively. Furthermore, the successful relative label-free quantification of four spiked proteins in <i>E. coli</i> samples, BSA, &#x3b2;-lactoglobulin, &#x3b1;-casein, and &#x3b1;-lactalbumin, was achieved, using either the ultrasonic-based FASP protocol or the classic overnight one. The new US-FASP method matches the analytical minimalism rules as time, cost, sample requirement, reagent consumption, energy requirements, and production of waste products are reduced to a minimum while maintaining high sample throughput in a robust manner as all of the advantages of the filter aided sample preparation protocol are maintained.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Ultrasonic-assisted sample preparation, Lc-ms/ms, Fasp, Label-free quantification, E. coli

### Affiliations
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, School of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon

### Submitter
Hugo M. Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Hugo M. Santos
LAQV-REQUIMTE, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science and Technology, NOVA University of Lisbon, Portugal


