### Accession
PXD043840

### Title
Identification of Novel Scaffold Proteins for Improved Endogenous Engineering of Extracellular Vesicles

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are gaining ground as next-generation drug delivery modalities. Genetic fusion of the protein of interest to a scaffold protein with high EV-sorting ability represents a robust cargo loading strategy. In this study 244 candidate scaffold proteins were studied, resulting in the identification of 24 proteins with conserved EV-sorting abilities across five types of producer cells. TSPAN2 and TSPAN3 were detected as the lead candidates for cargo loading, outperforming the well-known CD63 scaffold. EVs from human embryonic kidney epithelial (HEK-293T) cells, either wild type or overexpressing TSPAN2, TSPAN3 or CD63, were analyzed with label-free top-down proteomics to understand the effect of EV-engineering on protein signatures. The proteomics findings demonstrated that TSPAN2/TSPAN3-based engineering gives rise to EV subpopulations distinct from CD63. The discovery of these novel scaffolds provides a new platform for EV-based therapies.

### Sample Protocol
HEK-293T EV producer cells, either WT or overexpressing ThermoLuc-TSPAN2, ThermoLuc-TSPAN3 or ThermoLuc-CD63 constructs were employed for EV production. EVs were purified using the automated chromatography system (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, ÄKTA Start). Briefly, EVs were separated on a HiTrap Capto Core 700 column (GE Healthcare Life Sciences) and collected according to the absorbance from a 280 nm UV detector. Samples were further concentrated using 10 kDa cut-off spin-filters (Millipore, UFC901024) and stored at -80 °C before use. For proteomics, the sample volume was reduced with 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off filters and the proteins were precipitated (15 µg) with the trichloroacetic acid deoxycholate (TCA/DOC) method (DOI: 10.1101/pdb.prot4258). Protein pellets were suspended in 7 M urea / 2 M thiourea, 100 mM ABC, 20 mM methylamine solution, followed by disulfide reduction and cysteine alkylation with 5 mM DTT and 10 mM chloroacetamide for 60 min each at room temperature. Proteins were predigested with 1:50 (enzyme to protein) Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) for 4 h, diluted 5 times with 100 mM ABC and further digested with trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) overnight at room temperature. Peptides were desalted with in-house made C18 StageTips. Samples were injected to an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex) using a C18 trap-column (Dionex) and an in-house packed (3 µm C18 particles, Dr Maisch) analytical 50 cm x 75 µm ID emitter-column (New Objective). Peptides were eluted at 200 nl/min with a 8-40% B 60 min gradient (buffer B: 80% acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid, buffer A: 0.1% formic acid) to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer (MS) using a nano-electrospray source (spray voltage of 2.5 kV).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were analyzed the with the MaxQuant software. Search was performed against UniProt (www.uniprot.org) Homo sapiens reference proteome database using the tryptic digestion rule (including cleavages after proline). Only identifications with minimally 1 peptide 7 amino acids long were accepted and transfer of identifications between runs was enabled. Label-free normalization with MaxQuant LFQ algorithm was applied. Protein and LFQ ratio count (i.e. number of quantified peptides for reporting a protein intensity) was set to 1. Peptide-spectrum match and protein false discovery rate (FDR) was kept below 1% using a target-decoy approach.   Differential enrichment analysis was performed on the LFQ intensity values by using differential enrichment analysis of proteomics data (DEP version 1.16.0 (https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2017.147)), R version 4.1.2 (2021-11-01), and RStudio version 2022.07.01 build 554.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are gaining ground as next-generation drug delivery modalities. Genetic fusion of the protein of interest to a scaffold protein with high EV-sorting ability represents a robust cargo loading strategy. To address the paucity of such scaffold proteins, we leverage a simple and reliable assay that can distinguish intravesicular cargo proteins from surface- as well as non-vesicular proteins and compare the EV-sorting potential of 244 candidate proteins. We identify 24 proteins with conserved EV-sorting abilities across five types of producer cells. TSPAN2 and TSPAN3 emerge as lead candidates and outperform the well-studied CD63 scaffold. Importantly, these engineered EVs show promise as delivery vehicles in cell cultures and mice as demonstrated by efficient transfer of luminal cargo proteins as well as surface display of different functional entities. The discovery of these scaffolds provides a platform for EV-based engineering.

### Keywords
Endogenous loading, Exosome, Extracellular vesicles, Tetraspanin

### Affiliations
Division of Biomolecular and Cellular Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden
University of Tartu

### Submitter
Helena  Sork

### Lab Head
Dr Samir EL Andaloussi
Division of Biomolecular and Cellular Medicine, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge, Sweden


