### Accession
PXD035259

### Title
Cell surface proteome profiling of cancer-associated fibroblast-induced myeloid-derived suppressor cells and related cell types

### Description
Cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAF) promote immune suppression in the tumor microenvironment by polarizing monocytes to myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSC) that potently suppress T-cell function. Using a patient-derived coculture system, we profiled the cell surface proteome of CAF-induced MDSC to identify potential mechanism through which T-cell function is impaired.

### Sample Protocol
Monocytes from healthy blood were differentiated into MDSC by coculturing with CAF for 7 days. Immature dendritic cells, M1 and M2 macrophage were also generated from the same donors of monocytes. Samples were processed using the SP3 workflow.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed with MaxQuant v1.6.14 and searched against the Uniprot human database (2017-08-16) with the option match-between-runs.

### Publication Abstract
Myeloid cells are known to play a crucial role in creating a tumor-promoting and immune suppressive microenvironment. Our previous study demonstrated that primary human monocytes can be polarized into immunosuppressive myeloid-derived suppressor cells (MDSCs) by cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) in a 3D co-culture system. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying the immunosuppressive function of MDSCs, especially CAF-induced MDSCs, remain poorly understood. Using mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we compared cell surface protein changes among monocytes, <i>in vitro</i> differentiated CAF-induced MDSCs, M1/M2 macrophages, and dendritic cells, and identified an extracellular vesicle (EV)-mediated secretory phenotype of MDSCs. Functional assays using an MDSC/T-cell co-culture system revealed that blocking EV generation in CAF-induced MDSCs reversed their ability to suppress T-cell proliferation, while EVs isolated from CAF-induced MDSCs directly inhibited T-cell function. Furthermore, we identified fructose bisphosphatase 1 (FBP1) as a cargo protein that is highly enriched in EVs isolated from CAF-induced MDSCs, and pharmacological inhibition of FBP1 partially reversed the suppressive phenotype of MDSCs. Our findings provide valuable insights into the cell surface proteome of different monocyte-derived myeloid subsets and uncover a novel mechanism underlying the interplay between CAFs and myeloid cells in shaping a tumor-permissive microenvironment.

### Keywords
Coculture, Mdsc, Stroma, Caf, Myeloid

### Affiliations
Merck Research Laboratories
Merck & Co., Inc.

### Submitter
Carlo Ramil

### Lab Head
Dr An Chi
Merck & Co., Inc.


