### Accession
PXD008738

### Title
Implementation of data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry in metaproteomics of gut microbiota

### Description
A novel approach for metaproteomics that utilizes data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry which enables accurate and consistent quantification of peptides from samples with a complex microbial composition.

### Sample Protocol
Protocol is described at https://github.com/computationalbiomedicine/diatools.

### Data Protocol
Two different laboratory assembled microbial mixtures were used as a sample material which contained an equal amount of eight (8mix) or twelve (12mix) different bacterial strains. In addition, six human fecal samples from anonymous individuals were analyzed under the permission of the Southwest Finland Hospital District. The protein isolation for the 8mix and 12mix samples was performed using a Barocycler instrument NEP3229 which uses pressure cycles to lyse the cells. From the human fecal samples, the proteins were isolated using the NoviPure Microbial Protein Kit following the manufacturer’s instructions. For the 8mix samples, pressure-assisted trypsin digestion was performed using the Barocycler instrument NEP3229 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For the 12mix and human fecal samples, the trypsin digestion was performed conventionally in two steps: first trypsin was added in a 1:50 ratio and digested for 4h and then with a 1:30 ratio over night at 37C. After digestion, the peptides were desalted using a SepPak C18 96-well plate. The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed on a nanoflow HPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source.

### Publication Abstract
Metagenomic approaches focus on taxonomy or gene annotation but lack power in defining functionality of gut microbiota. Therefore, metaproteomics approaches have been introduced to overcome this limitation. However, the common metaproteomics approach uses data-dependent acquisition mass spectrometry, which is known to have limited reproducibility when analyzing samples with complex microbial composition. In this work, we provide a proof of concept for data-independent acquisition (DIA) metaproteomics. To this end, we analyze metaproteomes using DIA mass spectrometry and introduce an open-source data analysis software package, diatools, which enables accurate and consistent quantification of DIA metaproteomics data. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach in gut microbiota metaproteomics using laboratory-assembled microbial mixtures as well as human fecal samples.

### Keywords
Dda, Lc, Swath-ms, Dia

### Affiliations
University of Turku
Turku Centre for Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sami Pietila

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Elo
Turku Centre for Biotechnology


