### Accession
PXD030210

### Title
Integrated analysis of early transcriptomic and proteomic alterations in mouse models of ALS/FTD identify early metabolic adaptions with similarities to mitochondrial dysfunction disorders

### Description
Sporadic and familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a fatal progressive neurodegenerative disease that results in loss of motor neurons and, in some patients, associates with frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Apart from the accumulation of proteinaceous deposits, an emerging literature indicates that aberrant mitochondrial bioenergetics may contribute to the onset and progression of ALS/FTD. Here we sought to investigate the pathophysiological signatures of mitochondrial dysfunction associated with ALS/FTD. By means of label-free mass spectrometry (MS) and mRNA sequencing (RNA-seq), we report pre-symptomatic and symptomatic changes in the cortices of TDP-43 and FUS mutant mouse models. Using tissues from transgenic mouse models of mitochondrial diseases as a reference, we performed comparative analyses and extract unique and common mitochondrial signatures that revealed neuroprotective compensatory mechanisms in response to early damage. In this regard, upregulation of both Acyl-CoA Synthetase Long Chain Family Member 3 (ACSL3) and mitochondrial tyrosyl-tRNA synthetase 2 (YARS2) were the most representative change in pre-symptomatic ALS tissues, suggesting that fatty acid beta-oxidation and mitochondrial protein translation are mechanisms of adaptation in response to ALS pathology. Mechanistically, we demonstrate that downregulation of ACS-4/ACSL3 and YARS-2/YARS2 was sufficient to influence mitochondrial bioenergetics and to induce proteotoxicity in the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans. Together, our unbiased integrative analyses unveil novel molecular components that may influence mitochondrial homeostasis in the earliest phase of ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were first homogenised in lysis buffer (100mM Tris (hydroxymethyl) amino-methane hydrochloride (Tris-HCl), pH 7.5) with protease (complete Mini Protease Inhibitor Tablets, Roche) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP, Roche). 2% SDS was added before sonication and subsequent centrifugation. Protein concentration was quantified using the Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). Samples were further processed in Dr. Gomez’s Matallanas’ laboratory as described before[d1]  . Briefly, SDS removal and protein multi-digestion was conducted by filtered aided sample preparation [64].The resulting trypsin peptides were loaded onto C18 Stage tips for centrifugation before elution in 50% AcN - 0.1% TFA. A spike-in of 2 pmol of Hi3 E.Coli Standard per sample was added prior to the MS run.

### Data Protocol
MS proteomics was performed by the UCD Conway Institute Mass Spectrometry Core Facility on a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Ultimate™ 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex) ultra-high pressure nanoflow chromatography system. Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase column packed in-house (15cm x 75μm ID; Reprocil® Pur C18, 1.9 μm) at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min and an increasing acetonitrile gradient. Mobile phases were 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in water (phase A) and 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid in acetonitrile (phase B). Peptides were separated by a gradient starting at 1% of mobile phase B and increased linearly to 30% over 180 minutes. The injection volume was 5 μL, equivalent to an estimated 10 μg per sample. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion polarity. All data were acquired in automatic data dependent switching mode. High resolution MS scans (70,000 FWHM) were performed in a mass range from 300 to 1600 m/z prior to switching to MS/MS analysis using HCD. Two technical replicates were run for FUS and TDP samples while one technical replicate was obtained for the Hq and Aifm1 samples due to limited sample availability.   Preliminary iBAQ LC-MS/MS quantities were processed in Perseus v1.6.7.0 environment [84]. Processing included: deletion of proteins matching to reverse database and contaminants; relative iBAQ (riBAQ) normalization [45, 46]; exclusion of proteins identified by site, log2 transformation; Further analysis was continued in the R environment [69]. Differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified by moderated t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR adjustment. The analysis is performed in R with limma package (v3.40.6) [73]. To account for technical replicates dependence in case of FUS and TDP proteomics, the correlation approach with duplicateCorrelation function was applied [80]. Proteomics data are deposited on ProteomeXchange Consortium via the PRIDE partner repository under identifier PXDXXX.[d1]

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Als/ftd mouse model yars2

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin

### Submitter
David Matallanas

### Lab Head
Dr David Matallanas Gomez
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin


