### Accession
PXD009077

### Title
Adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cell extracellular vesicles downregulate inflammation in osteoarthritis chondrocytes and cartilage explants

### Description
Osteoarthritis (OA) is a joint condition associated with articular cartilage loss, low-grade synovitis and alterations in subchondral bone and periarticular tissues. In OA, the interest for mesenchymal stem cell (MSC)-EV therapeutic applications has increased.  We have assessed the immunomodulary properties of adipose-derived MSCs (AD-MSCs) microvesicles (MV) and exosomes (EX) in interleukin (IL)-1β stimulated OA chondrocytes and cartilage explants and characterized them by mass spectrometry in order to uncover novel mediators in (AD-MSC)-EV immunomodulation.

### Sample Protocol
AD-MSCs from abdominoplasty fat and immortalized keratinocytes (HaCaT) were cultured with appropriate media supplemented with EV free human serum. EVs were isolated from conditioned media by differential centrifugation and characterized by resistive pulse sensing and proteomics. Cartilage explants and primary chondrocytes were obtained from knee specimens of advanced OA. Both were stimulated with interleukin(IL)-1β (10 ng/mL) and treated with MSC- or HaCaT-MV (3.6x107 particles(p)/mL) or EX (7.2x107 p/mL) for 24h. Then, levels of IL-6, IL-10 and TNFα were measured.   10 µg per EV sample were digested with sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) according to [1]. Tryptic peptides were then dried into a vacuum dryer and re dissolved with 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. 5 µl of each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC Column, 3µ C18-CL, 75umx15cm; Eksigent) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3µl/min during 5 min. The peptides were loaded onto an analytical column (LC Column, 3 µ C18-CL, 75umx12cm, Nikkyo) equilibrated in 5% acetonitrile 0.1% FA (formic acid). Peptide elution was carried out with a linear gradient of 5 to 35% B in 90 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: ACN, 0.1% FA) for at a flow rate of 300nl/min.  Peptides were analysed in a mass spectrometer nanoESI qQTOF (5600 TripleTOF, ABSCIEX). Eluted peptides were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter. Analysis was carried out in a data-dependent mode (DDA). Survey MS1 scans were acquired from 350–1250 m/z for 250 ms. The quadrupole resolution was set to ‘UNIT’ for MS2 experiments, which were acquired 100–1500 m/z for 50 ms in ‘high sensitivity’ mode. Up to 25 ions were selected for fragmentation after each survey scan.

### Data Protocol
Version 4.0 of ProteinPilot (AB SCIEX) was used to search the Expasy database (version 01-2016) with the following parameters: trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation, taxonomy restricted to human, and the search effort set to through.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mesenchymal stem cell, Chondrocyte, Extracellular vesicles, Inflammation, Osteoarthritis

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr María José Alcaraz
Universitat de Valencia


