### Accession
PXD015180

### Title
Arginine valency in C9ORF72 dipolypeptides mediates promiscuous proteome  binding that transmits multiple modes of toxicity

### Description
C9ORF72-associated Motor Neuron Disease patients feature abnormal expression of 5 dipeptide repeat (DPR) polymers. Here we used quantitative proteomics in a mouse neuronal-like cell line (Neuro2a) to demonstrate that the valency of Arg in the most toxic DPRS, PR and GR, drives promiscuous binding to the proteome, compared to a relative sparse binding of the more inert AP and GA. Notable targets included ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors and translation elongation factors. PR and GR comprising more than 10 repeats robustly stalled the ribosome suggesting high-valency Arg electrostatically jams the ribosome exit tunnel during synthesis. Poly-GR also bound to arginine methylases and induced hypomethylation of endogenous proteins, with a profound destabilization of the actin cytoskeleton. Our findings point to arginine in GR and PR polymers as multivalent toxins to translation as well as arginine methylation with concomitant downstream effects on widespread biological processes including ribosome biogenesis, mRNA splicing and cytoskeleton assembly.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicates of GFP-tagged DPRs (10x and 101x) or GFP-transfected Neuro2a were were fluorescence-activated cell sorted using a FACS ARIA III cell sorter (BD Biosciences) using a 100-µm nozzle. Gating was done using the BD FACS Diva software (Becton, Dickinson Biosciences). Cells (1,000,000) of each population of interest were sorted at a speed of 1500 cells/s. Side scatter (SSC) and forward scatter (FSC) height, width, and area were collected to gate for the single cell population. DAPI area was collected to gate-out dead cells. Data were also collected for pulse height, width, and area of GFP with the FITC filter. To match for expression, cells were further gated to the same median GFP intensity of 2200 fluorescence units by varying the window of expression. Cells were pellets at 120 xg for 6 min then cell pellets were harvested RIPA lysis buffer (25mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 0.1% SDS, 1% Sodium deoxycholate, 1× complete mini-protease cocktail; Roche), and incubated on ice for 30 min. The concentration of proteins was measured by the Pierce BCA Protein Assay according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Equal amounts of protein for each sample were precipitated with six volumes of pre-chilled (–20°C) acetone and the precipitation was allowed to proceed overnight. Samples were then spun at 21,000 xg in a microcentrifuge at 4°C for 10 min. Acetone was decanted without disturbing the protein pellet. The pellets were washed once with pre-chilled acetone then allowed to dry for 10 min. The protein precipitates were resuspended in 100 µL 0.1M TEAB and were vortexed and sonicated 3 times for 30 sec to help solubilize the pellet. The samples were further processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were dimethyl-labelled then separated on Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) via an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm) in a gradient buffer(5% DMSO/0.1% v/v formic acid) to buffer B (100% CH3CN/5% DMSO/0.1% formic acid v/v) at 5 μL/min flowrate. The mass spectrometer was operated in a positive-ionization mode. The survey scan range was set from 400 to 1500 300 m/z, with a resolution of 120,000. Up to the 15 most abundant isotope patterns with a charge ≥ 2-5 were subjected to collision-induced dissociation fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 30 ±5%, an isolation window of 1.6 m/zand a resolution of 15,000. Dynamic exclusion to minimize resequencing was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analysed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science version 2.4.1). Data were filtered against the SwissProt Mus Musculus database (version 2016_07; 16794 proteins) combined with common contaminant proteins. GFP sequence (UniProt ID: P42212) was also added to the database. For protein identification, the search was conducted with 20 ppm MS tolerance, and 0.6 Da MS/MS tolerance. The enzyme specificity was set as trypsin. The maximum number of missed cleavage sites permitted was three, and the minimum peptide length required was six. The following modifications were allowed: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Dimethylation (K), Dimethylation (N-Term), Dimethylation: 2H(4) (K), Dimethylation 2H(4) (N-term), 2H(6)13C(2) Dimethylation (K), 2H(6)13C(2) Dimethylation (N-term) mono- and dimethylation of Arginine (Variable); Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed). The false discovery rate (FDR) maximum was set to 1% at the peptide identification level and 5% at the protein identification level. Proteins were filtered for those identified by at least two peptides, one of which was unique, in all three replicates. The common contaminant, Keratin, was excluded from the dataset. Peptide quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer v.2.2 using the precursor ion quantifier node. Dimethyl labelled peptide pairs (between two comparison of light, medium or heavy) were established with a 2 ppm mass precision, and a signal to noise threshold of 3. A retention time tolerance of isotope pattern multiplets was set to 0.6 min. Three single peak or missing channels were allowed for peptide identification. The protein abundance in each replicate was calculated by summation of the unique peptide abundances that were used for quantitation (light, medium and-or heavy dimethyl derivatives). Missing values were imputed from a distribution of all other log2-transformed protein values from that sample, using the default settings in Perseus (1.8 standard deviation downshift, 0.3 mean down shift). For pairwise comparison of proteomes and determination of significant differences in protein abundances, a two-sample Students t-test based on permutation-based FDR statistics was applied (250 permutations; FDR=0.05; S0=0.1) were applied.

### Publication Abstract
<i>C9ORF72</i>-associated Motor Neuron Disease patients feature abnormal expression of 5 dipeptide repeat (DPR) polymers. Here we used quantitative proteomics in a mouse neuronal-like cell line (Neuro2a) to demonstrate that the Arg residues in the most toxic DPRS, PR and GR, leads to a promiscuous binding to the proteome compared with a relative sparse binding of the more inert AP and GA. Notable targets included ribosomal proteins, translation initiation factors and translation elongation factors. PR and GR comprising more than 10 repeats appeared to robustly stall on ribosomes during translation suggesting Arg-rich peptide domains can electrostatically jam the ribosome exit tunnel during synthesis. Poly-GR also recruited arginine methylases, induced hypomethylation of endogenous proteins, and induced a profound destabilization of the actin cytoskeleton. Our findings point to arginine in GR and PR polymers as multivalent toxins to translation as well as arginine methylation that may explain the dysfunction of biological processes including ribosome biogenesis, mRNA splicing and cytoskeleton assembly.

### Keywords
Ran-translation; amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als); proteotoxicity; protein aggregation; abce1; methylosome; prmt1; prmt5

### Affiliations
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences  Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road  The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia
PhD student

### Submitter
Mona Radwan

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Danny Hatters
NHMRC Senior Research Fellow  Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology | Faculty of Medicine, Dentistry and Health Sciences  Level 2 South, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, 30 Flemington Road  The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010 Australia


