### Accession
PXD036905

### Title
SIRT1 regulates DNA damage signaling through PP4 phosphatase complex

### Description
The Sirtuin family of NAD+-dependent enzymes play an important role in the maintenance of genome stability upon stress. Several mammalian Sirtuins have been linked directly or indirectly to the regulation of DNA damage during replication through Homologous recombination (HR). The role of one of them, SIRT1, is intriguing as it seems to have a general regulatory role in DNA damage response (DDR) that has not been addressed. SIRT1-deficient cells show impairment of DDR reflected in a decrease in repair capacity, increased genome instability and decreased levels of H2AX. Here we unveil a close functional antagonism between SIRT1 and the PP4 phosphatase multiprotein complex in the regulation of DDR. Upon DNA damage SIRT1 interacts specifically with PP4C and promotes its inhibition through deacetylation of the domain WH1 of the PP4R3/ regulatory subunits. This in turn, regulates H2AX signal and RPA2 phosphorylation, two key events in the signaling of DNA damage and repair by HR. We propose a mechanism whereby during stress SIRT1 signaling ensures a global control of DNA damage through PP4.

### Sample Protocol
Material and Methods  Protein digestion The samples (3 Sirt1-KO and 1 Sirt1-WT cells protein extracts) were precipitated overnight with cold acetone to remove the glycerol and other reagents can interfere with the protein digestion. Briefly, after samples precipitation the samples were diluted in 50 µL of 8 M urea/ 50 mM NH4HCO3(pH 8.5) solution by ultrasonic bath and mixing. Proteins were reduced (DTT 20 mM50 in mM NH4HCO3; 90minutes, 32ºC) and alkylated (iodoacetamide 35 mM in 50 mM NH4HCO3; room temperature for 30 min, in the dark). Afterwards, the samples were diluted down to 1 M urea with digestion buffer and proteins were digested with trypsin (Sequence grade modified porcine Trypsin, Promega; 1µg trypsin/sample, pH 8, 34oC, 16h overnight). The resulting peptide mixtures were cleaned-up with C18 tips (PolyLC Inc.) as per manufacturer´s protocol. Finally, the cleaned-up peptide solutions were dried-down and stored at -20ºC until the analysis.  LC-MSMS analysis The peptide samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an nanoAcquity líquid chromatographer (Waters). The tryptic digests were resuspended in 1% FA solution and an aliquot of each was injected for chromatographic separation. Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18TM trap column (5µm180µm x 20mm; Waters), and were separated using a C18 reverse phase capillary column (ACQUITY UPLC BEH column; 130Å, 1.7μm, 75 μm x250mm, Waters). The gradient used for the elution of the peptides was 1 to 40 % B in 90 minutes, followed by gradient from 40% to 60% in 10 min (A: 0.1% FA; B: 100% ACN, 0.1%FA), with a 250 nL/min flow rate. Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization in an emitter needle (PicoTipTM, New Objective) with an applied voltage of 2000V. Peptide masses (m/z 300-1700) were analyzed in data dependent mode, where a full Scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM at 400m/z. Up to the 15th most abundant peptides (minimum intensity of 500 counts) were selected from each MS scan and then fragmented in the linear ion trap using CID (38% normalized collision energy) with helium as the collision gas.The scan time settings were:  Full MS: 250 ms (1 microscan) and MSn: 120 ms.  Generated. raw data files were collected with ThermoXcalibur(v.2.2).

### Data Protocol
Searches were performed with the. raw data obtained in the mass spectrometry analyses using Thermo Proteome Discover (v.1.4.1.14) with SequestHT as the search engine against SwissProt Human and mouse public Database (version of January 2017). The following search parameters were applied trypsin enzyme with 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl of cysteine as a fixed modification and acetylation and oxidation of methionine as a variable, the peptide tolerance 10ppm and 0.6 Da for MS and MS/MS spectra.  To improve the sensitivity of the database search, Percolator (semi-supervised machine learning) was used in order to discriminate correct from incorrect peptide spectrum matches. Percolator assigns a q-value to each spectrum, which is defined as the minimal FDR at which the identification is deemed correct. These q-values are estimated using the distribution of scores from the decoy database search. The results have been filtered, so only proteins identified with at least 2 high confidence peptides (FDR≤ 0.01, validation based on q-value) are included in the list.

### Publication Abstract
The Sirtuin family of NAD+-dependent enzymes plays an important role in maintaining genome stability upon stress. Several mammalian Sirtuins have been linked directly or indirectly to the regulation of DNA damage during replication through Homologous recombination (HR). The role of one of them, SIRT1, is intriguing as it seems to have a general regulatory role in the DNA damage response (DDR) that has not yet been addressed. SIRT1-deficient cells show impaired DDR reflected in a decrease in repair capacity, increased genome instability and decreased levels of &#x3b3;H2AX. Here we unveil a close functional antagonism between SIRT1 and the PP4 phosphatase multiprotein complex in the regulation of the DDR. Upon DNA damage, SIRT1 interacts specifically with the catalytical subunit PP4c and promotes its inhibition by deacetylating the WH1 domain of the regulatory subunits PP4R3&#x3b1;/&#x3b2;. This in turn regulates &#x3b3;H2AX and RPA2 phosphorylation, two key events in the signaling of DNA damage and repair by HR. We propose a mechanism whereby during stress, SIRT1 signaling ensures a global control of DNA damage signaling through PP4.

### Keywords
H2ax, Pp4 phosphatase complex, Label free proteomics, Sirt1, Dna damage response

### Affiliations
Chromatin Biology Laboratory,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC),  Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain
Proteomics Unit - Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute

### Submitter
Joan Josep Bech-Serra

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Vaquero
Chromatin Biology Laboratory,  Josep Carreras Leukaemia Research Institute (IJC),  Ctra de Can Ruti, Camí de les Escoles s/n,  08916, Badalona, Barcelona, Spain


