### Accession
PXD000837

### Title
Proteomic analysis of plasma membrane and tonoplast from the leaves of a mangrove plant Avicennia officinalis

### Description
We used gel electrophoresis coupled with LC-MS based proteomics to identify key transport proteins in the plasma membrane (PM) and tonoplast fractions of Avicennia officinalis leaves. This was part of our attempts to understand salt tolerance and secretion in mangrove plant species. PM and tonoplast proteins were purified using two-aqueous phase partitioning and density gradient centrifugation, respectively. Thirty of the 154 PM proteins and 31 of the 118 tonoplast proteins identified were predicted to have transmembrane domains. About 90% of the identified proteins could be classified based on their functions. The major classes of proteins were predicted to be involved in transport, metabolic processes, signal transduction and defense /stress response, while a few of the proteins were predicted to be involved in membrane trafficking. The main classes of transporter proteins identified included H+-ATPases, ATP-binding cassette transporters (ABC) and aquaporins, all of which could play a role in salt secretion. These data will serve as the baseline membrane proteomic dataset for Avicennia species. Further, this information can contribute to future studies on understanding the mechanism of salt tolerance in halophytes in addition to salt secretion in mangroves.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane (PM) and tonoplast fractions were prepared from freshly harvested leaves following two-phase partitioning and density gradient centrifugation methods, respectively. The purified PM and tonoplast fractions were separated using one- and two-dimentional gel electrophoresis. The PM and tonoplast pellets were solubilized in 2-DE rehydration solution consisting of 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 40 mM DTT and 0.002% w/v bromophenol blue. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) was carried out on IPG strips (17-cm, pH 4-7 NL, Bio-Rad). The strips were passively rehydrated for 16 h in 340 µl of rehydration buffer containing 50 µg protein and 0.5% v/v 4-7 ampholytes. After rehydration, the strips were transferred to IEF cell (Bio-Rad). The strips were focused at 20 oC for a total of 37.55 kVh. After IEF, the strips were equilibrated for 15 min in equilibration buffer consisting of 6 M urea, 0.05 M Tris pH 8.8, 2% w/v SDS, 20% v/v glycerol, 2% w/v DTT followed by another 15 min in equilibration buffer where DTT was replaced with iodoacetamide (IAA). For the second dimension of 2-DE, the strips were placed on to a separating gel (12% polyacrylamide, w/v). Gel electrophoresis was performed at 30 mA per gel with circulating cooling and completed in 5h. The gels were then stained with silver and gel image was captured. Three independent experiments were performed for both PM and tonoplast fractions from three biological replicates and spots that appeared consistently in all biological replicates were chosen for MS/MS analysis. In-gel digestion of proteins was carried out using MS-grade Trypsin Gold (Promega). Briefly, bands and spots were excised from the gels using a razor blade and incubated with 2.5 mM NH4HCO3 / 50% ACN at 4 oC for 24 h followed by drying using a vacuum centrifuge (speed vac). The samples were then reduced in 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM IAA followed by alternative washing with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydration using ACN. Finally, the samples were vacuum dried and were pre-incubated in 10-20 µl trypsin solution for 30 min at 4 oC. Then, 15 µl of 25 mM NH4HCO3 was added to cover each gel and trypsinization was carried out for 16 h at 37 oC. Tryptic digests were extracted twice using 50% ACN and 0.1% TFA. The combined extracts were vacuum-dried at room temperature and processed for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The peptide separation was carried out on an Eksigent nanoLC Ultra and ChiPLC-nanoflex (Eksigent, Dublin, CA, USA) in Trap Elute configuration

### Data Protocol
The MS analysis was performed on a TripleTOF 5600 system (AB SCIEX, Foster City, CA, USA) in Information Dependent Mode. MS spectra were acquired across the mass range of 350–1250 m/z in high resolution mode (>30000) using 250 ms accumulation time per spectrum. A maximum of 20 precursors per cycle were chosen for fragmentation from each MS spectrum with 100 ms maximum accumulation time for each precursor and dynamic exclusion for 8 s. Tandem mass spectra were recorded in high sensitivity mode (resolution >15000) with rolling collision energy on. Peptide identification was carried out on the ProteinPilot 4.5 software Revision 1656 (AB SCIEX) using the Paragon database search algorithm (4.5.0.0.). The data were searched against a database of Plant Reference Sequences (total 248,485 entries) swissprot and Mangrove transcriptome database.  The search parameters were as follows: Sample Type — Identification; Cys Alkylation — Iodoacetamide; Digestion — trypsin; Special Factors — Phosphorylation emphasis; Species — None. The processing was specified as follows: ID Focus—Amino Acid Substitutions; Search Effort — Thorough; Detected Protein Threshold — 0.05. No FDR analysis was performed on the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
In order to understand the salt tolerance and secretion in mangrove plant species, gel electrophoresis coupled with LC-MS-based proteomics was used to identify key transport proteins in the plasma membrane (PM) and tonoplast fractions of Avicennia officinalis leaves. PM and tonoplast proteins were purified using two-aqueous-phase partitioning and density gradient centrifugation, respectively. Forty of the 254 PM proteins and 31 of the 165 tonoplast proteins identified were predicted to have transmembrane domains. About 95% of the identified proteins could be classified based on their functions. The major classes of proteins were predicted to be involved in transport, metabolic processes, defense/stress response, and signal transduction, while a few of the proteins were predicted to be involved in other functions such as membrane trafficking. The main classes of transporter proteins identified included H(+) -ATPases, ATP-binding cassette transporters, and aquaporins, all of which could play a role in salt secretion. These data will serve as the baseline membrane proteomic dataset for Avicennia species. Further, this information can contribute to future studies on understanding the mechanism of salt tolerance in halophytes in addition to salt secretion in mangroves. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000837 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000837).

### Keywords
Tonoplast, Salt secretion, Avicennia officinalis, Plasma membrane, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Biological Sciences
National University of Singapore, Department of Biological Science, Singapore

### Submitter
Qingsong Lin

### Lab Head
Dr Assistant Professor Lin Qingsong
National University of Singapore, Department of Biological Science, Singapore


