### Accession
PXD026901

### Title
Protein expression profile of miR-33b overexpressing ES-2 cells upon OCM treatment

### Description
Omentum conditioned medium (OCM) is known to enhance ovarian cancer oncogenesis. In this study, miR-33b exerts tumor suppressive effects on ovarian cancer cells in response to omentum conditioned medium (OCM) treatment. To identify the molecular mechanism and main biological pathways involved in the tumor inhibiting activity by miR-33b in the ovarian cancer metastasis. To achieve this, miR-33b was stably overexpressed in ovarian cancer cell line ES-2, and the protein expression profile of miR-33b overexpressing ES-2 cells upon OCM treatment was determined.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, sample processing, and trypsin digestion  Cells / tissues were suspended in the S-TRAP lysis buffer (For cell extraction, 2.5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB) or Urea lysis buffer (For tissue extraction, 8M Urea in 50mM TEAB); proteins were extracted first by bead beating using Precellys homogenization (Bertin technologies) and probe sonication (MSE Soniprep), followed by centrifugation at 15000 g at 4°C for 25 min. Supernatant fraction was collected for protein quantitation using BCA assay (Thermo Pierce) or Bradford assay (Bio-rad). Protein digestion was performed using the Suspension-trapping (STRAP) strategy (For cell samples, HaileMariam et al. 2018) or the FASP strategy (For tissue samples, Wiśniewski et al. 2009). For S-TRAP, 50 µg proteins (from each sample) were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 20 mM DTT and 40mM iodoacetamide, respectively. For FASP, 200 µg proteins (from each sample) were subjected to reduction and alkylation by 50 mM TCEP and 50mM 2-chloroacetamide, respectively. Protein digestion was performed by adding trypsin (Promega, 1:25 enzyme-to-substrate ratio) and incubating for 1.5 hr at 47 °C (for S-TRAP) or 18 hr at 37 °C (for FASP). Subsequent tryptic peptides were Speedvac dried and then desalted using C18 StageTips for LC-MS/MS analysis      Data acquisition    Eluted peptides were analyzed with Dionex Ultimate3000 nanoRSLC system coupled to Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion Tribid Lumos mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated on a commercial C18 column (75 μm i.d. × 50cm length  × 2μm particle size) coupled to a NanoTrap column (75 μm i.d. × 2cm length  × 3μm particle size) (Thermo Fisher). Separation was attained using a linear gradient of increasing buﬀer B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) and declining buﬀer (0.1% FA) at 300 nL/min. Buﬀer B was increased to 30% B in 200 min and ramped to 40% B in 15 min followed by a quick ramp to 90% B, where it was held for 10 min before a quick ramp back to 5% B, where it was held and the column was re-equilibrated. Mass spectrometer was operated in positive polarity mode with capillary temperature of 300 °C. Full MS survey scan resolution was set to 120 000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 4 × 105, maximum ion injection time (IT) of 30 ms, and for a scan range of 400−1500 m/z. A data-dependent top speed method with a time interval of 3s between every survey scan was operated during which higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) was used. Spectra were obtained at 30000 MS2 resolution with AGC target of 4 × 105 and maximum ion injection time (IT) of 60 ms, 1.6 m/z isolation width, and normalized collisional energy of 30. Preceding precursor ions targeted for HCD were dynamically excluded of 50 s.

### Data Protocol
The high resolution, high mass accuracy MS data obtained were processed using Maxquant version 1.6.1.0, wherein data were searched using the Andromeda algorithm against Human UniProt FASTA database (April 2020) containing 49, 900 entries, using settings as below: oxidized methionine (M), acetylation (Protein N-term) were selected as dynamic modifications, and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications with minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids was enabled. Confident proteins were identified using a target-decoy approach with a reversed database, strict false-discovery rate 1% at peptide and PSM level. Proteins identified from both conditions were quantified using the peptide LFQ intensities and their ratio obtained were used for label free quantitation to calculate the fold change. Data visualization and statistical data analysis were performed by Perseus software version 1.6.13.0.

### Publication Abstract
Peritoneal metastases are frequently found in high-grade serous carcinoma (HGSOC) patients and are commonly associated with a poor prognosis. The tumor microenvironment (TME) is a complex milieu that plays a critical role in epigenetic alterations driving tumor development and metastatic progression. However, the impact of epigenetic alterations on metastatic ovarian cancer cells in the harsh peritoneal microenvironment remains incompletely understood. Here, we identified that miR-33b is frequently silenced by promoter hypermethylation in HGSOC cells derived from metastatic omental tumor tissues. Enforced expression of miR-33b abrogates the oncogenic properties of ovarian cancer cells cocultured in omental conditioned medium (OCM), which mimics the ascites microenvironment, and in vivo tumor growth. Of note, restoration of miR-33b inhibited OCM-upregulated de novo lipogenesis and fatty acid &#x3b2;-oxidation in ovarian cancer cells, indicating that miR-33b may play a novel tumor suppressor role in the lipid-mediated oncogenic properties of metastatic ovarian cancer cells found in the omentum. Mechanistic studies demonstrated that miR-33b directly targets transforming growth factor beta-activated kinase 1 (TAK1), thereby suppressing the activities of fatty acid synthase (FASN) and carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1A (CPT1A) in modulating lipid metabolic activities and simultaneously inhibiting the phosphorylation of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling to govern the oncogenic behaviors of ovarian cancer cells. Thus, our data suggest that a lipid-rich microenvironment may cause epigenetic silencing of miR-33b, which negatively modulates ovarian cancer peritoneal metastases, at least in part, by suppressing TAK1/FASN/CPT1A/NF-&#x3ba;B signaling.

### Keywords
Label free quantification proteomics, Cell lysate

### Affiliations
Assistant Professor, Dept of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, The Ubiversity of Hong Kong
the University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Xueyu WANG

### Lab Head
Dr Dr CHAN, David Wai
Assistant Professor, Dept of Obstetrics & Gynaecology, Faculty of Medicine, The Ubiversity of Hong Kong


