### Accession
PXD035846

### Title
Role of N-glycosylation in FcRIIIa interaction with IgG

### Description
Immunoglobulins G (IgG) and their Fc gamma receptors (FcγRs) play important roles in our immune system. The conserved N-glycan in the Fc region of IgG1 impacts interaction of IgG with FcγRs and the resulting effector functions, which has led to design of antibody therapeutics with greatly improved antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC) activities. Studies have suggested that also N-glycosylation of the FcγRIII affects receptor inteactions with IgG, but detailed studies of the interaction of IgG1 and FcγRIIIa with distinct N-glycans have been hindered by the natural heterogeneity in N-glycosylation. In this study, we employed comprehensive genetic engineering of the N-glycosylation capacities in mammalian cell lines to express IgG1 and FcγRIIIa with different N-glycan structures to more generally explore the role of N-glycosylation in IgG1:FcRIIIa binding interactions. We included FcRIIIa variants of both the 158F and 158V allotypes and investigated the key N-glycan features that affected binding affinity. Our study confirms that afucosylated IgG1 has the highest binding affinity to oligomannose FcγRIIIa, a glycan structure commonly found on FcγRIIIa expressed by NK cells but not monocytes or recombinantly expressed FcγRIIIa.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for site-specific N-glycopeptide analysis  The purified protein was dissolved in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, reduced in 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA), reduced again with 10 mM DTT, and digested with 1:20  chymotrypsin:protein followed by 1:20 GluC:protein (Roche). The proteolytic digest was desalted by in-house produced modified StageTip columns containing 3 layers of C18 membrane (3M Empore disks, Sigma Aldrich)(68). Samples were eluted with 50% methanol in 0.1% formic acid (FA), dried down, and re-solubilized in 0.1% FA for LC-MS/MS analysis.   Site-specific FcRIIIa N-glycopeptide analysis by LC-MS/MS LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC (Thermo Scientific) interfaced via nanoSpray Flex ion source to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos MS (Thermo Scientific). Briefly, the nLC was operated in a single analytical column set up using PicoFrit Emitters (New Objectives, 75 μm inner diameter) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pure-AQ C18 phase (Dr. Maisch, 1.9-μm particle size, 19-21 cm column length). Each sample was injected onto the column and eluted in gradients from 3 to 32 % B in 75 min, and from 32% to 100% B in 10 min, and 100 % B for 10 min  at 200 nL/min (Solvent A, 100% H2O; Solvent B, 80% acetonitrile; both containing 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid). A precursor MS1 scan (m/z 350–2 000) of intact peptides was acquired in the Orbitrap at the nominal resolution setting of 120 000, followed by Orbitrap HCD-MS2 and at the nominal resolution setting of 60 000 of the five most abundant multiply charged precursors in the MS1 spectrum; a minimum MS1 signal threshold of 50 000 was used for triggering data-dependent fragmentation events. Targeted MS/MS analysis was performed by setting up a targeted MSn (tMSn) Scan Properties pane. A target list was composed of the top 30 most abundant glycans or glycopeptides from the proposed compositional list.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis Glycan and glycopeptide compositional analysis was performed from m/z features extracted from LC-MS data using in-house written SysBioWare software, as previously described (44,69). Briefly, For m/z feature recognition from full MS scans LFQ Profiler Node of the Proteome discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Scientific) was used. The list of precursor ions (m/z, charge, peak area) was imported as ASCII data into SysBioWare and compositional assignment within 3 ppm mass tolerance was performed. The main building blocks used for the compositional analysis were: NeuAc, Hex, HexNAc, dHex and the theoretical mass increment of the most prominent peptide corresponding to each potential glycosites. The most prominent peptide sequence related to the N-glycosite of interest was determined experimentally by comparing the yield of deamidated peptides before and after PNGase F treatment. One or two phosphate groups were added as building blocks for assignment. To generate the potential glycopeptide list, all the glycoforms with an abundance higher than 10% of the most abundant glycoform were used for glycan feature analysis. All oligomannose and hybrid structures were excluded from the TCL data.

### Publication Abstract
Immunoglobulins G (IgG) and their Fc gamma receptors (Fc&#x3b3;Rs) play important roles in our immune system. The conserved <i>N-</i>glycan in the Fc region of IgG1 impacts interaction of IgG with Fc&#x3b3;Rs and the resulting effector functions, which has led to the design of antibody therapeutics with greatly improved antibody-dependent cell cytotoxicity (ADCC) activities. Studies have suggested that also <i>N-</i>glycosylation of the Fc&#x3b3;RIII affects receptor interactions with IgG, but detailed studies of the interaction of IgG1 and Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa with distinct <i>N</i>-glycans have been hindered by the natural heterogeneity in <i>N-</i>glycosylation. In this study, we employed comprehensive genetic engineering of the <i>N-</i>glycosylation capacities in mammalian cell lines to express IgG1 and Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa with different <i>N-</i>glycan structures to more generally explore the role of <i>N-</i>glycosylation in IgG1:Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa binding interactions. We included Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa variants of both the 158F and 158V allotypes and investigated the key <i>N-</i>glycan features that affected binding affinity. Our study confirms that afucosylated IgG1 has the highest binding affinity to oligomannose Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa, a glycan structure commonly found on Asn162 on Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa expressed by NK cells but not monocytes or recombinantly expressed Fc&#x3b3;RIIIa.

### Keywords
Mabs, Cd16a, Glycosyltransferases, Glycoengineering, Igg, Surface plasmon resonance, Fc gamma receptors, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine
University of Copenhagen, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Sergey Vakhrushev

### Lab Head
Dr Sergey Vakhrushev
University of Copenhagen, Institute for Cellular and Molecular Medicine


