### Accession
PXD042019

### Title
Streptomyces secondary metaboites - strain M1

### Description
In this study, we describe the isolation and identification of Streptomyces isolates collected from traditional medicinal plants’ rhizosphere during a campaign in Hamedan Province, Iran. Traditional medicinal plants represent a rich and unique source for the isolation of Streptomyces and new antimicrobial compounds. This strain was isolated from the rhizosphere of Helichrysum rubicundum

### Sample Protocol
Pre-culture and main broth culture was prepared as described for metabolite extraction.   The mycelium of the strains was collected from the three-day broth cultures by centrifugation, resuspended in 10 ml of 50mM NH4HCO3 buffer in 50 ml Falcon tubes and sonicated (20 x 3” on and 7” off at 30%) on the ice bath, thereafter the suspension was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 15 minutes at 4°C to obtain intracellular extracts (supernatant). The protein lysate was mixed with 100% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid (TCA) solution (4:1) and incubated overnight at 4°C. The extract was centrifuged at 16,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C, supernatant was discarded and pellet was washed with ice cold acetone and dissolved in 50 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 2M urea. The protein concentration was assessed by Bradford analysis using the Pierce Coomassie Protein Assay Kit. Protein solutions (10 μg) were reduced with 1M dithiothreitol (DTT) (10 min at 56°C), alkylated with 150 mM iodoacetamide (20 min at room temperature), and digested with trypsin/LysC endoproteinase (Promega) overnight at 37°C (1:50 w/w). Digested samples were dried and dissolved in 50 μl 20mM ammonium formate . Peptide samples of both strains were separated using an Eksigent Expert nanoLC 425 system, coupled online to a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (ABSciex). The peptide solutions were injected and trapped for 5 min with 8 µl/min flow rate and separated on a YMC Triart C18 column (3 µm, 0.3 x 150 mm) using gradient elution from 3% to 40% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in ACN) for 90 min at a flow rate of 5 µl/min. The outlet of the LC column was connected to the inlet of a DuoSpray electrospray ionization source. The capillary voltage was set to 5500 and MS scans were recorded from 300 to 1250 m/z. The MS/MS scan range was set from 50 to 1800 m/z. Data was acquired in data-dependent acquisition mode. Precursors were selected for fragmentation at a threshold of 500 cps, with a charge of +2 to +5 and a dynamic exclusion window of 10s.

### Data Protocol
LC–MS raw data were analyzed and searched using PEAKS Xpro software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc) against the Streptomyces proteome database downloaded from UniProt (May 16, 2022). The precursor mass and fragment ion were set at 20 ppm using monoisotopic mass and 0.2 Da respectively. Trypsin  as enzyme and specific digest mode with 2 missed cleavages per peptide were selected. Methionine oxidation were allowed for the PEAKS searches. Only protein groups identified with a minimum of 2 unique peptides were accepted. For proteins detected by one unique peptide, the peptide MS/MS spectrum was manually verified by comparing the experimental spectrum with predicted fragment ions and the presence of mainly b and y type ions as expected for tryptic peptides CID spectra.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antibiotic, Secondary metabolites, Streptomyces

### Affiliations
Ghent University, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent Univers

### Submitter
Bart Devreese

### Lab Head
Dr Bart Devreese
Ghent University, Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology


