### Accession
PXD018141

### Title
Identification of RNA binding Proteins in A. thaliana leaves

### Description
The goal of this MS project was to identify the RNA binding proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves. To this end RBPs were isolated by a technique termed ‘RNA interactome capture’ and the captured proteins identified by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) [3] that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (75 µm × 35 or 50 cm) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45 °C during data acquisition. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). All solvents were of UPLC grade (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.6 – 1.0 µL/minute). Peptides were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 140 minute gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 120 minutes; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 minutes and 100% B for 10 minutes) at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyser (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) [4]. Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analysed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50 ms) followed by 15 product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. Collision induced dissociation (CID) energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 120 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda [5] search in MaxQuant (1.5.3.30) using the default settings [6]. Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated [7]. We downloaded the reference A. thaliana database from NCBI (Thale cress, ARA_GCF_000001735.4_TAIR10.1_protein.fasta, downloaded 20/02/2019). All searches included a contaminants database search (as implemented in MaxQuant) to estimate the level of contamination with known MS contaminants. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of the protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modifications and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P” with two missed cleavages allowed. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Label-free protein quantification was switched on, and unique and razor peptides were considered for quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2. Retention times were recalibrated based on the built-in nonlinear time-rescaling algorithm. MS/MS identifications were transferred between LC-MS/MS runs with the “match between runs” option in which the maximal match time window was set to 0.7 minutes and the alignment time window set to 20 minutes. The quantification is based on the “value at maximum” of the extracted ion current. At least two quantitation events were required for a quantifiable protein.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play a crucial role in regulating RNA function and fate. However, the full complement of RBPs has only recently begun to be uncovered through proteome-wide approaches such as RNA interactome capture (RIC). RIC has been applied to various cell lines and organisms, including plants, greatly expanding the repertoire of RBPs. However, several technical challenges have limited the efficacy of RIC when applied to plant tissues. Here, we report an improved version of RIC that overcomes the difficulties imposed by leaf tissue. Using this improved RIC method in Arabidopsis leaves, we identified 717 RBPs, generating a deep RNA-binding proteome for leaf tissues. While 75% of these RBPs can be linked to RNA biology, the remaining 25% were previously not known to interact with RNA. Interestingly, we observed that a large number of proteins related to photosynthesis associate with RNA in vivo, including proteins from the four major photosynthetic supercomplexes. As has previously been reported for mammals, a large proportion of leaf RBPs lack known RNA-binding domains, suggesting unconventional modes of RNA binding. We anticipate that this improved RIC method will provide critical insights into RNA metabolism in plants, including how cellular RBPs respond to environmental, physiological and pathological cues.

### Keywords
Rna interactome capture, Rbp, Uv cross linking, Rna binding proteins

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


