### Accession
PXD025235

### Title
Structured elements drive circular RNA translation and expand the human proteome part2

### Description
The human genome encodes tens of thousands circular RNAs (circRNAs) whose levels correlate with many disease states. While studies have focused on the non-coding functions of circRNAs, emerging evidence suggests that a handful of circRNAs encode proteins. Translation canonically starts by recognition of mRNA 5’cap and scanning to the start codon; how circRNA translation initiates remains unclear. Here, we developed a high-throughput screen to systematically identify and quantify RNA sequences that can direct circRNA translation. We identify and validate over 17,000 circRNA internal ribosome entry sites (IRES) and reveal that 18S rRNA complementarity and a structured RNA element on the IRES are important for facilitating circRNA cap-independent translation. With genomic and peptidomic analyses of the IRES, we identified nearly 1,000 putative endogenous protein-coding circRNAs and hundreds of translational units encoded by these circRNAs. We further characterized circFGFR1p, a protein encoded by circFGFR1, functions as a negative regulator of FGFR1 to suppress cell growth under stress conditions. The circRNA proteome may be important links among circRNA, biological control, and disease.

### Sample Protocol
BJ cell lysates were prepared as described in IP-LC-MS/MS. 40 μg total proteins were separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris Protein Gel (ThermoFisher Scientific). Regions of interest (35-45 kDa for BJ and whole gel for K562 and U2OS) were extracted according to the protein marker. The excised gel pieces were then reduced with 5 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate at 55°C for 30 min. The gel pieces were rinsed 2 times with 50% acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and placed in a speed vacuum for 5 min. Digestion was performed with Trypsin/LysC (Promega) in the presence of 0.02% protease max (Promega) in a standard overnight digestion at 37°C. Samples were then centrifuged and the solvent containing the peptides was collected. Further peptide extraction was performed by the addition of 60% acetonitrile, 39.9% water, 0.1% formic acid and incubation for 10-15 min. The peptide pools were dried in a speed vacuum. Samples were then reconstituted in 20 µL reconstitution buffer (2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) spiked with 5 pM of the heavy isotope labeled reference peptide and 2 µL of it was injected on the instrument. Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with liquid chromatography performed using a Nanoacquity UPLC (Waters Corporation). For PRM-MS, peptides were directly injected onto a 50 cm µPAC analytical column (Pharmafluidics) using a gradient (3-65% B, followed by a high-B wash) of 80 min. The mass spectrometer was set using a PRM method. HCD fragmentation was used for MS/MS spectra generation. MS/MS resolution was 120,000 (at m/z 200) with an AGC target value of 1 × 106 ions, a maximum fill time of 250 ms and an isolation window of 4.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW data files were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics) for peptide identification. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids were considered for the search including N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin cleaving C-terminal to arginine and lysine. A maximum of two missed cleavages were allowed. Maximum precursor and fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm. The contaminant database containing 245 frequently observed contaminants such as human keratins, bovine serum proteins, and protease was included for the PSM. Proteolysis with Trypsin/LysC was assumed to be semi-specific allowing for N-ragged cleavage with up to two missed cleavage sites. Precursor and fragment mass accuracies were held within 12 ppm. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%. The .RAW data files were further imported into Skyline 19.1.0.193 (MacCoss Lab) to generate XIC and perform peak integration.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Circular rna

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford School of Medicine

### Submitter
Chun-Kan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Y. Chang
Stanford School of Medicine


