### Accession
PXD018353

### Title
Altered N-glycan composition impacts flagella mediated adhesion in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

### Description
For the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, the presence of N-glycosylated proteins on the surface of two flagella is crucial for both cell-cell interaction during mating and flagellar surface adhesion. However, it is not known whether only the presence or also the composition of N-glycans attached to respective proteins is important for these processes. To this end, we tested several C. reinhardtii insertional mutants and a CRIPSR/Cas9 knockout mutant of xylosyltransferase 1A, all possessing altered N-glycan compositions. Taking advantage of atomic force microscopy and micropipette force measurements, our data revealed that reduction in N-glycan complexity impedes the adhesion force required for binding the flagella to surfaces as demonstrated by force spectroscopy and impairs polystyrene bead binding and transport. Notably, assembly, Intraflagellar Transport and FMG-1B transport into flagella are not affected by altered N-glycosylation. Thus, we conclude that proper N-glycosylation of flagellar proteins is crucial for adhering C. reinhardtii cells onto surfaces, indicating that N-glycans mediate surface adhesion via direct surface contact. Data deposited here include IS-CID data verifying altered N-glycan patterns in flagella of mutants analysed (Ursgal-SugarPy-flagella-IM-results.xls) as well as the N-glycoproteomic characterization of the novel CRISPRXylT1A mutant (Ursgal-SugarPy-CIRSPR-mutant-results.xls). Regarding the latter, PRM measurements verifying the knock out of XylT1A are also deposited here (Results_PRM-measurement_quantification_GT.xls). Further, label free quantification data on isolated flagella of original IM strains verifying that altered N-glycosylation does not impact flagellar protein localization can be found within this dataset (Flagella_IM-WT_ normalized_5_proteins.pdResult).

### Sample Protocol
Frozen, dry flagella and whole cell samples were resuspended in lysis buffer (10mM Tris/HCl, pH=7.4, 2 % SDS, 1 mM Benzamidine and 1 mM PMSF) and subjected to sonication for 10 min. After pelleting the not soluble cell debris, the protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA Protein Assay Kit by Thermo Scientific Pierce). Volumes corresponding to 60 µg of protein were tryptically digested and desalted as described in Rappsilber et al. 2007. Tryptic peptides were reconstituted in 2 % (v/v) acetonitrile/0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in ultrapure water and separated with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Scientific). Subsequently, the sample was loaded on a trap column (C18 PepMap 100, 300 µm x 5 mm, 5 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) and desalted for 5 min using 0.05 % (v/v) TFA/2 % (v/v) acetonitrile in ultrapure water with a flow rate of 10 µL*min-1. Following, peptides were separated on a separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 mm i.D., 2 mm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Scientific) with a length of 50 cm.  Details on the measurement can be found in Supplemental table 1 of the corresponding publication.

### Data Protocol
For quantification of glycosyltransferases, PRM (including a target list) was employed on whole cell samples and respective spectra were analyzed with the Skyline software. For quantification of flagellar proteins, flagella samples were measured in biological quadruplicates in standard, not targeted, data dependent measurements. Following, peptide wise protein abundance ratios (IM/WT) were calculated with ProteomeDiscovererTM  (normalizing on a set of not membrane standing flagellar proteins Cre02.g107050.t1.1, Cre03.g145127.t1.1, Cre03.g183200.t1.2, Cre09.g403800.t1.2 and Cre14.g614850.t1.1) and filtered for proteins identified in at least 11 samples, for proteins having Abundance Ratio Adj. P-Value < 0.05 for at least one ratio and for proteins appearing in the flagellar proteome ChlamyFPv5. In order to assign glycopeptides, samples were measured employing In-Source collision induced dissociation (IS-CID) followed by analysis of data with Ursgal and SugarPy as described in Schulze et al. 2018.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Lc-ms/ms, Sugarpy, Prm, Flagella, Adhesion, N-glycosylation

### Affiliations
Institute for Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Münster, Germany
IBBP-Plant Biochemistry and Biotechnology
AG Prof. Dr. Michael Hippler
University of Münster 

### Submitter
Lara Hoepfner

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Hippler
Institute for Plant Biology and Biotechnology, University of Münster, Germany


