### Accession
PXD040020

### Title
Musashi-type translational regulator controls the buildup of secondary cell wall in Arabidopsis

### Description
Deciphering the mechanism of secondary cell wall/SCW formation in vascular plants is key to understanding their development and the molecular basis of biomass recalcitrance. Although a sophisticated network of transcription factors has been implicated in SCW synthesis in plants, little is known about the implication of RNA-binding proteins in this process. Here we report that two RNA-binding proteins homologous to the animal translational regulator Musashi, Musashi-Like2/MSIL2 and Musashi-Like4/MSIL4, function redundantly to control SCW formation in interfascicular fibers and the setting of biomass recalcitrance. We show that the disruption of MSIL2/4 (msil2-4 mutant) decreases the abundance of lignin in fibers and triggers an hypermethylation of glucuronoxylan that is linked to an over-accumulation of GlucuronoXylan Methyltransferase1/3 (GXM1/3) proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from total inflorescence stem extracts of three biological replicates of Col-0 and msil2-4 mutant plants were solubilized in Laemmli buffer and heated for 10 min at 95°C. They were then stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to MS/MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 180-min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Aurora Generation 2, 1.6µm, IonOpticks). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.8.0, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Viridiplantae database (from Uniprot, Arabidopsis thaliana (thale-cress) taxonomy, 136447 sequences) and a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin..., 126 sequences). Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 20 ppm. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software (version 2.2.0) was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, false discovery rate of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1%, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
Deciphering the mechanism of secondary cell wall/SCW formation in plants is key to understanding their development and the molecular basis of biomass recalcitrance. Although transcriptional regulation is essential for SCW formation, little is known about the implication of post-transcriptional mechanisms in this process. Here we report that two <i>bonafide</i> RNA-binding proteins homologous to the animal translational regulator Musashi, MSIL2 and MSIL4, function redundantly to control SCW formation in <i>Arabidopsis</i>. MSIL2/4 interactomes are similar and enriched in proteins involved in mRNA binding and translational regulation. MSIL2/4 mutations alter SCW formation in the fibers, leading to a reduction in lignin deposition, and an increase of 4-<i>O</i>-glucuronoxylan methylation. In accordance, quantitative proteomics of stems reveal an overaccumulation of glucuronoxylan biosynthetic machinery, including GXM3, in the <i>msil2/4</i> mutant stem. We showed that MSIL4 immunoprecipitates <i>GXM</i> mRNAs, suggesting a novel aspect of SCW regulation, linking post-transcriptional control to the regulation of SCW biosynthesis genes.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Rna-binding proteins, Nanolc-ms/ms, Post-transcriptional regulation, Secondary cell wall

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


