### Accession
PXD041856

### Title
New Insights into the impact of Human Papillomavirus on Oral Cancer in Young Patients: Proteomic Approach Reveals a Novel Role for S100A8

### Description
Human Papillomavirus (HPV) infection has been recently linked to a subset of cancers affecting the oral cavity. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying HPV-driven oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) onset and/ progression are poorly understood. Methods: We perform a MS-based proteomic profiling based on HPV status on OSCC in young patients, following biological characterization and cell assays to  explore the proteome functional landscape. Results: Thirty-nine proteins are differentially abundant between HPV (+) and HPV (-) OSCC. Among them, COPS3, DYHC1, and S100A8 are unfavorable for tumor recurrence and survival in contrast to A2M and Serpine1, which low levels show association with better DFS. Remarkably, S100A8 is considered an independent prognostic factor for lower survival rate, and at high levels, it alters tumor-associated immune profiling, showing a lower proportion of M1 macrophages and dendritic cells. HPV (+) OSCC also displayed the pathogen-associated patterns receptor which, when activated, triggered S100A8 and NFκB inflammatory responses. Conclusion: HPV (+) OSCC has a peculiar microenvironment pattern, distinctively of HPV (-), involving expression of pathogen-associated pattern receptors, S100A8 overexpression, and NFκB activation and responses that had important consequences in prognosis and may guide therapeutic decisions.

### Sample Protocol
The retrospective study selected the OSCC cases positive for HPV among a cohort of patients, who were aged up to 40 years and were treated at the A.C.Camargo Cancer Center (São Paulo, SP, Brazil) between 1970 to 2006. HPV status was previously determined using primers GP5+/GP6+ specific for the L1 gene of 17 HPV types using radiative probes and PCR assay for HPV16. Histological sections with 10-μm-thick from paraffin-embedded surgical specimens were placed on the Arcturus PENmembrane glass slide (Applied Biosystems®, CA, USA), deparaffinized with xylene, and stained with hematoxylin. A mean area of ~4000 μm2 per sample was obtained. samples were treated with 1.6 M urea, reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 25 minutes at 56°C, and alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature, protected from light. The proteins were digested with trypsin at 37°C for 16 hours. After adding 0.4% formic acid, samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and stored at -80°C. peptide mixture was analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) mass spectrometer coupled to nanoflow liquid chromatography on EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Dinamarca) through a Proxeon nanoelectrospray ion source. Peptides in 0.1% formic acid were separated by a 2-90% acetonitrile gradient in a PicoFrit analytical column (20 cm x ID75, 5 µm particle size, New Objective), with a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 212 minutes and a gradient of 35% acetonitrile at 175 min. Resolution in the Orbitrap was set to r = 60,000, and the 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by CID (collision-induced dissociation) with a normalized collision energy of 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed using the MaxQuant v1.3.0.3 software [38], and MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human UniProt database. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
New insights into the impact of human papillomavirus on oral cancer in young patients: proteomic approach reveals a novel role for s100a8

### Affiliations
CNPEM
Head of Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, SP, Brazil.

### Submitter
Adriana Franco Paes Leme

### Lab Head
Dr Adriana Franco Paes Leme
Head of Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian Biosciences National Laboratory (LNBio), Brazilian Center for Research in Energy and Materials (CNPEM), Campinas, SP, Brazil.


