### Accession
PXD025394

### Title
Proteome and (ox)PTP profile analysis of diabetic NOD mouse under single (anti-CD3) or combined (anti-CD3 + IL1RA) treatment

### Description
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) results from autoimmune destruction of β cells in the pancreas. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are candidate genes for T1D and play a key role in autoimmune disease development and β-cell function. Here, we assessed the global protein and individual PTP profile in the pancreas of diabetic NOD mice treated with anti-CD3 mAb and IL-1RA combination therapy. The treatment reversed hyperglycemia compared to the anti-CD3 alone control group. We observed enhanced expression of PTPN2, a T1D candidate gene, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones in the islets from cured mice.

### Sample Protocol
Pancreatic tissue was divided in two equal parts and lysed by beads beating and sonication in reducing lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 1% NP-40, 1x protease inhibitor (Roche), 1x phosphatase inhibitor (Roche)), supplemented with 10 mM DTT) or alkylating lysis buffer (same components but supplement with 10 mM NEM instead of DTT). Buffers were degassed by 100% N2 gas for 30min.   The DTT treated sample was used for the total PTP profiling (AP-MS) and for the shotgun proteomic characterization of the pacreatic tissues.  For shotgun proteomics, samples were diluted in Ammonium bicarbonate (pH=8.5), reduced for 1h in 4 mM DTT at room temperature and alklyated for 30 min in 8 mM IAA at room temperature and in the dark. Then, proteins were digested by addition of Endoproteinase Lys-C (at 1:50 ratio)  for 4h at 37°C and Trypsin (at 1:50 ratio) overnight at 37°C, and digestions were stop by acidification to 5%FA. Samples were further purified by SCX STAGE tips before LC-MS.   For (ox)PTP profiling, samples were buffer exchanged to remove remainders of DTT and NEM from lysis buffer. For the total PTPome, the DTT samples containing either either pre-oxidized or free cysteines, were hyperoxidated by pervanadate before digestion. For the oxPTPome, the non-oxidized cysteines were permanently locked by NEM alkylation, so that only naturally oxidized cysteins would be available for hyperoxidation. Upon hyperoxidation by 1 mM pervanadate, proteins were reduced, alklylated and digested as described before. Digestion was stopped by acidification to 5% FA.  Samples were desalted before immunocapture.  The PTPs catalytic site peptides, containig the hyperoxidized cysteines, were sequentially immunocaptured using 10 ug of anti-oxPTP antibody coupled and cross-linked to Sepharose A/G beads, to avoid co-elution. Eluted peptides were also further purified by SCX STAGE tips and analyzed individually by LC-MS/Ms.   For shotgun proteomic analyses,  peptides were resuspended in 2%FA and were injected in an Agilent 2300 and separated using a gradient of 12-38%B in 155 min, where %B consisted of 80% ACN in 0.1%FA. Peptides were ionized at 1900 V and precursor ions were accumulated either until reaching a target AGC value of 3e6 ions or for 20 ms. Precursor ions (MS1) scans of 375-1600 m/z and of charge states 2-5 were recorded in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution, and the top 7 most abundant ions were isolated at 1.4 m/z windows for fragmentation. Fragmentation took place in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and fragment ions were accumulated either until reaching a target AGC value of 1e5 ions or for 150 ms. Fragment ions were measured in the orbitrap at 15,000 resolution in a range spanning 200 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 6s.  For oxPTP profiling analyses, peptides were resuspended in 2%FA and were injected in an Agilent 2300 and separated using a gradient of 10-40%B in 20 min, where %B consisted of 80% ACN in 0.1%FA. Peptides were ionized at 1900 V and precursor ions were accumulated either until reaching a target AGC value of 3e6 ions or for 20 ms. Precursor ions (MS1) scans of 375-1600 m/z and of charge states 2-5 were recorded in the orbitrap at 60,000 resolution, and the top 7 most abundant ions were isolated at 1.4 m/z windows for fragmentation. Fragmentation took place in the HCD cell at 27% collision energy and fragment ions were accumulated either until reaching a target AGC value of 1e5 ions or for 100 ms. Fragment ions were measured in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution in a range spanning 200 to 2000 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was set to 15s.

### Data Protocol
All "raw" files were processed with MaxQuant software using the Uniprot mouse proteome database (containing 85159 entries, and downloaded in April 2019). All files were searched for full tryptic peptides at 1% FDR for both PSM and protein level. For database digestion, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, minimum peptide leght of 7 aa and maximum peptide mass of 4600 Da. A minimum of 2 razor+unique peptides were used for LFQ quantitation. Match between run algorythm was only enabled under default parameters. For shotgun data, Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was selected as a fixed modification, and Methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable. In the case of OxPTP data, Methionine oxidation, N-term acetylation, cysteine carbamidomethylation and cysteine trioxidation were all selected as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Type 1 diabetes (T1D) results from autoimmune destruction of &#x3b2;-cells in the pancreas. Protein tyrosine phosphatases (PTPs) are candidate genes for T1D and play a key role in autoimmune disease development and &#x3b2;-cell dysfunction. Here, we assessed the global protein and individual PTP profiles in the pancreas from nonobese mice with early-onset diabetes (NOD) mice treated with an anti-CD3 monoclonal antibody and interleukin-1 receptor antagonist. The treatment reversed hyperglycemia, and we observed enhanced expression of PTPN2, a PTP family member and T1D candidate gene, and endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperones in the pancreatic islets. To address the functional role of PTPN2 in &#x3b2;-cells, we generated PTPN2-deficient human stem cell-derived &#x3b2;-like and EndoC-&#x3b2;H1 cells. Mechanistically, we demonstrated that PTPN2 inactivation in &#x3b2;-cells exacerbates type I and type II interferon signaling networks and the potential progression toward autoimmunity. Moreover, we established the capacity of PTPN2 to positively modulate the Ca2+-dependent unfolded protein response and ER stress outcome in &#x3b2;-cells. Adenovirus-induced overexpression of PTPN2 partially protected from ER stress-induced &#x3b2;-cell death. Our results postulate PTPN2 as a key protective factor in &#x3b2;-cells during inflammation and ER stress in autoimmune diabetes.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Oxptp, Treatment, Diabetes, Pancreas, Hf

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Julia Bauzá Martinez

### Lab Head
Dr Wei Wu
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands. Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands.


