### Accession
PXD013890

### Title
The interactomes of GlPXD1, 3 and 6 PIP-binding proteins in Giardia lamblia

### Description
We investigated the composition of the interactomes of 7 proteins in the parasitic protist Giardia lamblia, some of which were found to be associated to clathrin assemblies. This accession refers to the first three namely GlPXD1, 3 and 6.

### Sample Protocol
Epitope-tagged recombinant proteins were ectopically expressed in transgenic parasites. Cell extracts were chemically treated to cross-link labile protein complexes. Complexes were then immobilized on agarose resins carrying anti-epitope tag monoclonal antibodies and then eluted. Elutions were separated using SDS-PAGE. Stained gel lanes were cut into 8 equal sections. Each section was further diced into smaller pieces and washed twice with 100 μl of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/ 50% acetonitrile for 15 min at 50°C. The sections were dehydrated with 50 μl of acetonitrile. The gel pieces were rehydrated with 20 μl trypsin solution (5ng/μl in 10mM Tris-HCl/ 2mM CaCl2 at pH8.2) and 40μl buffer (10mM Tris-HCl/ 2mM CaCl2 at pH8.2). Microwave-assisted digestion was performed for 30 minutes at 60°C with the microwave power set to 5 W (CEM Discover, CEM corp., USA). Supernatants were collected in fresh tubes and the gel pieces were extracted with 150μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid/ 50% acetonitrile. Supernatants were combined, dried, and the samples were dissolved in 20μl 0.1% formic acid before being transferred to the autosampler vials for liquid chromatography-tandem MS (injection volume 7 to 9 μl). Samples were measured on a Q-exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nanoAcquity UPLC (Waters Corporation). Peptides were trapped on a Symmetry C18, 5μm, 180μm x 20mm column (Waters Corporation) and separated on a BEH300 C18, 1.7μm, 75μm x 150mm column (Waters Corporation) using a gradient formed between solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The gradient started at 1% solvent B and the concentration of solvent B was increased to 40% within 60 minutes. Following peptide data acquisition, database searches were performed using the MASCOT search program against the G. lamblia database (http://tinyurl.com/37z5zqp) with a concatenated decoy database supplemented with commonly observed contaminants and the Swissprot database to increase database size.

### Data Protocol
Generated co-IP datasets were filtered using a dedicated control-co-IP dataset generated using non-transgenic wild-type parasites. Filtration of the bait-specific co-IP and control-co-IP datasets was done using Scaffold4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/) with high stringency parameters (95_2_95, FDR 0%) and low stringency parameters (95_2_50, FDR 0%). Furthermore, exclusive hits for bait-specific datasets were manually curated using the following criteria for inclusion into the interactome model: i) exclusive detection with > 3 spectral counts in bait-specific datasets or ii) an enrichment of peptide counts >3 times with respect to the ctrl. WB co-IP dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Giardia lamblia is a parasitic protozoan that infects a wide range of vertebrate hosts including humans. Trophozoites are non-invasive but associate tightly with the enterocyte surface of the small intestine. This narrow ecological specialization entailed extensive morphological and functional adaptations during host-parasite co-evolution, including a distinctly polarized array of endocytic organelles termed peripheral vacuoles (PVs), which are confined to the dorsal cortical region exposed to the gut lumen and are in close proximity to the plasma membrane (PM). Here, we investigated the molecular consequences of these adaptations on the Giardia endocytic machinery and membrane coat complexes. Despite the absence of canonical clathrin coated vesicles in electron microscopy, Giardia possesses conserved PV-associated clathrin heavy chain (GlCHC), dynamin-related protein (GlDRP), and assembly polypeptide complex 2 (AP2) subunits, suggesting a novel function for GlCHC and its adaptors. We found that, in contrast to GFP-tagged AP2 subunits and DRP, CHC::GFP reporters have no detectable turnover in living cells, indicating fundamental differences in recruitment to the membrane and disassembly compared to previously characterized clathrin coats. Histochemical localization in electron tomography showed that these long-lived GlCHC assemblies localized at distinctive approximations between the plasma and PV membrane. A detailed protein interactome of GlCHC revealed all of the conserved factors in addition to novel or highly diverged proteins, including a putative clathrin light chain and lipid-binding proteins. Taken together, our data provide strong evidence for giardial CHC as a component of highly stable assemblies at PV-PM junctions that likely have a central role in organizing continuities between the PM and PV membranes for controlled sampling of the fluid environment. This suggests a novel function for CHC in Giardia and the extent of molecular remodeling of endocytosis in this species.

### Keywords
Clathrin, Endocytosis, Immunoprecipitation, Pip, Parasite, Lipid-binding, Protist

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Carmen Faso

### Lab Head
Dr Adrain B. Hehl
Laboratory of Molecular Parasitology, Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich


