### Accession
PXD020612

### Title
USP15 deubiquitinase safeguards hematopoiesis and genome integrity in hematopoietic stem cells and leukemia cells

### Description
To decipher the role of USP15 in DNA damage in leukemia cells, endogenous USP15 was immunoprecipitated from MV4-11 and Kasumi-1 cell lines under naive and DNA stress conditions (Mitomycin C, 30nM, 1h). 355 candidates co-immunoprecipitated with USP15 in all the conditions, in 4 independent experiments.

### Sample Protocol
For label-free proteomics analysis, samples were subjected to tryptic on-bead digest as described in Hubner et al.  Briefly, washed beads were taken up in digestion buffer (2 M urea buffer / 50 mM Tris pH 7.0 / 1 mM DTT / 5 µg/mL trypsin) and pre-digested for one hour. The supernatant was subjected to reduction (4 mM DTT for 30 min), alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min) and further over-night digest with 0.5 µg trypsin. After desalting, samples were measured by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo) connected to an EASY-nLC system (Thermo). A volume of 2 microliters was injected and a 45 min gradient (5 to 55% acetonitrile) was applied. The peptides were separated on an in-house prepared nano-LC column (0.074 mm x 250 mm, 3 µm Reprosil C18, Dr Maisch GmbH) using a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS acquisition was operated at an MS1 resolution of 60,000 and a scan range from 350 to 1800 m/z. For data-dependent MS2 acquisition a cycle time of 1 s was used and precursors were selected for fragmentation in data-dependent mode using an MS2 resolution of 15,000, a maximum injection time of 100 ms and an isolation width of 1.3 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS intensities were normalized by the LFQ algorithm whilst using the match-between-runs feature and separating the cell lines in parameter groups for individual LFQ normalization. Further data analysis was done using R. A number of at least two peptides per protein and three valid values in the USP15 group was required. The resulting list was imputed using a column-wise Gaussian distribution, a width of 0.2 and a downshift of 1.8. Log2-transformed LFQ-intensities among the replicates of the groups to be related were taken for comparison by applying a moderated t-test. Proteins with a Benjamini-Hochberg-adjusted p-value smaller than 0.1 (i.e. 10% FDR) were considered as significantly enriched.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Ubiquitin, Dna damage

### Affiliations
MDC Berlin
Molecular Oncology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Robert-Rössle-Str. 10m 13125 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Popp

### Lab Head
Dr Gaetano Gargiulo
Molecular Oncology, Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Robert-Rössle-Str. 10m 13125 Berlin, Germany


