### Accession
PXD007268

### Title
Novel analysis on substrate specificities of TbSTT3A and TbSTT3B by glycoproteomics

### Description
reprocessed data from Izquierdo et al, Distinct donor and acceptor specificities of Trypanosoma brucei oligosaccharyltransferases

### Sample Protocol
Aliquots of the eluted Ricin‐bound and ConA‐bound fractions were independently subjected to EndoH followed by PNGaseF digestion (Roche Applied Science), subjected to SDS–PAGE and the gel lanes were then divided into 10 independent slices. Proteins in each slice were excised, reduced and alkylated, by the addition of 10 mM DTT and then 50 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were digested with 25 μl of 12.5 μg/ml modified trypsin (Roche Applied Science) in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate. An aliquot of the tryptic digest (recovered in 1% formic acid in water) was analysed by LC‐MS on an LTQ‐Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoElectron) coupled to a Dionex 3000 nano‐LC system. The Orbitrap was set to analyse the survey scans at 60 000 resolution and the top five ions in each duty cycle selected for MS/MS in the LTQ linear ion trap. The raw files were processed to generate a Mascot generic file using the program Raw2msm and searched against an in‐house curated T. brucei database using the Mascot search engine v.2.2 (Matrix Science) run on an in‐house server using the following criteria: peptide tolerance=6 p.p.m., trypsin as the enzyme and carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, N‐acetylglucosamine modification of Asn and deamidation of Asn to Asp.

### Data Protocol
Peptides containing Asn-N-GlcNAc and/or [18O]Asp within an Asn-X-Ser/Thr sequon that were detected >=3 times were assigned as being predominantly TbSTT3A or TbSTT3B substrates when the proportion of the [18O]Asp feature was >= 0.8 and <=0.4, respectively

### Publication Abstract
<i>Trypanosoma brucei</i> causes African trypanosomiasis and contains three full-length oligosaccharyltransferase (OST) genes; two of which, <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B, are expressed in the bloodstream form of the parasite. These OSTs have different peptide acceptor and lipid-linked oligosaccharide donor specificities, and trypanosomes do not follow many of the canonical rules developed for other eukaryotic <i>N</i>-glycosylation pathways, raising questions as to the basic architecture and detailed function of trypanosome OSTs. Here, we show by blue-native gel electrophoresis and stable isotope labeling in cell culture proteomics that the <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B proteins associate with each other in large complexes that contain no other detectable protein subunits. We probed the peptide acceptor specificities of the OSTs <i>in vivo</i> using a transgenic glycoprotein reporter system and performed glycoproteomics on endogenous parasite glycoproteins using sequential endoglycosidase H and peptide:<i>N</i>-glycosidase-F digestions. This allowed us to assess the relative occupancies of numerous <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites by endoglycosidase H-resistant <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>5</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3A, and endoglycosidase H-sensitive <i>N</i>-glycans originating from Man<sub>9</sub>GlcNAc<sub>2</sub>-PP-dolichol transferred by <i>Tb</i>STT3B. Using machine learning, we assessed the features that best define <i>Tb</i>STT3A and <i>Tb</i>STT3B substrates <i>in vivo</i> and built an algorithm to predict the types of <i>N</i>-glycan most likely to predominate at all the putative <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites in the parasite proteome. Finally, molecular modeling was used to suggest why <i>Tb</i>STT3A has a distinct preference for sequons containing and/or flanked by acidic amino acid residues. Together, these studies provide insights into how a highly divergent eukaryote has re-wired protein <i>N</i>-glycosylation to provide protein sequence-specific <i>N</i>-glycan modifications. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD007236, PXD007267, and PXD007268.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Parasitology, Trypanosoma, Stt3, Glycoprotein biosynthesis, N-linked glycosylation, Oligosaccharyltransferase

### Affiliations
Dundee University
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Ferguson lab  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland

### Submitter
Michele Tinti

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ferguson
The Wellcome Centre for Anti-Infectives Research Ferguson lab  School of Life Sciences University of Dundee Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, Scotland


