### Accession
PXD003643

### Title
Blind testing cross-linking/mass spectrometry under the auspices of the 11th critical assessment of methods of protein structure prediction (CASP11)

### Description
We report the first blind test on the readiness of combining high-density cross-linking/mass spectrometry data in conjunction with ab initio structure prediction, through the help of Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP).   This blind test was coordinated by the CASP organizers and utilized the experimental protocol developed in our lab for providing high-density cross-linking/mass spectrometry data in a matter of days. The CASP organizing committee identified and acquired suitable targets and published resulting data on the CASP web page for the community of structure predictors.   We provided high-density cross-linking/mass spectrometry data for four targets in CASP11, revealing to us some of the current limitations of cross-linking. These are areas where the method must now develop. With CASP taking place biannually into the future, blind testing low-resolution structure analysis tools is a worthwhile and feasible undertaking.

### Sample Protocol
The CASP organizers liaised with experimental structure provider groups, who generously provided protein samples. Target proteins were cross-linked using sulfosuccinimidyl 4,4’-azipentanoate (sulfo-SDA) (Thermo Scientific) in a two stage reaction. Firstly, lysine residues were allowed to react with the sulfo-NHS ester component of the cross-linker. The diazirine group was then photo-activated using UV irradiation, at 365 nm, from a UVP CL-1000 UV Crosslinker (UVP Inc.). The resulting cross-linked mixture was separated on a NuPAGE 4-12% Bis-Tris gel using MES running buffer and Coomassie blue stain followed by in-gel digestion using trypsin. Resulting digests were desalted using self-made C18 StageTips prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Peptides were loaded directly onto a spray emitter analytical column (75 µm inner diameter, 8 µm opening, 250 mm length; New Objectives) packed with C18 material (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 µm; Dr Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using an air pressure pump (Proxeon Biosystems). Eluted peptides were sprayed directly into a hybrid linear ion trap - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were analyzed using a “high/high” acquisition strategy, detecting at high resolution in the Orbitrap and analyzing the subsequent fragments also in the Orbitrap. Survey scan (MS) spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 100,000 resolution. The eight most intense signals in the survey scan for each acquisition cycle were isolated with an m/z window of 2 Th and fragmented with collision-induced dissociation (CID) in the ion trap. 1+ and 2+ ions were excluded from fragmentation. Fragmentation (MS2) spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap at 7500 resolution. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with 90 seconds exclusion time and repeat count equal to 1.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric raw files were processed into peak lists using MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 using default parameters except the setting for “Top MS/MS peaks per 100 Da” being set to 100. Peak lists were searched against a database from the sequences of target proteins provided by the CASP Organizing Committee using Xi (ERI, Edinburgh) for identification of cross-linked peptides. Search parameters were MS accuracy, 6 ppm; MS/MS accuracy, 20 ppm; enzyme, trypsin; specificity, fully tryptic; allowed number of missed cleavages, four; cross-linker, SDA; fixed modifications, none; variable modifications, carbamidomethylation on cysteine, oxidation on methionine, SDA-loop (SDA cross-link within a peptide that is also cross-linked to a separate peptide). The linkage specificity for sulfo-SDA was assumed to be at lysine, serine, threonine, tyrosine and protein N-termini at one end, with the other end having specificity for any amino acid residue. False discovery rates were estimated following a modified target-decoy search strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Determining the structure of a protein by any method requires various contributions from experimental and computational sides. In a recent study, high-density cross-linking/mass spectrometry (HD-CLMS) data in combination with <i>ab initio</i> structure prediction determined the structure of human serum albumin (HSA) domains, with an RMSD to X-ray structure of up to 2.5 &#xc5;, or 3.4 &#xc5; in the context of blood serum. This paper reports the blind test on the readiness of this technology through the help of Critical Assessment of protein Structure Prediction (CASP). We identified between 201-381 unique residue pairs at an estimated 5% FDR (at link level albeit with missing site assignment precision evaluation), for four target proteins. HD-CLMS proved reliable once crystal structures were released. However, improvements in structure prediction using cross-link data were slight. We identified two reasons for this. Spread of cross-links along the protein sequence and the tightness of the spatial constraints must be improved. However, for the selected targets even ideal contact data derived from crystal structures did not allow modellers to arrive at the observed structure. Consequently, the progress of HD-CLMS in conjunction with computational modeling methods as a structure determination method, depends on advances on both arms of this hybrid approach.

### Keywords
Casp, Protein structure prediction, Cross-linking/mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
1. University of Edinburgh, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 2. Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Bioanalytics, Berlin, Germany.
Technische Universität Berlin

### Submitter
Adam Belsom

### Lab Head
Dr Juri Rappsilber
1. University of Edinburgh, Wellcome Trust Centre for Cell Biology, Edinburgh, United Kingdom. 2. Technische Universität Berlin, Institute of Biotechnology, Department of Bioanalytics, Berlin, Germany.


