### Accession
PXD014898

### Title
Mapping protein-DNA interactions by UV femtosecond laser crosslinking and mass spectrometry analysis

### Description
Transcription factors (TFs) regulate target genes by specific interaction with DNA sequences. Detecting and understanding these interactions on molecular level is of fundamental interest in both biological and clinical context. Crosslinking mass spectrometry is a powerful tool to assist structure prediction of protein complexes by providing direct evidence for physical contacts on sub-molecular level. Yet, until now it has been limited to the study of protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions. Here, we developed a femtosecond laser induced crosslinking mass spectrometry (fLiX-MS) workflow, which allows mapping of protein-DNA contacts at single nucleotide and up to single amino acid resolution. Applying the method to in-vitro assembled nucleosomes and recombinant TF-DNA complexes, our method proved both versatile and highly specific for mapping DNA binding domains. While for Nuclear factor 1 (NF1) the detected crosslinks were in perfect agreement with previous biochemical data on DNA binding, crosslinks for the TATA box binding protein (TBP) fitted to the known crystal structure. We further identified several protein-DNA interactions for the nucleosome and TBP, which were rather distant in the crystal-structure, indicating, that our method is capable to detect structural flexibility reflected in distinct conformational states. Moreover, applying the fLiX-MS workflow to cells, we detected several bona-fide crosslinks on DNA-binding domains, proving the applicability of the method for future large scale in-vivo experiments.

### Sample Protocol
In vitro protein-DNA complexes (human recombinant nucleosomes, pig Nuclear Factor 1/C, human TATA-box binding protein) were crosslinked using a femtosecond UV laser. Complexes were denatured in 4 M Urea and 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, for 5 min. After dilution to 1M Urea with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, and adding CaCl2 to 5 mM and MgCl2 to 2 mM, DNA was digested by the addition of 1 μl of MNase (New England Biolabs, M0247S), 1 μl of DNase I (New England Biolabs, M0303S) and 3 μl of Benzonase (Merck Millipore, 70746) for 90 min at 37˚C. Trypsin and LysC were added and proteins digested for 30 min at 37˚C and, subsequently, overnights at 25˚C. Formic acid (FA) was added to 0.1% after protein digestion. Samples were loaded onto stage tips containing 3 layers of C18 reverse phase material and washes twice with 100 μl Buffer A (0.1% FA). Peptides were eluted twice with Buffer B1 (50% ACN, 0.1% FA) and once with Buffer B2 (80% ACN, 0.1% FA). Eluates were dried on a centrifugal evaporator. Samples were resuspended in TiO2 Blocking Buffer (60% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 300 mM lactic acid) at 25˚C and 2000 rpm for 5 minutes. 15 mg of titaniumdioxide beads in 25 μl of Buffer B2 were added and incubated for 5 min at 25˚C and 2000 rpm. After one wash with TiO2 Blocking Buffer and three washes with Buffer B2, samples were eluted twice with TiO2 elution buffer (60% ACN, 5% NH4OH), dried on a centrifugal evaporator, resuspended in Buffer A* (2% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. In vivo protein-DNA crosslinks were obtained by UV femtosecond laser irradiation of mouse embryonic stem cells. Chromatin was extracted, digested with MNase and biotinylated by biotin replacement synthesis. Chromatin was captured by T1 streptavidin beads (65601, Thermo Scientific), washed three times with GdmCl wash buffer (0.6 M GdmCl, 25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0), twice with BW2x Buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% Tritone-X100, 2 M NaCl), twice with SDS wash buffer (25 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS, 2 M NaCl) and twice with TBS buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.6). Beads were resuspended in MNase/Benzonase digestion buffer (2 mM MgCl2, 5 mM CaCl2) and DNA digested by the addition of 1 µl of MNase (New England Biolabs), 1 µl of DNase I (New England Biolabs) and 3 µl of Benzonase (Merck Millipore) and incubation for 90 min at 37°C. GdmCl was added to 0.6 M and Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, to 10 mM concentration and proteins digested after addition of Trypsin and Lys-C and incubation overnight at 37˚C. Samples were desalted and purified over C18 stagetips and TiO2 as described for the in vitro-crosslinked complexes and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. Online chromatography was performed with a Thermo EASY-nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled online to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer with a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and separated applying a linear gradient of 5-20% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid) for 50 min and 20% to 30% for 10 min for in vitro samples or 15 min for samples derived from in vivo crosslinking, respectively, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Data acquisition switched between a full scan (60K resolution, 20ms max. injection time, AGC target 3e6) and 10 data‐dependent MS/MS scans (15K resolution, 60ms max. injection time, AGC target 1e5). Isolation window was set to 2.0 and normalized collision energy to 30. Multiple sequencing of peptides was minimized by excluding the selected peptide candidates for 20s.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were analyzed with the RNPxl workflow implemented in the proteome discoverer (v2.1.1.21). Peak lists were searched against the human UniprotFASTA database (Nucleosomes, TATA-box binding protein), the pig UniprotFASTA  database (Nuclear Factor 1/C) or the mouse UniprotFASTA  database, respectively, each combined with contaminant sequences from the MaxQuant Software package. False Discovery Rate control was performed by searching against a target-decoy version of the respective database. MS/MS spectra with a confident peptide-to-spectrum match (FDR <1%) were filtered from the sample’s data set. Precursors with a comparable intensity in the control run (fold-change <2) were also removed. For recombinant proteins, oxidation of methionine, trioxidation of cysteine and carbamylation of lysine and N-termini were allowed as variable modifications. For data from mESC, oxidation of methionine was chosen as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of cysteines a static modification. Precursor DNA modifications were searched against all possible combinations of up to four connected nucleotides and possible modifications of –H2O, -HPO3, -H3PO4, +HPO3. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance to 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Transcription factors (TFs) regulate target genes by specific interactions with DNA sequences. Detecting and understanding these interactions at the molecular level is of fundamental importance in biological and clinical contexts. Crosslinking mass spectrometry is a powerful tool to assist the structure prediction of protein complexes but has been limited to the study of protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions. Here, we present a femtosecond laser-induced crosslinking mass spectrometry (fliX-MS) workflow, which allows the mapping of protein-DNA contacts at single nucleotide and up to single amino acid resolution. Applied to recombinant histone octamers, NF1, and TBP in complex with DNA, our method is highly specific for the mapping of DNA binding domains. Identified crosslinks are in close agreement with previous biochemical data on DNA binding and mostly fit known complex structures. Applying fliX-MS to cells identifies several bona fide crosslinks on DNA binding domains, paving the way for future large scale ex vivo experiments.

### Keywords
Uv, Femtosecond laser, Transcription factor, Protein-dna crosslinking, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried Germany
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max-Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Wierer

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Wierer
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Am Klopferspitz 18 D-82152 Martinsried Germany


