### Accession
PXD032836

### Title
Distinct proteostasis states drive pharmacologic chaperone susceptibility for Cystic Fibrosis Transmembrane Conductance Regulator misfolding mutants

### Description
Pharmacological chaperones represent a class of therapeutic compounds for treating protein misfolding diseases. One of the most prominent examples is the FDA-approved pharmacological chaperone lumacaftor (VX-809), which has transformed cystic fibrosis (CF) therapy. CF is a fatal disease caused by mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR). VX-809 corrects folding of F508del CFTR, the most common patient mutation, yet F508del exhibits only mild VX-809 response. In contrast, rarer mutations P67L and L206W are hyper-responsive to VX-809, while G85E is non-responsive. Despite the clinical success of VX-809, the mechanistic origin for the distinct susceptibility of mutants remains unclear. Here, we use interactomics to characterize the impact of VX-809 on proteostasis interactions of P67L and L206W and compare these to F508del and G85E. We determine hyper-responsive mutations P67L and L206W exhibit decreased interactions with proteasomal, and autophagy degradation machinery compared to F508del and G85E. We then show inhibiting the proteasome attenuates P67L and L206W VX-809 response. Our data suggests a previously unidentified but required role for protein degradation in VX-809 correction. Furthermore, we present an approach for identifying proteostasis characteristics of mutant-specific therapeutic response to pharmacological chaperones.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transiently transfected with respective CFTR expression plasmids using a calcium phosphate method. A fully confluent 10cm plate (approximately 107 cells) was used per condition. Cells were harvested by washing with PBS and incubated with 600 L of TN buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCL) with 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630 and complete, Mini, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche) in PBS and rocked at 4 °C for 20 minutes. A cell scraper was then used to dislodge cells and transfer them to a micro-centrifuge tube. Cells were sonicated for 3 minutes and spun down at 18,000 g for 30 minutes. Total protein concentration was normalized using Bio-Rad protein assay dye. A sample of the lysates (used as the “input”) was then denatured with 6X Laemmli buffer + 100mM DTT and heated at 37°C for 15 minutes before being separated by SDS-PAGE. Samples were transferred onto PVDF membranes (Millipore) for immunoblotting and dehydrated. Primary antibodies were incubated either at room temperature for 2 hours, or overnight at 4°C. Membranes were then washed three times with TBS-T and incubated with secondary antibody constituted in 5% milk at 4°C for 1 hour. Membranes were washed three times with TBS-T and then imaged using a ChemiDoc MP Imaging System (BioRad). Co-interacting protein identification technology or CoPIT developed by Pankow, et al. Nature, 2015 was employed for affinity purification of CFTR bound with interactors as described previously. Briefly, for immunoprecipitation, cell lysates were precleared with 4B Sepharose beads (Sigma) at 4°C for 1 hour while rocking. Precleared lysates were then immunoprecipitated with Protein G beads complexed to the 24-1 antibody (6 mg antibody per mL of beads) overnight at 4°C while rocking. The next day, a sample of the supernatant was collected for Western blot analysis as the “clear”, indicating residual protein not isolated by the beads. Resin was washed three times with TNI buffer, washed twice with TN buffer, and frozen at -80 °C for 1.5 hours. Proteins were then eluted twice with shaking at 37 °C for 20 minutes - 1 hour with a 0.2 M Glycine (pH 2.3) /0.5% IGEPAL CA-630 buffer. Samples were then blotted as described above or processed for mass spectrometry analysis. Eluted samples were precipitated in methanol/chloroform, washed three times with methanol, and air dried. Protein pellets were then resuspended in 3 L 1% Rapigest SF Surfactant (Waters) followed by the addition of 10 L of 50mM HEPES pH 8.0, and 32.5L of H2O. Samples were reduced with 5mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Sigma) and alkylated with 10mM iodoacetamide (Sigma). 0.5 g of Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega or Pierce) was then added and incubated for 16-18 hours at 37°C, with shaking at 700 rpm. Peptide samples were then reacted with TMT 11-plex reagents (Thermo Fisher) in 40% v/v acetonitrile and incubated for one hour at room temperature. Reactions were then quenched by the addition of ammonium bicarbonate (0.4% w/v final concentration) and incubated for one hour at room temperature. TMT labeled samples for a given experiment were then pooled and acidified with 5% formic acid (Sigma, v/v). Samples were concentrated using a SpeedVac and resuspended in buffer A (95% water, 4.9% acetonitrile, and 0.1% formic acid, v/v/v). Cleaved Rapigest SF surfactant was removed by centrifugation for 30 minutes at 21,100 x g. Peptides were directly loaded onto a triphasic MudPIT columns using a high-pressure chamber. Samples were then washed for 30 minutes with buffer A. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using an Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher) mass spectrometer equipped with an UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System (Thermo Fisher).  MudPIT experiments were performed with 10 L sequential injections of 0, 10, 30, 60, & 100% buffer C (500mM ammonium acetate in buffer A), followed by a final injection of 90% buffer C with 10% buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid v/v) and each step followed by a 90 minute gradient from 4% to 40% B with a flow rate of either 300 or 500 nL/min, followed by a 15 minute gradient from 40% to 80% B with a flow rate of 500 nL/min. on a 20cm fused silica microcapillary column (ID 100 M) ending with a laser-pulled tip filled with Aqua C18, 3 m, 100Å resin (Phenomenex). Electrospray ionization (ESI) was performed directly from the analytical column by applying a voltage of 2.0 or 2.2 kV with an inlet capillary temperature of 275°C. Data-dependent acquisition of MS/MS spectra was performed by scanning from 300-1800 m/z with a resolution of 60,000 to 120,000. Peptides with an intensity above 1.0E4 with charge state 2-6 from each full scan were fragmented by HCD using normalized collision energy of 35 to 38, with a 0.4 m/z isolation window, 120 ms maximum injection time, at a resolution of 15,000-45,000 scanned from 100 to 1800 m/z or defined a first mass at 110 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 45 or 60s, and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
To determine statistically significant CFTR interaction proteins, we used a two-tailed paired t-test (using the scipy.stats.ttest_rel package in Python)  to calculate the p-value between the log2 TMT intensity of each protein pulled down with CFTR and the corresponding the log2 TMT intensity of each protein pulled down with tdTomato control. First, we normalized log2 protein abundances to the log2 CFTR protein abundance across TMT channels in individual TMT11plex sets (Supplemental Figure 2). We then scaled the log2 fold abundances for these interactors to the corresponding WT DMSO condition within each run to provide a common reference point. Subsequently, we averaged these scaled log2 abundance changes from replicate TMT11plex sets. Finally, we excluded any proteins not quantified for both WT and F508del since direct quantitative comparison is not possible for these proteins. A heatmap portraying all proteins included for all pathways and all mutants showing this normalization is included (Supplemental Figure S3B) as well as the data plotted (Supplement Dataset 3). For aggregate pathways statistics in violin plots, we used a one-way ANOVA with Geisser-Greenhouse correction and post-hoc Tukey multi-comparison testing to evaluate the statistically significant difference between conditions for a given pathway. Data plotted is included (Supplement Dataset 4). Finally, we used a two-tailed ratio paired t-test to determine statistical differences between quantified Western blot data.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Theratype, Corrector, Interactomics, Tandem mass tags, Cystic fibrosis, Affinity-purification mass spectrometry (ap-ms), Protein quality control

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University

### Submitter
Eli McDonald

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Plate
Vanderbilt University


