### Accession
PXD034640

### Title
A gas phase fractionaction scheme integrating ion mobility for rapid diaPASEF library generation

### Description
Data independent acquisition (DIA or DIA/SWATH ) mass spectrometry has emerged as a primary measurement strategy in the field of quantitative proteomics. diaPASEF is a recent adaptation that leverages trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) to improve selectivity and increase sensitivity. The complex fragmentation spectra generated by co-isolation of peptides in DIA mode  are most typically analyzed with reference to prior knowledge in the form of spectral libraries. The best established method for generating libraries uses data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, or DIA mode if appropriately deconvoluted, often including offline fractionation to increase depth of coverage,to create spectral libraries. More recently strategies for spectral library generation based on gas phase fractionation (GPF), where a representative sample is injected serially using narrow window DIA methods designed to cover different slices of the precursor space, have been introduced  and performed comparably to deep offline fractionation-based libraries for DIA data analysis. Here, we investigated whether an analogous GPF-based library building approach that accounts for the ion mobility (IM) dimension is useful for the analysis of diaPASEF data and can remove the need for offline fractionation. To enable a rapid library development approach for diaPASEF we designed a  GPF acquisition scheme covering the majority of multiply charged precursors in the m/z vs 1/K0 space requiring 7 injections of a representative sample and compared this with libraries generated by direct deconvolution-based analysis of diaPASEF data or by deep offline fractionation and ddaPASEF. . We found that the GPF based library  outperformed library generation by direct deconvolution of the diaPASEF data, and performed comparably to deep offline fractionation libraries, when analysing diaPASEF data acquired from 200ng of commercial HeLa digest. With the ion mobility integrated GPF scheme we establish a pragmatic approach to rapid and comprehensive library generation for the analysis of diaPASEF data.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial HeLa digest purchased from Pierce. diaPASEF data acquisition.  Mass sp ectrometry (MS) proteomics data were acquired on a timsTOF Pro (Bruker) mass spectrometer quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer integrating trapped ion mobility separations coupled online via a Captivespray electrospray source (Bruker) to a nanoElute (Bruker) nanoflow liquid chromatography system. All analyses were performed using 200ng HeLa digest (Pierce). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid in water for channel A and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile for channel B. Peptides were separated on an Aurora 2 (Ionopticks) integrated packed emitter column (25cm x 75um ID, 1.6 um C18) using a gradient as follows 2% B, 0 min; 17% B, 60 min; 25 % B, 90 min; 37 % 100 min. The flow rate was 400nl/min and the column was maintained at 50 °C. MS data were acquired in data independent acquisition mode using the ‘standard diaPASEF’ windows scheme (25 m/z width, 4 windows per 100 ms ion mobility scan, 16 ion mobility scans per duty cycle) as described in Meier et al1.  IM-GPF data acquisition.  The IM-GPF acquisition scheme was designed using the diaPASEF window editor in TimsControl (Bruker). To scheme was designed to cover approximately the same precursor space in the m/z and 1/K0 dimensions as the ‘standard diaPASEF’  acquisition method. We used 5 m/z isolation windows with 1 m/z overlap on both sides requiring 199 quadrupole positions. We allowed 2 quadrupole positions per ion mobility cycle spanning the IM range 0.57-1.47 V/cm-2. The windows were exported into text files and then split into 7 acquisition methods where the windows were evenly distributed across 7 acquisition methods with 15 ion mobility cycles (i.e. frames) per method. The 7 schemes were then imported to TimsControl in 7 separate acquisition methods. The coordinates for the 7 GPF methods in the format for direct import to TimsControl software are provided in the supplementary material.

### Data Protocol
Library generation was performed using Spectronaut 16 integrating the Pulsar search engine using default settings (automated MS2 demultiplexing; carbamidomethyl  cysteine set as fixed modification; oxidized methionine and protein n-terminal acetylation set as variable modification; fully specific Trypsin/P digestion; 2 missed cleavages; peptide length 7-52; mass tolerances set to dynamic, precursor and protein Qvalue set to 0.01). DIA data analysis was performed using Spectronaut 16 using default settings (mass tolerances, IM extraction window, and RT extraction window set to dynamic; decoy method mutated; precursor and protein (run and experiment level) Qvalue set to 0.01; data filtering set to Qvalue; imputation switched off). Spectronaut results at peptide precursor and protein group level were exported and  analyszed with R using theBiovenn package and base functions boxplot and density.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Spectral library, Diapasef, Dia

### Affiliations
Queen's University Belfast

### Submitter
Jack Penny

### Lab Head
Dr Ben C Collins
Queen's University Belfast


