### Accession
PXD040584

### Title
Boundary of Life and Death: changes in mitochondrial and cytosolic proteomes of Arabidopsis thaliana suspension cells associated with programmed cell death

### Description
Despite the critical role of programmed cell death (PCD) in plant development and defence responses, its regulation is not fully understood. It has been proposed that mitochondria may control the early stages of plant PCD, but the details of this regulation are currently unknown. Here, we used Arabidopsis thaliana cell suspension culture, a model system that enables induction and precise monitoring of PCD rates, as well as chemical manipulation of this process to generate a quantitative profile of the alterations in mitochondrial and cytosolic proteomes associated with early stages of plant PCD induced by heat stress. The cells were subjected to PCD-inducing heat levels (10 min, 54oC), with/without the calcium channel inhibitor and PCD blocker LaCl3. The stress treatment was followed by separation of cytosolic and mitochondrial fractions and mass spectrometry-based proteome analysis. Heat stress induced rapid and extensive changes in protein abundance in both fractions and 113 mitochondrial proteins were detected in the cytosol upon PCD induction. Western blot analysis confirmed the release of mitochondrial heat shock protein 60 family members occurring in response to PCD-inducing, but not sublethal level of heat stress, that may indicate their cytosolic role as positive regulators of PCD in plants. In our system, LaCl3 appeared to act downstream of cell death initiation signal, as it did not affect the release of mitochondrial proteins, but instead partially inhibited changes occurring in the cytosolic fraction, including upregulation of proteins with hydrolytic activity. Collectively, these generated data provide new insights into the regulation of cell death and survival decisions in plant cells.

### Sample Protocol
Prior to experiments, flasks of 100 ml of seven-day old dark grown suspension cells were examined for viability. The flasks showing >95% viability were pooled together to ensure use of homogenous biological material for experiments. Heat treatments were performed in Grant OSL200 water bath set to 85 oscillations/min using 100 ml aliquots of suspension cells in 250 ml Erlenmeyer flasks (PCD induction: 54°C for 10 min; sublethal stress: 33°C for 10 min). To inhibit PCD, cells were pre-incubated with 750 µM LaCl3 (Acros Organics) for 30 min in the dark prior to heat stress treatment.  Mitochondrial and cytosolic fractions were isolated using 100 ml of cell suspension culture per treatment. The heat-treated samples were cooled on ice and processed within 10 min of heat treatment. Cells that were not subjected to heat treatment required homogenisation using glass beads (425–600 μm diameter, Sigma-Aldrich)in mortar and pestle 3 times for 4 min to achieve >80% cell disruption, while for heat treated samples 2 times for 4 min were sufficient. The homogenisation buffer (0.3 M mannitol (Duchefa Biochemie), 50 mM sodium pyrophosphate (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.2 % (w/v) bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5 % (w/v) PVP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), 2 mM EGTA (Sigma-Aldrich), 20 mM cysteine (Sigma-Aldrich), pH 8.0 (with phosphoric acid) was changed after every filtration. The homogenised cells were centrifuged at 2,000 x g for 10 min (4°C) to remove cell debris and the glass beads, and the supernatant was subjected to centrifugation step at 13,000 g for 15 min (4°C). The 250 µl of resulting supernatant (cytosolic fraction) was mixed with 750 µl protein lysis buffer (6M urea (Lennox Laboratory Supplies), 2M thiourea (Fisher Chemical) supplemented with protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche, cOmplete™ mini) while the pellet (crude mitochondrial fraction). The purified mitochondrial pellets were then resuspended in 200 µl of protein lysis buffer. Fractions were stored at -80°C until subsequent proteomic/western blot analyses.       Proteins were prepared for MS analysis as previously described (Eitle et al., 2019). Mitochondrial fractions were homogenised with a motorised pestle for 10 s. Protein concentrations for each sample were determined using a Qubit fluorometer (Invitrogen) and the Quant-iT protein assay kit (ThermoFisher) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 100 µg protein of each sample was purified with the 2-D Clean-up Kit (GE Healthcare) as per the manual (procedure A). The resulting protein pellets after the final centrifugation step were resuspended in 50 µl resuspension buffer (6 M Urea, 2 M Thiourea, 0.1 M TRIS (Sigma-Aldrich ), pH 8) and concentrations were quantified. 20 µl of the cleaned samples were denatured under heat (56°C for 20 min) with 105 µl 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AMBIC, Sigma-Aldrich) and 1 µl 0.5 M dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich). 2.7 µl of 0.55 M iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) was used to alkylate the proteins for 15 min in the dark before the overnight digestion with 1% w/v ProteaseMAX Surfactant Trypsin Enhancer (Promega) and 0.5 µg/µl trypsin at 37°C. Samples were acidified with 1 µl pure trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Carl Roth ) for 5 min to stop the reaction and centrifuged at 13,000 g rfc  for 10 min. The supernatant was transferred into a fresh tube and the resulting peptides were purified using ThermoScientific for the clean-up with C18 spin-columns (Thermo Scientific). All following centrifugation steps were carried out at 1500 rfc for 1 min at room temperature. To each sample, Sample Buffer 1 (20% acetonitrile (ACN, Merck) and 2% TFA in ddH2O) was added in a ratio of 3 parts sample : 1 part buffer. The columns were placed into a 1.5 ml tube with a cut-off lid, 200 µl Activation Solution (50% ACN in ddH2O) was rinsed down the walls and the columns centrifuged. The flow-through was discarded and the step was repeated. To equilibrate the columns, they were washed twice with 200 µl Wash Buffer (0.5% TFA and 5% ACN in ddH2O). The columns were placed into a new receiver tube and the samples were loaded on top of the resin bed. After a centrifugation step, the flow-through was twice reloaded on the columns and spun down again. The C18-columns were placed into a new receiver tube and washed with 200 µl Wash Buffer. The washing step was repeated two more times and the flow-through was discarded after every centrifugation step. The columns were placed into fresh 1.5 ml tubes, and the samples were eluted with 30 µl Elution Buffer (70% ACN in ddH2O). The final peptide eluant of  This step was carried out twice more, so a total of 90 µl eluant per sample was collected. The tubes were dried using a SpeedyVac and dried down at medium heat. Once completely dried, the samples were stored at 4°C.

### Data Protocol
Four biological replicates for each group (total n=32) were subjected to high resolution accurate mass spectrometry. Samples were removed from 4°C storage, equilibrated to room temperature for 10 min before adding Q Exactive Loading Buffer (2% ACN and 0.05% TFA in ddH2O) to final peptides concentration of 0.5 µg/µl. The following search parameters were used: first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, second search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm with cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites allowed. False Discovery Rates (FDR) were set to 1% for both peptides and proteins and the FDR was estimated following searches against a target-decoy database. MaxQuant v1.6.17.0 was used to perform protein identification and label free quantification (LFQ) normalisation. The generated MS/MS data was searched against both the predicted proteome derived from the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR11 reference genome (Berardini et al., 2015, https://www.arabidopsis.org/, accessed September 2021, containing 48,231 peptide sequences) and a contaminant sequence set supplied by MaxQuant, using the Andromeda algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Proteomics, Plant programmed cell death, Heat stress, Cytosol

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare,Ireland
Biology

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jim Carolan
Department of Biology, Maynooth University, Co. Kildare,Ireland


