### Accession
PXD004750

### Title
Proteomic analysis in leaf color variants and CKs from Camellia sinensis

### Description
Leaf colour variation is observed in several plants. We obtained two types of branches with yellow (H1) and variegated (H2) leaves from Camellia sinensis. To reveal the mechanisms that underlie the leaf colour variations, proteomic analysis using label-free MS-based approach was performed using leaves from variants and normal branches (CKs).

### Sample Protocol
Leaf colour variation is observed in several plants. We obtained two types of branches with yellow (H1) and variegated (H2) leaves from Camellia sinensis. To reveal the mechanisms that underlie the leaf colour variations, proteomic analysis using label-free MS-based approach was performed using leaves from variants and normal branches (CKs).

### Data Protocol
Leaf colour variation is observed in several plants. We obtained two types of branches with yellow (H1) and variegated (H2) leaves from Camellia sinensis. To reveal the mechanisms that underlie the leaf colour variations, proteomic analysis using label-free MS-based approach was performed using leaves from variants and normal branches (CKs).

### Publication Abstract
Leaf colour variation is observed in several plants. We obtained two types of branches with yellow and variegated leaves from Camellia sinensis. To reveal the mechanisms that underlie the leaf colour variations, combined morphological, histological, ionomic and proteomic analyses were performed using leaves from abnormal branches (variants) and normal branches (CKs). The measurement of the CIE-Lab coordinates showed that the brightness and yellowness of the variants were more intense than the CKs. When chloroplast profiles were analysed, HY1 (branch with yellow leaves) and HY2 (branch with variegated leaves) displayed abnormal chloroplast structures and a reduced number and size compared with the CKs, indicating that the abnormal chloroplast development might be tightly linked to the leaf colour variations. Moreover, the concentration of elemental minerals was different between the variants and the CKs. Furthermore, DEPs (differentially expressed proteins) were identified in the variants and the CKs by a quantitative proteomics analysis using the label-free approach. The DEPs were significantly involved in photosynthesis and included PSI, PSII, cytochrome b6/f complex, photosynthetic electron transport, LHC and F-type ATPase. Our results suggested that a decrease in the abundance of photosynthetic proteins might be associated with the changes of leaf colours in tea plants.

### Keywords
Tea plant, Proteomic analysis, Leaf color variations

### Affiliations
Tea Research Institue, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China
Tea Research Institute, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences

### Submitter
Chengying Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Aiqing Miao
Tea Research Institue, Guangdong Academy of Agricultural Sciences, China


