### Accession
PXD030707

### Title
Multi-omics characterization of the USP7 regulatory circuitry reveals control of H2AK119ub1 dosage uncoupled from H3K27me3 .

### Description
Ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7) has been implicated in multiple cellular and developmental pathways. However, its molecular network remains poorly defined. We combined quantitative proteomics, transcriptomics and epigenomics to define the core USP7 regulome. We found that USP7 forms a regulatory hub, linking processes involved in the packaging, maintenance and expression of the genome. Further analysis revealed that USP7 regulates non-canonical Polycomb repressive complexes 1 (ncPRC1s) but affects neither canonical PRC1s nor PRC2s. By stabilizing key subunits of PRC1.6 and to a lesser extend PRC1.1, USP7 acts as a rheostat that modulates the global level of H2AK119ub11. Unexpectedly, changes in the genomic deposition of H2AK119ub11 are uncoupled from H3K27me3, challenging prevalent models for Polycomb repression. Indeed, a complete loss of PRC1 and H2AK119ub1 has only a highly restricted effect on H3K27me3. Besides defining the organizational principles of the USP7 regulome, our results reveal selective control of H2AK119ub1 dosage that is disconnected from H3K27me3.

### Sample Protocol
Interactomics & global proteomics Immunopurified proteins were subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin (sequencing grade; Promega) on-bead. For the global proteome analysis of whole cell extracts, cells were lysed in 100 mM Tris/HCl buffer pH 8.2 with 1 % sodium deoxycholate (SDC) using sonication in a Bioruptor Pico (Diagenode). Protein concentrations were measured using the bicinchonic acid (BCA) assay. 100 μg protein was reduced in lysis buffer with 5 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. Next, proteins were digested with 2.5 μg trypsin (1:40 enzyme:substrate ratio) overnight at 37 °C. After digestion, peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5 % and centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 min to spin down the precipitated SDC. Peptides dissolved in the supernatant were desalted on a 50 mg C18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). After washing the cartridge with 0.1 % TFA, peptides were eluted with 50 % acetonitrile (AcN) and dried in a Speedvac centrifuge.   Nanoflow LC-MS Proteolytic peptides were analyzed by nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo), operating in positive mode. Peptides were trapped on a 2 cm x 100 μm Pepmap C18 column (Thermo Fisher 164564) and then separated on an in-house packed 25 cm x 75 μm capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, using a linear gradient of 0–32 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % formic acid during 90 min. The eluate was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired according to a data dependent acquisition (DDA) regime in continuum mode. Spectra were recorded in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution for MS1 and 30,000 resolution for MS2 in profile mode and with standard AGC target settings. Fragmentation of the peptides was performed by HCD.  For targeted proteomics, a parallel reaction monitoring regime (PRM) was used to select for a set of previously selected peptides on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) operating in positive mode and running Tune version 3.3. Precursors were selected in the quadrupole with an isolation width of 0.7 m/z and fragmented with HCD using 30 % collision energy (CE). See Supplementary Table 1 for the isolation list [to do: Karel]. MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in the orbitrap at 30,000 resolution in profile mode and with standard AGC target settings. The injection time mode was set to dynamic with a minimum of 9 points across the peak. The sequence of sampling was blanks first and then in order of increasing peptide input amounts to avoid any contamination of previous samples.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis USP7 interactomics mass spectrometry data were analyzed using MaxQuant v2.0.1.0 (www.maxquant.org, Cox et al 2009) with standard settings and with the additional options ‘LFQ’ and ‘iBAQ’ selected (note: fragment tolerance set to 20 ppm). Raw mass spectrometry data recorded on the Orbitrap Eclipse with the FAIMS option were first converted into mzXML format using the FAIMS MzXML Generator software tool (Coon Lab) before MaxQuant analysis. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids were set. The Andromeda search engine was used to search the MS/MS spectra against the Uniprot database (taxonomy: Homo sapiens, release June 2021) concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.6 Da for HCD spectra. The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while STY phosphorylation was set as a variable modification. Both the PSM and protein FDR were set to 0.01. In case the identified peptides of two proteins were the same or the identified peptides of one protein included all peptides of another protein, these proteins were combined by MaxQuant and reported as one protein group. Before further statistical analysis, known contaminants and reverse hits were removed.  Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) data were analyzed with Skyline (skyline.ms). The Skyline output was converted to ridgeline plots using in-house developed software. Skyline reports containing all essential data such as area per fragment for each target were loaded into R and manually curated. If the expected peptide fragment ion peaks could not be correctly assigned, fragments were excluded and their associated areas were set to 0. Summed areas were calculated for all fragment ion peak chromatograms for each target peptide and then summed over all targeted peptides per protein. Standard deviations (three biological and two technical replicates) were calculated for every target peptide in each condition and indicated in the bars. All summed areas were normalized to the WT condition. Peptide bar graphs were constructed by dividing the bar for each target peptide into the respective areas for every fragment ion peak, indicated by the color shading patterns. For the protein abundance comparison between WT and KO conditions, the normalized areas for all detected fragment ion chromatograms were summed over all selected target peptides per protein and visualized in box plots. The median for the WT condition was set to 1. Protein abundances are based on ≥ 2 target tryptic peptides unless indicated otherwise. Proteins for which no peptides were detected in a specific condition are indicated by an asterisk.

### Publication Abstract
Ubiquitin-specific protease 7 (USP7) has been implicated in cancer progression and neurodevelopment. However, its molecular targets remain poorly characterized. We combined quantitative proteomics, transcriptomics, and epigenomics to define the core USP7 network. Our multi-omics analysis reveals USP7 as a control hub that links genome regulation, tumor suppression, and histone H2A ubiquitylation (H2AK119ub1) by noncanonical Polycomb-repressive complexes (ncPRC1s). USP7 strongly stabilizes ncPRC1.6 and, to a lesser extent, ncPRC1.1. Moreover, USP7 represses expression of AUTS2, which suppresses H2A ubiquitylation by ncPRC1.3/5. Collectively, these USP7 activities promote the genomic deposition of H2AK119ub1 by ncPRC1, especially at transcriptionally repressed loci. Notably, USP7-dependent changes in H2AK119ub1 levels are uncoupled from H3K27me3. Even complete loss of the PRC1 catalytic core and H2AK119ub1 has only a limited effect on H3K27me3. Besides defining the USP7 regulome, our results reveal that H2AK119ub1 dosage is largely disconnected from H3K27me3.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Ap-ms, Interactome, Prc1, Prc2, Histone h2a ubiquitylation, Polycomb, Prm, Usp7

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam


