### Accession
PXD015523

### Title
PDZD8 interacts with Protrudin and Rab7 to form an ER-late endosome membrane contact site that recruits mitochondria

### Description
Endosomes regulate a plethora of cellular processes including signaling, nutrient status and organelle quality control by controlling the fate of material entering the cells. Endosomes undergo a process of maturation which specifies whether material will be shuttled back to the cell surface or degraded by the lysosome. Nevertheless, a complete inventory of factors regulating endosomal maturation is still lacking. Recently, membrane contact sites (MCSs) between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and endosomes have emerged as important players in endosomal sorting, dynamics and motility. Here, we identify the ER transmembrane protein PDZD8 as a new Rab7 effector that, together with the MCS component Protrudin, forms an ER-late endosome MCS. At these ER-late endosome MCSs, PDZD8 also recruits mitochondria to form a three-way contact. Our data suggest that the PDZD8/Protrudin-Rab7 MCS functions to facilitate an early stage of late endosome maturation.

### Sample Protocol
HCT116 cells were grown in 15cm dishes, harvested and washed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Three biological replicates were prepared for each sample group (control / PDZD8 / Protrudin). Cells were re-suspended to 2x106 cells/ml in PBS and the crosslinker dithiobis-succinimidyl-propionate (DSP) was added to a final concentration of 500 μM. Following 30 min of incubation at room temperature, Tris-Cl pH7.5 was added to a final concentration of 100mM to quench the crosslinking. Cell pellets were re-suspended in lysis buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-Cl pH7.5, 1% sodium-deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP-40, 1mM EDTA supplemented with protease inhibitors) and incubated on ice for 30 min. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min in 8000x g at 4˚C and supernatant was collected and its protein concentration determined using Pierce™ BCA protein assay kit. 10 mg of total protein per sample were diluted in lysis buffer to a 1ml volume and used as starting material for each pull-down condition. 2μg of appropriate antibody were added to the lysate and incubated in constant rotation for one hour at 4˚C, 100ul mMACS™ protein G magnetic microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) were added and incubated for 4hrs at 4˚C. Columns were placed in the Multi™MACS M96 separator, equilibrated in lysis buffer, then pull-down samples were loaded onto columns and let flow. Columns were washed 5 times in 500μl wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-Cl pH7.5). Elution of samples from column was achieved through on-column trypsinization by 30 min incubation in 25μl Elution buffer I (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-Cl pH7.5, 1mM DTT, 5mg/ml Trypsin), followed by the addition of 100μl Elution buffer II (2M Urea, 50mM Tris-Cl pH7.5, 5mM Chloroacetamide). Eluate was collected in a new tube and allowed continued trypsin digestion overnight. Peptide were acidified with TFA followed by purification on C18 stageTips. Samples are: Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_1 - control 1 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_2 - control 2 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_3 - control 3 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_7 - PDZD8 1 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_8 - PDZD8 2 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_9 - PDZD8 3 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_19 - ZFYVE27 1 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_20 - ZFYVE27 2 Animal_20170714_MH_SA_Yael_21 - ZFYVE27 3

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.6.9 and the Andromeda search engine. MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniprotKB database.Database results were filtered to keep a maximal FDR of 0.01 on both the peptide and the protein levels.  All statistical tests and calculations were done using the Perseus software on the label free quantification (LFQ) intensity values after log2 transformation. Data analysis was performed for each pull down separately after filtering for valid values in at least 2 samples of the pull down group. Data were imputed based on the assumption that missing values indicate low abundance; missing values were replaced with random values that create a Gaussian distribution with a downshift of 1.6 or 1.7 standard deviations and a width of 0.4 of the original distribution. To identify potential interactors one sided Student t-test was performed between the control and each pull down with permutation-based FDR q value < 0.05 and S0=0.1

### Publication Abstract
Endosomes are compositionally dynamic organelles that regulate signaling, nutrient status and organelle quality by specifying whether material entering the cells will be shuttled back to the cell surface or degraded by the lysosome. Recently, membrane contact sites (MCSs) between the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and endosomes have emerged as important players in endosomal protein sorting, dynamics and motility. Here, we show that PDZD8, a Synaptotagmin-like Mitochondrial lipid-binding Proteins (SMP) domain-containing ER transmembrane protein, utilizes distinct domains to interact with Rab7-GTP and the ER transmembrane protein Protrudin and together these components localize to an ER-late endosome MCS. At these ER-late endosome MCSs, mitochondria are also recruited to form a three-way contact. Thus, our data indicate that PDZD8 is a shared component of two distinct MCSs and suggest a role for SMP-mediated lipid transport in the regulation of endosome function.

### Keywords
Human, Q exactive plus, Ls-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Department of Human Molecular Genetics and Biochemistry, Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel


