### Accession
PXD015820

### Title
Cell-specific non-canonical amino acid labelling identifies changes in the hippocampal de novo proteome during memory formation

### Description
The formation of spatial long-term memory (LTM) requires the de novo synthesis of distinct sets of proteins; however, a non-biased examination of the de novo proteome in this process is lacking. Here, we generated a novel mouse strain, which enables cell-type-specific labelling of newly synthesised proteins with non-canonical amino acids (NCAAs) by genetically restricting the expression of the mutant tRNA synthetase, NLL-MetRS. Combining this labelling technique with an accelerated version of the active place avoidance task, and bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) followed by SWATH quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified 156 proteins that were altered in synthesis in hippocampal neurons during spatial memory formation. In addition to observing increased synthesis of proteins important in known memory-related processes, such as glutamate receptor recycling, we also identified alter synthesised of proteins associated with mRNA splicing and stability as a potential mechanism involved in spatial LTM formation.

### Sample Protocol
ollowing PBS perfusion the hippocampus of RC3xCamk2a-Cre mice was dissected. The samples were snap-frozen and then extracted in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer (Cell Signalling, 9806) as previously described (Bodea et al., 2017), with protein concentrations being determined using the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (ThermoFisher, 23225). BONCAT purification was carried out as previously described (Evans et al., 2019). Briefly, for samples to be analysed via western blot following BONCAT purification (BONCAT-WB), 100 μg of protein was used. Proteins were first alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) as this has been shown to reduce non-specific reactions when using the strain-promoted azide-alkyne cycloaddition (van Geel et al., 2012). Anl labelled proteins were then reacted with 100 μM DIBO-biotin (Click Chemistry Tools, A112) for 2 h at room temperature. 40 μg of streptavidin-coated Dynabeads (ThermoFisher, 11205D) were then used to purify biotinylated proteins, with beads being washed multiple times with IP wash buffer (0.1% SDS and 0.05% Tween in Tris-buffered saline (TBS)). Bound proteins were removed from the beads by boiling in 1x Laemmli buffer. For BONCAT-SWATH-MS analysis, samples were purified as above, but using 250 μg of protein and 100 μg of streptavidin-coated Dynabeads per sample. Beads were then washed in IP wash buffer and resuspended in TBS.

### Data Protocol
In order to identify proteins newly synthesised during spatial memory formation, Anl-labelled proteins from both trained and non-trained RC3xCamk2a-Cre mice were analysed by BONCAT-SWATH-MS. Briefly, BONCAT-purified proteins bound to beads from four trained and four untrained samples were placed in Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer and subsequently reduced with DTT, followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. Samples were then digested with 80 ng of trypsin overnight. Samples were then analysed via information dependent analysis, nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spec, and SWATH-MS as previously described (Evans et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
The formation of spatial long-term memory (LTM) requires the de novo synthesis of distinct sets of proteins; however, a non-biased examination of the de novo proteome in this process is lacking. Here, we generated a novel mouse strain, which enables cell-type-specific labelling of newly synthesised proteins with non-canonical amino acids (NCAAs) by genetically restricting the expression of the mutant tRNA synthetase, NLL-MetRS, to hippocampal neurons. By combining this labelling technique with an accelerated version of the active place avoidance task and bio-orthogonal non-canonical amino acid tagging (BONCAT) followed by SWATH quantitative mass spectrometry, we identified 156 proteins that were altered in synthesis in hippocampal neurons during spatial memory formation. In addition to observing increased synthesis of known proteins important in memory-related processes, such as glutamate receptor recycling, we also identified altered synthesis of proteins associated with mRNA splicing as a potential mechanism involved in spatial LTM formation.

### Keywords
Non-canonical amino acid labelling, Protein synthesis, Swath, Active place avoidance, Long-term memory, Azidohomoalanine, Mrna splicing, Azidonorleucine

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Queensland Brain Institute University of Queensland

### Submitter
Harrison Evans

### Lab Head
Dr Jurgen Gotz
Queensland Brain Institute University of Queensland


