### Accession
PXD040652

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Neural Stem Cell to Oligodendrocyte Precursor Cell Differentiation Reveals Phosphorylation-Dependent Dclk1 Processing

### Description
The differentiation from neural stem cells (NSCs) to oligodendrocyte precursor cells (OPCs) is only incompletely understood. In the current study, we used the so-called neurosphere assay to study this process. We performed in vitro differentiation from neurospheres (which predominantly consist of NSCs) to oligospheres (consisting mainly of OPCs) and investigated their proteome by 6plex TMT-labeling and their phosphoproteome by 3plex dimethyl labeling. Among others, we identified a continuous upregulation of double cortin like kinase 1 (Dclk1) as well as its phosphorylation sites in the so-called SP-rich region. Using western blotting and qPCR, we show that two different Dclk1 isoforms (long and short) are present in NSCs and OPCs which gradually interchange during the investigated differentiation process. We further demonstrate that Dclk1 long is proteolytically processed into Dclk1 short and that this process is regulated via phosphorylation in the SP-rich region. Finally, we generated different BioID constructs fused to individual Dclk1 domains and investigate their interactome as well as potential substrates of Dclk1.

### Sample Protocol
130 ug of lysed neurospheres were precipitated by CHCl3/MeOH, resuspended in 0.1 M TEAB/0.1% RapiGest (Waters), reduced with 5 mM DTT and alkylated with 20 mM acrylamide. The reaction was quenched by adding 5 mM DTT and 1.5 µg of trypsin (Promega) was added. Digestion was carried out overnight at 37° C, followed by TMT 6plex (Thermo Fisher Scientific) labeling according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Samples were combined, ACN amounts reduced to < 5%, TFA added to 0.1%, and samples desalted using Oasis HLB columns (Waters). Samples were dried, separated into 24 fractions via a 3100 OFFGEL fractionator (Agilent) and dried after StageTip desalting. 3 mg of each neurosphere lysate were reduced (5 mM DTT) and alkylated (20 mM acrylamide). The reaction was quenched with DTT (5 mM) and samples diluted 1:5 with 25 mM HEPES pH 8.2. CaCl2 was supplemented to a final concentration of 1 mM, trypsin was added at a ratio of 1:200 (w/w), and digestion was carried out overnight at 37° C. The next day, 3plex dimethyl labeling was carried out. Then, samples were combined, desalted with Oasis HLB columns, and eluates dried. Peptides were SCX-fractionated using an ÄKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare) equipped with a 100 mm x 9.4 mm PolySULFOETHYL A column (PolyLC). 12 fractions were collected, lyophilized, and desalted using Oasis HLB columns. The eluate fractions were dried, and resuspended in 500 µl of 5% TFA, 80% ACN, 1 M glycolic acid. TiO2 beads (Sachtleben) were added to the sample at a peptide to bead ratio of 1:6 (w/w) and incubated for 15 min, 1,200 rpm, RT. Beads were pelleted by centrifugation and the supernatant was transferred to another tube. The beads were washed sequentially with 1 ml 80% ACN, 1% TFA and 1 ml of 20% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by drying. Phosphopeptides were eluted by incubation with 200 µl 1% NH4OH. The supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube, acidified with FA, and desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges. 1 mg of lysate from NIH/3T3 cells transfected with the individual BirA*-Dclk1 fusion proteins were combined with 1 mg of SILAC-heavy labeled control lysate (empty vector). Biotinylated proteins were enriched using Streptavidin Sepharose HP affinity resin (GE Healthcare). Proteins were reduced, alkylated and digested on beads (2.5 ug trypsin/mg protein, overnight 37 °C). Resulting peptides were desalted with Oasis HLB columns, dried and phosphoenrichment performed as described above. Both non- and phosphopeptides were kept, dried and desalted.  Dried peptide samples were resuspended in 5% FA, 5% ACN or 50 mM citrate (phosphopeptide enriched samples) and analyzed by UHPLC-MS/MS using either an LTQ Orbitrap Velos in combination with an EASY-nLC 1000 or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos in combination with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano System. For both systems, in-house manufactured spray tips were used. Tips were generated from 100 µm ID/360 µm OD fused silica capillaries with a P2000 laser puller (Sutter Instrument), and packed with 5 µm/1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ particles (Dr. Maisch) to a length of 30 cm/50 cm for the Orbitrap Velos/Fusion Lumos, respectively. For Orbitrap Velos analyses, peptides were loaded on the analytical column with solvent A (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO) at a flow rate of 1 µl/min, and separated with 60 min or 90 min linear gradients from 99% solvent A, 1% solvent B (0.1% FA, 5% DMSO, 94.9% ACN) to 65% solvent A 35% solvent B at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized in the nanosource of the mass spectrometer in the positive ion mode at a cone voltage of 1.6 kV. Survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer from m/z 400 to 1200 with a resolution of 30K or 60K followed by fragmentation of the 10 most abundant ions by either CID and analysis in the LTQ, or HCD and analysis in the Orbitrap for dimethyl- and TMT-labeled samples, respectively. Only multiply charged ions were selected for fragmentation, the repeat count was set to one and the dynamic exclusion to 60 and 90 sec for 60 min/90 min gradients, respectively. For phosphopeptide enriched samples, multi stage activation was enabled for neutral-loss of phosphoric acid. For Orbitrap Fusion Lumos analyses, peptides were loaded to the analytical column with 100% solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at a flow rate of 600 nl/min, and peptides separated with 120 min linear gradients from 95% solvent A, 5% solvent B (0.1% FA, 90% ACN) to 65% solvent A, 40% solvent B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Eluting peptides were ionized in the positive ion mode at a cone voltage of 2 kV and survey scans acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer from 375 – 1500 m/z at a resolution of 60K. The most intense ions were fragmented by HCD (charges: +2 to +7) in the top speed mode (3 sec cycle time) with a dynamic exclusion of 60 sec and fragment ions analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. For both systems, prior to loading of phosphopeptide-enriched samples, the analytical column was equilibrated with three injections of 50 mM citrate.

### Data Protocol
For neurosphere proteome analyses by TMT labeling, data were processed using ProteomeDiscover 2.4.0.305 in combination with Mascot 2.6.1. After recalibration of precursor masses with the Spectrum Files RC node (MS1/MS2 tolerances: 20 ppm/0.02 Da), spectra were searched against UniProt Mus musculus (55,192 entries, release date 06/2019) in combination with two databases containing common contaminants (cRAP) and MaxQuant contaminants in a reverse-decoy approach. Trypsin/P was selected as enzyme and up to two missed cleavages allowed. Mass tolerances were 10 ppm (MS1) and 20 mmu (MS2). Propionamide (Cys) and TMT6plex (peptide N-Term, Lys) were defined as fixed modifications, and oxidation (Met) as well as acetyl (protein N-term) as variable modifications. Identified peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were validated by the Percolator node based on q-values and target FDRs of 1%/5% (strict/relaxed). The combined PSMs were aggregated to peptides and proteins according to the principle of strict parsimony and finally filtered at 1% FDR on the peptide and protein level. For peptide/protein quantification, TMT reporter ion signals were extracted at the MS2 level with a tolerance of 20 ppm using the most confident centroid. Subsequently, the following filters were applied for peptides selection: unique and razor; reporter abundance based on: automatic; co-isolation threshold: 30%; average reporter S/N: 10. The resulting protein table was filtered for master proteins, exported, and further analyzed using R (version 3.5.3) with the R packages openxlsx (version 4.1.5), amap (version 0.8-18), and limma (version 3.42.2).  Raw files of dimethyl labeling (DML)  neurosphere phosphoproteome analyses were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 in combination with UniProt Mus musculus (63,666 entries including isoforms, release date 04/2020) and MaxQuant’s internal contaminant database with the following settings: precursor ion tolerance (first/main search): 20/4.5 ppm, MS/MS tolerance (ITMS): 0.5 Da, peptide/protein FDR: 0.01, site FDR: 0.01, minimal peptide length: 7, minimal score for modified peptides: 40. The enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P with 2 missed cleavage sites. Acetylation (protein N-term), carbamylation (N-term), oxidation (Met) and phoshospho (Ser/Thr/Tyr) were defined as variable modifications, as well as propionamide (Cys) as fixed modification. For quantification, 3plex DML was defined and both the re-quantify and the match between runs option were enabled with default settings. MaxQuant txt output files (“ProteinGroups” and “Phospho(STY)Sites”) were used for further bioinformatics analysis with Perseus 1.6.15.0 and R 4.1.2 (+tidyverse package).  For SILAC data isoform protein-protein interaction analyses of BioID Dclk1 fusion proteins, raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant against the same database as described above including sequences of myc-BioID (Plasmid #35700, Addgene) and Streptavidin (P22629). The same search settings as used for the DML data were utilized with 2plex SILAC quantification. The resulting proteinGroups and phosphosite txt files were further processed with R 4.2.0 (+tidyverse package) and the additional packages imputeLCMD (2.1), Normalyzer-DE (1.14.0), EnhancedVolcano (1.14), pheatmap (1.0.12), and clusterProfiler (4.4.4).

### Publication Abstract
Oligodendrocytes are generated via a two-step mechanism from pluripotent neural stem cells (NSCs): after differentiation of NSCs to oligodendrocyte precursor/NG2 cells (OPCs), they further develop into mature oligodendrocytes. The first step of this differentiation process is only incompletely understood. In this study, we utilized the neurosphere assay to investigate NSC to OPC differentiation in a time course-dependent manner by mass spectrometry-based (phospho-) proteomics. We identify doublecortin-like kinase 1 (Dclk1) as one of the most prominently regulated proteins in both datasets, and show that it undergoes a gradual transition between its short/long isoform during NSC to OPC differentiation. This is regulated by phosphorylation of its SP-rich region, resulting in inhibition of proteolytic Dclk1 long cleavage, and therefore Dclk1 short generation. Through interactome analyses of different Dclk1 isoforms by proximity biotinylation, we characterize their individual putative interaction partners and substrates. All data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD040652.

### Keywords
Dimethyl, Proximity biotinylation, Pura, Phosphoproteomics, Oligodendrocyte precursor cells, Neural stem cells, Tmt, Silac, Isobaric labeling, Differentiation, Dclk1, Neural development

### Affiliations
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn

### Submitter
Robert Hardt

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Winter
Institute for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Bonn


