### Accession
PXD041357

### Title
Capillary Zone Electrophoresis-High Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry-Tandem Mass Spectrometry for Top-down Characterization of Histone Proteoforms

### Description
Characterization of histone proteoforms with various post-translational modifications (PTMs) is critical for a better understanding of functions of histone proteoforms in epigenetic control of gene expression. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based top-down proteomics (TDP) is a valuable approach for delineating histone proteoforms because it can provide us with a bird's-eye view of histone proteoforms carrying diverse combinations of PTMs. Here, we present the first example of coupling capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), and MS for online multi-dimensional separations of histone proteoforms. Our CZE-high-field asymmetric waveform IMS (FAIMS)-MS/MS platform identified 366 histone proteoforms from a commercial calf histone sample using a low microgram amount of histone sample as the starting material. CZE-FAIMS-MS/MS improved the number of histone proteoform identifications by about 3 folds compared to CZE-MS/MS alone (without FAIMS). The results indicate that CZE-FAIMS-MS/MS could be a useful tool for comprehensive characterization of histone proteoforms with high sensitivity.

### Sample Protocol
The histone extract was dissolved in 50 mM NH4OAc (pH 6.5 or pH 9.0) to prepare 2 mg/mL histone samples for CZE-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the ProSightPD 1_1 node for TDP was used for database search. The detailed database searching setup was the same as our previous work. Briefly, the MS1 spectra were firstly averaged using the cRAWler algorithm in Proteome Discoverer. The precursor m/z tolerance was set to 0.2 m/z. For both precursor and fragmentation Xtract parameters, the signal-to-noise ratio threshold, the lowest and the highest m/z were set to 3, 200, and 4000, respectively. Then deconvolution was performed by the Xtract algorithm followed by database searching against a Bos taurus database (downloaded from http://proteinaceous.net/-database-warehouse-legacy/ in April 2018). A three-prone database searching was performed: (1) a search was performed with a 2-Da and 10-ppm mass tolerance of absolute mass for MS1 and MS2, respectively; (2) a subsequent biomarker search was performed to find unreported truncated proteoforms with 10 ppm tolerance for both MS1 and MS2; (3) the last search was performed with a 1000-Da mass tolerance for MS1, and a 10-ppm mass tolerance for MS2 for matching unexpected PTMs. The target-decoy strategy was exploited for evaluating the false discovery rates (FDRs). FDR estimation was performed for each of three search strategies. The identified proteoform-spectrum matches (PrSMs) and proteoforms were filtered using a 1% FDR. The raw files for FAIMS CV ranging from +10 V to +30 V were analyzed with the TopPIC (Top-down mass spectrometry based proteoform identification and characterization) software (version 1.4.7). The raw files were firstly converted to mzML files with the MsConvert software, and spectral deconvolution was performed with the TopFD (Top-down mass spectrometry feature detection) software, generating msalign files, which were used as the input for database searching using TopPIC. The spectra were searched against a Bos taurus database (downloaded from Swiss-Uniprot, March 2022). FDRs were estimated using the target-decoy approach. A 1% PrSM-level FDR and a 5% proteoform-level FDR were employed to filter the identifications. The mass error tolerance was 15 ppm. The mass error tolerance was 1.2 Da for identifying PrSM clusters. The maximum mass shift was 500 Da. The maximum number of mass shift was set to 2.

### Publication Abstract
Characterization of histone proteoforms with various post-translational modifications (PTMs) is critical for a better understanding of functions of histone proteoforms in epigenetic control of gene expression. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based top-down proteomics (TDP) is a valuable approach for delineating histone proteoforms because it can provide us with a bird's-eye view of histone proteoforms carrying diverse combinations of PTMs. Here, we present the first example of coupling capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), ion mobility spectrometry (IMS), and MS for online multi-dimensional separations of histone proteoforms. Our CZE-high-field asymmetric waveform IMS (FAIMS)-MS/MS platform identified 366 (ProSight PD) and 602 (TopPIC) histone proteoforms from a commercial calf histone sample using a low microgram amount of histone sample as the starting material. CZE-FAIMS-MS/MS improved the number of histone proteoform identifications by about 3 folds compared to CZE-MS/MS alone (without FAIMS). The results indicate that CZE-FAIMS-MS/MS could be a useful tool for comprehensive characterization of histone proteoforms with high sensitivity.

### Keywords
Post-translational modification, Capillary zone electrophoresis, High-field asymmetric waveform ion mobility spectrometry, Top-down proteomics, Histone

### Affiliations
Chemistry, Michigan State University
Michigan State University 

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Chemistry, Michigan State University


