### Accession
PXD029145

### Title
CLUH controls astrin-1 expression to couple mitochondrial metabolism to cell cycle progression

### Description
Proliferating cells undergo metabolic changes in synchrony with cell cycle progression and cell division. Mitochondria provide fuel, metabolites, and ATP during different phases of the cell cycle, however it is not completely understood how mitochondrial function and the cell cycle are coordinated. CLUH is a post-transcriptional regulator of mRNAs encoding mitochondrial proteins involved in oxidative phosphorylation and several metabolic pathways. Here, we show a role of CLUH in regulating the expression of astrin, which is involved in metaphase to anaphase progression, centrosome integrity, and mTORC1 inhibition. We find that CLUH binds both the SPAG5 mRNA and its product astrin, and controls the synthesis and the stability of the full-length astrin-1 isoform. We show that CLUH interacts with astrin-1 specifically during interphase. Astrin-depleted cells show mislocalized CLUH at focal adhesions, mTORC1 hyperactivation and enhanced anabolism. On the other hand, cells lacking CLUH show decreased astrin levels and increased mTORC1 signaling, but cannot sustain anaplerotic and anabolic pathways. In absence of CLUH, cells fail to grow during G1, and progress faster through the cell cycle, indicating dysregulated matching of growth, metabolism and cell cycling. Our data reveal a role of CLUH in coupling growth signaling pathways and mitochondrial metabolism with cell cycle progression.

### Sample Protocol
For immunoprecipitation of CLUH followed by mass spectrometry of WT cells enriched in G2, cells were collected and lysed IP buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, pH7.4; 50 mM KCl; 0.1% Triton X-100 supplemented freshly with protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich)] for 30 min on ice after passing 3x through syringe (30G x 1/2”, B. Braun Sterican). Afterwards, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 30 min and protein amount was determined by standard Bradford assay (Biorad). For each reaction, 400 μg of protein were diluted in 250 μl IP buffer and incubated for 3h in head-to-toe agitation at 4°C with 0.5 μg of the rabbit polyclonal rabbit anti-CLUH (#NB100-93305), and as control rabbit polyclonal anti-FLAG (#F7425 from Sigma-Aldrich). 20 μl of prewashed magnetic Dynabeads Protein G (Invitrogen) were added per reaction and incubated for 1 h in head-to-toe agitation at 4°C. Afterwards, beads were washed five times with IP buffer. Elution was performed with 30 µl SP3 lysis buffer (5% SDS in 1x PBS) by vortexing for 1 min and boiling at 95°C for 5 min. Afterwards, proteins were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 55°C and alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide at RT for 30 min in the dark. Next, samples were centrifuged at 20,000 x g for 10 min and supernatant was transferred to new tube and stored at -20°C until they were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded with solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent). Peptides were chromatographically separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using the following gradient: 3-5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 1 min, 5% - 30% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80 % acetonitrile) within 40 min, 30% -50% solvent B 8 min and 40% to 95% solvent B within 1 min, followed by washing with 95% solvent B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. The MS1 survey scan was acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.8 using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against a canonical Uniprot human fasta database, which was modified by replacing the default entry for SPAG5 (Q96R06) by two separate entries representing (i) the N-terminal 125 amino acids and (ii) the C-terminal sequence from position 126 on. The MaxQuant default list was used to filter for common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was restricted to replicates of the same condition. LFQ quantification was used with default settings. LFQ intensities were loaded into in Perseus version 1.6.1.1. Decoys and potential contaminants were removed and the dataset was filtered for at least 4 out of 4 values in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the left end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults. Two sample Student’s T-test were calculated using permutation-based FDR estimation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cluh; spag5; mitochondria

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
University of Cologne

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Elena I. Rugarli
University of Cologne


