### Accession
PXD030676

### Title
Gill metaproteomic of deep-sea mussel Gigantidas haimaensis

### Description
This projiect aims to identify the proteome of the symbiotic gill, including the host and symbiotic bacteria proteins, and to reveal the metabolic interdependence among the tripartite holobiont which is based on mussel, methane-oxidizing endosymbiont and sulfur-oxidizing episymbiont.

### Sample Protocol
100 mg gill tissue was ruptured in Lysing Matrix Z (MPBIO, France) using a Bench-Top Bead Beating Lysis System (MPBIO, France) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 40 mM DTT, 0.5% SDS, and protease inhibitor cocktail, pH = 8.0), and sonicated from 5 min at 400 W to break the nucleic acids using a Ultrasonic Homogenizer (SCIENTZ, China). Protein solution was purified by centrifugation and quantified using the Bradford method. Approximately 40 μg protein was used in SDS-PAGE analysis on a 4-12% gradient gel and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue to visualize the protein bands. Each gel was then cut into eight slices and destained with 100 mM NH4HCO3, 50 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% CAN, then 100% CAN. Each sample was reduced using 10 mM DTT and alkylated using 55 mM iodoacetamide. In-gel digestion was performed using 5 µg/mL MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific, USA) for 14 h at 37 °C. The Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Scientific, USA) were applied for desalting. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed on a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Thermo Scientific, USA) coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometry (Thermo Scientific, USA). The following 120-min mobile phase mixing gradient was applied: an initial 5 min from mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) to 5 min of 3% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN), 5 min from 3% to 8% B, 60 min from 8% to 25% B, 30 min from 25% to 40% B, 10 min from 40% to 98% B, and 5 min at 98% B. The flow rate was controlled at 300 nl/min. The following settings were applied in Orbitrap analysis: positive ion mode, MS resolution: 60,000, scan range: 300-1500 m/z, AGC target: standard, dynamic exclusion duration: 60 s, HCD in MS/MS, HCD collision energy: 30%, and isolation window: 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were converted into MGF files using ThermoRawFileParser v1.3.2 and searched using the MetaPro-IQ pipeline against our custom database. The search sensitivity and amount of protein identified were optimized by following an iterative pipeline. In brief, a search against the whole custom database was performed to generate a “pseudo-metaproteome” database for each sample. A typical target-decoy database search (FDR < 0.01) was performed and the resulting proteins for all samples were combined and de-duplicated to generate an combined non-redundant database. The original raw files were searched for protein identification against the non-redundant database using MaxQuant v1.6.17.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cold seep, Symbiosis, Bathymodioline, Metaproteome, Chemosynthesis, Mytilidae

### Affiliations
Department of Biology,Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China
Hong Kong Baptist University

### Submitter
Yitao LIN

### Lab Head
Dr Jian-wen Qiu
Department of Biology,Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong, China


