### Accession
PXD045755

### Title
Bacterial extracellular vesicles of human amniotic fluid and maternal feces

### Description
Fecal and amniotic fluid samples were collected from 25 pregnant women undergoing elective Caesarean section delivery after a term pregnancy at Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) were isolated from both sample types and their protein cargo analyzed using LC-ESI-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated from amniotic fluid using ultracentrifugation and subsequent density gradient ultracentrifugation. EVs were isolated from fecal matter by size-exclusion chromatography and density gradient ultracentrifugation. Proteins were isolated from isolated EVs using methanol precipitation. Mass spectrometry analysis of the EV proteins was performed at the Turku Proteomics Facility (Turku, Finland). Peptides digested with trypsin were re-suspended in 15 μl of formic acid, and 5 μl of this was analyzed. The LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses were performed in a nanoflow HPLC system (Easy-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. The peptides were first loaded onto a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 μm x 15 cm, ReproSil-Pur 5 μm 200 Å C18-AQ, Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mobile phase consisted of water with 0.1% formic acid (solvent A) and acetonitrile/water (80:20 (v/v)) with 0.1% formic acid (solvent B). The peptides were then eluted with a linear 20 min gradient of solvent B from 8% to 43%. MS data was acquired automatically using Thermo Xcalibur 4.1. software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The information-dependent acquisition method consisted of an Orbitrap MS survey scan of mass range 300–2000 m/z followed by HCD fragmentation for the 10 most intense peptide ions.

### Data Protocol
The proteomic analysis of the sample data was performed with Peaks Studio software (version 10.6), and searches of the UniProt Swissprot and UniProt trEMBL (UniProt release 2021_04) databases with the parent mass error tolerance set at 10.0ppm and the fragment mass error tolerance at 0.02 Da were carried out to identify the proteins. The FDR for both the peptide and protein identifications was set at 1.0% and only the top proteins in each group were accepted. A protein was considered identified if it was represented by at least one unique peptide and the total protein coverage of the supporting peptides was ≥1%.  Negative controls were analyzed in parallel with the EV-derived proteins and proteins identified in control samples were excluded from the EV protein identification results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Amniotic fluid, Extracellular vesicles, Bacteria, Feces

### Affiliations
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu,Oulu, Finland Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland
University of Oulu

### Submitter
Anna Kaisanlahti

### Lab Head
Dr Terhi Tapiainen
Biocenter Oulu, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. Research Unit of Clinical Medicine, University of Oulu,Oulu, Finland Department of Pediatrics and Adolescent Medicine, Oulu University Hospital, Oulu, Finland


