### Accession
PXD028425

### Title
Human menstrual blood-derived stem cell transplantation suppresses liver injury in DDC-induced chronic cholestasis

### Description
Increasing studies suggested the treatment potential of mesenchymal stem cells in variety diseases. Evidence showed that MSCs could promote injured tissue repair and improve disease mortality. These indicated that MSC transplantation may be an ideal candidate for cholestasis treatment.We found that MenSC transplantation could significantly improve the symptoms and pathological changes of DDC-induced cholestasis liver injury in mice.

### Sample Protocol
The liver samples were separately powered with liquid nitrogen and suspended in lysis buffer [8 M urea, 50 mM Tris 8.0, 1% NP40, 1% NaDOC (sodium deoxycholate), 5 mM dithiothreitol, 2 mM EDTA, 30 mM nicotinamide, 3 µm trichostatin A, 1% cocktail protease (Sigma, P8215, for use with fungal extracts) and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Solarbio, P1260)]. Samples were sonicated and centrifuged at 4°C for 10 min at 20000 g to remove tissue fragments. Protein content was detected using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare). Equal amounts of protein were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 45 min at 30°C, alkylated with 30 mM iodoacetamide for 1 h in the dark at room temperature, then precipitated with acetone on ice. The precipitate was washed with acetone and suspended in 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C. 1% trifluoroacetic acid was used to stop the digestion. Peptide obtained was cleaned using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex) and vacuum-dried in a Scan-Vac maxi-beta (Labogene).

### Data Protocol
The peptide samples were reconstituted in 120 μl 0.5 M TEAB and treated using a TMTsixplex label reagent kit (Pierce, 90068). One unit of TMT reagent (5 mg) was thawed and reconstituted in 420 μl acetonitrile. Subsequently, four reconstituted samples were mixed separately with four TMT reagents (126, 127, 128, and 129), incubated for 2 h at room temperature and then vacuum-dried. Finally, labeled samples were resuspended in water and mixed. The labeled peptide samples were fractionated for proteome analysis. Fractionation was performed with an XBridge Shield C18 RP column (Waters) in an LC20AD HPLC system (Shimadzu).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Liver injury; treatment; mensc

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University.310003, Qingchun Road, Hangzhou, China
Zhejiang

### Submitter
Y Y

### Lab Head
Dr Ya Yang
The First Affiliated Hospital, College of Medicine, Zhejiang University.310003, Qingchun Road, Hangzhou, China


