### Accession
PXD043940

### Title
UMAD1 contributes to ESCRT-III dynamic subunit turnover during cytokinetic abscission

### Description
Abscission is the final stage of cytokinesis whereby the midbody, a thin intercellular bridge, is resolved to separate the daughter cells. Cytokinetic abscission is mediated by the Endosomal Sorting Complex Required for Transport (ESCRT), a conserved membrane remodelling machinery. The midbody organiser CEP55 recruits early acting ESCRT factors such as ESCRT-I and ALIX, which subsequently initiate the formation of ESCRT-III polymers that sever the midbody. We now identify UMAD1 as an ESCRT-I subunit that facilitates abscission. UMAD1 selectively associates with VPS37C and VPS37B, supporting the formation of cytokinesis-specific ESCRT-I assemblies. TSG101 recruits UMAD1 to the site of midbody abscission, to stabilise the CEP55/ESCRT-I interaction. We further demonstrate that the UMAD1/ESCRT-I interaction facilitates the final step of cytokinesis. Paradoxically, UMAD1 and ALIX co-depletion has synergistic effects on abscission whilst ESCRT-III recruitment to the midbody is not inhibited. Importantly, we find that both UMAD1 and ALIX are required for the dynamic exchange of ESCRT-III subunits at the midbody. Therefore, UMAD1 reveals a key functional connection between ESCRT-I and ESCRT-III that is required for cytokinesis.

### Sample Protocol
YFP-tagged proteins stably expressed in HeLa or HEK 293T cells were affinity-purified using GFP-Trap beads. Stable expression of unfused YFP (YFP-Ø) served as a negative control so that the purified protein fractions were analysed by quantitative immunoprecipitation tandem mass tag (IP-TMT) based mass spectrometry (MS) to identify hits enriched over YFP-Ø.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer v2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (PD 2.2). Signal values across samples were normalised to eliminate variation in signal at the level of sample preparation and data acquisition. Data processed this way was then searched using Mascot search algorithm and Sequest search engine embedded in PD 2.2, against the current version of the reviewed Swissprot Homo Sapiens (Human) database downloaded from Uniprot. Data analysis was performed using Perseus (Tyanova et al., 2016). Choose Experiment type: Affinity purification (IP-MS)

### Publication Abstract
Abscission is the final stage of cytokinesis whereby the midbody, a thin intercellular bridge, is resolved to separate the daughter cells. Cytokinetic abscission is mediated by the endosomal sorting complex required for transport (ESCRT), a conserved membrane remodelling machinery. The midbody organiser CEP55 recruits early acting ESCRT factors such as ESCRT-I and ALIX (also known as PDCD6IP), which subsequently initiate the formation of ESCRT-III polymers that sever the midbody. We now identify UMAD1 as an ESCRT-I subunit that facilitates abscission. UMAD1 selectively associates with VPS37C and VPS37B, supporting the formation of cytokinesis-specific ESCRT-I assemblies. TSG101 recruits UMAD1 to the site of midbody abscission, to stabilise the CEP55-ESCRT-I interaction. We further demonstrate that the UMAD1-ESCRT-I interaction facilitates the final step of cytokinesis. Paradoxically, UMAD1 and ALIX co-depletion has synergistic effects on abscission, whereas ESCRT-III recruitment to the midbody is not inhibited. Importantly, we find that both UMAD1 and ALIX are required for the dynamic exchange of ESCRT-III subunits at the midbody. Therefore, UMAD1 reveals a key functional connection between ESCRT-I and ESCRT-III that is required for cytokinesis.

### Keywords
Cytokinesis; midbody; escrt; membrane remodelling

### Affiliations
KCL
King’s College London

### Submitter
xiaoping yang

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Martin-Serrano
King’s College London


