### Accession
PXD026681

### Title
NGLY1 deficiency perturbs cerebral development by affecting stress tolerability and neural stem cell signaling during neurogenesis

### Description
Although NGLY1 deficiency has been discovered as a result of mutations in the NGLY1 gene, cellular and molecular mechanisms underlying the neurological abnormalities due to NGLY1 malfunction in the brain remain mostly unknown. Using human cerebral organoid (CO) models and systems biology techniques, we uncovered NGLY1 deficiencyinduced alterations at the early stage of cerebral development. Despite the similar vitality and cellular pluripotency of NGLY1-functional and -deficient WA09 hESCs, COs developed from the NGLY1-deficient hESCs had the defective formation of SATB2+ upper-layer neurons and attenuation of STAT3 and HES1 signaling critical for sustaining radial glia. The NGLY1-deficient CO cells, compared with the NGLY1-functional ones, also presented higher vulnerability to multiple stressors. Bulk and single-cell analysis of transcriptomes revealed that NGLY1-deficient COs showed a propensity for premature neuronal differentiation, accompanied by significant downregulation of secretory and transcription factors, including TTR, IGFBP2, and ID4. Supplementing recombinant TTR to NGLY1-deficient CO cells reduced their susceptibility to proteasome inhibition. Ectopic expression of NGLY1 led to IGFBP2 and ID4 upregulation in CO cells developed from NGLY-deficient patientderived induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs). Moreover, ID4 expression, STAT3 signaling, and proliferation were enhanced by treatment of recombinant IGFBP2 in CO cells developed from the NGLY1-deficient WA09 hESCs and patient-derived iPSCs. Our findings indicate that NGLY1 could be critical for regulating various stress responses and maintaining neural stem cells (NSCs) in the developing cerebrum. In patients, NGLY1 deficiencyassociated neurological abnormalities, including microcephaly, may be a consequence of aberrations in NSC signaling sustained by NGLY1.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol with slight modifications.4 Briefly, the samples were solubilized in 8M urea, 1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), and 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (all from MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) and sonicated on ice for 5 minutes. Samples were reduced with 1M DTT and incubated at 30°C for 1 hour, followed by centrifugation at 13,000 RCF for 5 minutes. Around 50 μg of the reduced samples were transferred onto pre-rinsed Vivacon 500 spin column (30 kD MWCO; Sartorius, Goettingen, Germany), washed using 8 M 6 urea in 100 mM AmBic, and spun for 10 minutes at 13,000 RCF at room temperature. SDS was removed by washing three times with 8M urea in 100 mM AmBic and spinning for 10 minutes at 13,000 RCF. Reduced samples were alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 100 mM AmBic for 20 min in dark at room temperature. IAA was then removed by washing two times with 8M urea in 100 mM AmBic, and again two times with 50mM AmBic in a similar fashion. Five μg of trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega) in 10 mM AmBic was added and incubated rocking overnight at 37°C. Following overnight digestion, samples were centrifuged at 13,000 RCF and the flow-through was collected, reduced to ~1 μL by vacuum centrifugation then resuspended in 3% acetonitrile (CAN). The peptide concentration was measured on a NanoDrop 2000/2000c spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA) at 205 nm wavelength. Samples were then acidified to a final concentration of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. The LC-MS/MS of digested proteins was performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-flow system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA) coupled to an LTQ XL Orbitrap ETD MS instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA). Around 1.5 μg of peptide samples were pre-concentrated onto a C18 trapping column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm; Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA) for 10 minutes at a flow rate of 5 μL/min, buffer-used 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were then separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min by a 15 cm long C18 separation column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 75 μm × 15 cm; Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA) with a linear gradient of 5% – 45% buffer B for 65 munites, followed by a 5-minute wash with 90% buffer B, and a 15-minute equilibration with 5% buffer B (buffer A: 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, buffer B: 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid). LC and MS acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Carlsbad, CA). The LTQ-Orbitrap instrument was operated at positive ion mode with normalized collision energy set to 35%. All MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the data-dependent mode in the full mass range of m/z 300 to 2000 at a resolution of 60000 in the FT mode. Ten most intense precursor ions were selected for MS/MS scan by collision-induced dissociation (CID) using a dynamic exclusion of 5 seconds, the minimum relative signal intensity of 1000, and a ≥2 positive charge state. All samples were performed in technical triplicate analysis.

### Data Protocol
To identify and quantify the protein peptides, MS/MS spectra were analyzed and subjected to label-free quantification (LFQ) using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) with the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot human database. Search parameters used were a maximum 7 number of miss-cleavages for trypsin as two per peptide; carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while Methionine oxidation was considered as a variable modification. LFQ was activated with a minimum ratio count of 2 as well as allowed matching between runs and unidentified features. The standard Orbitrap settings were used with the mass tolerances for MS and MS/MS were 20 ppm and 0.5 Da. Only proteins that were identified with more than 2 peptides and the minimum length of 7 amino acids were considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in N-glycanase 1 (NGLY1), which deglycosylates misfolded glycoproteins for degradation, can cause NGLY1 deficiency in patients and their abnormal fetal development in multiple organs, including microcephaly and other neurological disorders. Using cerebral organoids (COs) developed from human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), we investigate how NGLY1 dysfunction disturbs early brain development. While NGLY1 loss had limited impact on the undifferentiated cells, COs developed from NGLY1-deficient hESCs showed defective formation of SATB2-positive upper-layer neurons, and attenuation of STAT3 and HES1 signaling critical for sustaining radial glia. Bulk and single-cell transcriptomic analysis revealed premature neuronal differentiation accompanied by downregulation of secreted and transcription factors, including TTR, IGFBP2, and ID4 in NGLY1-deficient COs. NGLY1 malfunction also dysregulated ID4 and enhanced neuronal differentiation in CO transplants developed in vivo. NGLY1-deficient CO cells were more vulnerable to multiple stressors; treating the deficient cells with recombinant TTR reduced their susceptibility to stress from proteasome inactivation, likely through LRP2-mediated activation of MAPK signaling. Expressing NGLY1 led to IGFBP2 and ID4 upregulation in CO cells developed from NGLY1-deficiency patient's hiPSCs. In addition, treatment with recombinant IGFBP2 enhanced ID4 expression, STAT3 signaling, and proliferation of NGLY1-deficient CO cells. Overall, our discoveries suggest that dysregulation of stress responses and neural precursor differentiation underlies the brain abnormalities observed in NGLY1-deficient individuals.

### Keywords
Ngly1, Cerebral organoids, Neurodevelopment, Neuroprogenitors, Congenital deglycosylation disorder, Stress responses, Human pluripotent stem cells, Secretory factors

### Affiliations
Research associate
Strand Leader BENM, Lloyd Sansom Chair Future Industries Institute, UniSA

### Submitter
Parul Mittal

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Dr. Peter Hoffmann
Strand Leader BENM, Lloyd Sansom Chair Future Industries Institute, UniSA


