### Accession
PXD008145

### Title
Skeletal muscle-specific methyltransferase METTL21C trimethylates p97 and regulates autophagy-associated protein breakdown

### Description
Protein aggregates and cytoplasmic vacuolization are major hallmarks of multisystem proteinopathies (MSP) that lead to muscle weakness. Here, we identify METTL21C as a novel skeletal muscle-specific lysine methyltransferase. Insertion of a -galactosidase cassette into the Mettl21c mouse locus revealed METTL21C is specifically expressed in MYH7 positive skeletal muscle fibers. Ablation of the Mettl21c gene reduced endurance capacity and led to accumulation of cellular residuals due to incomplete autophagy in the skeletal muscle of Mettl21c-/- mutants during aging. Moreover, denervation-induced muscle atrophy highlighted further impairments of autophagy-related proteins, including LC3, p62, and cathepsins in Mettl21c-/- muscles. In addition, we demonstrate METTL21C interacts with the ATPase p97 (VCP), which is mutated in various human MSP conditions. We also reveal METTL21C trimethylates p97 on Lys315 residue, and found loss of this modification reduced p97 hexamer formation and ATPase activity in vivo. We conclude the methyltransferase METTL21C is an important modulator of protein degradation in skeletal muscle under both normal and enhanced protein breakdown conditions due to its ability to trimethylate and regulate p97.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of complex muscle lysates for proteomic analysis was performed as previously described. Briefly, proteins were separated using 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen). After Coomassie staining, each lane was cut into ten slices, followed by de-staining of the gel pieces, reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 45 min and carbamidomethylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark for 30 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested using the proteases LysC (Wako) and Trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37°C, the peptides were extracted in acetonitrile and, after removal of the organic solvent using a SpeedVac concentrator, samples were acidified with trifluoracetic acid and desalted using Stop and Go Extraction Tips.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic analysis was performed using an Easy nLC 1000 UHPLC coupled to a QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The raw files were processed using MaxQuant Software and its implemented Andromeda search engine. Parameters were set to default values; Methyl (KR), Dimethyl (KR) and Trimethyl (K) were added as variable modifications for analysis of the methyltransferase assay. For analysis of MYH isoforms only unique peptides were used for quantification. GO annotations, statistical analysis and t-tests were performed using Perseus Software.

### Publication Abstract
Protein aggregates and cytoplasmic vacuolization are major hallmarks of multisystem proteinopathies (MSPs) that lead to muscle weakness. Here, we identify METTL21C as a skeletal muscle-specific lysine methyltransferase. Insertion of a &#x3b2;-galactosidase cassette into the Mettl21c mouse locus revealed that METTL21C is specifically expressed in MYH7-positive skeletal muscle fibers. Ablation of the Mettl21c gene reduced endurance capacity and led to age-dependent accumulation of autophagic vacuoles in skeletal muscle. Denervation-induced muscle atrophy highlighted further impairments of autophagy-related proteins, including LC3, p62, and cathepsins, in Mettl21c<sup>-/-</sup> muscles. In addition, we demonstrate that METTL21C interacts with the ATPase p97 (VCP), which is mutated in various human MSP conditions. We reveal that METTL21C trimethylates p97 on the Lys315 residue and found that loss of this modification reduced p97 hexamer formation and ATPase activity in&#xa0;vivo. We conclude that the methyltransferase METTL21C is an important modulator of protein degradation in skeletal muscle under both normal and enhanced protein breakdown conditions.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Proteomics, Methylation

### Affiliations
CECAD/Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany
Institute for Genetics/CECAD (AG Krüger)

### Submitter
Janica  Wiederstein

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Krüger
CECAD/Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany


