### Accession
PXD044554

### Title
Skeletal muscle proteomics underpin multifaceted mitochondrial dysfunction in Friedreich´s Ataxia

### Description
Friedreich´s Ataxia (FRDA) is a severe neuromuscular disorder caused by a deficiency of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. While some aspects of FRDA pathology are developmental, the causes underlying the steady progression are unclear. The inaccessibility of key affected tissues to sampling is a main hurdle. Skeletal muscle displays a disease phenotype and may be sampled in vivo to address open questions on FRDA pathophysiology. We performed a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics analysis in gastrocnemius skeletal muscle biopsies from genetically confirmed FRDA patients (n=5) and controls. Our data corroborate a predominant mitochondrial biosignature of FRDA, which extends beyond a mere oxidative phosphorylation failure. Skeletal muscle proteomics highlighted a derangement of mitochondrial architecture and maintenance pathways and an adaptative metabolic shift of contractile proteins. The present findings are relevant for the design of future therapeutic strategies and highlight the value of skeletal muscle -omics as disease state readout in FRDA.

### Sample Protocol
Skeletal muscle biopsies were transferred into ammonium-bicarbonate buffer (100mM, pH 8.0) containing 0.5% sodium deoxycholate. Proteins were extracted using a Precellys Evolution homogenizer. Protein quantification was performed via Bradford Assay with ROTI®-Nanoquant K880 (Carl Roth). Sample volumes equivalent to 50µg of protein were diluted using ammonium-bicarbonate buffer, reduced by adding dithiothreitol, and digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Free cysteines were alkylated by iodoacetamide in ABC-buffer. Peptides were buffer exchanged to 100µl of 100mM TEAB-buffer (pH8.5) using Pierce Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (P/N 89852, Thermo Scientific) and TMTpro labeled (TMTpro™ 16plex Label Reagent Set, P/N A44521, Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using a XBridge Peptide BEH C18 column, 4.6mm x 250mm, 300Å, 5µm (P/N 186003625, Waters).  A total of 47 fractions were collected. These fractions were recombined into 16 pools (as indicated by the MS raw data file), lyophilized and stored dry at -20°C. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid and 5% per pool subjected to nanoLC-MS.  Pooled peptide fractions were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 RSCL nano-HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Eclipse mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ionization source. Survey full scan MS spectra were acquired from 400 to 1600 m/z at a resolution of 120,000 with an isolation window of 0.7 mass-to-charge ratio (m/z), a maximum injection time (IT) of 50 ms, and automatic gain control (AGC) target 400,000. The MS2 spectra were measured in the Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 50,000 with a maximum IT of 200 ms, and AGC target or 100,000. Fragmentation was performed by higher-energy collisional dissociation with normalized collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
The MS data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 2.5 (Thermo Scientific). MS/MS spectra were searched by Sequest HT engine against a Uniprot human reference proteome database. The search parameters were as follows: Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with two missed cleavages being allowed. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl on cysteine; variable modifications were oxidation of methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine, and acetylation and/or methionine loss of the protein N-terminus. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was 20 mmu. Maximum false discovery rate (FDR) for protein and peptide identification was set to 1%. For quantitation, the protein fold changes were calculated based on the fourteen TMTpro reporter ion intensities present in MS2 scans. The reporter ion intensities were extracted using the default software settings. Comparison of protein abundances between FRDA and controls was performed by means t-test. DE proteins interactions were investigated interrogating the STRING database.

### Publication Abstract
Friedreich's ataxia (FRDA) is a severe multisystemic disorder caused by a deficiency of the mitochondrial protein frataxin. While some aspects of FRDA pathology are developmental, the causes underlying the steady progression are unclear. The inaccessibility of key affected tissues to sampling is a main hurdle. Skeletal muscle displays a disease phenotype and may be sampled <i>in vivo</i> to address open questions on FRDA pathophysiology. Thus, we performed a quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics analysis in gastrocnemius skeletal muscle biopsies from genetically confirmed FRDA patients (<i>n</i> = 5) and controls. Obtained data files were processed using Proteome Discoverer and searched by Sequest HT engine against a UniProt human reference proteome database. Comparing skeletal muscle proteomics profiles between FRDA and controls, we identified 228 significant differentially expressed (DE) proteins, of which 227 were downregulated in FRDA. Principal component analysis showed a clear separation between FRDA and control samples. Interactome analysis revealed clustering of DE proteins in oxidative phosphorylation, ribosomal elements, mitochondrial architecture control, and fission/fusion pathways. DE findings in the muscle-specific proteomics suggested a shift toward fast-twitching glycolytic fibers. Notably, most DE proteins (169/228, 74%) are target of the transcription factor nuclear factor-erythroid 2. Our data corroborate a mitochondrial biosignature of FRDA, which extends beyond a mere oxidative phosphorylation failure. Skeletal muscle proteomics highlighted a derangement of mitochondrial architecture and maintenance pathways and a likely adaptive metabolic shift of contractile proteins. The present findings are relevant for the design of future therapeutic strategies and highlight the value of skeletal muscle-omics as disease state readout in FRDA.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Frataxin, Friedreich´s ataxia, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Innsbruck Medical University, Biocenter
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Protein Core Facility, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria

### Submitter
Klaus Faserl

### Lab Head
Dr Klaus Faserl
Institute of Medical Biochemistry, Protein Core Facility, Medical University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria


