### Accession
PXD037858

### Title
A dual role for FADD in human T-cell lymphoblastic neo-plasms

### Description
In this study, we set out to get insight into the clinical implications of FADD expres-sion in T-cell lymphoblastic neoplasms, and to explore the landscape of deregulated cell signaling events in human T-cell lymphoblastic neoplasms, taking FADD expression as the defining variable.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 5 % SDS in 50 mM TEAB supplemented with cOmplete, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich), 1.2 mM Sodium Molybdate, 1 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, 4 mM Sodium Tartrate Dihydrate, 5 mM Glycerophosphate, 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide and 1 unit/µL Universal Nuclease (Thermo Scientific). Samples were prepared for mass spectrometry using S-Trap micro columns (Protifi) according to the manufacturer recommended protocol. Proteins were reduced by 20 mM TCEP at 37°C for 30 min; and alkylated by 20 mM N-ethylmaleimide in the dark for 30 min. A ratio of 1:10 wt:wt Trypsin TPCK Treated (Worthington-Biochem) was used to digest the samples for 2 h at 47°C. Eluted peptides were dried down and resuspended in loading buffer (2 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid).

### Data Protocol
Peptide samples were injected on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC (Thermo Fisher Sci-entific) connected to an Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were injected on a PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (300 µm ID x 5 mm, 5 µm, 100 Å) followed by separation on an EASY-Spray column (50 cm x 75 µm ID, PepMap C18, 2 µm, 100 Å) (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Buffer A consisted of water containing 0.1 % FA and Buffer B of 80 % acetonitrile containing 0.1 % FA. Peptides were separated with a liner gradient of 3 − 35 % Buffer B over 115 min followed by a step from 35 − 90 % Buffer B in 10.5 min at 250 nL/min and held at 90 % for 4.5 min. The gra-dient was then decreased to 3 % Buffer B in 0.5 min at 250 nL/min for 10 min. Column temperature was controlled at 45°C. The Orbitrap FusionTM LumosTM TribridTM mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS scan spectra were acquired in the range of m/z 390 to 1,010 with a standard automatic gain control (AGC) target and a maximum injection time of 55 ms, at a resolution of 60,000. Targeted MS2 scan spectra were acquired in the range of m/z 200 to 1,600 using 8 m/z quadrupole isolation windows, AGC of 1000 %, at a resolution of 15,000, and higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was performed in one-step collision energy of 33 %. An electrospray voltage was static and capillary temperature of 275°C, with expected LC peak width of 20s. No sheath and auxiliary gas flow, was used. DIA files were processed on Spectronaut (version 15) performing the directDIATM experimental analysis workflow using default settings with N-ethylmaleimide on cysteine as fixed modification, searched against a SwissProt Homo sapiens database (containing 42,393 database entries with isoforms; downloaded on 14 March 2021).

### Publication Abstract
A reduction in <i>FADD</i> levels has been reported in precursor T-cell neoplasms and other tumor types. Such reduction would impact on the ability of tumor cells to undergo apoptosis and has been associated with poor clinical outcomes. However, FADD is also known to participate in non-apoptotic functions, but these mechanisms are not well-understood. Linking FADD expression to the severity of precursor T-cell neoplasms could indicate its use as a prognostic marker and may open new avenues for targeted therapeutic strategies. Using transcriptomic and clinical data from patients with precursor T-cell neoplasms, complemented by in vitro analysis of cellular functions and by high-throughput interactomics, our results allow us to propose a dual role for FADD in precursor T-cell neoplasms, whereby resisting cell death and chemotherapy would be a canonical consequence of FADD deficiency in these tumors, whereas deregulation of the cellular metabolism would be a relevant non-canonical function in patients expressing FADD. These results reveal that evaluation of FADD expression in precursor T-cell neoplasms may aid in the understanding of the biological processes that are affected in the tumor cells. The altered biological processes can be of different natures depending on the availability of FADD influencing its ability to exert its canonical or non-canonical functions. Accordingly, specific therapeutic interventions would be needed in each case.

### Keywords
T-lbl, Fadd, Dia

### Affiliations
Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, NE2 4HH, United Kingdom
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científi-cas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain

### Submitter
Jose Luis Marin-Rubio

### Lab Head
Dr María Villa-Morales
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO), Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científi-cas-Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (CSIC-UAM), Madrid, Spain


