### Accession
PXD024101

### Title
Community Evaluation of Glycoproteomics Informatics Solutions Reveals High-Performance Search Strategies for Glycopeptide Analysis

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based glycoproteomics studies now routinely report thousands of intact glycopeptides. Diverse informatics solutions aiding the challenging glycopeptide identification process have recently appeared, but their strengths and weaknesses have not been established leaving a critical knowledge gap that prevents rapid progress in the field. This interlaboratory study comprising both expert users (13 teams) and developers (9 teams) of glycoproteomics software is the first to evaluate the relative performance of current informatics solutions for accurate and comprehensive N- and O-glycopeptide identification. Two LC-MS/MS datasets of intact glycopeptides from serum proteins were shared with all teams. The relative team performance for large-scale glycopeptide analysis was systematically established through 11 orthogonal performance tests based on the assigned spectra reported by each team. This study has found that a diversity of approaches exists for comprehensive glycopeptide data analysis, has demonstrated the team-to-team (vari)ability of identifying intact glycopeptides from shared datasets, and, importantly, has revealed several high-performance informatics solutions and search strategies that will be useful to improve the challenging glycoproteomics data analysis in the immediate future.

### Sample Protocol
In short, a synthetic N-glycopeptide from human vitamin K-dependent protein C (52 fmol, EVFVHPNYSK, Hex5HexNAc4NeuAc2) was spiked into human serum (5 µg, product number #31876, Thermo Fisher Scientific), the mixture digested using trypsin, and the resulting glycopeptides enriched, see Extended method for details.The enriched glycopeptide mixture (~1 μg/injection) was analysed twice using LC-MS/MS. Two slightly different acquisition modes were employed to generate File A and File B. In brief, peptides were separated using C18 reversed phase nanoLC and detected using a Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer. For both files, MS1 data were acquired at high resolution, data-dependent HCD-MS/MS was performed, and product-dependent (oxonium ion) triggered fragmentation of glycopeptide ions was enabled. Product-dependent triggered ETciD-/CID-MS/MS (Orbitrap) and EThcD-/CID-MS/MS (ion trap) events were scheduled for File A and File B, respectively. File A and File B were provided to all participants as .raw and .mgf files, see Extended method for details.

### Data Protocol
The participants were requested to use a fixed protein search space (human proteome, 20,231 UniProtKB reviewed sequences), but were free to choose the N- and O-glycan search space. Teams were asked not to include xylose and any glycan substitutions in the glycan search space. The participants reported their team details, identification strategy and the identified glycopeptides in a common reporting template. The returned reports were carefully checked for compliance to the study guideline. See Extended method for details.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Glycopeptide, Search engine, Software, Mass spectrometry, Informatics

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Biomolecular Discovery Research Centre, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Morten Thaysen-Andersen
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Biomolecular Discovery Research Centre, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia


