### Accession
PXD017942

### Title
Rickettsia rickettsii modulates the proteome of tick cells towards a protective state against apoptosis

### Description
Different types of cell death, including apoptosis, play an important role in the immune defense of arthropods, as infected cells are eliminated, preventing the dissemination of the infectious agent throughout the animal body. The apoptosis can be triggered by two main pathways: the intrinsic or mitochondrial pathway and the extrinsic or death receptor pathway. Both culminate in the activation of the effector caspases, such as caspase-3, resulting, for instance in DNA fragmentation and exposition of markers on the surface of the apoptotic cell, allowing its recognition and elimination by phagocytic cells. To ensure survival and proliferation, microorganisms can inhibit apoptosis of the host cell. The differential proteome of a tick cell line (BME26) in response to an experimental infection with Rickettsia rickettsii, causative agent of the severe Rocky Mountain spotted fever, showed that pro-apoptotic proteins are downregulated in the beginning of infection (6 h) and upregulated in a later time-point (48 h). We therefore evaluated the effects of infection on classic features of apoptotic cells: the spontaneous fragmentation of gDNA and the activity of caspase-3 and the exposition of phosphatidylserine in BME26 cells after induction with staurosporine, a classic activator of apoptosis. The spontaneous fragmentation of DNA was observed exclusively in non-infected cells. In addition, the activity of caspase-3 and the exposition of phosphatidylserine is lower in infected than in non-infected cells. Caspase-3 activity is also lower in infected IBU/ASE-16 cells, an embryonic tick cell line of one primary vector of R. rickettsii in Brazil, Amblyomma sculptum. Importantly, while the activation of caspase-3 exerted a detrimental effect on rickettsial proliferation in BME26 cells, the enzyme inhibition increased bacterial growth. Together, our results suggest that R. rickettsii controls the apoptosis in tick cells, which seems to be important to ensure the colonization of the vector cell. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report on the modulation of the apoptosis in a tick cell line upon the infection with a species of the genus Rickettsia.

### Sample Protocol
The embryonic cell line of the tick R. microplus, BME26, was cultured in L-15B300 medium. The embryonic cell line of the tick A. sculptum, IBU/ASE-16, was also cultured in L-15B300 medium supplemented with L- glutamine 2 mM. BME26 cells were incubated at 34 °C and IBU/ASE-16 cells at 30 °C. The number of viable cells per mL was determined by the use of an automatic cell counter (TC20® BioRad) after staining with 0,4% Trypan solution. The highly virulent Taiaçu strain of R. rickettsii was used in the experiments. Firstly, an inoculum of R. rickettsii in tick cells (BME26) was obtained. To that end, R. rickettsii-infected Vero cells were disrupted by three cycles of incubation at 37 °C followed by 3 s at liquid N2 to release rickettsiae. The resulting cell lysate was used to infect tick cells. After 72 h at 34°C, cells were used to infect additional cells. After additional 48 h at 34°C, cells were havested, suspended in supplemented L-15B300 medium containing 10% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and 5% bovine fetal serum, and stored in liquid N2 before use. An aliquot of the infected BME26 cells was used to gDNA extraction and quantification of rickettsiae in the inoculum as described below. For all experiments, the culture medium was replaced by L-15B300 medium without antibiotics three days before infection. Cells were infected using a MOI (multiplicity of infection) of 10. As control, cells were incubated with a lysate of non-infected BME26 or IBU/ASE-16 cells, disrupted by three cycles of incubation at 37 °C followed by 3 s at liquid N2. Five biological replicates of BME26 cells infected with R. rickettsii for either 6 or 48 h were obtained. As control, five biological replicates of BME26 cells incubated with a lysate of non-infected BME26 cells for 6 or 48 h were also obtained. After treatment, the cells were detached from the flasks with a cell scraper device in sterile SPG buffer containing a cocktail of protease inhibitors (P2714, Sigma-Aldrich). After centrifugation at 3,500 rpm for 10 min, the cells were suspended in a lysis buffer (100 mM NH4HCO3, 8M urea) containing the same cocktail of protease inhibitors described above, and then disrupted by thermal shock (three cycles of 2 min at 30 °C and 30 s in liquid N2). The protein concentration was determined using the bicinchoninic acid kit (BCA; Pierce ™, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's instructions. Fifty ug of proteins of each biological replicate were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT, final concentration of 5 mM), alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA, final concentration 10 mM) and digested with trypsin using a ratio of 1:50 (μg trypsin/μg protein) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution at 37°C overnight. The reaction was stopped with 1% formic acid and 10 μg of the resulting peptides were desalted with ZipTip C18 (Millipore Corporation) and concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge. The desalting peptides were suspended in 0.1% formic acid and submitted to liquid chromatography coupled to in-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analyses. The peptides were separated on an EASY-Column (10 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm) analytical column coupled to a high efficiency liquid chromatograph (HPLC), Easy Nano-LC model (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For elution of the peptides, a linear gradient of 0 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid was used in 75 min and flow of 300 nL / min. The voltage of the nanoelectrospray was 1.7 kV and the temperature was 275 °C. The mass spectrometer (model LTQ Orbitrap Velos, Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS / MS modes. MS spectra were acquired between 400 and 2000 m/z on the Orbitrap analyzer, with resolution of 60,000. The 20 most intense ions of the MS spectra were selected and fragmented by collision induced dissociation (CID) with 35% normalized collision energy. All biological replicates were analyzed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS raw files were imported into the MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 program and the search tool Andromeda was used to search peptides against a database. This database was composed of deduced amino acid sequences from transcripts obtained by a RNA-seq analysis of BME26 cells and protein sequences from bacteria of the genus Rickettsia available in Uniprot database, 65,279 sequences. For protein identification, it was used a tolerance of 10 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The cleavage by trypsin with a maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.994 Da) were selected as variable modifications. The peptides were validated by applying a false positive index filter of less than 1%. Differential proteome from infected cells in relation to control cells was determined using the LFQ (label-free quantification) method by Perseus v.1.5.2.6 software. Only proteins with p <0.05 (Student's t-test) with a multiple test correction (FDR) <5% and with a relative abundance (fold-change) ≥ 1.5 or ≤ 0.67 in infected cells in relation to control cells were considered modulated. Proteins with significant differences of relative abundance in infected cells in relation to the control but presenting a fold-change of ˂ 1.5 and ˃ 0.67 were considered unmodulated. Proteins identified exclusively in infected or control samples were also considered modulated (up or downregulated, respectively). The main component analysis (PCA) was performed using the online platform MetaboAnalyst 3.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rickettsiae, Proteome, Tick, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Departamento de Parasitologia Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1374, sala 39, Sao Paulo, Brazil

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Andréa Cristina Fogaça
Departamento de Parasitologia Instituto de Ciências Biomédicas, Universidade de São Paulo Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 1374, sala 39, Sao Paulo, Brazil


