### Accession
PXD025866

### Title
Systematic analysis of the ubiquitome in mouse testis

### Description
The ubiquitome was systematically investigated in mouse testis using di-glycine remnant antibodies by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Two biological replicates were applied in this study. For each biological replicate, testes were decapsulated, lysed, reduced, trypsin digested, and desalted. The purified peptides were fractionated on an XBridgeTM BEH300 C18 column (10×250 mm, 5 μm; Waters) using the Agilent 1260 series system at a flow rate of 3 mL/min. Hp-RP fractionation involved Hp-RP binding buffer (2% ACN/5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and elution buffer (90% ACN/5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) over a 62 min gradient (0%–10% buffer B for 5 min, 10%–27%B for 34 min, 27%–31% B for 4 min, 31%–39% B for 4 min, 39%–60% B for 7 min, followed by 8 min at 60% B). Upon the application of UV-light, a total of 160 fractions were collected in a 96-well plate and finally pooled to generate 10 fractions for K-ε-GG peptide enrichment. Each fraction was dried in a SpeedVac concentrator.  Purified peptides were resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with the Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Acclaim® PepMap100 C18 column, 3 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX) combined with a reverse-phase analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm, Acclaim® PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å; DIONEX) were applied for on-line separation under a 240-min linear gradient (3% to 30% buffer B for 210 min, 30% to 45% buffer B for 21 min, 45% to 100% buffer B for 1 min, 100% buffer B for 8 min). LTQ Orbitrap Velos was performed in data-dependent acquisition mode. Peptides with a charge state less than +3 were excluded and siloxane (m/z 445.120025) was used as a lock mass for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0) was used to compare raw files against mouse protein sequences from Uniprot (January 15, 2020) with the following parameters: full tryptic digestion with two maximum missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification; oxidation (+15.99492 Da), acetylation (+42.01056) and diGly modification of Lys (not C-term) (+114.042927) were set as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cut-offs were set to 0.01 for proteins, peptides and sites.

### Publication Abstract
A growing body of evidence now supports the fact that protein ubiquitination is an important modification during the regulation of spermatogenesis. However, little is known about the ubiquitome of the testis. In this study, we created a large-scale mouse testis ubiquitome profile using di-glycine remnant antibodies and mass spectrometry and identified a total of 14,219 ubiquitination sites in 4217 proteins. Bioinformatics and phenotypic analyses showed that the ubiquitinated proteins were closely related to meiosis and spermiogenesis. And 512 ubiquitination regulatory enzymes were identified in testis that can exert regulatory functions over ubiquitination: the homologous to E6AP C-terminus (HECT) and multi-subunit RING-finger type E3 ligases were significantly enriched. In addition, we identified 22 new ubiquitination sites on testicular histones and 146 ubiquitinated epigenetic factors, thus demonstrating that ubiquitination plays an important role in epigenetic regulation. Collectively, this in-depth characterization of the ubiquitome in mouse testis could provide a rich resource for further studies of regulatory events at the protein level during spermatogenesis. All MS data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD025866.

### Keywords
Ubiquitination; testis; mouse

### Affiliations
18351998967
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.

### Submitter
yao ping

### Lab Head
Dr Xuejiang Guo
State Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine. Department of Histology and Embryology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.


