### Accession
PXD034075

### Title
Serum differential proteomic profiling of patients with isolated methylmalonic acidemia by iTRAQ

### Description
The serum for 3 MMA patients and 3 healthy subjects were used for LC-MS/MS.Quantitative proteomic profiling of serum of patients with isolated MMA by iTRAQ labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Frozen serum samples were extracted by using RIPA lysis buffer and digested into peptides. The digested-peptide samples were labeled by iTRAQ-label reagent with TEAB. After pooling, the samples were evaporated by vacuum concentration to remove excess water, TEAB, and isopropanol. The freeze-dried samples were processed by UHPLC followed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and quantification using Proteome discoverer (v2.1.0.81). The local false discovery rate was 1.0% after searching against Human protein database with a maximum of two missed cleavages and one missed termini cleavage. The following settings were selected: Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Pyro-glu from E, Pyro-glu from Q for variable modifications as well as Carbamidomethylation (C), iTRAQ 8plex (N-term), iTRAQ8plex (K) for fixed modifications. Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. DEPs were screened by T-test of “limma” R package, and proteins with P-value < 0.05 and fold change (FC) ≥ 1.2 were considered as DEPs.

### Publication Abstract
Isolated methylmalonic acidemia (MMA) is an inherited organic acid metabolic disorder in an autosomal recessive manner, caused by mutations in the methylmalonyl coenzyme A mutase gene, and the isolated MMA patients often suffer from multi-organ damage. The present study aimed to profile the differential proteome of serum between isolated MAA patients and healthy control. The <i>in vivo</i> proteome of isolated MAA patients and healthy subjects was detected by an isobaric tag for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). A total of 94 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified between MMA patients and healthy control, including 58 upregulated and 36 downregulated DEPs in MMA patients. Among them, the most significantly upregulated proteins were CRP and immunoglobulins, and the top five most significantly downregulated proteins were all different types of immunoglobulins in MMA patients. GO analysis showed that these DEPs were mainly enriched in immune-related function and membrane protein-related function. KEGG revealed that these DEPs were mainly enriched in lysosome and cholesterol metabolism pathways. Also, these DEPs were predicted to contribute to lipid metabolic diseases. We addressed the proteomes of isolated MMA patients and identified DEPs. Our study expands our current understanding of MMA, and the DEPs could be valuable for designing alternative therapies to alleviate MMA symptoms.

### Keywords
Methylmalonic acidemia, Human, Lc-ms/ms, Serum

### Affiliations
Department of Pediatrics, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University

### Submitter
Hu Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Hao
Department of Pediatrics, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen University


