### Accession
PXD046705

### Title
Proteome analyses of marine particle-associated microbes

### Description
Marine microalgae (phytoplankton) mediate almost half of the worldwide photosynthetic carbon dioxide fixation and therefore play a pivotal role in global carbon cycling, most prominently during massive phytoplankton blooms. Phytoplankton biomass consists of considerable proportions of polysaccharides, substantial parts of which are rapidly remineralized by heterotrophic bacteria. We analyzed the diversity, activity and functional potential of such polysaccharide-degrading bacteria in different size fractions during a diverse spring phytoplankton bloom at Helgoland Roads (southern North Sea) at high temporal resolution using microscopic, physicochemical, biodiversity, metagenome and metaproteome analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Seawater samples were collected during spring 2018 (March 1 to May 29) off the North Sea island Helgoland (German Bight) at the LTER site ‘Kabeltonne’ (54° 11.3′ N, 7° 54.0′ E, DEIMS.iD: https://deims.org/1e96ef9b-0915-4661-849f-b3a72f5aa9b1) by fractionating filtration (FL: 0.2-3 µm; PA3: 3-10 µm; PA10: >10 µm). Protein extraction and sample preparation was done as described by Schultz et al., 2020 (DOI: 10.1111/1758-2229.12842)

### Data Protocol
For measurement, an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was coupled to an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto in-house packed capillary columns of 20 cm length and 75 µm inner diameter. Columns were filled with Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were separated using a 131 min nonlinear binary gradient from 2% to 99% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile(v/v), 0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The MS1 scan were recorded in the orbitrap with a mass window of 300–1,650 m/z and a resolution of 140,000 at 200 m/z. The 15 most intense precursor ions (ions with an unassigned charge or a charge of 1,7,8, >8 are excluded) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of NCE 27. The resulting MS/MS spectra were acquired were recorded with a resolution of 17.500 at 200 m/z. Dynamic exclusion and lock mass correction were enabled. All MS/MS spectra were analyzed using Mascot (version 2.7.0.1; Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot was set up to search the database containing all protein sequences from the 18 metagenomes obtained during the spring bloom 2018 assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. For database construction, redundant proteins from the 18 metagenomic samples were removed using cd-hitwith a clustering threshold of 97% identity. The created database was added by a set of common laboratory contaminants and reverse entries, amounting to 81,874,922 sequences in the final database.The database search with Mascot was performed with the following parameters: fragment ion mass tolerance and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, none missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as a variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.11.1; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to merge the search results and to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. During creation of the Scaffold file, an additional X! Tandem search was performed for validation (version 2017.2.1.4; The GPM, thegpm.org; version X!Tandem Alanine) with default settings (fragment ion mass tolerance and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modification, Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine as variable modifications). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the PeptideProphet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the ProteinProphet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.  For (semi-)quantitative analysis, the Scaffold’s ‘Quantitative Value’ for normalized, weighted spectra for each protein group was divided by the sum of all quantitative values for the sample to calculate percent normalized weighted spectra (%NWS). Average values were calculated from all three biological replicates of each sample. Protein groups that were not identified within a replicate were included as ’0’ in this calculation. In order to make Bacteria-specific %NWS readily comparable across all samples, all bacterial spectra were normalized to 100% (%BacNWS).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bacterioplankton, Algal spring bloom, North sea, Mass spectrometry, Particles

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology

### Submitter
Daniela Zuehlke

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Sievers
University of Greifswald, Institute of Microbiology, Department of Microbial Physiology and Molecular Biology


