### Accession
PXD037668

### Title
Molecular Docking and Proteomics Reveals the Synergistic Antibacterial Mechanism of Theaflavin with β-lactam Antibiotics Against MRSA

### Description
Recurrent epidemics of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) have illustrated that the effectiveness of antibiotics in clinical application is rapidly fading. A feasible approach is to combine natural products with existing antibiotics to achieve an antibacterial effect. In this molecular docking study, we found that theaflavin (TF) preferentially binds the allosteric site of penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP2a), inducing the PBP2a active site to open, which is convenient for β-lactam antibiotics to treat MRSA infection, instead of directly exerting antibacterial activity at the active site. Subsequent TMT-labeled proteomics analysis showed that TF treatment did not significantly change the landscape of the Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) USA300 proteome.Checkerboard dilution tests and kill curve assays were performed to validate the synergistic effect of TF and ceftiofur, and the fractional inhibitory concentration index (FICI) was 0.1875.Our findings provide a potential therapeutic strategy to combine existing antibiotics with natural products to resolve the prevalent infections of multidrug-resistant pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight culture of USA300 was diluted 1:100 in MHB media with or without 64 μg/mL TF and shaken at 35 °C to an OD600 of 1.5. Then, the bacteria were collected by centrifugation at 4 ℃ and 5000 rpm for 10 min and rinsed with normal saline three times. Subsequently, bacterial precipitates were collected and rapidly frozen in liquid nitrogen. SDT lysis was used to extract bacterial protein according to the manufacturer's instructions (Wiśniewski et al., 2009), and then the protein was quantified using a BCA kit (Beyotime, Shanghai, China). For proteomics sample preparation, the protein was digested by trypsin (1:50 w/w, Promega, Madsion, WI) at 37 °C overnight to prepare peptides. Then, 100 μg peptide was taken from each group and labeled with TMT isobaric tags based on the TMT kit (Thermo, USA) instructions. Then, the nano LC–MS/MS experiment was carried out with an Orbitrap elite LC–MS/MS (Thermo, USA) as previously described (Liu et al., 2016; Ma et al., 2017). At least three biological replications were performed in each group.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer software 1.4 and Mascot 2.2 were used to analyze the TMT-labeled proteomics data. The parameters for database searching were set as follows: (1) quantification type: TMT sixplex; (2) digestion: trypsin; (3) mass tolerance: 10 ppm; and (4) fragment mass tolerance: 0.1 Da. The DESeq2 package was used for normalization and differential expression analysis (Osabe et al., 2021). Adjusted P < 0.05 and fold change > 1.5 were set as the cutoff criteria for differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). StaphNet is a functional gene network model for MRSA. The network was constructed based on the genome of S. aureus subspecies USA300_FPR3757, a representative MRSA strain. To understand the biological functions of candidate genes, this study mapped the DEPs to the online website StaphNet (https://www.inetbio.org/staphnet/) for gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis. StaphNe's web server can generate a variety of biological hypotheses, and using StaphNet can identify genes for virulence-related phenotypes of MRSA or search for new candidate genes. The use of StaphNet can be based on what has been previously described in the literature (Kim et al., 2018). A pathway-centric search engine was applied to identify potential interactions between DEPs and the data were further imported into Cytoscape to build PPI networks. A volcano plot and a bubble chart were illustrated using the R package “ggplot2” (Wickham, 2009).

### Publication Abstract
Recurrent epidemics of methicillin-resistant <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> (<i>S. aureus</i>) (MRSA) have illustrated that the effectiveness of antibiotics in clinical application is rapidly fading. A feasible approach is to combine natural products with existing antibiotics to achieve an antibacterial effect. In this molecular docking study, we found that theaflavin (TF) preferentially binds the allosteric site of penicillin-binding protein 2a (PBP2a), inducing the PBP2a active site to open, which is convenient for &#x3b2;-lactam antibiotics to treat MRSA infection, instead of directly exerting antibacterial activity at the active site. Subsequent TMT-labeled proteomics analysis showed that TF treatment did not significantly change the landscape of the <i>S. aureus</i> USA300 proteome. Checkerboard dilution tests and kill curve assays were performed to validate the synergistic effect of TF and ceftiofur, and the fractional inhibitory concentration index (FICI) was 0.1875. The antibacterial effect of TF combined with ceftiofur was better than that of single-drug treatment <i>in vitro</i>. In addition, TF effectively enhanced the activity of ceftiofur in a mouse model of MRSA-induced pneumonia. Our findings provide a potential therapeutic strategy to combine existing antibiotics with natural products to resolve the prevalent infections of multidrug-resistant pathogens.

### Keywords
Mrsa; theaflavin; β-lactam antibiotics; molecular docking; synergistic combinations

### Affiliations
College of Animal Science, Jilin University, China
College of Animal Science, Jilin University

### Submitter
Shuhan Guan

### Lab Head
Dr Dacheng Wang
College of Animal Science, Jilin University, China


