### Accession
PXD027041

### Title
Proteomics of MSC-derived exosomes upon Plekhm1-KO

### Description
Leukemia cells instruct their surrounding bone marrow microenvironment (BMM) rendering it hospitable to leukemia cell survival. Conversely, how cells of the BMM influence leukemia progression is less well understood. Pleckstrin homology domain family M member 1 (PLEKHM1) serves as a hub between fusion and secretion of intracellular vesicles. Here, we performed label-free quantitative proteomics to investigate the exosomal cargo released by BMM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSC) lacking Plekhm1 compared to wild-type cells.

### Sample Protocol
After isolation of exosomes via ultracentrifugation, sample preparation was performed using the in StageTip (“iST”) method described in (Kulak et al., 2014) with minor modifications. Briefly, the exosomes were lysed, reduced and alkylated in sodium deoxycholate (SDC) buffer (2% SDC, 50mM Tris pH 8.5, 1mM tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 4mM Chloroacetamide). The proteins were boiled for 10 minutes at 95°C and were digested by adding 1 volume of 50mM Tris pH 8.5 containing 500ng LysC/Trypsin and incubation overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped with isopropanol/1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the peptides were purified on SDB-RPS stage tips (3M Empore) and centrifuged at 3500 g for 5 minutes. Next, isopropanol/1%TFA was added, the samples were centrifuged at 3500g for 3 minutes and finally 0.2% TFA in water was added. After the final centrifugation the peptides were eluted in 80% acetonitrile (ACN)/1.25% ammonia and dried by vacuum centrifugation before reconstitution in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA for LC‐MS/MS analysis. Tryptic peptides derived from isolated exosomes were analysed on a Q Exactive HF coupled to an easy nLC 1200 (ThermoFisher Scientific) using a 35 cm long, 75µm ID fused-silica column packed in house with 1.9 µm C18 particles (Reprosil pur, Dr. Maisch), and kept at 50°C using an integrated column oven (Sonation). Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient from 1.5-40% acetonitrile over 220 minutes and directly sprayed into the mass-spectrometer equipped with a nanoFlex ion source (ThermoFisher Scientific). Full scan MS spectra (300-1650 m/z) were acquired in Profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target value of 3 x 106 charges. Up to 15 most intense precursors per full scan were isolated using a 1.6 Th window and fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD, normalised collision energy of 27). MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid mode with a resolution of 15,000, a maximum injection time of 25 ms and an AGC target value of 1 x 105. Single charged ions, ions with a charge state above 5 and ions with unassigned charge states were not considered for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 30s.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data processing was performed with MaxQuant (v 1.6.10.43) and its in-built label-free quantification algorithm MaxLFQ applying default parameters (Tyanova, Temu, & Cox, 2016). Acquired spectra were searched against the mouse reference proteome (Taxonomy ID 10090) downloaded from UniProt (10-12-2018; 62309 sequences including isoforms) and a collection of common contaminants (244 entries) using the Andromeda search engine integrated in MaxQuant (Cox et al., 2011). Identifications were filtered to obtain false discovery rates (FDR) below 1% for both peptide spectrum matches (PSM; minimum length of 7 amino acids) and proteins using a target-decoy strategy (Elias and Gygi, 2007). “Match-between-runs” was enabled applying default settings. Filtering and statistical analysis of the MaxQuant output (“ProteinGroups.txt”) was performed in Perseus (v 1.6.7.0). Proteins not passing the protein-FDR cut-off (“only identified by site”) and/or identified in the reversed or contaminants databases were removed and only proteins with at least 2 values per experimental group (WT and KO) were used for statistical analysis. Significant proteins were defined after a Student`s t-test applying a p-value cut-off (<0.05) and fold-change threshold (log2ratio larger than +-0.58).

### Publication Abstract
Leukemia cells reciprocally interact with their surrounding bone marrow microenvironment (BMM), rendering it hospitable to leukemia cell survival, for instance through the release of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs). In contrast, we show here that BMM deficiency of pleckstrin homology domain family M member 1 (PLEKHM1), which serves as a hub between fusion and secretion of intracellular vesicles and is important for vesicular secretion in osteoclasts, accelerates murine BCR-ABL1+ B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-ALL) via regulation of the cargo of sEVs released by BMM-derived mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). PLEKHM1-deficient MSCs and their sEVs carry increased amounts of syntenin and syndecan-1, resulting in a more immature B-cell phenotype and an increased number/function of leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) via focal adhesion kinase and AKT signaling in B-ALL cells. Ex&#xa0;vivo pretreatment of LICs with sEVs derived from PLEKHM1-deficient MSCs led to a strong trend toward acceleration of murine and human BCR-ABL1+ B-ALL. In turn, inflammatory mediators such as recombinant or B-ALL cell-derived tumor necrosis factor &#x3b1; or interleukin-1&#x3b2; condition murine and human MSCs in&#xa0;vitro, decreasing PLEKHM1, while increasing syntenin and syndecan-1 in MSCs, thereby perpetuating the sEV-associated circuit. Consistently, human trephine biopsies of patients with B-ALL showed a reduced percentage of PLEKHM1+ MSCs. In summary, our data reveal an important role of BMM-derived sEVs for driving specifically BCR-ABL1+ B-ALL, possibly contributing to its worse prognosis compared with BCR-ABL1- B-ALL, and suggest that secretion of inflammatory cytokines by cancer cells in general may similarly modulate the tumor microenvironment.

### Keywords
Exosome, Lfq, Mesenchymal stromal cells, Qexactive hf

### Affiliations
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY
Institute of Biochemistry II, Goethe University Hospital Frankfurt/Main, Germany

### Submitter
Georg Tascher

### Lab Head
Dr Daniela Krause
Goethe-Universität Frankfurt, Georg-Speyer-Haus, Paul-Ehrlich-Str. 42-44, Frankfurt am Main, GERMANY


