### Accession
PXD001252

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana proteomics/phosphoproteomics

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) target a variety of protein substrates to regulate cellular signaling processes in eukaryotes. In plants, the number of identified MAPK substrates  that control  plant defense responses is still limited. Here, we generated transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana plants with  an inducible system to simulate in vivo activation of two stress-activated MAPKs, MPK3 and MPK6. Metabolome analysis revealed that this artificial MPK3/6 activation (without any exposure to pathogens  or other stresses) is sufficient to drive the production of major defense-related metabolites,  including  various camalexin, indole glucosinolate and agmatine derivatives. An accompanying (phospho)proteome analysis led to detection of hundreds of potential phosphoproteins  downstream  of  MPK3/6  activation. Besides known MAPK substrates, many candidates on this list possess typical MAPK-targeted phosphosites and in many  cases, the corresponding phosphopeptides were detected by mass spectrometry. Notably, several  of these putative phosphoproteins have been reported to be associated with the biosynthesis of  antimicrobial defense substances (e.g. WRKY transcription factors and proteins encoded by the genes from the “PEN”  pathway required for penetration resistance to  filamentous pathogens). Thus, this work provides an inventory of candidate phosphoproteins, including  putative direct MAPK substrates, for future analysis of MAPK-mediated defense control.

### Sample Protocol
Plant  growth  -  Arabidopsis  thaliana  (Col-0,  mpk3,  mpk6,  ein2,  ein3/eil1,  rbohD),  were  transformed  with  a  constitutively-active  variant  of  MKK5  (designated  as  MKK5DD)  from  Petroselinum  crispum  (Lee  et  al.,  2004),  under  the  control  of  a  dexamethasone-inducible  promoter  (Aoyama  and  Chua,  1997).  As  a  control,  the  Col-0  genotype  was  additionally  transformed with a kinase-inactive MKK5 mutant (designated as MKK5KR). Seeds were sown on  soil, stratified for two days at 4°C, and after transfer to individual pots, the plants were eventually  maintained under short-day conditions (8 h day light, 200 µE, 23°C) for six weeks prior to DEX  treatment (20 µM DEX in 0.0075% SILWET L-77).   Protein  extraction  of  total  protein  and  phosphoprotein  enrichment  (Prefractionation-assisted  Phosphoprotein Enrichment, PAPE) - Both procedures were carried out according to Lassowskat  et al. (2013).   In-solution digestion - Protein concentration was determined by 2-D Quant Kit (GE Healthcare,  www.gelifesciences.com)   and   the   proteins   were   reduced   with   DTT   and   alkylated   with  iodoacetamide.  The  solution  was  diluted  to  an  end  concentration  of  0.5  M  urea  with  50  mM  NH 4 HCO 3    (pH   8)   and   digested   overnight   with   sequencing   grade   trypsin   (Promega,  www.promega.com) at a ratio of 1:50 at 37°C. Peptides were desalted on C18 columns (Thermo  Scientific, www.piercenet.com) and reconstituted in solution containing 5% ACN, 0.1% TFA.   Mass  spectrometry  (proteomics)  -  Tryptic  digests  were  analyzed  with  an  LC-MS  system  consisting  of  a  nano-LC  (Easy-nLC  II,  Thermo  Scientiﬁc,  www.proxeon.com)  coupled  to  a  hybrid-FT-mass    spectrometer    (LTQ    Orbitrap    Velos    Pro,    Thermo    Scientiﬁc,    www.  thermoscientific.com). Peptide separations were performed on a C18 column (EASY column; 10  cm, ID 75 µm, particle diameter 3 µm) at a ﬂow rate of 300 nL/min and a linear gradient of 5 to  40%  B  in  150  min  for  total  protein  measurements  and  300  min  for  measurement  of  the phosphoprotein-enriched fractions (A: 0.1% formic acid in water, B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN). A voltage of +1.9 kV was applied to electrospray peptide ions. A capillary temperature of 275°C for peptide transfer and a lock mass of 445.120024 m/z were used. Precursor mass scanning was  performed  from  400  to  1850  m/z  in  the  Orbitrap  with  a  resolution  of  30,000  and  the  20  most  intense  precursor  ions  were  selected  for  subsequent  CID  fragmentation  in  the  linear  trap  quadrupole  mass  analyzer  (LTQ).  Singly  charged  ions  were  rejected  from  fragmentation.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled (Repeat Count: 1, Repeat Duration: 20 s, Exclusion List Size:  500, Exclusion Duration: 30 s).

### Data Protocol
Each  sample  (genotypes/treatments/timepoints)  is  based  on  three  biological  replicates,  which  are  each  measured  twice  (resulting  in  six  values  per  sample).  The  resulting MS raw data were analyzed with the Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics  Limited, www.nonlinear.com). After alignment and feature detection, normalization was applied  automatically  to  all  features  as  recommended  by  the  Progenesis  LC-MS  software  manual.  Resulting  features  were  filtered  for  an  ANOVA  p-value  of  <0.05  and  fold-change  of  >2.0.  Available  MS  spectra  with  rank  10  and  better  were  searched  against  an  A.  thaliana  protein  database  based  on  TAIR10  (www.arabidopsis.org)  using  an  in-house  Mascot  server  (with  the  following parameters: precursor mass tolerance: 7 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.8 Da, missed  cleavages:  2).  Carbamidomethylation  of  cysteine  was  set  as  a  static  modification.  Variable  modiﬁcations  were  oxidation  (M),  acetylation  of  protein  N-terminus,  deamidation  (NQ)  and  phosphorylation (ST). Peptides with Mascot scores less than 20 were rejected. Protein grouping  and  quantitation  from  non-conflicting  peptides  was  enabled.  Normalized  abundance  relative  to  maximum  (SuppTab.  S04-09)  was  calculated based  on  normalized  abundance  from  Progenesis  LC-MS. Maximum value of each protein (from 0 to 24 hours samples) was set as one, with all  other values being relative to this. Phosphopeptides were identified with the Proteome Discoverer  1.4  software,  which  includes  the  phosphoRS  2.0  algorithm  (Thermo  Fisher  Scientific)  for  phospho-site  mapping.  A  false  discovery  rate  (FDR)  was  calculated  by  searching  a  “decoy”  database  containing  all  the  target database  sequences  in  reverse  order.  Peptide-spectrum  match  (PSM)  was  set  at  a  q-value  <0.05  (i.e.,  a  corrected  significance  threshold  employing  the  Benjamini-Hochberg FDR procedure to control for a family-wise error rate).

### Publication Abstract
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) target a variety of protein substrates to regulate cellular signaling processes in eukaryotes. In plants, the number of identified MAPK substrates that control plant defense responses is still limited. Here, we generated transgenic Arabidopsis thaliana plants with an inducible system to simulate in vivo activation of two stress-activated MAPKs, MPK3, and MPK6. Metabolome analysis revealed that this artificial MPK3/6 activation (without any exposure to pathogens or other stresses) is sufficient to drive the production of major defense-related metabolites, including various camalexin, indole glucosinolate and agmatine derivatives. An accompanying (phospho)proteome analysis led to detection of hundreds of potential phosphoproteins downstream of MPK3/6 activation. Besides known MAPK substrates, many candidates on this list possess typical MAPK-targeted phosphosites and in many cases, the corresponding phosphopeptides were detected by mass spectrometry. Notably, several of these putative phosphoproteins have been reported to be associated with the biosynthesis of antimicrobial defense substances (e.g., WRKY transcription factors and proteins encoded by the genes from the "PEN" pathway required for penetration resistance to filamentous pathogens). Thus, this work provides an inventory of candidate phosphoproteins, including putative direct MAPK substrates, for future analysis of MAPK-mediated defense control. (Proteomics data are available with the identifier PXD001252 via ProteomeXchange, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org).

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Phosphorylation, Lc-ms/ms, Leaf, Mapk

### Affiliations
SEB
IPB Department SEB Weinberg 3 06120 Halle

### Submitter
Ines Lassowskat

### Lab Head
Dr Justin Lee
IPB Department SEB Weinberg 3 06120 Halle


