### Accession
PXD011029

### Title
Effect of water stress combined with sulfur deficiency on reproductive processes and seed composition in pea

### Description
).  In this study we describe the effect of drought combined or not with S-deficiency on pea productivity, nutrient partitioning between plant parts and seed quality traits. A moderate water stress was applied at the beginning of the reproductive phase, a period during which drought frequently occurs in the field. Sharp differences in the plant and seed characteristic in response to the combined stress compared to individual stresses were observed, highlighting synergistic effects on reproductive processes and antagonistic effects on seed protein composition, which could be explained by changes in the sink strength of the seeds for nitrogen.

### Sample Protocol
Total soluble proteins were extracted from four biological replicates of mature seeds as previously described (Gallardo et al., 2007) but using 500 μl of the denaturing urea/thiourea buffer for 10 mg of mature seed powder. Proteins were separated on SDS-PAGE (Coomassie Brilliant Blue). Image acquisition was performed using the Odyssey Infrared Image System scanner (LICOR Biosciences, Lincoln, NE) with an intensity of 7.5 (high quality) and a resolution of 169 μm. Image analysis and band quantification were performed using Phoretix 1D (v11.2, Cleaver Scientific Ltd) as described in Le Signor et al., 2017. In each well, the data were normalized by dividing the volume of each protein band by the sum of the volumes of all protein bands. The molecular weights in kilodalton (kDa) of the protein bands were calculated using a prestained low-range protein ladder (Bio-Rad, Hercules, USA).  After in-gel tryptic digestion, protein identification was made by nanoLC-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap Velos Mass Spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate® 3000 RSLC chromatographer. Data were acquired using Xcalibur 2.1 software.The instrument was operated in positive mode in data-dependent mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (from 300 to 1800 m/z) were acquired with a resolution set at 60,000. The 20 most intense ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated (isolation width: 2 m/z; 1 microscan) and fragmented using CID mode (energy of 35% and wideband-activation enabled). Dynamic exclusion was active during 30 s with a repeat count of one. Polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z, 445.1200025) ions were used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS ion searches were performed using Mascot search engine version 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) via Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) against the pea gene atlas (Alves-Carvalho et al., 2015). The search parameters included trypsin as a protease with two allowed missed cleavages and carbamidomethylcysteine, methionine oxidation and acetylation of N-term protein as variable modifications. The tolerance of the ions was set to 5 ppm for parent and 0.8 Da for-fragment ion matches. Peptides and proteins identified by MASCOT were validated using « Peptid Prophet » and « Protein Prophet » algorithm with Scaffold software (v4.8.3, Proteome Software, Portland, USA). Protein identifications were accepted when they contained at least two identified peptides and with a probability >95% as specified by the Peptide Prophet algorithm and by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Keller et al., 2002), respectively. Major proteins in each band were identified using the Exponentially Modified Protein Abundance Index (emPAI) (Ishihama et al., 2005).

### Publication Abstract
Water stress and sulfur (S) deficiency are two constraints increasingly faced by crops due to climate change and low-input agricultural practices. To investigate their interaction in the grain legume pea (Pisum sativum), sulfate was depleted at the mid-vegetative stage and a moderate 9-d water stress period was imposed during the early reproductive phase. The combination of the stresses impeded reproductive processes in a synergistic manner, reducing seed weight and seed number, and inducing seed abortion, which highlighted the paramount importance of sulfur for maintaining seed yield components under water stress. On the other hand, the moderate water stress mitigated the negative effect of sulfur deficiency on the accumulation of S-rich globulins (11S) in seeds, probably due to a lower seed sink strength for nitrogen, enabling a readjustment of the ratio of S-poor (7S) to 11S globulins. Transcriptome analysis of developing seeds at the end of the combined stress period indicated that similar biological processes were regulated in response to sulfur deficiency and to the combined stress, but that the extent of the transcriptional regulation was greater under sulfur deficiency. Seeds from plants subjected to the combined stresses showed a specific up-regulation of a set of transcription factor and SUMO ligase genes, indicating the establishment of unique regulatory processes when sulfur deficiency is combined with water stress.

### Keywords
Combined stresses, Lc-ms/ms, Pea, Seed quality

### Affiliations
INRA
INRA - Centre Val de Loire

### Submitter
Lucie Combes-Soia

### Lab Head
Dr lucie combes-soia
INRA - Centre Val de Loire


