### Accession
PXD013634

### Title
The effects of Sindbis viral vectors on neuronal function

### Description
Viral vectors are attractive tools to express genes in neurons. Transduction of neurons with a recombinant, replication-deficient Sindbis viral vector is a method of choice for studying the effects of short-term protein overexpression on neuronal function. However, to which extent Sindbis by itself may affect neurons is not fully understood. We assessed effects of neuronal transduction with a Sindbis viral vector on the transcriptome and proteome in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures, and analyzed the electrophysiological properties of individual CA1 neurons, at 24h and 72h after viral vector injection. Whereas Sindbis caused substantial gene expression alterations, changes at the protein level were less pronounced. Alterations in transcriptome and proteome were predominantly limited to proteins involved in mediating anti-viral innate immune responses. Sindbis transduction did not affect the electrophysiological properties of individual neurons: the membrane potential, excitability and synaptic currents were similar between transduced and nontransduced CA1 neurons up to 72h after Sindbis injection. We conclude that Sindbis viral vectors are suitable for studying short-term effects of a protein of interest on electrophysiological properties of neurons, but not for studies on the regulation of gene expression.

### Sample Protocol
Snap-frozen organotypic slices (3 per group) were homogenized in ice-cold homogenization buffer (0.32 M Sucrose, 5mM HEPES, pH 7.4) containing ‘cOmplete’ protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN, USA) with a glass hand homogenizer (12 strokes). Protein concentration was determined using a Bradford Assay. Subsequently SDS loading buffer was added to the samples. Sample complexity was reduced by separating 30μg of protein per sample on molecular weight using a 10% SDS polyacrylamide gel. The gel was fixed overnight in fixation buffer (50% Ethanol and 28% Phosphoric Acid), washed three times in water and stained with Colloidal Coomassie Blue. Each sample was cut into two slices, the gel pieces were destained using 50mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile, and the proteins were digested with trypsin (sequence grade; Promega, Madison, USA) in a MultiScreen- HV 96 well plate (Millipore) overnight at 37 °C. Finally, the peptides were extracted from the gel pieces using 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid in 50% acetonitrile, and 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and stored at -20 °C until further use. For HPLC-ESI MS/MS analysis, the TripleTOF 5600+ MS was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 LC system (Dionex). The samples were re-dissolved in mobile phase A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% fluoroacetic acid), then loaded and trapped on a 5 mm Pepmap 100 C18 column (300 μm id, 5 μm particle size, Dionex). Next, peptides were fractionated on a Alltima C18 homemade column (300 μm id, 3 μm particle size), using a linear gradient of increasing concentration of mobile phase B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% fluoroacetic acid) from 5% to 22% in 88 min, to 25% at 98 min, 40% at 108 min, and to 95% at 110 min. After 8 min. the column was back equilibrated to the initial condition of 5% acetonitrile for 10 min. Peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, Gas1 and Gas2 at 15 p.s.i., curtain gas at 25 p.s.i., and an interface heater temperature of 150 °C. The MS survey scan ranged from m/z 350–1250 acquired for 200 ms. The top 20 precursor ions were selected for 100 ms per MS/MS acquisition, with a threshold of 100 counts and an exclusion window of 16s. Rolling CID function was activated, with an energy spread of 15 eV, and the subsequent MS/MS scan ranged from m/z 200-1800.

### Data Protocol
the MS/MS spectra were searched against the Mouse (UP000000589_10090 and UP000000589_10090_additional) and Sindbis (UP0000006710_11034) database using the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8). The search parameters were set to trypsin digestion, the rest was kept at default.

### Publication Abstract
Viral vectors are attractive tools to express genes in neurons. Transduction of neurons with a recombinant, replication-deficient Sindbis viral vector is a method of choice for studying the effects of short-term protein overexpression on neuronal function. However, to which extent Sindbis by itself may affect neurons is not fully understood. We assessed effects of neuronal transduction with a Sindbis viral vector on the transcriptome and proteome in organotypic hippocampal slice cultures, and analyzed the electrophysiological properties of individual CA1 neurons, at 24 h and 72 h after viral vector injection. Whereas Sindbis caused substantial gene expression alterations, changes at the protein level were less pronounced. Alterations in transcriptome and proteome were predominantly limited to proteins involved in mediating anti-viral innate immune responses. Sindbis transduction did not affect the intrinsic electrophysiological properties of individual neurons: the membrane potential and neuronal excitability were similar between transduced and non-transduced CA1 neurons up to 72 h after Sindbis injection. Synaptic currents also remained unchanged upon Sindbis transduction, unless slices were massively infected for 72 h. We conclude that Sindbis viral vectors at low transduction rates are suitable for studying short-term effects of a protein of interest on electrophysiological properties of neurons, but not for studies on the regulation of gene expression.

### Keywords
Mouse, Proteomics, Triple tof, Hippocampus, Sindbis virus

### Affiliations
CNCR, VU amsterdam
The department of Molecular and cellular neurobiology, Neuroproteomics, CNCR, Vrije University Amsterdam

### Submitter
Sophie van der Spek

### Lab Head
Dr Ka wan Li
The department of Molecular and cellular neurobiology, Neuroproteomics, CNCR, Vrije University Amsterdam


