### Accession
PXD018170

### Title
Proteome and Secretome of Denatonium-treated Mouse Trachea Cells

### Description
The peptide-level analysis of proteome and secretome changes of mouse trachea cells upon denatonium treatment (in comparison to Ringer lactate solution control).

### Sample Protocol
To investigate the secretome of denatonium-stimulated tracheas, mice were euthanized using isoflurane and tracheae were explanted. The tracheae of six mice were stimulated for 30 min with either 1 mM denatonium or vehicle solution (Ringer’s lactate solution). Supernatant (SN) and trachea epithelium (TE) were collected and protein purification and enrichment for liquid chromatography coupled to MS (LC-MS/MS) analysis was performed by using paramagnet beads and performing the SP3 method.  Total peptide concentration was measured and adjusted to 0.5 mg/ml and 1.5 µg total peptide was analysed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive HF instrument. To enhance the identification of short peptides the samples were measured twice: once including and once excluding singly charged ions.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spectrometry data were processed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.7.9) using the built-in Andromeda engine and mouse protein sequences (UniprotKB release 2016_08 including isoforms and unreviewed sequences) for peptide identification. Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation as variable modifications, using a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions. Minimal peptide sequence length was set to 5. To improve peptide quantitation, matching between MS runs, which utilized the same MS protocol settings, was enabled. Search results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. All other MaxQuant settings were set to their default values.

### Publication Abstract
Constant exposure of the airways to inhaled pathogens requires efficient early immune responses protecting against infections. How bacteria on the epithelial surface are detected and first-line protective mechanisms are initiated are not well understood. We have recently shown that tracheal brush cells (BCs) express functional taste receptors. Here we report that bitter taste signaling in murine BCs induces neurogenic inflammation. We demonstrate that BC signaling stimulates adjacent sensory nerve endings in the trachea to release the neuropeptides CGRP and substance P that mediate plasma extravasation, neutrophil recruitment, and diapedesis. Moreover, we show that bitter tasting quorum-sensing molecules from Pseudomonas aeruginosa activate tracheal BCs. BC signaling depends on the key taste transduction gene Trpm5, triggers secretion of immune mediators, among them the most abundant member of the complement system, and is needed to combat P. aeruginosa infections. Our data provide functional insight into first-line defense mechanisms against bacterial infections of the lung.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Denatonium, Mouse, Secretome, Trachea

### Affiliations
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Laboratory, Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich
Technical University of Munich

### Submitter
Alexey Stukalov

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Immunopathology of Virus Infections Laboratory, Institute of Virology, Technical University of Munich


