### Accession
PXD029780

### Title
A Sensitive and Controlled Data-Independent Acquisition Method for Proteomic Analysis of Cell Therapies

### Description
Mass Spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic measurements are uniquely poised to impact the development of cell and gene therapies. With the adoption of rigorous instrumental performance controls (PQs), large-scale proteomics can move from a research to a manufacturing control tool. Especially suited, data-independent acquisition (DIA) approaches have distinctive qualities to extend multi-attribute method (MAM) principles to characterize the proteome of cell therapies. Here we describe the development of a DIA method for the sensitive identification and quantification of proteins on a Q-TOF instrument. Using the improved acquisition parameters, we defined some control metrics to improve the reproducibility of SWATH acquisition-based proteomic measurements. Finally, we applied the method to analyze the proteome of Jurkat cells that here serves as a model for human T-cells.

### Sample Protocol
Commercial PepCalMix (SCIEX), containing 20 heavy labeled peptides, at a concentration of 1 pmol/µL (stock solution). Aliquots of 10 µL each were stored at −80 ºC until further use. For nanoLC-MS measurements, 1 µL of the PepCalMix aliquot was diluted in 99 µL of 5% v/v acetic acid in 10% v/v acetonitrile containing water (final peptide concentration: 10 fmol/µL). Commercial K562 digests were reconstituted to 2 µg/µL in 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and stored at −80 ºC in 10 µL aliquots. Prior to nanoLC-MS measurements, 9 µL of 0.1% v/v formic acid in 2% v/v acetonitrile containing water and 1 µL of the stock PepCalMix solution (1 pmol/µL) were added to the 10 µL K562 digest aliquot. The final K562 peptide concentration was 1 µg/µL.  Jurkat cells (ATCC) were cultured in T-75 flasks using RPMI-1640 media (ATCC) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Gibco). Cells were passaged to maintain a cell density between 2x105 – 2x106 cells/mL. The desired number of cells was counted using a Multisizer 3 Coulter Counter (Beckman Coulter, Sykesville, MD) and aliquoted into Protein LoBind Tubes (Eppendorf). Cells were washed three times with Dulbecco’s phosphate buffered saline without calcium and magnesium (Gibco), centrifuging at 200 ×g between washes. Cells were frozen at −20 oC. Jurkat cells digests were obtained following the manufacturer-recommended S-TRAP (Protifi, Farmingdale, NY) protocol. Briefly, 5×106 cells were lysed with 50 µL of lysis solution provided in the S-TRAP mini kit. Cysteine residues were reduced (50 mmol/L DTT, 20 min, 75 ºC, 1,000 rpm) and alkylated (150 mmol/L IAA, 20 min, RT. The protein extract was acidified with 5 µL of 12% v/v phosphoric acid. Then, 350 µL of 90% v/v methanol in 100 mmol/L triethylamine bicarbonate (TEAB) were added to the protein solution, which was then loaded onto the S-TRAP column. Proteins were digested with 7.5 µg of trypsin/Lys-C in 100 mmol/L TEAB for 1.5 h at 47 ºC. Peptides were recovered by centrifugation at 1,000 ×g for 1 min and successive addition of 0.2% v/v formic acid in water and 0.2% v/v formic acid in 80% v/v acetonitrile in water.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra acquired by DDA were processed for protein identification in ProteinPilot software v5.0.2 running the Paragon search engine30, 31  (v5.0.2.0, SCIEX). MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt canonical human database (containing 20,396 entries). The search was performed in “Thorough ID” mode, which automatically adjusts the mass tolerance to the resolution of the MS and MS/MS acquisitions. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines, trypsin for digestion, and TripleTOF 6600+ system were set as search defaults. Protein and peptides are reported with 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Proteins are reported with a minimum of 1 peptide identification. Peak extractions from the DIA experiments were performed in PeakView software 2.0 using the SWATH acquisition microapp (AB SCIEX) using DDA-generated peptide query parameters (PQPs) libraries. The PQPs were generated for non-redundant and unmodified peptides identified from a combined search of K562 and Jurkat samples (total of 26 DDA MS files) in ProteinPilot software. The following criteria were used for MS/MS peak extraction and protein quantification: 6 transitions/peptide; 10 min retention time tolerance; 75 ppm mass tolerance; peptide identification scoring less than 1% FDR; up to 6 peptides/protein and up to 6 transitions/peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Car-t cells, Performance control, Swath acquisition, Proteomics, Jurkat cells, Data-independent acquisition

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Standards and Technology/Institute for Biosciences and Bioengineering Research
National Institute of Standards and Technology Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research

### Submitter
Camille Lombard-Banek

### Lab Head
Dr John E. Schiel
National Institute of Standards and Technology Institute for Bioscience and Biotechnology Research


