### Accession
PXD011985

### Title
“PALAEOSHELLOMICS” REVEALS THE USE OF FRESHWATER MOTHER-OF-PEARL IN PREHISTORIC ORNAMENTS.

### Description
Palaeoproteomics analysis of mollusc shells (Modiolus modiolus, Ostrea edulis, Unio pictorum, Margaritifera margaritifera, Unio crassus, Pseudunio auricularius) and shell ornaments (double-buttons) from Neolithic European sites (Havnø, Hornstaad-Hörnle IA, Peştera Ungurească).

### Sample Protocol
Powdered reference shells and double-buttons were bleached using diluted NaOCl (2.6%) for 48 and 3 hours respectively. Demineralization was carried out using cold diluted acetic acid, the resulting solutions were thoroughly desalted, concentrated and lyophilized. All samples were digested using two proteolytic enzymes (trypsin and elastase). LC-MS/MS analyses were carried out using a nanoflow HPLC instrument (U3000 RSLC Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for M. modiolus, O. edulis, U. pictorum, M. margaritifera and the Havnø and Hornstaad-Hörnle IA samples; an Ultimate 3000 Dionex nanoHPLC instrument coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass analyzer was used for the analysis U. crassus, P. auricularius and for sample PesB.

### Data Protocol
Raw Thermo files were processed using the software PEAKS v. 8.5 (Ma et al., 2003) and searched against a database containing all sequences available on NCBI restricting the taxonomy to Mollusca (fasta database downloaded on 15/02/2018) and all common contaminants (cRAP; common Repository of Adventitious Proteins: http://www.thegpm.org/crap/). A no-enzyme search was perfomed. Parent ion and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. The following threshold values were used for acceptance of high-quality peptides: false discovery rate threshold 0.5%, protein scores −10lgP ≥ 40, number of unique peptides ≥ 2, de novo sequences scores (ALC %) ≥ 50.

### Publication Abstract
The extensive use of mollusc shell as a versatile raw material is testament to its importance in prehistoric times. The consistent choice of certain species for different purposes, including the making of ornaments, is a direct representation of how humans viewed and exploited their environment. The necessary taxonomic information, however, is often impossible to obtain from objects that are small, heavily worked or degraded. Here we propose a novel biogeochemical approach to track the biological origin of prehistoric mollusc shell. We conducted an in-depth study of archaeological ornaments using microstructural, geochemical and biomolecular analyses, including 'palaeoshellomics', the first application of palaeoproteomics to mollusc shells (and indeed to any invertebrate calcified tissue). We reveal the consistent use of locally-sourced freshwater mother-of-pearl for the standardized manufacture of 'double-buttons'. This craft is found throughout Europe between 4200-3800 BCE, highlighting the ornament-makers' profound knowledge of the biogeosphere and the existence of cross-cultural traditions.

### Keywords
Archaeology, Stable isotopes, Paleoproteomics, Ornaments, Lc-ms/ms, Mollusc shell

### Affiliations
University of Turin
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin

### Submitter
Beatrice Demarchi

### Lab Head
Dr Beatrice Demarchi
Department of Life Sciences and Systems Biology, University of Turin


