### Accession
PXD028518

### Title
Eccrine sweat proteomics for the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis

### Description
In clinical routine, the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF) is still a challenge due to the limitations of diagnosis guidelines and tests. A diagnosis test of choice, the sweat test measures eccrine sweat chloride concentration as a byproduct of the eccrine sweat gland CFTR function. Despite the combined use of CFTR genotyping and direct physiologic testing of CFTR function, reports of inconclusive diagnosis justified the need for alternative tests and new biomarkers. Meanwhile, eccrine sweat composition has already been linked to disease-specific profiles of non-electrolytes (i.e. proteins, peptides and metabolites). In this study, we analyzed sweat samples from 28 healthy volunteers and 14 CF patients by UHPLC-Q-Orbitrap-based Shotgun proteomics, to address CF-related changes in sweat protein composition and abundance. Over 1000 proteins were identified and quantified in a label-free manner. Beside similar protein composition, enrichment and functional classifications, HV and CF samples were grouped apart since protein abundance profiles were significantly correlated with CF status and degree of severity (ΔF508 homozygous and pancreatic insufficiency onset). Four-hundred and two proteins in CF-specific abundance, 68 proteins in genotype-specific abundance and 71 proteins in abundance related to pancreatic status, respectively, highlighted eccrine gland cell perturbations in protein biosynthesis & trafficking, CFTR proteostasis & membrane stability, cell-cell adherence, membrane integrity & cytoskeleton crosstalk. Cytoskeleton-related biomarkers were of utmost interest because of consistent abundances between CF sweat and other CF tissues. Nine clinical CF diagnosis biomarker (CUTA, ARG1, EZR, AGA, FLNA, MAN1A1, MIA3, LFNG, SIAE) and 5 CF severity biomarker (ARG1, GPT, MDH2, EML4 (ΔF508 homozygous), MGAT1 (pancreatic insufficiency)) candidates were deemed suitable for further verification.

### Sample Protocol
Sweat protein concentration was estimated using the Pierce Micro BCA™ Protein Assay kit (#23235, ThermoFisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Ten micrograms of proteins were precipitated by incubation in 90% acetonitrile for 30 min at 4 °C followed by centrifugation for 10 min, at 4 °C, at 10 000 g. The protein pellet was re-suspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated in : i) 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 56 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm (Thermomixer comfort, Eppendorf), to reduce disulfide bonds, ii) 20 mM iodoacetamide protected from light for 30 min, at room temperature, to alkylate/block cysteine residues, iii) 11 mM DTT protected from light for 10 min, at room temperature, to quench the residual iodoacetamide, iv) mass-spectrometry grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease, MS Grade, ThermoFisher Scientific) at a 1: 50 enzyme: protein ratio (protein concentration = 0.25 µg.µL-1), for 18 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm, v) MS-grade trypsin in 80% acetonitrile, at a 1:100 enzyme: protein ratio, for 3 h at 37 °C, under stirring at 600 rpm. Digestion was stopped by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5 % (v/v). Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and re-suspended at 3.75 µg / 20 µL in 0.1 % TFA. At this step, aliquots from each control sample were collected and mixed in three 10-sample pools. CF samples were only processed as individual samples. No CF pooled library was prepared. Individual samples and pooled samples were desalted with C18 Zip Tips according to the manufacturer’s recommendations, dried and re-suspended at 3 µg / 9 µL (injection volume) in 0.1 % TFA spiked with an equivalent of MassPREP Digestion Standard Mixture 1 (#186002865, Waters) corresponding to 50 fmol of ADH (Alcohol dehydrogenase 1 from S. cerevisiae) content per injection volume. The individual and pooled samples were randomly sorted into: i) 3 series of 10 samples plus 1 pooled mix, ii) 2 series of 8 and 7 CF samples, and analyzed using an ACQUITY UPLC M-Class liquid chromatography system (Waters) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). Five acquisition rounds (1 per series) were performed to avoid any technical bias that might come from a single LC-MS acquisition series. The chromatographic separation consisted in a 3-minute long trapping step performed on a reversed-phase (RP) ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Trap Column (nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm, Waters) followed by a 177-min elution step on a ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Analytical Column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 C18 Analytical Column, 100 Å, 1.8 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm, Waters) using a gradient of mixed water and acetonitrile, both supplemented with 0.1 % formic acid, as eluents. The mass acquisition was operated in data-dependent positive ion mode. Source parameters were set at: i) 2.3 kV for spray voltage, ii) 270 °C for capillary temperature. For individual samples, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 1600 with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an Automated Gain Control (AGC) of 3E+6, a maximum Injection Time (IT) of 200 ms and an internal lock mass calibration at m/z 445.12003. MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 200 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 10-second dynamic exclusion were enabled. For each pooled sample, the MS acquisition consisted in a two-step strategy of three injections each. During both steps, MS spectra were obtained for scans between m/z 400 and m/z 528.3, m/z 524.3 and m/z 662.8 or m/z 658.8 and m/z 1600, in three independent analyses respectively, with a mass resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200, an AGC of 3E+6, a maximum IT of 200 ms and internal lock mass calibrations at m/z 445.12003, m/z 536.16537 and m/z 684.20295, respectively. During the first acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 25 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 25) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 250 ms and a (N)CE at 28. For the second acquisition step, an exclusion list for all signals related to peptides identified at the first step with more than 4 PSM (peptide-spectrum matches) was uploaded to the methods. During the second acquisition step, MS/MS spectra were obtained for the top 10 most intense ions of each MS scan (TopN = 10) with a mass resolution of 17.500 at m/z 200, an isolation window of 1.6 m/z with an isolation offset of 0.5 m/z, an AGC of 1E+5, a maximum IT of 600 ms and a (N)CE at 28. The exclusion of single-charged ions and a 15-second dynamic exclusion were enabled for both steps.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were submitted to protein identification and label-free quantification by the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.6.0) using default settings when not specified otherwise. Identification consisted in a search against a custom-made reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens database (20443 Homo sapiens entries + 4 MPDS Mix 1 entries, release date 2019-08-08) with Carbamidomethyl (C) set as a fixed modification Oxidation (M), Deamidation (NQ) set as variable modifications and a minimum of two peptides (including one unique peptide) required. LFQ was enabled and separated between HV and CF groups with a minimum LFQ ratio count of 1, no Fast LFQ and no requirement of MSMS for LFQ comparison. The ‘match between runs’ option was enabled and tuned to allow matches from the library (pooled samples considered as parameter group 1, ‘match from’) and between individual samples (parameter groups 0 and 2, ‘match from and to’). A match time window of 2.5 minutes was used. MaxQuant output data (proteingroups.txt) were submitted to statistical analysis using the Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43). ‘Only identified by site’, ‘REVERSED’ and Contaminant data were filtered out. LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and proteins with less than 50 % of valid values were filtered out. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on Z-score-normalized LFQ intensities. HV versus CF comparison was addressed by a two-sample Student’s t-test and a permutation-based FDR calculation. Proteins with a fold change above 2 and a FDR below 0.05 were considered significantly differently expressed between HV and CF groups. Heat-map representation and hierarchical clustering were generated using the average Euclidian distance calculation.

### Publication Abstract
In clinical routine, the diagnosis of cystic fibrosis (CF) is still challenging regardless of international consensus on diagnosis guidelines and tests. For decades, the classical Gibson and Cooke test measuring sweat chloride concentration has been a keystone, yet, it may provide normal or equivocal results. As of now, despite the combination of sweat testing, <i>CFTR</i> genotyping, and CFTR functional testing, a small fraction (1-2%) of inconclusive diagnoses are reported and justifies the search for new CF biomarkers. More importantly, in the context of precision medicine, with a view to early diagnosis, better prognosis, appropriate clinical follow-up, and new therapeutic development, discovering companion biomarkers of CF severity and phenotypic rescue are of utmost interest. To date, previous sweat proteomic studies have already documented disease-specific variations of sweat proteins (e.g., in schizophrenia and tuberculosis). In the current study, sweat samples from 28 healthy control subjects and 14 patients with CF were analyzed by nanoUHPLC-Q-Orbitrap-based shotgun proteomics, to look for CF-associated changes in sweat protein composition and abundance. A total of 1057 proteins were identified and quantified at an individual level, by a shotgun label-free approach. Notwithstanding similar proteome composition, enrichment, and functional annotations, control and CF samples featured distinct quantitative proteome profiles significantly correlated with CF, accounting for the respective inter-individual variabilities of control and CF sweat. All in all: (i) 402 sweat proteins were differentially abundant between controls and patients with CF, (ii) 68 proteins varied in abundance between F508del homozygous patients and patients with another genotype, (iii) 71 proteins were differentially abundant according to the pancreatic function, and iv) 54 proteins changed in abundance depending on the lung function. The functional annotation of pathophysiological biomarkers highlighted eccrine gland cell perturbations in: (i) protein biosynthesis and trafficking, (ii) CFTR proteostasis and membrane stability, and (iii) cell-cell adherence, membrane integrity, and cytoskeleton crosstalk. Cytoskeleton-related biomarkers were of utmost interest because of the consistency between variations observed here in CF sweat and variations previously documented in other CF tissues. From a clinical stance, nine candidate biomarkers of CF diagnosis (CUTA, ARG1, EZR, AGA, FLNA, MAN1A1, MIA3, LFNG, SIAE) and seven candidate biomarkers of CF severity (ARG1, GPT, MDH2, EML4 (F508del homozygous), MGAT1 (pancreatic insufficiency), IGJ, TOLLIP (lung function impairment)) were deemed suitable for further verification.

### Keywords
Human, Biomarkers, Cystic fibrosis, Orbitrap, Shotgun proteomics, Eccrine sweat

### Affiliations
MSLab, MolSys RU, University of Liege
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-Director MolSys Research Unit-Director CART (Center for Analytical Research and Technology)-Director Liège Université, Liège, Belgium

### Submitter
Bastien Burat

### Lab Head
Dr Gauthier EPPE
Laboratory of Mass Spectrometry-Director MolSys Research Unit-Director CART (Center for Analytical Research and Technology)-Director Liège Université, Liège, Belgium


