### Accession
PXD033040

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Retinal Mitochondria-associated ER Membranes Identified Novel Proteins of Retinal Degeneration in Long-term Diabetes

### Description
The mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (MAM) is the physical contact site between the ER and the mitochondria and plays a vital role in the regulation of calcium trafficking and bioenergetics. Previous studies suggest that disturbances in calcium trafficking and dysregulation of reactive oxygen species in the ER and mitochondria may contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy (DR). However, few studies have examined the impact of diabetes on the retinal MAM proteome profile. In the present study, we used Long Evans rats with streptozotocin-induced long-term Type 1 diabetes to identify key pathways and proteins in the retinal MAM that are potentially implicated in the pathogenesis of DR.

### Sample Protocol
Six retinas from 3 rats were pooled as one sample, and MAM from 6 samples (3 diabetic, 3 non-diabetic) were isolated following the protocol as previously described (DOI: 10.1038/s41598-017-02213-1). All the fractions were flash frozen by liquid nitrogen and pre-served in −80 °C until use. Collected MAM samples were processed by a surfactant cocktail-aided extraction/precipitation/on-pellet digestion protocol for efficient and reproducible proteolytic digestion. Protein digest was analyzed by a trapping nano LC-Orbitrap MS system and tandem MS data was acquired under data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS rawfiles were searched against a combined Uniprot-SwissProt Mus musculus/Rattus norvegicus database (containing 24,991 protein entries) using MS-GF+ search engine (v10089, released on July 16, 2013). Target-decoy approach was employed for false positive rate (FDR) estimation and control. Peptide filtering, global FDR control, and protein grouping was conducted by IDPicker (v3.1.643.0). MS1 ion current-based quantification was accomplished by IonStar, an in-house developed quantitative workflow to generate protein quantification results.  Protein ratio calculation and paired t-test were conducted manually in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
The mitochondria-associated endoplasmic reticulum (ER) membrane (MAM) is the physical contact site between the ER and the mitochondria and plays a vital role in the regulation of calcium signaling, bioenergetics, and inflammation. Disturbances in these processes and dysregulation of the ER and mitochondrial homeostasis contribute to the pathogenesis of diabetic retinopathy (DR). However, few studies have examined the impact of diabetes on the retinal MAM and its implication in DR pathogenesis. In the present study, we investigated the proteomic changes in retinal MAM from Long Evans rats with streptozotocin-induced long-term Type 1 diabetes. Furthermore, we performed in-depth bioinformatic analysis to identify key MAM proteins and pathways that are potentially implicated in retinal inflammation, angiogenesis, and neurodegeneration. A total of 2664 unique proteins were quantified using IonStar proteomics-pipeline in rat retinal MAM, among which 179 proteins showed significant changes in diabetes. Functional annotation revealed that the 179 proteins are involved in important biological processes such as cell survival, inflammatory response, and cellular maintenance, as well as multiple disease-relevant signaling pathways, e.g., integrin signaling, leukocyte extravasation, PPAR, PTEN, and RhoGDI signaling. Our study provides comprehensive information on MAM protein changes in diabetic retinas, which is helpful for understanding the mechanisms of metabolic dysfunction and retinal cell injury in DR.

### Keywords
Diabetic retinopathy; type 1 diabetes; mitochondria-associated er membrane; proteomic; retinal degeneration

### Affiliations
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo
University at Buffalo

### Submitter
Shichen Shen

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo


