### Accession
PXD004820

### Title
Proteomic analysis provides insights into the molecular bases of hydrogen gas-induced cadmium resistance in Medicago sativa

### Description
Recently, molecular hydrogen (H2) has emerged as a bio-regulator both in animals and plants. Normally, functions of endogenous generated H2 could be mimicked by exogenously applied hydrogen-rich water (HRW) or hydrogen-rich saline (particularly in animals). Although alfalfa seedlings showed more cadmium (Cd) resistance after the administration with HRW, corresponding molecular mechanism is still elusive. To address this gap, iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics was used. In our experimental conditions, out of 238 significant differential proteins identified in the Cd- and HRW/Cd-treated samples, 60 were unique to Cd-stressed alone samples, 107 were unique to HRW plus Cd treatment samples, and 71 were shared between two groups. Furthermore, 58 proteins from the 238 proteins significantly responded in Cd- and HRW/Cd-treatment samples were selected for further bioinformatics analysis. Interestingly, results indicated that they were classified into six categories: oxidation-reduction process, carbon metabolism, citrate cycle, cysteine and methionine metabolism, metal ion homeostasis, and sulfur compound metabolic process. In addition, the protein expression patterns were consistent with the results of increased non-protein thiols abundant, as well as iron and zinc content, in seedling roots. These suggest that HRW alleviates Cd toxicity mainly by decreasing oxidative damage, enhancing sulfur compound metabolic process, and maintaining nutrient element homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Plant material, treatment and sample collection   Alfalfa (Medicago sativa L. Victoria) seeds were sterilized with 5% NaCIO for 10 min and rinsed extensively in distilled water. The sterile seeds were subsequently being germinated for 1 d at 25°C in darkness, and transferred to the nutrient medium (quarter-strength Hoagland’s solution with pH 6.0), which were placed into plastic chamber in the illuminating incubator (14 h light with a light intensity of 200 μmol·m-2·s-1, 25±1 °C, and 10 h dark, 23±1 °C). Uniform 5-day-old seedlings were selected then incubated in quarter-strength Hoagland’s solution (pH 6.0) with or without 10% saturated hydrogen-rich water (HRW) for 12 h followed by the indicated time points of incubation in 100 μM CdCl2. HRW was prepared by bubbling purified hydrogen gas (99.99%, v/v) into quarter-strength Hoagland’s solution, as previously described [27,30].   After various treatments for indicated time, seedlings were photographed, or root and above ground tissues were harvested. Samples were used immediately or flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for further experiments.   Protein extraction and digestion The root total proteins were extracted with Plant Total Protein Extraction Kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, MO) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, 250 mg of root tissue (about 40 plants mixed) was ground into a fine powder in liquid nitrogen. The powder was washed with methanol and acetone successively, then pelleted and dried with a SpeedVac (Thermo Scientific, USA). The root tissue pellet was extracted with Reagent Type 4 Working Solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 40 mM Trizma base, and 1% C7BzO as the detergent, adding protease inhibitor cocktail prior to use) supplied by the kit. After incubation at ambient temperature for 15 min, the suspension was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min to remove the insoluble materials. Supernatants were collected as protein extracts. Protein concentration was quantified using Bradford assay (Bio-Rad). Peptides were generated by a modified Filter-aided Sample Preparation (FASP) protocol [37]. In short, each sample of 200 µg protein was reduced with 5 mM dithiotheritol for 1 h at 60℃, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 40 min at 25 °C in darkness. After that, the protein sample was buffer-exchanged with 200 µL 0.5 M TEAB (triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5) using a spin ultra filtration unit of nominal molecular weight cut-off 10 KDa (Millipore, MA). Sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample at an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50 and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. Digested peptides were collected by centrifugation, and quantified using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer.  ITRAQ labeling and high pH reverse phase fractionation ITRAQ Labeling was performed using two iTRAQ 8-plex reagent kits (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA) to conduct four replicate. 100 µg of digested samples were labeled as follows: Sample Con→Con: tag 113 & 117; Sample Con→Cd: tag 114 &118; Sample HRW→Cd: tag 115 & 119; Sample HRW→Con: tag 116 & 121. The labeled samples were allowed to incubate at room temperature for 2 h and the peptide mixtures were then pooled and vacuum-dried. High pH Reverse Phase Fractionation chromatography was carried out using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 high-performance LC system with a fraction collection device. The iTRAQ-tagged tryptic peptides were reconstituted in buffer A (20 mM ammonium formate, pH10.0), and then load onto Gemini® 5 μm NX-C18 Column (250 × 3 mm, 110 Å, Phenomenex). The peptides were eluted with gradient 5-15% B (20 mM ammonium formate in 90% ACN, pH10.0) in 15 min, 15-45% B in 30 min, 90% B hold for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Absorbance at 214 nm was monitored, and a total of 10 fractions were collected and vacuum-dried.

### Data Protocol
Nano LC-MS/MS conditions On-line separation was performed with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each of the fractions was dissolved in 0.1% FA and then centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 20 min. A volume of 5 µL of the supernatant (approximately 2 µg peptide products) was firstly loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific); then eluted on the analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC, C18, 75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) by a gradient from 3-45% B (80% ACN and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 112 min. Due to the loading and washing steps, the total time for an Nano LC-MS/MS run was 160 min longer. Data-dependent MS/MS was performed using an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer, equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (both from Thermo Fisher Scientific). The electrospray voltage applied was 2.2 kV. From the 60,000 resolution MS1 full scan (m/z 350-1800), the five most prominent ions were selected for MS/MS analysis if they exceeded a threshold of 5000 counts and were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 40% and the resulting fragments were detected with 7500 resolution in the Orbitrap. The lock mass option was enabled using polydimethylcyclosiloxane (m/z 445.120020) for recalibration. Every ion selected for fragmentation was excluded for 60s by dynamic exclusion. ITRAQ data analysis   Raw data were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer Software (version: 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein identification was performed using Sequest HT engine against the UniprotKB Medicago truncatula database (update to June 9th, 2016, including 70050 protein sequences). Searching parameters were as follows: Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme with allowance at most two missed cleavage; Gln → pyro-Glu (N-term Q), Oxidation (M), Deamidated as the potential variable modifications, and Carbamidomethyl (C), iTRAQ 8plex (N-term), iTRAQ 8plex (K) as fixed modifications; A mass tolerance of 10 ppm was permitted for intact peptide mass and 0.02 Da for fragmented ions. A Percolator algorism was applied to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR) based on q-value, and only peptides at the 99% confidence interval were counted as the identified protein. For protein quantitation, one protein had to contain at least two unique peptides. The quantitative protein ratios were weighted and normalized by the median ratio in Sequest HT. When the average of abundance level of a protein showed a difference corresponding to a >1.5-fold or <0.67-fold change (|Fold Change (FC)| ≥ 1.5) in experimentally treated groups (Con→Cd, HRW→Cd, and HRW→Con) compared to Control group (Con→Con), the protein was considered to be a differential abundance protein.   Bioinformatic analysis of differential abundance proteins (DAPs)   In the present study, a multi-omics data analysis tool, OmicsBean (http://www.omicsbean.com:88/), which integrated Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis, was employed to analyze the obtained DAPs. A Venn Diagram online tool (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/) was used to located the co-existed DAPs among three comparing pairs (Con→Cd vs Con→Con, HRW→Cd vs Con→Con, and HRW→Con vs Con→Con).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cadmium; molecular hydrogen; itraq; medicago sativa

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Chen Dai

### Lab Head
Dr Weiti Cui and Chen Dai
College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, 210095, China


