### Accession
PXD026089

### Title
Identification of trans-acting factors mediating mRNA localization

### Description
Here we aimed to identify protein interacting partners of the (AU)8 motif mediating mRNA localization. For that, RNA carrying this motifs and its mutated version (ATATATATATATATAT ➝ GTACATACATGTACAT) is included in in vitro produced RNA containing 5 boxB sites, the RNA is incubated with mouse brain lysate and fished out using GRNA chromatography. Bound proteins were analysed by mass spectrometry and ELAVL2, ELAVL3 and ELAVl4 identified among the most enriched interactions of AU)8 motif.

### Sample Protocol
For isolation of interacting partners of tested RNA element, we used GRNA chromatography. Ras and Ras_mut RNA were generated by in vitro transcription. The resulting RNA was incubated with mouse brain lysate and bound to lambda-GST protein immobilized on glutathione beads. Per 60 µg of GST-lambda N fusion peptide, 20 µl of a 50% slurry of Glutathione-Sepharose 4B (Amersham, 17075601) in binding buffer (BB: 20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.05% NP-40) were incubated on an orbital rocker for 30 min at room temperature. Glutathione-Sepharose beads were washed twice in 1 ml of BB to remove the unbound GST-lambda N, and incubated with 18 pmol RNA in 200 µl BB for 1 hr at 4ºC. The beads were washed twice with 1 ml BB and incubated with protein lysate prepared from P3 mouse brains (2 mg total protein, lysis buffer: 20 mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10% Glycerol, 0.3% NP-40, 0.4 mM Pefabloc, after lysis and clarification lysates were diluted to reduce NP-40 to 0.15%) for 2 hr at 4ºC. The samples were washed 3 times with 1 ml BB, once with BB without NP-40 and bound proteins were eluted with 0.15 µg RNAse A in 60 µl elution buffer (20mM TRIS-HCl pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl 1.5mM MgCl2) for 30 min at 30ºC orbital shaker. 60µl of the supernatant was collected as eluate. Eluates were subjected to tryptic digestion and liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Peptide separation was done on a 20 cm reversed-phase column (75 µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ (1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a 200 min gradient with a 250 nL/min flow rate of increasing Buffer B concentration (from 2% to 60%) on a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) system (ThermoScientific). Peptides were measured on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (ThermoScientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode with a 70K resolution, 3 x 106 ion count target and maximum injection time 10 ms for the full scan, followed by Top 20 MS2 scans with 15K resolution, 1 x 105 ion count target and maximum injection time of 22 ms. Each replicate was injected and measured twice.

### Data Protocol
RAW data were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.6.3.4, using mouse Uniprot database 2019-07, with FDR of 1% for peptide and protein identification. Integrated LFQ normalization and match between run option was activated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Grna chromatography, Rna motif

### Affiliations
Proteomics Platform , BIH at Charite, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin
Proteomics Platform, BIH@Charite

### Submitter
Marieluise Kirchner

### Lab Head
Dr Philipp Mertins
Proteomics Platform , BIH at Charite, Robert Roessle Strasse 10, 13125 Berlin


