### Accession
PXD016043

### Title
Extrinsic inflammatory, but not intrinsic oligodendroglial factors contribute to oligodendroglial differentiation block in multiple sclerosis

### Description
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most frequent demyelinating disease and despite significant advances in the immunotherapy, disease progression still cannot be prevented. Promotion of remyelination, an endogenous repair process, represents a promising new treatment approach. However, spontaneous remyelination frequently fails in MS lesions due to an impaired differentiation of progenitor cells into mature, myelinating oligodendrocytes. Intrinsic oligodendroglial and extrinsic inflammatory factors may contribute to this differentiation block. Therefore, we compared induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-derived oligodendrocytes (hiOL) from MS patients and healthy controls as well as their response to extrinsic factors. While functional capabilities or proteome compostion of both cell types were virtually indistinguishable, we discovered that Interferon-gamma (IFNÎ³) producing immune cells significantly impaired oligodendroglial differentiation and observed no differences in the functional capabilities or the proteome. In summary, these data indicate that the oligodendroglial differentiation block is not due to intrinsic oligodendroglial factors, but rather caused by the inflammatory environment present in MS lesions. These findings may contribute to the development of remyelination promoting strategies in MS.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, FAC-sorted RR and control hiOL were prepared for bottom-up MS analysis using a one-pot sample preparation method (iST Sample Preparation Kit; Preomics) following the manufacturer´s instructions with the exception of two additional fractionation steps prior to final elution of peptides. For the LC-MSMS measurements, a Bruker nanoElute UHPLC system was coupled via a Captive Spray ion source to a hybrid TIMS-quadrupole time-of-flight mass spectrometer (tims-ToF Pro, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). Peptide mixtures were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and separated within 120min with a linear gradient from 3 to 35% B on a self-packed C18 reverse phase capillary column with pulled emitter tip (nanoseparations; 360 µm OD x 75 µm ID × 250 mm; Reprosil pur C18-aq, 1.9µm, Dr. Maisch) using a constant flow of 300 nl/min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B: 0.1% FA, 80% ACN). At the end of the gradient the column was flushed with 90% B before re-equilibration at starting conditions. MS and MS/MS spectra were recorded in positive mode from m/z 100 to 1700 Da, using the PASEF scan mode. Each duty cycle consisted of 1 TIMS-MS and an average of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames, each one containing multiple MS/MS spectra, which resulted in a total cycle time of 1.1 s. To exclude the majority of singly charged ions with low m/z for PASEF precursor selection, a polygon filtering was applied to the m/z over ion mobility area. For the 120 min runs target intensity was set to of 20.000 cts/s and an ion mobility range (1/K0) of 0.6–1.6 Vs/cm2 was used. Data were acquired with a 100 ms ramp time. The Bruker Hystar / OTOF Control software was used to control the whole LC-MS system and record the data (version 3.2, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen; Germany)..

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform (version 1.6.14.0). Identification of peptides and proteins was enabled by the built-in Andromeda search engine by querying the concatenated forward and reverse mouse Uniprot database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; version from 04/2019) including common lab contaminants. Trypsin with full enzyme specificity and only peptides with a minimum length of 7 amino acids were selected. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed; the match between runs option was turned on. Carbamidomethylation (Cys) was set as fixed modification, while Oxidation (Met) and N-acetylation at the protein N-terminus were defined as variable modifications. For peptide and protein identifications a minimum false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % was required. Relative label free quantification (LFQ) was based on the measurements of 2 x 3 biological replicates for RRMS and control hiOL. Data processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.6.0). Reverse and contaminant hits, as well as proteins that were identified by a single modified peptide only, were eliminated from the list of identified protein groups. Proteins eventually included for further analysis had to be identified with at least 2 peptides, one of which had to be unique for the protein group. LFQ intensity values were log2 transformed and missing values (NaN) were replaced by imputation (downshift 1.8, width 0.3), simulating signals of low abundant proteins within the distribution of measured values. To identify in a supervised manner the sets of proteins that significantly distinguish control and RRMS hiOL, a two-sample t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 to correct for multiple hypothesis testing was performed on the averaged log2 transformed LFQ values from both experiments. The overlap of proteins identified from both experimental groups was shown by a Venn diagram generated using the BioVenn web application.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is the most frequent demyelinating disease in young adults and despite significant advances in immunotherapy, disease progression still cannot be prevented. Promotion of remyelination, an endogenous repair mechanism resulting in the formation of new myelin sheaths around demyelinated axons, represents a promising new treatment approach. However, remyelination frequently fails in MS lesions, which can in part be attributed to impaired differentiation of oligodendroglial progenitor cells into mature, myelinating oligodendrocytes. The reasons for impaired oligodendroglial differentiation and defective remyelination in MS are currently unknown. To determine whether intrinsic oligodendroglial factors contribute to impaired remyelination in relapsing-remitting MS (RRMS), we compared induced pluripotent stem cell-derived oligodendrocytes (hiOL) from RRMS patients and controls, among them two monozygous twin pairs discordant for MS. We found that hiOL from RRMS patients and controls were virtually indistinguishable with respect to remyelination-associated functions and proteomic composition. However, while analyzing the effect of extrinsic factors we discovered that supernatants of activated peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) significantly inhibit oligodendroglial differentiation. In particular, we identified CD4<sup>+</sup> T cells as mediators of impaired oligodendroglial differentiation; at least partly due to interferon-gamma secretion. Additionally, we observed that blocked oligodendroglial differentiation induced by PBMC supernatants could not be restored by application of oligodendroglial differentiation promoting drugs, whereas treatment of PBMCs with the immunomodulatory drug teriflunomide prior to supernatant collection partly rescued oligodendroglial differentiation. In summary, these data indicate that the oligodendroglial differentiation block is not due to intrinsic oligodendroglial factors but rather caused by the inflammatory environment in RRMS lesions which underlines the need for drug screening approaches taking the inflammatory environment into account. Combined, these findings may contribute to the development of new remyelination promoting strategies.

### Keywords
Ifnγ, Induced pluripotent stem cells, Proteomics, Oligodendrocytes, Relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis, Mass spectrometry, Remyelination

### Affiliations
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry
Max Planck Institute for Biomedical Research Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany

### Submitter
Hannes Drexler

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes C. A. Drexler
Max Planck Institute for Biomedical Research Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Unit Röntgenstr. 20 48149 Münster Germany


