### Accession
PXD007570

### Title
Mapping Protein Targets of Bioactive Small Molecules using Lipid-Based Chemical Proteomics

### Description
Lipids play critical roles in cell biology, often through direct interactions with proteins. We recently described the use of photoreactive lipid probes combined with quantitative mass spectrometry to globally map lipid-protein interactions, and the effects of drugs on these interactions, in cells. Here, we investigate the broader potential of lipid-based chemical proteomic probes for determining the cellular targets of biologically active small molecules, including natural product derivatives and repurposed drugs of ill-defined mechanisms. We identify the prostaglandin-regulatory enzyme PTGR2 as a target of the anti-diabetic hops derivative KDT501 and show that miconazole—an anti-fungal drug that attenuates disease severity in preclinical models of multiple sclerosis—inhibits SGPL1, an enzyme that degrades the signaling lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate, drug analogues of which are used to treat multiple sclerosis in humans. Our findings highlight the versatility of lipid-based chemical proteomics probes for mapping small molecule-protein interactions in human cells to gain mechanistic understanding of bioactive compounds.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC cells are treated in situ with lipid probes and photocrosslinked. Lysates are derivitized with biotin (via Click chemistry) and precipitated. Proteins are resolubilized, reduced, and alkylated in solution. Labeled proteins are affinity enriched with streptavidin resin. Proteins are digested on-bead with trypsin. Tryptic digests are analyzed by MuDPIT (5 steps) on Orbitrap Velos spectrometers. (See Niphakis et al. 2015)

### Data Protocol
RAW files (5 / experiment) are converted using RawConverter (1.0.0.0) to ms2 files (selecting monoisotpic m/z in DDA). MS1 information is extracted with ReAdW (4.2.1) to mzXML. ms2 files are search using ProLuCID on IP2. DTASelect files and mzXML are used with CIMAGE to quantify peptide and protein ratios.

### Publication Abstract
Lipids play critical roles in cell biology, often through direct interactions with proteins. We recently described the use of photoreactive lipid probes combined with quantitative mass spectrometry to globally map lipid-protein interactions, and the effects of drugs on these interactions, in cells. Here, we investigate the broader potential of lipid-based chemical proteomic probes for determining the cellular targets of biologically active small molecules, including natural product derivatives and repurposed drugs of ill-defined mechanisms. We identify the prostaglandin-regulatory enzyme PTGR2 as a target of the antidiabetic hops derivative KDT501 and show that miconazole-an antifungal drug that attenuates disease severity in preclinical models of multiple sclerosis-inhibits SGPL1, an enzyme that degrades the signaling lipid sphingosine-1-phosphate, drug analogues of which are used to treat multiple sclerosis in humans. Our findings highlight the versatility of lipid-based chemical proteomics probes for mapping small molecule-protein interactions in human cells to gain mechanistic understanding of bioactive compounds.

### Keywords
Chemoproteomics, Hek293t, Orbitrap velos, Lipid probes, Neuro2a

### Affiliations
The Scripps Research Institute
Department of Molecular Medicine The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology The Scripps Research Institute USA

### Submitter
Kenneth Lum

### Lab Head
Dr Benjamin Cravatt
Department of Molecular Medicine The Skaggs Institute for Chemical Biology The Scripps Research Institute USA


