### Accession
PXD028556

### Title
Mitochondrial aconitase (ACO2) modulates iron homeostasis and is associated with outcomes in poor prognosis aggressive non-small cell lung cancer

### Description
NSCLC accounts for 85% of lung cancers, the most frequently diagnosed and leading cause of cancer related death. An ACO2-iron acis regulates intracellular iron and consequently the particularly aggressive phenotype associated with NSCLC engraftment and poor prognosis. These findings suggest that NSCLC stratified by ACO2 protein level may benefit from treatments that target iron homeostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Super-SILAC standard was generated as previously described {Zhang, 2014 #1058}. In brief, three NSCLC cell lines (HCC827, H520 and H460) that differ in histology were grown in RPMI 1640 Minus L-Lysine and L-Arginine media supplemented with 13C615N2-Lysine (Lys-8), 13C615N4-Arginine (Arg-10) and 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (all from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, Inc.) and 1% penicillin-streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich) until their proteomes were fully labeled by the heavy lysing and arginine. Proteins were extracted in urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 7.6) and combined in a ratio of 1:1:1 (protein amount) to generate the super-SILAC standard. Sample preparation for MS analysis for primary tumors Proteins extracted from the patient specimens were mixed with equal amounts of the super-SILAC standard and reduced with 4.5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 20 min and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in dark. After overnight digestion by trypsin, peptides were desalted and purified by using Pierce C18 Spin Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as previously described {Zhang, 2015 #1406}.  LC-MS/MS analysis Purified peptides were separated by a ultra high performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system (Easy- nLC1000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nano-electrospray ion source (EASY-SPRAY, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides re-suspended in 0.1% formic acid were loaded onto a 50 cm column (75 μm inner diameter) packed with PepMap®RSLC C18 resin and heated at 60 °C with a flow rate of 250 nl/min from 5% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid over 224 min, followed by 30% to 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in 2 min and then 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 12 min to clean up the column.  Mass spectra were obtained by using one full MS scan (400–1200 m/z) in the Orbitrap mass analyzer followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans. For MS scans, automatic gain control target was set at 1000,000 with a maximum ion injection time of 200 ms, and resolution was 240,000 (full-width half-maximum) at m/z 400 in the Orbitrap. For MS2 scans, up to 10 most intensive ions were selected and fragmented by collision induced dissociation with normalized collision energies at 30 in the ion trap. Automatic gain control target for MS2 was 10,000 with a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was set at 50 s. Maximum exclusion list size was 500.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant [15] (version 1.5.2.8). Peaks were searched against the UniProt human database (released Feb, 2015; http://www.uniprot.org) using Andromeda search engine [16] implemented in MaxQuant. Two mis-cleavages were allowed and a minimum of 7 amino acids per identified peptide was required. False discovery rate for peptides and proteins was set at 1%. “Match between runs” option was turned on with an alignment time window of 20 min and a matching time window of 2 min. A minimum ratio count of 1 was chosen for quantification of SILAC pairs. “Re-quantify” option was selected.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nsclc, Engraftment, Aco2, Iron, Aggressiveness

### Affiliations
The Hospital for Sick Children
Hospital for Sick Children

### Submitter
Shideh Mirhadi

### Lab Head
Dr Michael F. Moran
The Hospital for Sick Children


