### Accession
PXD041554

### Title
Simultaneous carbon catabolite repression governs sugar and aromatic co-utilization in Pseudomonas putida M2

### Description
Strains of Pseudomonas putida have emerged as promising biocatalysts for the conversion of sugars and aromatics obtained from lignocellulosic biomass. Understanding the role of carbon catabolite repression (CCR) in these strains is critical to optimizing the conversion of biomass to fuels and chemicals. The functioning of CCR in a P. putida strain, P. putida M2, capable of growing on both hexose and pentose sugars as well as aromatics, was investigated by cultivation experiments, proteomics, and CRISPRi-based gene repression. Strain M2 was able to co-utilize sugars and aromatics simultaneously; however, during co-cultivation with glucose and phenylpropanoid aromatics (p-coumarate and ferulate), intermediates (4-hydroxybenzoate and vanillate) accumulated, and substrate consumption was incomplete. In contrast, xylose-aromatic consumption resulted in transient intermediate accumulation and complete aromatic consumption, while xylose was incompletely consumed. Proteomics analysis of these co- cultivations revealed that glucose exerted stronger repression compared to xylose on the proteins involved in aromatic catabolism. Key glucose (Eda) and xylose (XylX) catabolic proteins were also identified at lower abundance during co-cultivation with aromatics implying simultaneous catabolite repression by sugars and aromatics. Downregulation of crc mediated by CRISPRi led to faster growth and uptake of both glucose and p-coumarate in the CRISPRi strains compared to the control while no difference was observed on xylose + p-coumarate. The increased abundance of the Eda protein and amino acids biosynthesis proteins in the CRISPRi strain further supported these observations. Lastly, small RNAs (sRNAs) sequencing results showed that the levels of CrcY and CrcZ homologs in M2, previously identified as sRNAs involved in CCR in P. putida strains, were lower under strong CCR (glucose + p-coumarate) condition compared to when repression was absent (p-coumarate or glucose only).

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from P. putida samples were extracted using a previously described chloroform/methanol precipitation method (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.bfx6jpre). Extracted proteins were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with 20% methanol, and protein concentration was determined by the DC assay (BioRad). Protein reduction was accomplished using 5 mM tris 2-(carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) for 30 min at room temperature, and alkylation was performed with 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAM; final concentration) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Overnight digestion with trypsin was accomplished with a 1:50 trypsin:total protein ratio. The resulting peptide samples were analyzed on an Agilent 1290 UHPLC system coupled to a Thermo scientific Obitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer for discovery proteomics (https://dx.doi.org/10.17504/protocols.io.buthnwj6).

### Data Protocol
The acquired LCMS raw data were converted to mgf files and searched against the latest uniprot P. putida protein database with Mascot search engine version 2.3.02 (Matrix Science). The resulting search results were filtered and analyzed by Scaffold v 5.0 (Proteome Software Inc.). The normalized spectra count of identified proteins were exported for relative quantitative analysis and selecting target genes which expression were significantly altered between experimental groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lignocellulose, Crc, Proteomics, Crispri, Carbon catabolite repression, Small rna., Pseudomonas putida

### Affiliations
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory

### Submitter
Christopher Petzold

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher J. Petzold
Staff Scientist Biological Systems & Engineering Division Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory Berkeley CA 94720


