### Accession
PXD003386

### Title
Bovine sperm surface lectinome

### Description
Identification of bovine sperm surface carbohydrate-binding proteins relevant in two important aspects of fertilization: (i) formation of the sperm reservoir in the oviductal epithelium, and (ii) gamete recognition (oocyte-sperm interaction). Using whole sperm cells and a novel affinity capture method that combines proteolysis of protein-glycan complexes and mass spectrometry (i.e., CREDEX-MS), several lectins were enriched, identified by MS/MS proteomics, and mapped within the fertilization events in bovine species.

### Sample Protocol
Well-defined carbohydrate structures, previously identified as key elements of zona pellucida or oviductal epithelium glycosylation, were displayed as bait in an affinity chromatography experimental protocol for isolation and enrichment of sperm surface proteins of defined glycan specificity, using intact live bull sperm cells under both capacitating and non-capacitating conditions. Using nano-LC-MS/MS, proteomic analyses of the Sia/Fuc-binding proteins isolated from sperm surface by CREDEX-MS generated a lectinome of 94 proteins, 58 hitherto unidentified in bovine species. These may represent low-abundance proteins not previously detected in whole sperm proteomic studies, i.e., glycospecific proteins detectable only in an enriched fraction.

### Data Protocol
Given the lack of information on which proteins are involved in the carbohydrate-regulated fertilization events, no targeted scanning and/or quantitative approach could be employed in our proteomic studies. Therefore, a post-processing analysis to determine presence/absence of protein identification under the different CREDEX parameters was chosen. Potential functional information on the identified proteins was obtained from UniProt, agriGO, DAVID or KEGG databases; STRING was also employed to provide physical and functional protein-protein interactions.

### Publication Abstract
Glycan-protein interactions play a key role in mammalian fertilization, but data on the composition and identities of protein complexes involved in fertilization events are scarce, with the added complication that the glycans in such interactions tend to differ among species. In this study we have used a bovine model to detect, characterize and identify sperm lectins relevant in fertilization. Given the complexity of the sperm-toward-egg journey, two important aspects of the process, both primarily mediated by protein-sugar interactions, have been addressed: (1) formation of the sperm reservoir in the oviductal epithelium, and (2) gamete recognition (oocyte-sperm interaction). Using whole sperm cells and a novel affinity capture method, several groups of proteins with different glycan specificities, including 58 hitherto unreported as lectins, have been identified in sperm surface, underscoring both the efficacy of our selective approach and the complex composition and function of sperm. Based on these results and previous data, we suggest that sperm surface proteins play significant roles in fertilization events such as membrane remodeling, transport, protection and function, thus supporting the hypothesis that rather than a simple lock-and-key model, mammalian fertilization relies on a complex interactome involving multiple ligands/receptors and recognition/binding events.

### Keywords
Bovine, Fertilization, Sperm, Lectins

### Affiliations
Universitat Pompeu Fabra
Pompeu Fabra University

### Submitter
Sira Defaus

### Lab Head
Dr David Andreu
Pompeu Fabra University


