### Accession
PXD001216

### Title
Analysis of differential expression patterns of mRNA and protein during cold- and de-acclimation in Arabidopsis

### Description
Overwintering plants are capable of exhibiting high levels of cold tolerance, which is acquired through the process of cold acclimation (CA). In contrast to CA, the acquired freezing tolerance is rapidly reduced during cold de-acclimation (DA) and plants resume growth after sensing warm temperatures. In order to better understand plant growth and development, and to aid in the breeding of cold-tolerant plants, it is important to decipher the functional mechanisms of the DA process.
In this study, we performed comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses during CA and DA. As revealed by shotgun proteomics, we identified 3,987 peptides originating from 1,569 unique proteins and the corresponding mRNAs were analyzed. Among the 1,569 genes, 658 genes were specifically induced at the transcriptional level during the process of cold acclimation. In order to investigate the relationship between mRNA and the corresponding protein expression pattern, a Pearson correlation was analyzed. Interestingly, 199 genes showed a positive correlation of mRNA and protein expression pattern, indicating that both their transcription and translation occurred during CA. However, 226 genes showed a negative correlation of mRNA and protein expression pattern, indicating that their mRNAs were transcribed during CA and were stored for the subsequent DA step. Under this scenario, those proteins were specifically increased during DA without additional transcription of mRNA. These data indicate that the expression of specific mRNAs and subsequent accumulation of corresponding proteins are not always in accordance under low temperature stress conditions in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis plants were grown on MS plates and treated for cold (2 ºC) for 7 days (CA7d) under 12h/12h light/dark conditions and subsequent to cold treatment, DA-treated samples (DA6h, DA12h, DA24h) were grown at 22 ºC for 24 hours under long day conditions and samples were harvested at 5 time points; NA, CA7d, DA6h, DA12h and DA24h with three biological replicates. Total proteins were extracted using extraction buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl pH 9.0 containing 8 M of urea) and protein samples were digested by trypsin after reduction with dithiothreitol and alkylation with iodoacetamide. Desalted peptide samples were analyzed with a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Fisher Scientific) that was coupled with a Dionex Ultimate3000 pump and an HTC-PAL autosampler (CTC analytics). A self-pulled needle (150 mm length × 100 μm i.d., 6-μm opening) packed with ReproSil C18 materials (3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH) was used as an analytical column with a “stone-arch” frit. A spray voltage of 2,400 V was applied and the injection volume was 1 μg / 5 μL with a flow rate of 500 nL min−1. The mobile phases consisted of 0.5% acetic acid (A) and 0.5% acetic acid and 80% acetonitrile (B). A three-step linear gradient of 5% to 10% B in 5 min, 10% to 40% B in 60 min, 40% to 100% B in 5 min, and 100% B for 10 min was employed. The MS scan range was m/z 300 to 1,500. The top-10 precursor ions were selected in the MS scan by Orbitrap with resolution = 60,000. Subsequent MS/MS scans were performed with an ion trap in the automated gain control mode, where the automated gain control values of 5.00e + 05 and 1.00e + 04 were set for full MS and MS/MS, respectively. The normalized collision-induced dissociation was set to 35.0. A lock mass function was used for the LTQ-Orbitrap XL in order to obtain constant mass accuracy during the gradient analysis.

### Data Protocol
The Mass Navigator version 1.2 (Mitsui Knowledge Industry) with the default parameters for LTQ-Orbitrap XL was used to create peak lists on the basis of the recorded fragmentation spectra. The m/z values of the isotope peaks were converted to the corresponding monoisotopic peaks when the isotope peaks were selected as the precursor ions. In order to improve the quality of MS/MS spectra, the Mass Navigator software discarded all peaks that were less than 10 absolute intensity and with less than 0.1% of the most intense peaks in the MS/MS spectra. Peptides and proteins were identified by means of automated database searching using Mascot version 2.2 (Matrix Science) in The Arabidopsis Information Resource database (TAIR8_pep_20080412, ftp://ftp.arabidopsis.org/home/tair/Sequences/blast_datasets/TAIR8_blastsets/) with a precursor mass tolerance of 3 ppm and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.8 Da. Furthermore, strict trypsin specificity was employed which allowed for up to a total of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of Met was allowed as a variable modification. Peptides were considered identified if the Mascot score was over the 95% confidence limit based on the “identity” score of each peptide. The peptide “Peak top heights” were used for calculation as each protein expression levels and the value was obtained by the ratio of “Peak top height (Light)” (unlabeled protein) to “Peak top height (Heavy)” (15N isotope labeled protein). 15N isotope labeled protein samples were mixture of NA, CA and DA samples. Unlabeled protein sample and 15N isotope labeled protein samples were combined into one sample and analyzed by the LC-MS. Obtaining data and calculation was done as followed. The LC-MS peak height of each peptide (Light) and the corresponding isotope (Heavy) pair in all samples were determined using Mass Navigator v1.2. In order to quantify protein expression levels, unique peptides were selected under the conditions where the corresponding peaks were detected in more than 36/45 experiments (3 biological and 3 technical replicates with 5 time points of samples) after the “Quantitation score” (Mass Navigator) was cut off at 0.7. In order to remove any error from peaks, we assessed the value of “Peak intensity at MSMS triggered retention time”, which represents the confidence of peptide peaks. When the value of “Peak intensity (Heavy)” was “-1”, the “Peak top height (Light)” was calculated as a “non-detected” peak. When the value of the “Peak intensity (Light)” was “-1”, the “Peak top height (Light)” was calculated as “0”. The average values of peptide “Peak top heights” were calculated in each experiment using the peptide ratio of values of “Peak top height (Light)” to “Peak top height (Heavy)”.

### Publication Abstract
Overwintering plants are capable of exhibiting high levels of cold tolerance, which is acquired through the process of cold acclimation (CA). In contrast to CA, the acquired freezing tolerance is rapidly reduced during cold de-acclimation (DA) and plants resume growth after sensing warm temperatures. In order to better understand plant growth and development, and to aid in the breeding of cold-tolerant plants, it is important to decipher the functional mechanisms of the DA process. In this study, we performed comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analyses during CA and DA. As revealed by shotgun proteomics, we identified 3987 peptides originating from 1569 unique proteins and the corresponding mRNAs were analyzed. Among the 1569 genes, 658 genes were specifically induced at the transcriptional level during the process of cold acclimation. In order to investigate the relationship between mRNA and the corresponding protein expression pattern, a Pearson correlation was analyzed. Interestingly, 199 genes showed a positive correlation of mRNA and protein expression pattern, indicating that both their transcription and translation occurred during CA. However, 226 genes showed a negative correlation of mRNA and protein expression pattern, indicating that their mRNAs were transcribed during CA and were stored for the subsequent DA step. Under this scenario, those proteins were specifically increased during DA without additional transcription of mRNA. In order to confirm the negative correlation of mRNA and protein expression patterns, qRT-PCR and western blot analyses were performed. Mitochondrial malate dehydrogenase 1 (mMDH1) exhibited a negative correlation of mRNA and protein levels, which was characterized by CA-specific mRNA induction and protein accumulation specifically during DA. These data indicate that the expression of specific mRNAs and subsequent accumulation of corresponding proteins are not always in accordance under low temperature stress conditions in plants.

### Keywords
Nano-lc-ms/ms, Arabidopsis, Cold deacclimation, Cold acclimation

### Affiliations
Plant Genomic Network Research Team, RIKEN CSRS, JAPAN

### Submitter
Kentaro Nakaminami

### Lab Head
Dr Motoaki Seki
Plant Genomic Network Research Team, RIKEN CSRS, JAPAN


