### Accession
PXD006004

### Title
RNA polymerase II Immunoprecipitation from Arabidopsis LC-MSMS

### Description
RNA polymerase II (Pol II) was immunoprecipitated from Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings, using antibodies that specifically recognize: 1) C’ terminal Domain (CTD), 2) CTD Serine 5 Phosphorylation  and 3) CTD Serine 2 Phosphorylation. Proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with different Pol II pools were analysed.

### Sample Protocol
For RNA polymerase II immunoprecipitation Arabidopsis seedlings grown were grown in constant light for 16 days. 4g of seedlings/per sample were harvested from petri dishes containing ½ MS medium, during harvesting/weighting time seedlings were kept in ice which was followed by flash frozing in liquid Nitrogen.  20g of frozen material were ground together with liquid Nitrogen pre-cooled mortar and pestle, and liquid Nitrogen was added 5 times until a fine powder was obtained. 20 mL of extraction buffer were added and homogenized until material was thawed using the pestle. Extraction buffer: 50mM Hepes buffer pH=7.4 , 50mM NaCl, 1mM PMSF, 1mM DTT, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1% (v/v) IGEPAL CA-630, 1:100 of protease inhibitor cocktail for plant cell lysate (SIGMA, P9599), 1:500 Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 2 (SIGMA, P5726), 1:500 Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail 3 (SIGMA, P0044) and Complete, EDTA-free (ROCHE) 2 tablets/50 mL of final buffer volume. The resulting lysate was spun at 13.000 rpm during 15 minutes at 4°C and after filtered with a 0.22 µM filter and syringe. 5 mL of lysate were used per sample and incubation was carried out in 5mL Eppendorf tubes – low protein binding.   20 µg of each antibody were pre-bound to 50 uL protein A (Rabbit) or protein G (Mouse) agarose beads in extraction buffer, at 4°C for 2 hours with constant mixing in a rotating wheel. For samples R18_CTD, R23_CTD an antibody specifically recognizing the C’ terminal Domain (CTD) of RNA polymerase II (Pol II) (abcam, ab817) was used. For samples R13_Pol_II _S2, R21_Pol_II_S2, R26_Pol_II_S2 an antibody specifically recognizing CTD Serine 2 Phosphorylation (abcam, ab5095) was used. For samples R14_Pol_II_S5, R19_Pol_II_S5 and R24_Pol_II_S5 an antibody specifically recognizing CTD Serine 5 Phosphorylation (abcam, ab5408) was used. For R15_IgG a mix of 10 µg of Rabbit IgG (Santa Cruz, sc-2027) and 10 µg of Mouse IgG was used (Santa Cruz, sc-2025). For sample R20_IgG_mouse R25_IgG_mouse and R22__IgG_rabbit R22__IgG_rabbit, 20 µg of Rabbit or Mouse were used, respectively.  Incubation with beads was carried out at 4°C for 30 minutes with constant mixing in a rotating wheel. After incubation, beads were spun at 1000Xg at 4°C for 2 minutes, supernatant was removed and a 5 minute wash with 1 mL of extraction buffer was carried out at 4°C with constant rotation. This washing step was repeated 5 times in total. Samples were eluted in 30-35 uL of 2X Laemmli Buffer at 80°C for 10 minutes. Eluted protein samples were purified on as SDS PAGE.  Coomassie-stained gel pieces digested using Trypsin. Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 Stage tips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as decribed elsewhere (Franz-Wachtel et al, 2012). The peptide mixtures were separated using a 127 minute segmented gradient from to 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 5000 charges and 106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011), which is a module of the MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a uniprot database consisting of 33,429 protein entries from A.thalinana and 285 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Initial precursor mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) and at the fragment ion level 0.5 dalton (Da) was set for CID fragmentation. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) set to 0.01 (Elias and Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Intron splicing increases proteome complexity, promotes RNA stability, and enhances transcription. However, introns and the concomitant need for splicing extend the time required for gene expression and can cause an undesirable delay in the activation of genes. Here, we show that the plant microRNA processing factor SERRATE (SE) plays an unexpected and pivotal role in the regulation of intronless genes. Arabidopsis SE associated with more than 1000, mainly intronless, genes in a transcription-dependent manner. Chromatin-bound SE liaised with paused and elongating polymerase II complexes and promoted their association with intronless target genes. Our results indicate that stress-responsive genes contain no or few introns, which negatively affects their expression strength, but that some genes circumvent this limitation via a novel SE-dependent transcriptional activation mechanism. Transcriptome analysis of a Drosophila mutant defective in ARS2, the metazoan homologue of SE, suggests that SE/ARS2 function in regulating intronless genes might be conserved across kingdoms.

### Keywords
Pol ii, Lc-msms, Arabidopsis

### Affiliations
AG Evolutionäre Genetik der Pflanzen Fak. V - Institut für Biologie und Umweltwissenschaften (IBU)  Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg  Carl von Ossietzky-Str. 9-11  26111 Oldenburg
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Laubinger
AG Evolutionäre Genetik der Pflanzen Fak. V - Institut für Biologie und Umweltwissenschaften (IBU)  Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg  Carl von Ossietzky-Str. 9-11  26111 Oldenburg


