### Accession
PXD048221

### Title
MS data of tryptic peptides obtained through activity-guided protein purification

### Description
Protein band obtained from the Panax notoginseng leaves homogenate following an activity-guided protein-purification procedure, that showed regioselective ginsenoside hydrolysis activity was digested with trypsin and analyzed by Nano LC-LTQ Orbitrap MS to construct a peptide library of accessible amino acid sequences. Subsequent mutual sequence alignment analysis between the peptide and transcript libraries identified three candidate genes.

### Sample Protocol
Beads were resuspended in 200μL 6M Urea in 50mM NH4HCO3, and 10μL of 200mM DTT was added. The mixture was heated at 65°C and shaked for 15 min. 10μL of 500mM IAA was added, and the mixture was shaked at r.t. for 30 min in dark. After centrifugation, supernatant was removed, and beads were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 for three times. 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3, 1μL of 100mM CaCl2, and 1μg trypsin were added, and the mixture was shaked overnight at 37°C.  The nano-LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using a LTQ-Orbitrap velos pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, U.S.A.). Extracted peptides were separated using an EASY -nLC II system . The samples were autosampled directly and bound onto a trapping column packed with 5 μm C18 reversed-phase material. The peptide mixtures were seperated on an analytical column (75 μm, 10 cm) packed with 3 μm C18 reversed-phase material and eluted with the following gradient: 2-40% B for 70 min; 40-95% B for 5 min; 95% B for 20 min (solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN). The eluent was introduced to the mass spectrometer at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source was operated in a data dependent mode. Full scan MS spectra (from m/z 350−2000) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution of 60,000(FWHM). The top fifteen most abundant precursor ions from each MS scan with charge states ≥2 were selected for MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap analyzer with a CID of 35% collision energy.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant_1.5.1.2. The database search was performed using carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, oxidation of methionine as variable modification, Lys8 and Arg10 as heavy labels, trypsin as digestion enzyme, the maximum missed cleavage sites as 2, and other settings were default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Panax notoginseng, Orbitrap based lcms, Plant glucosidase, Tryptic peptides

### Affiliations
Beijing University of Chinese Medicine
Modern Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine.

### Submitter
Xiao Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Xiao Liu
Modern Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine.


