### Accession
PXD016311

### Title
Major Antigen and paramyosin proteins as candidate biomarkers for serodiagnosis of canine infection by zoonotic Onchocerca lupi

### Description
Onchocerca lupi is a filarial worm parasitizing domestic carnivores and humans. Adult nematodes usually localize beneath in the sclera or in the ocular retrobulbar of infected animals, whilst microfilariae are found in the skin. Therefore, diagnosis of O. lupi is achieved by microscopic and/or molecular detection of microfilariae from skin biopsy and/or surgical removal of adults from ocular tissues of infected hosts. An urgent non-invasive diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of O. lupi in dog is mandatory. In this study, an immunoproteomic analyses was performed using a combination of immunoblotting with O. lupi reactive sera and mass spectrometry. Onchocerca lupi major antigen protein (Ol-MJA) and paramyosin (Ol-PARA) were identified as potential biomarkers for serodiagnosis. Linear epitopes were scanned using high-density peptide microarray. Sera collected from dogs infected with O. lupi and healthy controls led to the identification of 11 immunodominant antigenic peptides (n = 7 for Ol-MJA; n = 4 for Ol-PARA). These peptides were validated using sera of dogs uniquely infected with the most important filarioids infesting dogs either zoonotic (Dirofilaria repens, Dirofilaria immitis) or not (Achontochelonema reconditum and Cercopithifilaria bainae). Six antigenic peptides, three for Ol-MJA and for Ol-PARA, respectively, were selected as potential candidate biomarkers for the serological detection of canine O. lupi infection. The molecular and proteomic dataset herein reported should provide a useful resource for studies on O. lupi toward supporting the development of new interventions (drugs, vaccines and diagnostics) against canine onchocercosis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples Female (n=3) and male (n=2) O. lupi nematodes have been isolated from the eye of an infected dog (3-year-old, male) that died accidentally, from Algarve (southern Portugal) where O. lupi is known to occur. Eggs were collected by cutting the uterus of female, whilst mfs by sedimentation from the skin of the dorsal region of the dog (see below). All samples were preserved in RNAlater® (Life Technologies, California, USA) and stored at -80°C until used.  Skin samples were collected using a disposable punch over an area of ≈0.4 × 0.5 cm from the interscapular regions of the dogs. Skin biopsies were soaked in saline solution for 12 h at room temperature and sediments (20 µl) were individually observed under light microscopy and microfilariae were identified according to morphological keys. Serum samples were obtained from O. lupi positive dog with a mfs load of 18 mfs and from dogs solely infected with Cercopithifilaria bainae, Acanthocheilonema reconditum, Dirofilaria repens and Dirofilaria immitis, sourced from previous researches. As negative control serum sample collected form pathogen-free dog was included in the study.  SDS-PAGE and Western blotting Proteins were extracted from adult female of O. lupi using the TriPure protocol as described below and quantified (0.55 µg/µl) using the QUBIT® Protein Assay kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. 24 µl of total proteins were added to the same volume of 1x Sodium Dodecyl Sulphate (SDS) sample buffer and to 1 µl of β-mercaptoethanol and heated to 100°C for 10 min and microcentrifuge for 5 min. Two 7.5% SDS polyacrylamide gels (SDS-PAGE) were loaded with 3 μl of O. lupi protein and a standard (5 μl, pre-stained) (Precision Plus Protein™ All Blue Prestained Protein Standards, BioRad, California, USA) was loaded into the first well of each gel. Both gels were run at 200V for ~45min. Proteins from gel were transferred to polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane in a semi-dry blotting cell (0.5A/45min) using the BioRad TurboBlot. For immunostaining, each blot was incubated at 4°C overnight (O/N), in blocking solution (PBS/0.1%Tween-20/5% skim milk powder). Following blocking, membranes were incubated at 4°C with serum from uninfected dogs (negative control) or those infected with O. lupi, D. immitis, D. repens, A. reconditum and C. bainae (1:1000 dilutions). Dog antibodies were detected using rabbit anti-dog IgG horseradish peroxidase conjugate (1:3000; Sigma Adrich, Missouri, USA) and detected using the FemtoChromo kit (G Biosciences, Missouri, USA). The second SDS-PAGE was stained with colloidal blue and putative bands at the same molecular weight as the blotting, were cut and examined by nLC-MS/MS analysis from Cogentech Proteomics/MS facility (Milan, Italy).      Liquid chromatography–tandem MS (LC–MS/MS) analysis Two bands identified by SDS-PAGE and Western blotting were cut from gels and trypsinized. Peptides were desalted, dried in a Speed-Vac and resuspended in 10 µl of solvent A (2 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid). 3 μl were injected on a quadrupole Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled with an UHPLC Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) with a 25 cm fused-silica emitter of 75 μm inner diameter. Columns were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch Gmbh, Ammerbuch, Germany), 1.9 μm of diameter, using a high-pressure bomb loader (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark). Peptides separation was achieved with a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (2 % ACN, 0.1% formic acid) to 40% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) over 30 min and from 40% to 100% solvent B in 2 min at a constant flow rate of 0.25 μl/min, with a single run time of 33. MS data were acquired using a data-dependent top 12 method, the survey full scan MS spectra (300–1750 Th) were acquired in the Orbitrap with 70000 resolution, AGC target 1e6, IT 120 ms. For HCD spectra resolution was set to 35000, AGC target 1e5, IT 120 ms; normalized collision energy 25% and isolation width of 3.0 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification  For protein identification the raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fischer Scientific). MS2 spectra were searched with Mascot engine against uniprot_swsprot_all_20170110 database (553231 entries), with the following parameters: enzyme Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage 2, fixed modification carbamidomethylation (C), variable modification oxidation (M) and protein N-terminal acetylation, peptide tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 20 mmu. Peptide Spectral Matches (PSM) was filtered using percolator based on q-values at a 0.01 FDR (high confidence). Proteins were considered identified with 2 unique high confident peptides. Scaffold (version Scaffold 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
Onchocerca lupi (Spirurida: Onchocercidae) is a filarial worm parasitizing domestic carnivores and humans. Adult nematodes usually localize beneath in the sclera or in the ocular retrobulbar of infected animals, whilst microfilariae are found in the skin. Therefore, diagnosis of O. lupi is achieved by microscopic and/or molecular detection of microfilariae from skin biopsy and/or surgical removal of adults from ocular tissues of infected hosts. An urgent non-invasive diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of O. lupi in dog is mandatory. In this study, an immunoproteomic analyses was performed using a combination of immunoblotting and mass spectrometry techniques. Onchocerca lupi major antigen (Ol-MJA) and paramyosin (Ol-PARA) proteins were identified as potential biomarkers for serodiagnosis. Linear epitopes were herein scanned for both proteins using high-density peptide microarray. Sera collected from dog infected with O. lupi and healthy animal controls led to the identification of 11 immunodominant antigenic peptides (n = 7 for Ol-MJA; n = 4 for Ol-PARA). These peptides were validated using sera of dogs uniquely infected with the most important filarioids infesting dogs either zoonotic (Dirofilaria repens, Dirofilaria immitis) or not (Acanthocheilonema reconditum and Cercopithifilaria bainae). Overall, six antigenic peptides, three for Ol-MJA and for Ol-PARA, respectively, were selected as potential antigens for the serological detection of canine O. lupi infection. The molecular and proteomic dataset herein reported should provide a useful resource for studies on O. lupi toward supporting the development of new interventions (drugs, vaccines and diagnostics) against canine onchocercosis.

### Keywords
Major antigen, Canine onchocercosis, Paramyosin, Biomarkers, Onchocerca lupi

### Affiliations
University of Sao Paulo
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, 70010 Valenzano, Bari, Italy.

### Submitter
Giuseppe Palmisano

### Lab Head
Dr Domenico Otranto
Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Bari, 70010 Valenzano, Bari, Italy.


