### Accession
PXD011439

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis Reveals Elevated Capacity for Photosynthesis in Polyphenol Oxidase Expression-Silenced Clematis terniflora DC. Leaves

### Description
Comparitive proteomics on Clematis terniflora leaves with VIGS-CtPPO and VIGS-vector

### Sample Protocol
The tissues were ground in liquid nitrogen. For protein extraction, the phenol extraction method was performed according to a previously published protocol [67]. Briefly, 6 g of frozen powder was suspended in 15 ml of homogenization medium containing 50% (v/v) phenol, 100 mM KCl, 50 mM EDTA, 0.2% (v/v) 2-mercaptoethanol, 1mM PMSF, 700 mM sucrose, and 500 mM Tris-HCl at pH 7.5, shaken at 37°C for 15 min, and then centrifuged at the speed of 2500 × g at 4°C for 20 min. Four volumes of precipitation solution (0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol) were added in to the phenolic phase collected to precipitate the proteins. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation for 10 min at the speed of 2500 × g. The supernatant was discarded and washed with precipitation solution. Precipitation was allowed to occur at -20°C for 3 hours and the precipitate was obtained by centrifugation, whichrepeated twice. The collected proteins were dissolved in 0.5 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC). Protein concentrations were determined using the Bradford assay with bovine serum albumin as the standard. The protein (100 μg) and an additional 50 mM ABC were transferred into a new tube to create a final volume of 100 μL. The protein was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 55°C and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 30 min in darkness, then digested with sequence-grade modified trypsin (Promega, Fitchburg, Wisconsin). Trypsin and 1% lysyl endopeptidase were added to the protein and then the solutions were incubated in a water bath at 37°C for 4 hours and another 1% enzyme was added. The solutions were incubated at 37°C for 12 h, centrifuged at 10,000 × g, and then dried in a vacuum. Trypsinized peptides in 200 µL of 0.1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and 0.5% acetonitrile were loaded onto activated and balanced C18 SPE columns (Sep-Pak C18; Waters, Milford, MA). After washing the column with 200 µL of 0.1% TFA and 0.5% acetonitrile, 300 µL of 0.1 % TFA and 60 % acetonitrile were added and then the elution solution was collected and dried in a vacuum. Obtained supernatant was collected for subsequent analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed using MaxQuant version 1.5.8.3. MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine against the Uniprot database (Taxonomy: Viridiplantae, Release 2018-04-08; total of 39584 entries). The main Andromeda search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and the fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimum peptide length was set to seven amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages was allowed. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 for peptide and protein identifications. Identified peptides shared between two proteins were combined and reported as one protein group. For comparison between samples, we used label-free quantification with a relative percent content of the normalized protein intensity. Protein abundance was analyzed based on emPAI values [68]. The mean of three emPAI values was divided by the sum of the emPAI values for all identified proteins and multiplied by 100. Protein content was estimated by the molar fraction percentage (mol%).

### Publication Abstract
Polyphenol oxidase (PPO) catalyzes the o-hydroxylation of monophenols and oxidation of o-diphenols to quinones. Although the effects of PPO on plant physiology were recently proposed, little has been done to explore the inherent molecular mechanisms. To explore the in vivo physiological functions of PPO, a model with decreased PPO expression and enzymatic activity was constructed on <i>Clematis terniflora</i> DC. using virus-induced gene silencing (VIGS) technology. Proteomics was performed to identify the differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in the model (VC) and empty vector-carrying plants (VV) untreated or exposed to high levels of UV-B and dark (HUV-B+D). Following integration, it was concluded that the DEPs mainly functioned in photosynthesis, glycolysis, and redox in the PPO silence plants. Mapman analysis showed that the DEPs were mainly involved in light reaction and Calvin cycle in photosynthesis. Further analysis illustrated that the expression level of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase, the content of chlorophyll, and the photosynthesis rate were increased in VC plants compared to VV plants pre- and post HUV-B+D. These results indicate that the silence of PPO elevated the plant photosynthesis by activating the glycolysis process, regulating Calvin cycle and providing ATP for energy metabolism. This study provides a prospective approach for increasing crop yield in agricultural production.

### Keywords
Clematis terniflora dc.; polyphenol oxidase; virus induced gene silencing

### Affiliations
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University, Zheda Road 38, Hangzhou 310027, China
Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Xi Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Jingkui Tian
College of Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University, Zheda Road 38, Hangzhou 310027, China


