### Accession
PXD003794

### Title
Glycomic and proteomic analyses of malignant ascites fluid were used to identify  potential metastatic biomarkers of epithelial ovarian cancer : Partial

### Description
Ovarian cancer is a major cause of cancer mortality among women largely due to late diagnosis of advanced stage metastatic disease. More extensive molecular analysis of metastatic ovarian cancer is needed to identify post-translational modifications of proteins particularly associated with metastatic disease so that we can better understand the metastatic process and identify potential therapeutic targets. Proteins are the target of many recently developed cancer treatments, but an often neglected aspect of biomarker discovery is protein glycosylation, especially those involving tumor-associated carbohydrate antigens (TACAs) such as sialyl-Lewis(x) (SLe(x) and sialyl-Lewis(a) (SLe(a), which have been identified in various cancers. Although it is already known that considerable changes in protein glycosylation are major contributors to the initiation, progression and metastasis of tumors, specifics about glycosylation changes particularly important to the metastatic process are still lacking. In this report we describe the results of a combined glycomic and proteomic study of metastatic ovarian cancer (OC) ascites fluids. Glycoproteins in ascites fluid were enriched by affinity binding to lectins (ConA or WGA) and other affinity matrices. Separate glycomic and proteomic analyses were performed as well as glycopeptide analyses. Relative abundances of different N-glycan groups and proteins were identified from original ascites fluids and corresponding lectin bound samples. Levels of biomarkers CA125, MUC1 and fibronectin were also monitored in these samples by Western blot analysis. N-glycan analysis of ascites fluids showed the presence of large, highly fucosylated and sialylated, complex and hybrid glycans, some of which were not observed in normal serum. Proteins in OC ascites that were more abundant or not present in the serum control, were haptoglobin, fibronectin, lumican, fibulin, hemopexin, ceruloplasmin, alpha-1-antitrypsin and alpha-1-antichymotrypsin. Glycopeptide analysis identified N- and O-glycans in clusterin, hemopexin, and fibulin that were present in OC ascites.

### Sample Protocol
Samples of metastatic ovarian cancer ascites were obtained from the Cancer Center Biorepository and as part of the UCDCC #183 clinical study of ovarian cancer (Dr. Gary Leiserowitz) with patient consent utilizing an institutionally approved IRB protocol. The ascites specimens were de-identified (coded) so that the identity of the individual donating the samples could not be identified by the research personnel. Ascites specimens (ranging in volume from 10 ml to 1.5 liters) were transferred to sterile centrifuge tubes or bottles, centrifuged at 300-450 x g (1200-1400 rpm, Beckman GPR centrifuge) for 10 min to pellet cells (tumor cells, immune cells, especially lymphocytes, and other cells) in the sample. Supernatant (fluid) was removed, aliquoted and frozen for future analysis (-80oC).

### Data Protocol
CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.4.8, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability. Peptide Probabilities from X! Tandem were assigned by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 80.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Ovarian cancer is a major cause of cancer mortality among women, largely due to late diagnosis of advanced metastatic disease. More extensive molecular analysis of metastatic ovarian cancer is needed to identify post-translational modifications of proteins, especially glycosylation that is particularly associated with metastatic disease to better understand the metastatic process and identify potential therapeutic targets. Glycoproteins in ascites fluid were enriched by affinity binding to lectins (ConA or WGA) and other affinity matrices. Separate glycomic, proteomic, and glycopeptide analyses were performed. Relative abundances of different N-glycan groups and proteins were identified from ascites fluids and a serum control. Levels of biomarkers CA125, MUC1, and fibronectin were also monitored in OC ascites samples by Western blot analysis. N-Glycan analysis of ascites fluids showed the presence of large, highly fucosylated and sialylated complex and hybrid glycans, some of which were not observed in normal serum. OC ascites glycoproteins, haptoglobin, fibronectin, lumican, fibulin, hemopexin, ceruloplasmin, alpha-1-antitrypsin, and alpha-1-antichymotrypsin were more abundant in OC ascites or not present in serum control samples. Further glycopeptide analysis of OC ascites identified N- and O-glycans in clusterin, hemopexin, and fibulin glycopeptides, some of which are unusual and may be important in OC metastasis.

### Keywords
Epithelial ovarian cancer, Ascites, Concanavalin a

### Affiliations
UC Davis Proteomics Core

### Submitter
Brett Phinney

### Lab Head
Dr Brett Phinney
UC Davis Proteomics Core


