### Accession
PXD005311

### Title
Large scale phosphoprotein profiling to unravel Drosophila cold acclimation regulatory mechanisms

### Description
In this study we compared the phosphoproteome of control and cold acclimated Drosophila melanogaster in order to unravel the cold acclimation regulation mechanisms. For this prurpose we enriched phosphopeptides from each sample using a sequential elution from IMAC strategy (SIMAC) and analyzed them with a LTQ-OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer using a combination of different fragmentation strategies (classical data dependant analysis using CID, neutral loss scanning and multi-stage activation) in order to improve the number of identified phosphopeptides.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from pools of 20 adult female flies incubated at 25°C or 15°C (4 biological replicates each). Phosphopeptides were enriched using a sequential elution from IMAC strategy (SIMAC): Acid Elution for the enrichment of mono-phosphorylated peptides, Basic elution for the enrichment of multi-phosphorylated peptides, and unbound mono-phosphorylated peptides in the flow through were further enriched using TiO2 chromatopgraphy. Enriched peptides were identified by LC-MS/MS chromatography using LTQ-OrbiTrap XL mass spectrometrer. Three different methods were used in order to improve the identification rate of the phosphorylated peptides: a classical data-dependant acquisition method with CID fragmentation, a neutral loss scanning and a multi-stage activation method.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 1.2 software supported by Mascot database search engine was used for peptide and protein identification using its automatic decoy database search to calculate a false discovery rate (FDR). MS/MS spectra were compared to the UniProt Drosophila melanogaster Reference proteome database (UniProt UP000000803 release May 14, 2016, 22023 sequences). Mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS was set at 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The enzyme selectivity was set to full trypsin with one miscleavage allowed. Protein modifications were fixed carbamidomethylation of cysteines, variable oxidation of methionine, variable acetylation of N-terminus and variable phosphorylation of serine, threonine or tyrosine. Proline Studio 1.1 software was used for the validation (peptide rank 1, FDR < 1% on mascot score at the peptide spectrum match level) and the spectral count comparison of the identified proteins in each samples.

### Publication Abstract
The regulatory mechanisms involved in the acquisition of thermal tolerance are unknown in insects. Reversible phosphorylation is a widespread post-translational modification that can rapidly alter proteins function(s). Here, we conducted a large-scale comparative screening of phosphorylation networks in adult Drosophila flies that were cold-acclimated versus control. Using a modified SIMAC method followed by a multiple MS analysis strategy, we identified a large collection of phosphopeptides (about 1600) and phosphoproteins (about 500) in both groups, with good enrichment efficacy (80%). The saturation curves from the four biological replicates revealed that the phosphoproteome was rather well covered under our experimental conditions. Acclimation evoked a strong phosphoproteomic signal characterized by large sets of unique and differential phosphoproteins. These were involved in several major GO superclusters of which cytoskeleton organization, positive regulation of transport, cell cycle, and RNA processing were particularly enriched. Data suggest that phosphoproteomic changes in response to acclimation were mainly localized within cytoskeletal network, and particularly within microtubule associated complexes. This study opens up novel research avenues for exploring the complex regulatory networks that lead to acquired thermal tolerance.

### Keywords
Fruit fly, Simac, Phosphorylation network, Acclimation

### Affiliations
Protim - Irset – Inserm U1085 Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes, France
Protim, Irset, Inserm U1085

### Submitter
E Com

### Lab Head
Dr Charles Pineau
Protim - Irset – Inserm U1085 Campus de Beaulieu, Rennes, France


