### Accession
PXD046477

### Title
Characterization of  Campylobacter jejuni proteome  profiles in co-incubation scenarios

### Description
This study aimed to reveal the influence of co-incubation with Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, or Staphylococcus aureus on the proteome of C. jejuni 81–176 using data-independent-acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). We compared the proteome profiles during co-incubation with the proteome profile in response to the bile acid deoxycholate (DCA) and investigated the impact of DCA on proteomic changes during co-incubation, as C. jejuni is exposed to both factors during colonization. We identified 1,375 proteins by DIA-MS, which is notably high, approaching the theoretical maximum of 1,645 proteins. S. aureus had the highest impact on the proteome of C. jejuni with 215 up-regulated and 230 down-regulated proteins. However, these numbers are still markedly lower than the 526 up-regulated and 516 down-regulated proteins during DCA exposure.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded onto a 4–12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigels (Invitrogen) and run into the gel for 1.5 cm. Following Coomassie staining, the protein areas were cut out, diced, and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and finally overnight digestion with trypsin was performed. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, the solution dried in a Speedvac and kept at −20°C for further analysis.Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoflow chromatography system (nanoElute) hyphenated to a hybrid timed ion mobilityquadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (timsTOF Pro, all Bruker Daltonics GmbH & Co. KG, Bremen, Germany). In brief,250 ng equivalents of peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid in water), enriched on a reversed-phase C18 trapping column (0.3 cm × 300 μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on a reversed phase C18 column with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (Aurora 25 cm × 75 μm, IonOpticks) using a 50 min linear gradient of 5–35% acetonitrile / 0.1% formic acid (v:v) at 250 nL min−1, and a column temperature of 50°C. For identification, representative samples were analyzed in PASEF acquisition mode using default manufacturer’s settings [n = 12] (Meier et al., 2018). For identification and quantification samples were analyzed in diaPASEF mode using a customized 16×2 window acquisition scheme (Skowronek et al., 2022). For each biological replicate, three technical replicates were performed in diaPASEF mode for quantitation.

### Data Protocol
The data processing was performed using the Spectronaut v16.0.220606.53000 software package (Biognosys AG, Schlieren, Switzerland). Identification of proteins as well as hybrid spectral library generation from 12×2 DDA acquisitions and 12×2 DIA acquisitions experiments were done using the Pulsar search engine against UniProtKB C. jejuni 81–176, E. faecalis ATCC 700802, E. faecium TX0016 and S. aureus NCTC 8325 proteomes using the default parameters. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% on the spectral, peptide and protein group levels for all samples. DIA quantification was performed with up to 6 fragments per peptide and up to 10 peptides per protein. A dynamic retention time alignment was done, as well as dynamic mass recalibration and quartile normalization, for the 1% FDR. Imputation of global data was executed for the final results table.

### Publication Abstract
In dynamic microbial ecosystems, bacterial communication is a relevant mechanism for interactions between different microbial species. When <i>C. jejuni</i> resides in the intestine of either avian or human hosts, it is exposed to diverse bacteria from the microbiome. This study aimed to reveal the influence of co-incubation with <i>Enterococcus faecalis</i>, <i>Enterococcus faecium</i>, or <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> on the proteome of <i>C. jejuni</i> 81-176 using data-independent-acquisition mass spectrometry (DIA-MS). We compared the proteome profiles during co-incubation with the proteome profile in response to the bile acid deoxycholate (DCA) and investigated the impact of DCA on proteomic changes during co-incubation, as <i>C. jejuni</i> is exposed to both factors during colonization. We identified 1,375 proteins by DIA-MS, which is notably high, approaching the theoretical maximum of 1,645 proteins. <i>S. aureus</i> had the highest impact on the proteome of <i>C. jejuni</i> with 215 up-regulated and 230 down-regulated proteins. However, these numbers are still markedly lower than the 526 up-regulated and 516 down-regulated proteins during DCA exposure. We identified a subset of 54 significantly differentially expressed proteins that are shared after co-incubation with all three microbial species. These proteins were indicative of a common co-incubation response of <i>C. jejuni</i>. This common proteomic response partly overlapped with the DCA response; however, several proteins were specific to the co-incubation response. In the co-incubation experiment, we identified three membrane-interactive proteins among the top 20 up-regulated proteins. This finding suggests that the presence of other bacteria may contribute to increased adherence, e.g., to other bacteria but eventually also epithelial cells or abiotic surfaces. Furthermore, a conjugative transfer regulon protein was typically up-expressed during co-incubation. Exposure to both, co-incubation and DCA, demonstrated that the two stressors influenced each other, resulting in a unique synergistic proteomic response that differed from the response to each stimulus alone. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD046477.

### Keywords
Enterococcus faecalis, Enterococcus faecium, Bile acids, Proteomics, Co-incubation, Staphylococcus aureus, Campylobacter jejuni

### Affiliations
University Medical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Goettingen, Department of Clinical Chemistry, Core Facility Proteomics


