### Accession
PXD028640

### Title
Comprehensive Phosphoproteomic Analysis of Nostoc flagelliforme in Response to Dehydration Provides Insights into Plant ROS Signaling Transduction

### Description
To elucidate a mechanism for drought adaptation of Nostoc flagelliforme, we performed a global phosphoproteome analysis on the abundance of phosphoproteinse. A total of 329 phosphopeptides from 271 phosphoproteins with 1168 phosphorylation sites were identified. The identified DEPPs were functionally categorized to be mainly involved in a two-component signaling pathway, photosynthesis, energy and carbohydrate metabolism, and an antioxidant system.

### Sample Protocol
Nostoc flagelliforme strain was collected from the Helan Mountain in the east region of Ningxia, China. Samples were cultured in an incubator at 25°C with continuous illumination at 40 μmol photon m−2·s−1 for 6−7 h, which was long enough for the photosynthetic activity to fully recover. Then the samples were exposed to air at 25°C to ensure fast water loss and were sampled at intervals of 1 h to assess water loss of 0, 30, 75, and 100%.

### Data Protocol
The samples were labeled using the 8-plex iTRAQ reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). The LC−MS/MS analysis used a Q Exactive MS (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Scientific).

### Publication Abstract
Terrestrial cyanobacteria, originated from aquatic cyanobacteria, exhibit a unique mechanism for drought adaptation during long-term evolution. To elucidate this diverse adaptive mechanism exhibited by terrestrial cyanobacteria from the post-translation modification aspect, we performed a global phosphoproteome analysis on the abundance of phosphoproteins in response to dehydration using <i>Nostoc flagelliforme</i>, a kind of terrestrial cyanobacteria having strong ecological adaptability to xeric environments. A total of 329 phosphopeptides from 271 phosphoproteins with 1168 phosphorylation sites were identified. Among these, 76 differentially expressed phosphorylated proteins (DEPPs) were identified for each dehydration treatment (30, 75, and 100% water loss), compared to control. The identified DEPPs were functionally categorized to be mainly involved in a two-component signaling pathway, photosynthesis, energy and carbohydrate metabolism, and an antioxidant system. We concluded that protein phosphorylation modifications related to the reactive oxygen species (ROS) signaling pathway might play an important role in coordinating enzyme activity involved in the antioxidant system in <i>N. flagelliforme</i> to adapt to dehydration stress. This study provides deep insights into the extensive modification of phosphorylation in terrestrial cyanobacteria using a phosphoproteomic approach, which may help to better understand the role of protein phosphorylation in key cellular mechanisms in terrestrial cyanobacteria in response to dehydration.

### Keywords
Nostoc flagelliforme, Dehydration, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia

### Submitter
Lingxia   Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Wenyu Liang
School of Life Sciences, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, Ningxia


