### Accession
PXD030452

### Title
CTCF ChIP-MS from native chromatin in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) and motor neurons (MNs)

### Description
To identify CTCF partners and co-localizing proteins from native chromatin in mESCs and MNs in endogenous conditions. The goal is to identify proteins within each sample with respect to wild-type control for each.

### Sample Protocol
One-step FLAG-CTCF pull-down was performed from 10mg native chromatin that is digested with benzonase from 2 different cell types (mouse). The pull-down and washes were performed in the presence of protease & phosphatase inhibitors. After washes, competitive elution with 1X FLAG peptide (~0.5 mg/ml) was done. The elutions were 20mM Tris ph7.9, 0.2mM EDTA, 50mM KCl without protease & phosphatase inhibitors. The samples were sent to Rutgers Proteomics Facility for preparation that include typsinization & purification with C18-stage columns. They were then run on an LC-MS/MS in Rutgers Proteomics Facility. MS2 (HCD) were taken in data acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS2 spectra were identified with a reverse search algorithm such as SEQUEST or MASCOTT in Rutgers Proteomics Facility. Spectral counts were reported in excel sheets.

### Publication Abstract
CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) is critical to three-dimensional genome organization. Upon differentiation, CTCF insulates active and repressed genes within Hox gene clusters. We conducted a genome-wide CRISPR knockout (KO) screen to identify genes required for CTCF-boundary activity at the HoxA cluster, complemented by biochemical approaches. Among the candidates, we identified Myc-associated zinc-finger protein (MAZ) as a cofactor in CTCF insulation. MAZ colocalizes with CTCF at chromatin borders and, similar to CTCF, interacts with the cohesin subunit RAD21. MAZ KO disrupts gene expression and local contacts within topologically associating domains. Similar to CTCF motif deletions, MAZ motif deletions lead to derepression of posterior Hox genes immediately after CTCF boundaries upon differentiation, giving rise to homeotic transformations in mouse. Thus, MAZ is a factor contributing to appropriate insulation, gene expression and genomic architecture during development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Native chromatin, Ctcf chip-ms, Lc-ms/ms, Ctcf partners

### Affiliations
Howard Hughes Medical Institute NYU School of Medicine-Smilow Research Center Biochemistry Department
New York University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Havva Ortabozkoyun Kara

### Lab Head
Dr Danny Reinberg
Howard Hughes Medical Institute NYU School of Medicine-Smilow Research Center Biochemistry Department


