### Accession
PXD008973

### Title
Human Th17 Cell differentiation

### Description
The early stages of human Th17 Cell differentiation were studied using label free proteomics to compare Th17 polarized CD4+ human T cells at 24 h and 72 h with activated cells (72 and 24 h) and Thp cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis: Proteins were extracted from the cell pellet using a lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 7.6), heated at 95⁰C for 5 min. The lysate was then sonicated at high voltage with a setting of 5 cycles for 30 seconds and 30 seconds rest between cycles. The cell debris was cleared by centrifugation at 16000g for 20 min, and a DC Protein Assay (#5000116, BioRad) was used to estimate protein amounts.   Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) Method: Briefly, an aliquot corresponding to 50 µg of protein from each biological replicate corresponding to different time points (i.e., 24 and 72 h) (n=5 for both Th17 and corresponding Th0 controls) were mixed with FASP urea buffer (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) in a 30-kDa filter tube (Millipore) to eliminate the SDS.  The proteins were reduced with dithiothretiol (DTT) and alkylated with iodoacetamide in dark for 20 min. Finally, they were digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin in 1:30 (protein:protease) ratio overnight at 37⁰C. The digested peptides were then acidified and desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (WAT054955 Vac 1 cc 50 mg, Waters). The desalted samples were dried using a centrifugal evaporator and stored at -80⁰C until further LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification: The mass spectrometry raw files were processed using MaxQuant software version 1.5.5.1 (Cox and Mann, 2008) and UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2017) human database (May 2017) was used to search the peptide data using Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) as a search algorithm. The search parameters involved trypsin specificity set to 2, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed term modification and N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. The peptide and protein level false discovery rates (FDR) were set to 0.01. The match between the runs option was enabled to transform the identifications across the mass spectrometric measurements. The label free quantification method (MaxLFQ) was used to determine the relative intensity values of proteins and to normalize the protein intensities between the sample runs (Cox et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Th17 cells contribute to the pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases and cancer. To reveal the Th17 cell-specific proteomic signature regulating Th17 cell differentiation and function in humans, we used a label-free mass spectrometry-based approach. Furthermore, a comprehensive analysis of the proteome and transcriptome of cells during human Th17 differentiation revealed a high degree of overlap between the datasets. However, when compared with corresponding published mouse data, we found very limited overlap between the proteins differentially regulated in response to Th17 differentiation. Validations were made for a panel of selected proteins with known and unknown functions. Finally, using RNA interference, we showed that SATB1 negatively regulates human Th17 cell differentiation. Overall, the current study illustrates a comprehensive picture of the global protein landscape during early human Th17 cell differentiation. Poor overlap with mouse data underlines the importance of human studies for translational research.

### Keywords
Human, Cord blood, Lc-ms/ms, Th0, Th17

### Affiliations
Turku Biosciences
ATLAS Lab, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Robert Moulder

### Lab Head
Dr Professor Riitta Lahesmaa
ATLAS Lab, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Åbo Akademi, Turku, Finland


