### Accession
PXD014679

### Title
A peptidomimetic proprotein convertase inhibitor is a potential anti-glioma drug as revealed by biological assays and proteomic studies

### Description
Proprotein convertases (PCs) are proteases which have an important regulatory function in a wide variety of biological processes. However, these enzymes have a key role in the activation of many cancer-related proteins and promotes the malignant phenotype of cancer cells. Here, with proteomics and biological tests, we investigated the consequences of the use of a peptidomimetic PCs inhibitor on glioma cells and macrophages in the same time and its potential application to cancer therapy. Thus, we demonstrated that the PCs inhibitor acts on macrophage activation, characterized by the secretion of pro-inflammatory and anti-tumoral factor. Also, the PCs inhibitor triggers a strong decrease of the proliferation and invasion of glioma cells, even when they are associated with macrophages in spheroids. In fact, the PCs inhibitor induces great changes in the intracellular and secreted protein profiles of the glioma cells. Many of cancerous processes are affected, such as cell growth, proliferation, angiogenesis and the immunosuppressive capacity of cancer cells. Taken together, these data, establish that the inhibitor acts both on cancer cells and macrophages and can be used as a potential anti-cancer therapeutic strategy.

### Sample Protocol
NR8383 and C6 cells were plated on sterile 24 well plates and cultured until they reached confluence. For stimulation, cells were starved overnight in Ham’s F12K or DMEM medium supplemented with 2% FBS. They were then stimulated in serum free medium with different concentration of PCs inhibitor (50, 100 or 150 μM) or with DMSO. At 24h, cell supernatants were centrifuged at 500 x g and passed through a 0.22-µm filter to remove cells and debris. Four hundred microliters of the cell supernatant were collected for each condition and digest by liquid digestion. Cells were washed three times with ice-cold PBS and then lysed with RIPA buffer for total protein extraction. Total protein extract (0.04 mg) was used for FASP. The analysis of digested proteins was performed using a nano Acquity UPLC system (Waters) coupled with a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) via a nanoelectrospray source. The samples were separated by means of online reversed phase, using a pre-concentration column (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm). The peptides were separated by applying a linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid (5%-35%) for 2 hours, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in data-dependent mode defined to analyse the ten most intense ions of MS analysis (Top 10). The MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 300 to 1600, resolution of 70,000 FWHM, AGC of 3e6 ions and maximum injection time of 120 ms. The MS/MS analysis was performed with an m/z mass range between 200 to 2000, AGC of 5e4 ions, maximum injection time of 60 ms and resolution set at 17,500 FWHM.

### Data Protocol
The proteins were identified by comparing all MS/MS data with the proteome database of the complete reviewed proteome of Rattus norvegicus (Uniprot, release July 2018, 8054 entries), using the MaxQuant software version 1.5.8.3 (33, 34). Lys-C trypsin specificity was used for the digestion mode with two missed cleavages. N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were selected as the variable modifications. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. For MS spectra, an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm was selected, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for HCD data (35). For identification, the FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein level was set to 0.01. Relative, label-free quantification of proteins was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated into MaxQuant with the default parameters (36). Analysis of the proteins identified was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.6.2.1) (37). The file containing the information from identification was used with hits to the reverse database, and proteins only identified with modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. Then, the LFQ intensity was logarithmized (log2[x]). Categorical annotation of rows was used to define different groups depending on the concentration of PCs inhibitor used (0, 50, 100, 150 µM). Multiple-samples tests were performed using an ANOVA test with a p-value of 0.05 and preserved grouping in randomization. The results were normalized by Z-score and represented as a hierarchical clustering. Functional annotation and characterization of identified proteins were obtained using PANTHER software (version 14.0, http://www.pantherdb.org) and STRING (version 10.5, http://string-db.org).

### Publication Abstract
Tumors are characterized by the presence of malignant and non-malignant cells, such as immune cells including macrophages, which are preponderant. Macrophages impact the efficacy of chemotherapy and may lead to drug resistance. In this context and based on our previous work, we investigated the ability to reactivate macrophages by using a proprotein convertases inhibitor. Proprotein convertases process immature proteins into functional proteins, with several of them having a role in immune cell activation and tumorigenesis. Macrophages were treated with a peptidomimetic inhibitor targeting furin, PC1/3, PC4, PACE4, and PC5/6. Their anti-glioma activity was analyzed by mass spectrometry-based proteomics and viability assays in 2D and 3D <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> cultures. Comparison with temozolomide, the drug used for glioma therapy, established that the inhibitor was more efficient for the reduction of cancer cell density. The inhibitor was also able to reactivate macrophages through the secretion of several immune factors with antitumor properties. Moreover, two proteins considered as good glioma patient survival indicators were also identified in 3D cultures treated with the inhibitor. Finally, we established that the proprotein convertases inhibitor has a dual role as an anti-glioma drug and anti-tumoral macrophage reactivation drug. This strategy could be used together with chemotherapy to increase therapy efficacy in glioma.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Glioma, Proteomic, 3d-culture, Macrophages

### Affiliations
PRISM - Unité INSERM 1192 Université de Lille France
PRISM

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM - Unité INSERM 1192 Université de Lille France


