### Accession
PXD028310

### Title
Detection of Circulating Serum Protein Biomarkers of Non-muscle Invasive Bladder Cancer after the Protein Corona-Silver Nanoparticles Analysis by SWATH-MS

### Description
Because cystoscopy is expensive and invasive, a new method of detecting non-invasive muscular bladder cancer (NMIBC) is needed. This study aims to identify potential serum protein markers for NMIBC to improve diagnosis and to found treatment approaches to avoid disease progression to a life-threatening phenotype (muscle-invasive bladder cancer, MIBC). Here, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs, 9.73 ± 1.70 nm) as a scavenging device together with Sequential Window Acquisition of All Theoretical Mass Spectra (SWATH-MS) were used to quantitative analyze the blood serum protein al-terations in two NMIBC subtypes: T1 and Ta, and they were compared to normal samples (HC). NMIBC's analysis of serum samples identified three major groups of proteins, the relative content of which is different from the HC content: proteins implicated in the complement and coagulation cascade pathways and apolipoproteins. In conclusion, many biomarker proteins were identified that merit further examination to validate their useful significance and utility within the clinical management of NMIBC patients.

### Sample Protocol
From January 2018 to June 2019, peripheral venous blood samples from 42 NMIBC patients (age varying from 31 to 86 years) and from 42 age-matched healthy controls (HC) were collected at HULA from Lugo (Spain). In this work, NMIBC patients (n = 42) were categorized into two subtypes: Ta subtype (n = 26) and T1 subtype (n = 16) and samples were colleted before they underwent surgery and/or before receiving any treatment.  All bood samples were collected in VACUETTE® Serum Clot Activator Tubes (9 mL), allowed to clot for 15 min, and centrifuged at 1,800×g (5 min, 4˚C). The resultant serum was transferred to sterile cryovials, frozen and stored at -80 °C until further use. The study was approved by the Clinical Research Ethics Committees (CEIC) of Galicia (Spain) (number 2017/419) and it had been conducted in conformity withthe declaration of Helsinki. Furthermore, all participants provided written consent before their participation within the study. Corona proteins associated with AgNPs were separated by SDS-PAGE using a PowerPacTM Basic Power Supply (Bio-Rad). After that, corona proteins were digested following the method previously described in detail [J. Proteomics2020, 212, 103581;Int. J. Mol. Sci.2020, 21, 8449].

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS): Digested peptides were separated by reverse-phase chromatography (RPC), and identification of proteins was revealed with a nanoLC 400 system (Eksigent) coupled to the Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex). Proteins were searched with the ProteinPilotTM software (version 5.0.1; AB Sciex) through the human-specific Uniprot database with 1 missed cleavage and 1% global false discovery rate (FDR) as input parameters.   Relative quantification by SWATH acquisition: SWATH-MS acquisition and processing of the data has been as previously stated, with slight modifications [J. Proteomics2020, 212, 103581; Int. J. Mol. Sci.2020, 21, 8449]. Briefly, a spectral library was first created using pooled samples from each group (HC, NMIBC with the T1 subtype, NMIBC with the Ta subtype) via a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach by micro-LC. Then, an MS/MSALL add-in for PeakView Software (v. 2.2., Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA) was employed for the peak extraction using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (v. 2.0., Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA). The construction of the spectral library only includes peptides with a confidence score > 99%. SWATH–MS acquisition was performed on a TripleTOF® 6600 LC-MS/MS system (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA) via a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method.    Data processing: Extraction of peaks and the relative quantitative analysis were performed in the PeakView (v. 2.2) using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (v. 2.0) and the MarkerView software (Sciex, Redwood City, CA, USA), respectively.  Parameters used were: number of fragments = 7, number of peptides = 10, peptide confidence = 95%, XIC width = 30 ppm, XIC extraction window = 5 min. Exportation of the SWATH file to the MarkerView software (version 1.3.1; AB Sciex) allowed the quantitative analysis of ions, peptides and proteins in the different samples. As output result, the summed intensity of ions for the peptide, summed intensity of the peptides for protein and Area under Curve (AUC) of the ions were provided. The test set (T1,Ta) was compared with the control (HC) dataset to generate fold change ratios. For protein quantitation, only peptides with a False Discovery Rate (FDR) below 1% were considered. Average MS peak area of each protein derived from the analysis of the biological replicates and Student’s t-test analysis among samples was developed. t-test indicates the capacity of each variable to distinguish between two groups, and it was reported as a p-value. The criteria to select differentially expressed proteins was a p-value <0.05 with a 1.5-fold in- or decrease.

### Publication Abstract
Because cystoscopy is expensive and invasive, a new method of detecting non-invasive muscular bladder cancer (NMIBC) is needed. This study aims to identify potential serum protein markers for NMIBC to improve diagnosis and to find treatment approaches that avoid disease progression to a life-threatening phenotype (muscle-invasive bladder cancer, MIBC). Here, silver nanoparticles (AgNPs, 9.73 &#xb1; 1.70 nm) as a scavenging device together with sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) were used to quantitatively analyze the blood serum protein alterations in two NMIBC subtypes, T1 and Ta, and they were compared to normal samples (HC). NMIBC's analysis of serum samples identified three major groups of proteins, the relative content of which is different from the HC content: proteins implicated in the complement and coagulation cascade pathways and apolipoproteins. In conclusion, many biomarker proteins were identified that merit further examination to validate their useful significance and utility within the clinical management of NMIBC patients.

### Keywords
Protein corona (pc); silver nanoparticles (agnps); bladder cancer (bc); bi-omarkers; fingerprinting; swath-ms

### Affiliations
Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS)
FIDIS

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana Bravo
Health Research Institute of Santiago de Compostela (IDIS)


