### Accession
PXD013918

### Title
Mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation regulates NAD+-dependent genotoxic stress responses

### Description
ADP-ribosylome analysis in human U20S cells and mouse muscle tissues

### Sample Protocol
ADP-ribosylome was enriched using GST-AF1521 macrodomain (Larsen et al. Nat Comm 2016) and analyzed on Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), coupled to a nano EasyLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific).  We applied an ADP-ribose product-dependent method called HCD-PP-EThcD). Briefly, the method includes high-energy data-dependent HCD, followed by high-quality HCD and EThcD MS/MS when two or more ADP-ribose fragment peaks (136.0623, 250.0940, 348.07091, and 428.0372) were observed in the HCD scan. A detailed description of the MS parameters can be found in (Bilan et al. Anal Chem 2017).

### Data Protocol
RAW MS files were converted to mzXML using ReAdW (https://github.com/PedrioliLab/ReAdW). Each mzXML file was split into 2 files, that exclusively contained HCD35 or ETD MS/MS scans, using an in-house script. At the same time, ADP-ribosylation diagnostic ions (i.e. 136.0623, 250.094, 348.07091, 428.0372) were also removed from the MS/MS scans. These files were then searched against the Swiss-Prot mouse protein database version of 2018-09 or Swiss-Prot Human protein database version of 2019-01, depending on the origin of the sample. Comet (http://comet-ms.sourceforge.net/) version 2018.01 rev. 2 was used for these searches and the following variable modifications were accounted for: 15.9949 at M; 541.061110 at S, D, E, R, K, Y, H, C, T; 42.010565 at the N-terminus; and 57.021464 at C. Semi-tryptic peptides with a maximum of 4 missed cleavages and a precursor tolerance of 25 ppm were considered. Peptide (PeptideProphet) and protein (ProteinProphet) probabilities were assigned using TPP v5.0.0 Typhoon (https://sourceforge.net/projects/sashimi/).

### Publication Abstract
In addition to its role as an electron transporter, mitochondrial nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD<sup>+</sup>) is an important co-factor for enzymatic reactions, including ADP-ribosylation. Although mitochondria harbor the most intra-cellular NAD<sup>+</sup>, mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation remains poorly understood. Here we provide evidence for mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation, which was identified using various methodologies including immunofluorescence, western blot, and mass spectrometry. We show that mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation reversibly increases in response to respiratory chain inhibition. Conversely, H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-induced oxidative stress reciprocally induces nuclear and reduces mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation. Elevated mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation, in turn, dampens H<sub>2</sub>O<sub>2</sub>-triggered nuclear ADP-ribosylation and increases MMS-induced ARTD1 chromatin retention. Interestingly, co-treatment of cells with the mitochondrial uncoupler FCCP decreases PARP inhibitor efficacy. Together, our results suggest that mitochondrial ADP-ribosylation is a dynamic cellular process that impacts nuclear ADP-ribosylation and provide evidence for a NAD<sup>+</sup>-mediated mitochondrial-nuclear crosstalk.

### Keywords
Adp-ribosylation, Mitochondria, U2os, Muscle

### Affiliations
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zürich

### Submitter
Deena Leslie Pedrioli

### Lab Head
Dr Michael O. Hottiger
Head of Department Department of Molecular Mechanisms of Disease University of Zurich Winterthurerstr. 190 8057 Zurich, Switzerland


