### Accession
PXD023180

### Title
Age-dependent changes in protein incorporation into collagen-rich tissues of mice by in vivo pulsed SILAC labelling

### Description
Collagen-rich tissues have poor reparative capacity that is further impaired with age, predisposing to common age-related disorders such as osteoporosis and osteoarthritis. We used in vivo pulsed SILAC labelling to quantify new protein incorporation into cartilage, bone, skin and plasma of mice across the life course.

### Sample Protocol
Bone and cartilage samples were placed in 180 µL of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and heated at 65 °C for 15 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes. To quench remaining IAA, DTT was added and samples were incubated for 30 minutes. Then, samples were incubated with 4M GuHCl for 2h. The samples were adjusted to pH 8 with 400 mM tris base. Proteins were digested with 1 µg of trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Digestion was terminated adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.5-1 %. Peptides were purified using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges (SOLA HRP SPE cartridges, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 5 µl of plasma was reduced with 5 mM DTT, alkylated with 20 mM IAA and proteins precipitated with methanol/chloroform. Precipitated proteins were solubilised in 6 M urea buffer. Urea was diluted to <1 M with milli-Q water and proteins digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:25. Digestion was terminated adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5-1%. Peptides were purified using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges as above. Skin samples were grinded in a Cryomill, then incubated in 8 M urea, 3 % SDS with protease inhibitors (cOmplete Mini EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche) at room temperature for 1 hour in a total volume of 3 mL. As there was still a substantial pellet, samples were shaken overnight at 4 °C to solubilise the pellet. Samples were centrifuged at 2,500 g for 10 minutes and 100 µL of sample was taken for further processing. Proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT for 30 minutes at room temperature, alkylated with 20 mM IAA for 30 minutes at room temperature and precipitated with methanol/chloroform. Precipitated proteins were solubilised in 6 M urea buffer. Urea was diluted to <1 M with milli-Q water and proteins digested with trypsin overnight at 37°C at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:25. Digestion was terminated adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.5-1 %. Peptides were purified using C18 solid phase extraction cartridges as above. Samples were analysed on a LC-MS/MS platform consisting of either Orbitrap Fusion Lumos or Q-Exactive HF coupled to an UPLC ultimate 3000 RSLCnano (all Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectral data files were searched using MaxQuant software (V1.5.7.4) using SILAC (Lys6) quantitation. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteine; and variable modifications were oxidized methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, acetylation at protein N-terminal, and hydroxylation of proline. The data was searched against the mouse canonical Uniprot database (29/07/2015). FDR on peptide and protein level were set to 1 %. Second peptide and “match between runs” options were enabled, all other parameters were left at default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Collagen turnover; pulse silac, Mouse

### Affiliations
University of Oxford, Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
University of Oxford, Discovery Proteomics Facility, Target Discovery Institute


