### Accession
PXD037482

### Title
Identification of protein substrates of the Cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase CRL4 through its substrate recognition factors DCAFs

### Description
Cullin-RING finger Ligases (CRLs) represent the largest family of E3 ubiquitin ligases and are responsible for ubiquitination of ~20% of cellular proteins degraded through the proteasome, catalyzing the transfer of E2-loaded ubiquitin to a substrate. Eight Cullins were described in vertebrates and among them, CUL4 associates with DDB1 acting as an adaptor to form the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex, involved in protein ubiquitination and regulation of many cellular processes. The specificity of CUL4-DDB1 is mediated by substrate recognition adaptors named DDB1/CUL4 associated factors (DCAFs), which are characterized by the presence of a short structural motif of approximately 40 amino acids terminating in a tryptophan (W)-aspartic acid (D) dipeptide, the WD40 domain. Using different approaches (bioinformatics/structural analyses), independent studies suggested at least 60 different WD40 containing proteins that could act as adaptors for the DDB1/CUL4 complex. In this study, we aimed to validate the DCAFs based on their interaction with DDB1 and to define new partners and potential substrates of each DCAF using affinity purification followed by mass spectrometry. Using BioID and AP-MS approaches, we confirmed seven WDR40 protein that can be considered as DCAF with a high confidence level. Because identification of protein substrates of E3-ubiquitin ligases is not always guaranteed by identifying protein interactions, changes in protein stability and protein degradation was measured by pulse-SILAC to identify the protein substrates targeted for proteasomal degradation by each DCAFs. In conclusion, this work provides new insights into the roles of DCAFs as substrate adaptors for the DDB1-CUL4 complex, identifies the proteins targeting and the cellular processes that are involved.

### Sample Protocol
For co-immunoprecipitation and BioID experiments, 1-2mg of total protein were incubated with 20ul of GFP-trap agarose beads from ChromaTek or High performance streptativin beads, respectively, during 3h or 24h at 4°C, respectively. Beads were then washed in lysis buffer and transferred in lowbind tube. Reduction step was carried out by incubated the beads at 60 °C during 30 min under agitation with 100uL of 20mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with DTT (10mM). Alkylation of samples was performed by adding 100uL of 20mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer supplemented with chloroacetamide (15mM) during 1 h at room temperature protected from the light. DTT was added to reach a final concentration of 15mM, during 10 min upon agitation. Beads were the incubated overnight at 37 °C with 1ug of Pierce trypsin protease MS-Grade. Trypsin was stopped by acidifying with a final concentration of 1% formic acid (FA). Supernatant were saved and beads were incubated with 200uL of buffer containing 60% acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA, centrifuged again and supernatant was and combined with that obtained previously. Samples were then concentrated by a centrifugal evaporator at 60 °C until complete drying (∼2 h), and resuspended in 30 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) buffer. Peptides were purified with ZipTip 10-μl micropipette tips containing a C18 column. Briefly, the ZipTip was first moistened by suctioning 10 μl of 100% ACN solution three times, then equilibrated by suctioning 10 μl of 0.1% TFA buffer three times. Each peptide sample was passed on the balanced ZipTip by 10 succeeding up-and-downs of 10 μl of the sample. This step was performed three times to pass the entire sample on the column. The ZipTip was then washed with 10 μl of 0.1% TFA buffer three times. The elution of the peptides was performed in a new low-binding microtube, 10 times with a volume of 10 μl of 50% ACN and 0.1% FA buffer. This step was carried out three times to obtain a final volume of 30 μl. The peptides were then concentrated by centrifugal evaporator at 65 °C until complete drying and then resuspended in 25 μl of 1% FA buffer. Peptides were assayed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial and stored at −20 °C until analysis by mass spectrometry.  For pulse Silac experiments, 50ug of proteins were incubated and boiled during 2 minutes with DTT 5mM. Samples were then diluted 4 times in 20mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with by adding 1 μg Pierce MS-grade trypsin and incubated overnight at 37 °C with shaking. Peptides were purified with ZipTip 100-μl micropipette tips containing a C18 column as previously described in proximity labelling assay section, concentrated with by centrifugal evaporator at 65 °C until complete drying and then resuspended in 25 μl of 1% FA buffer. Peptides concentration was determined using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial and stored at −20 °C until analysis by mass spectrometry. After trypsin digestion, peptides were separated using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoHPLC system. A total of 1.5 μg in 1% (v/v) formic acid were loaded with a constant flow of 4 μl/min onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (0.3 mm id × 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). After trap enrichment, peptides were eluted onto an EasySpray PepMap C18 nano column (75 μm × 50 cm, Dionex Corporation) with a linear gradient of 5–35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) over 240 min with a constant flow of 200 nl/min. The HPLC system was coupled to an OrbiTrap QExactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Thermo Fisher Scientific Scientific Inc) via an EasySpray source. The spray voltage was set to 2.0 kV and the temperature of the column set to 40 °C. Full scan MS survey spectra (m/z 350–1600) in profile mode were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 70,000 after accumulation of 1,000,000 ions. The ten most intense peptide ions from the preview scan in the Orbitrap were fragmented by collision-induced dissociation (normalized collision energy 35% and resolution of 17,500) after the accumulation of 50,000 ions. Maximal filling times were 250 ms for the full scans and 60 ms for the MS/MS scans. Precursor ion charge state screening was enabled and all unassigned charge states as well as singly, 7 and 8 charged species were rejected. The dynamic exclusion list was restricted to a maximum of 500 entries with a maximum retention period of 40 s and a relative mass window of 10 ppm. The lock mass option was enabled for survey scans to improve mass accuracy. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (version 4.3.73.11).

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant version 1.6.7 software and the Uniprot human database (2020/03/21, 75777 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzyme was Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and carbamylation (K and N-termimal, only for pulse-SILAC experiments). A mass tolerance of 7 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions, and the following parameters: multiplicity of 3 SILAC media (R0K0, R6K4 and R10K8), identification values “PSM FDR” “Protein FDR,” and “Site decoy fraction” 0.05, minimum ratio count of 1 and selection of the “Re-quantify” option. Following the analysis, the results were sorted according to several parameters. Proteins positive for at least one of the “Reverse” “Only.identified.by.site,” and “Potential.contaminant” categories were eliminated, as well as proteins identified with less than 1 unique peptide for pulse-SILAC and 2 uniques peptides for BioID experiments. The ratios identified in only one of the 2 replicas for each experiment were eliminated in pulse-SILAC experiments. Statistical analysis were performed using Limma t-test with ProStaR software tools

### Publication Abstract
Cullin-RING finger ligases represent the largest family of ubiquitin ligases. They are responsible for the ubiquitination of &#x223c;20% of cellular proteins degraded through the proteasome, by catalyzing the transfer of E2-loaded ubiquitin to a substrate. Seven cullins are described in vertebrates. Among them, cullin 4 (CUL4) associates with DNA damage-binding protein 1 (DDB1) to form the CUL4-DDB1 ubiquitin ligase complex, which is involved in protein ubiquitination and in the regulation of many cellular processes. Substrate recognition adaptors named DDB1/CUL4-associated factors (DCAFs) mediate the specificity of CUL4-DDB1 and have a short structural motif of approximately forty amino acids terminating in tryptophan (W)-aspartic acid (D) dipeptide, called the WD40 domain. Using different approaches (bioinformatics/structural analyses), independent studies suggested that at least sixty WD40-containing proteins could act as adaptors for the DDB1/CUL4 complex. To better define this association and classification, the interaction of each DCAFs with DDB1 was determined, and new partners and potential substrates were identified. Using BioID and affinity purification-mass spectrometry approaches, we demonstrated that seven WD40 proteins can be considered DCAFs with a high confidence level. Identifying protein interactions does not always lead to identifying protein substrates for E3-ubiquitin ligases, so we measured changes in protein stability or degradation by pulse-stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture to identify changes in protein degradation, following the expression of each DCAF. In conclusion, these results provide new insights into the roles of DCAFs in regulating the activity of the DDB1-CUL4 complex, in protein targeting, and characterized the cellular processes involved.

### Keywords
Bioid, Cullin4, Dcafs, Interactome, Ubiquitylation, Pulse-silac, Ddb1

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr François-Michel Boisvert
Department of Immunology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke


