### Accession
PXD019355

### Title
Metaproteomic Profiling of Functional Changes Driven by Gut Fungal Colonization

### Description
Gut microbiome modulates the host immune development, yet the functional contribution of gut fungi remains elusive. We previously showed that mice colonized only with fungi displayed allergic features and fecal metabolite profiles similar to germ-free mice. To gain insights into the functional changes attributed to fungal colonization, we performed proteomic analyses of feces and small intestine of gnotobiotic mice colonized with either bacteria, fungi, or both. Comparison of fecal metaproteomic profiles between mouse groups yielded broad changes in the relative levels of bacterial, fungal and mouse proteins. Many of the detected fungal proteins have been previously reported as a part of extracellular vesicles and having immunomodulating properties. Changes in the levels of mouse proteins derived from the small intestine impacted essential cellular pathways, including lipid metabolism and apoptosis. The results show how fungal colonization impacts the host proteome and suggest an influence on the host final cellular phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Fecal and jejunal tissue samples were collected from gnotobiotic mice colonized with either bacteria, fungi, or both. Mice fecal microbiota enriched by differential centrifugation and the tissue samples were resuspended in lysis buffer and the cells were mechanically disrupted by bead-beating. To disrupt released cellular DNA the supernatants were sonicated, centrifuged and the protein concentration in the supernatants was measured. The cell lysates originating from feces were processed according to Filter-Aided Sample Preparation protocol. The resulting peptide mixtures were desalted and lyophilized. Prior to the LC-MS/MS analysis the peptide mixtures were resuspended in 5% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. An aliquot of the tryptic digests was used to determine the concentration of the peptide mixtures by using Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay. Tissue samples were distributed into 4 experimental groups and labeled with the tandem mass tags (TMT)-6 plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Each experimental setup had one TMT tag that labeled pooled samples, which were created by combining an equal amounts of peptides from each sample in one experimental group. The pooled samples served as an internal standard for normalizing the data across the experimental setups. The remaining 5 TMT reagents in each experimental setup were used for labeling 4 o 5 biological replicates (originating from different animals) for each of the four experimental conditions. For labelling, the peptides were incubated with TMT reagents for 1 h at room temperature. The resulting four multiplexed samples were desalted, subjected to C18 chromatography and quantified as described above. Tryptic peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) operated with Xcalibur (version 4.0.21.10) and coupled to a Thermo Scientific Easy-nLC (nanoflow Liquid Chromatography) 1200 system. Tryptic peptides (2 μg) were loaded onto a C18 trap (75 um x 2 cm; Acclaim PepMap 100, P/N 164946; ThermoScientific) at a flow rate of 2ul/min of solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 3% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water). Peptides were eluted using a 120 min gradient from 5 to 40% (5% to 28% in 105 min followed by an increase to 40% B in 15 min) of solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% LC-MS grade acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min and separated on a C18 analytical column (75 um x 50 cm; PepMap RSLC C18; P/N ES803; ThermoScientific).  LFQ - Peptides were electrosprayed using 2.3 kV voltage into the ion transfer tube (300°C) of the Orbitrap Lumos operating in positive mode. The Orbitrap first performed a full MS scan at a resolution of 120000 FWHM to detect the precursor ion having a m/z between 375 and 1575 and a +2 to +7 charge. The Orbitrap Auto Gain Control and the maximum injection time were set at 4e5 and 50 ms, respectively. The Orbitrap was operated using the top speed mode with a 3 sec cycle time for precursor selection. The most intense precursor ions presenting a peptidic isotopic profile and having an intensity threshold of at least 5000 were isolated using the quadrupole and fragmented with HCD (30% collision energy) in the ion routing multipole. The fragment ions (MS2) were analyzed in the ion trap at a rapid scan rate. The AGC and the maximum injection time were set at 1e4 and 35 ms, respectively, for the ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 sec to avoid of the acquisition of same precursor ion having a similar m/z (plus or minus 10 ppm). Analysis of TMT labeled peptide fractions was carried out on an Orbitrap Data acquisition on the Orbitrap Fusion (control software version 2.1.1565.20) using a data-dependent method with multi-notch synchronous precursor selection MS3 scanning for TMT tags. The Orbitrap Fusion was operated with a positive ion spray voltage of 2100 and a transfer tube temperature of 275°C. Details for all acquisition methods are available in their native format among the attached files.

### Data Protocol
The spectral raw data were processed by using MaxQuant (version 1.6.5.0) . Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant framework performed the spectral data search against a matched protein database composed of 12 genome-derived proteomes for the bacterial species and 7 UniProtKB-derived protein databases for 6 fungal species and mouse. For search of the LFQ data, we defined enzyme specificity to be trypsin, allowed N-terminal cleavage to proline, and allowed for ≤2 missed tryptic cleavages. We used the default settings for the MaxQuant searches, except that lysine acetylation and glutamate/glutamine conversion to pyroglutamic acid were set as variable modifications. We also allowed for N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, and carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to ≤20 ppm, and the allowed value for the fragment mass was set to ≤0.5 Da. Match between runs was used, with match time window 0.7 min and alignment window time 10 min. The maximum false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels were set to 1%. Proteins Label-Free Quantitative (LFQ) intensities were determined by using the MaxLFQ algorithms. TMT-MS3 data were also processed using MaxQuant using Reporter ion MS3 and TMT6plex-Lys126-131 internal labels. The spectra were searched against the Uniprot reference mouse database. Enzyme specificity was trypsin, with allowed N-terminal cleavage to proline, and we allowed for ≤2 missed cleavages. The default settings for the MaxQuant searches were used, with the same variable modifications and fixed modification described above. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to ≤20 ppm, and the allowed value for the fragment mass was set to ≤0.5 Da. The maximum false discovery rates (FDR) at peptide and protein levels were set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lfq and tmt proteomics, Gut fungi, Gnotobiotic mice, Early-life gut microbiome

### Affiliations
Depts. of Physiology and Pharmacology & Pediatrics Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada
Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital of North Norway, Tromsø, Norway; Department of Clinical Medicine, UiT The Arctic University of Norway, Tromsø Norway

### Submitter
Veronika Pettersen

### Lab Head
Dr Marie-Claire Arrieta
Depts. of Physiology and Pharmacology & Pediatrics Cumming School of Medicine University of Calgary, Canada


