### Accession
PXD027608

### Title
The Effect of Temperature Conditioning (9°C and 20°C) on the Proteome of Steinernema carpocapsae and Heterorhabditis megidis Infective Juveniles

### Description
Entomopathogenic nematodes (Rhabditida; Steinernematidae and Heterorhabditidae) are insect parasites which are of economic importance due to their use as biocontrol agents. The third larval stage, infective juveniles (IJs) leave the natal host and move in the soil to locate a new insect host. Both families are associated with mutualistic bacteria, which are released into the haemolymph of the host insect, killing the insect and providing nutrition for nematode development and reproduction, and are thus categorised as entomopathogenic nematodes. Similarities between these two families are due to convergent evolution associated with this lifestyle, rather than common ancestry. Heterorhabditids are closely related to the vertebrate parasites Strongylida (Adams and Nguyen, 2002) and to Caenorhabditis elegans, whereas steinernematids are more closely related to Strongyloididae. The IJ stage of parasitic nematodes is analogous to the dauer stage of C. elegans; both are developmentally arrested, stress resistant stages that disperse to colonise new hosts or food resources, respectively. By investigating the molecular mechanisms and consequences of temperature acclimation and aging in EPN IJs, insights into survival and the changes induced by low temperature exposure may be gained. Label free quantitative (LFQ) massspectrometery-based proteomics facilitates the identification and quantification of thousands of proteins in a single run. Such data allows for the comparison of the proteomes of EPN IJs after conditioning via gene ontology mapping and functional enrichment analysis. Understanding how the IJ proteome is affected by temperature and aging can provide a molecular basis for the wide array of phenotypes and behaviours these organisms may adopt. This study aims to provide proteomic data which may elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the phenotypic plasticity which EPN IJs of two distantly related species exhibit.

### Sample Protocol
Heterorhabditis megidis UK211 and Steinernema carpocapsae All were used. Nematodes were cultured in last instar Galleria mellonella larvae (Mealworm Company, Sheffield, UK) using methods outlined in Woodring and Kaya (1988), at 20°C,with an inoculum density of 100 IJs/insect. Cadavers were placed on White traps and monitored daily. After first emergence of IJs, the White trap water was replaced with fresh sterile water. IJs were allowed to emerge into the water for 3-4 days and collected. IJs from successive harvests were pooled and rinsed 3 times by sedimentation and stored at 1000 IJs/ml in sterile tap water in 35 ml aliquots in lidded plastic tubs (9 cm diameter). Tubs were placed in20°C and 9°C temperature-controlled rooms and sampled at intervals (3 or 6 weeks at 20oC and 3, 6 or 9 weeks at 9oC). In addition, unconditioned IJs (time 0) were also sampled. There were 5 replicate tubs for each storage time and temperature. The contents of a tub were sedimented in a 50 ml falcon tube in their conditioning temperature. The pelleted IJs in approx. 150 µl were transferred to a 1.5ml Eppendorf tube and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.  Each sample was homogenised in lysis buffer, containing 6M urea, 2M thiourea, and a Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (cOmplete, Mini Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Merck), centrifuged at 10000 x g for 1 minute, and snap frozen. This step was repeated 3 times to ensure complete homogenisation. Protein content was then quantified using Qubit (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions.  Protein (100 µg) was purified using a 2D Clean Up Kit (GE Healthcare) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting pellets were stored in the kit’s wash solution at -20°C until the last samples were collected, then all were centrifuged at 13000 x g for 5 minutes and the resulting pellets were resuspended in 50 µl of resuspension buffer (6M urea, 2M thiourea, 0.1M TrisHCl, pH8). A 20 µl aliquot was removed from each sample for reduction, alkylation and digestion. One hundred and five µls of ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM) and 1 µl of dithiothreitol (DTT) were added to the samples and incubated at 56°C for 20 minutes. Once cooled, samples were alkylated with 2.7 µl of iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark conditions.  One µl of a 1% (w/v) solution of ProteaseMax (Promega) and 0.5µg/µl trypsin (Promega) were added to the samples and incubated at 37°C for a minimum of 16 hours. Samples were removed from 37°C, centrifuged briefly and acidified with 1µl of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 5 minutes at room temperature (20-25°C). Samples were centrifuged at 13000 x g for 10 minutes and the supernatant was purified using C18 Spin Columns (Pierce, Thermo Fisher Scientific) followingthe manufacturer’s instructions and then lyophilised in a Speedyvac concentrator (Thermo Scientific Savant DNA120). Samples were then resuspended in a loading buffer, (2% v/v acetonitrile, 0.05% v/v TFA) and µg was loaded from 4 biological replicates per samples were run on the QExactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific) high-resolution accurate mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Peptides were separated over a 2% to 40% gradient of acetonitrile on a Thermo Fisher EASY-Spray, PepMap RSLC C18 column (500mm length, 75mm ID), using a reverse-phase gradient at a flow rate of 250nL min-1 over 125 minutes.  All data were acquired over 105 minutes with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A full MS scan at 140,000 resolution and range of 300–1700 m/z was followed by an MS/MS scan, resolution 17,500 and range of 200–2000 m/z, selecting the15 most intense ions prior to MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and LFQ normalisation of MS/MS data was performed using Max-Quant v1.6.3.3 (http://www.maxquant.org) following the general procedures and settings outlined in Hubner et al., (2010). The Andromeda search algorithm (Cox et al., 2011) incorporated in the MaxQuant software was used to correlate MS/MS data for S. carpocapsae and H. megidis against the predicted protein data sets derived from the S. carpocapsae (Serra et al., 2019) and H. bacteriophora (Bai et al., 2013) genomics initiatives, respectively.  Normalised LFQ intensities were used to quantify protein abundances, and the data was filtered to remove contaminants. The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed, and each replicate was renamed to their respective groups (3wks9°C for proteins from IJs stored at 9°C for 3 weeks). Only proteins found in 3 replicates of at least 1 group were retained. A data imputation step replaced missing values with values of low abundant proteins chosen randomly from a distribution specified by a downshift of 2 times the mean standard deviation (SD) and a width of 0.3 times the SD. A principal component analysis (PCA) was initially performed on the normalised intensity values of all replicates. However, a number of outliers were identified, resulting in 3 replicates in each sample in the final datasets for analysis. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was performed on all groups using a Benjamini-Hochberg false discovery rate (FDR) of <5% to select proteins for z-score normalisation. These ANOVA significant proteins were used for hierarchical clustering of samples using Euclidean distance and average linkage pre-processed with K means. GO term enrichment was performed in Blast2Go v5.2 using a Fishers exact test (p<0.05) on each cluster relative to all ANOVA significant proteins.  Pairwise Student’s t-tests were performed for all samples relative to the week 0 samples to visualise the effect of age and temperature conditioning on the IJs proteome. Volcano plots were generated in Perseus by plotting negative log p values of the y axis and log2fold transformed differences on the x axis for each comparison. Statically significant (SS; p< 0.05) and differentially abundant (DA; fold change of 1.5) were identified as SSDAs and selected for further analysis. Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment was performed in Blast2Go v5.2 using a Fishers exact test (p<0.05) on all statistically significant proteins relative to all proteins retained post data imputation. All statistically significant proteins identified in pairwise-t-tests were grouped using Bioedit (v7.0.5.3) and uploaded in FASTA format to STRING: Protein-Protein Interaction Networks Functional Enrichment Analysis v11.0 with the highest confidence setting (0.9) and disconnected nodes were removed, to identify protein-protein interactions which were increasing and decreasing in IJs after storage in 9°C or 20°C over time. The H. megidis genome has not been sequenced, and therefore there is a paucity in molecular data available for the species. The genome of the closely related H. bacteriophora is available (Bai et al., 2013) and allows for the detection of similar peptides from H. megidis. The genome of S. carpocapsae has been recently sequenced (Serra et al., 2019).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Steinernema carpocapsae, Enomopathogenic nematodes, Heterorhabditis megidis, Temperature conditioning

### Affiliations
Biology
Maynooth University, Ireland

### Submitter
James Carolan

### Lab Head
Dr James Carolan
Maynooth University, Ireland


