### Accession
PXD022889

### Title
Proteomic signature of host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection in the nasopharynx

### Description
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by SARS-CoV-2 infection has become a global health pandemic. COVID-19 severity ranges from asymptomatic infection to severe multi-organ disease. Although the inflammatory response has been implicated in the pathogenesis of COVID-19, the exact nature of dysregulation in signaling pathways has not yet been elucidated underscoring the need for further molecular characterization of SARS-CoV-2 infection in humans. Here, we characterize the host response directly at the point of viral entry through analysis of nasopharyngeal swabs. Multiplexed high resolution mass spectrometry-based proteomic analysis of confirmed COVID-19 cases and negative controls identified 7,682 proteins and revealed significant upregulation of interferon-mediated antiviral signaling in addition to multiple other proteins that are not interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) or well-characterized during viral infections. Downregulation of several proteasomal subunits, E3 ubiquitin ligases, and components of protein synthesis machinery was significant upon SARS-CoV-2 infection. Targeted proteomics to measure abundance levels of MX1, ISG15, Stat1, RIG-I and CXCL10, permitted differentiation of COVID-19 positive from negative cases. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed increased phosphorylation of several proteins with known antiviral properties and as well as several proteins including CEP131, CFAP57 and xxxx that have not previously been implicated in the context of viral (or coronavirus) infections. Additionally, decreased phosphorylation levels of AKT and PKC, which have been shown to play varying role in different viral infections, were observed in infected individuals relative to controls. These data provide novel insights that add depth to our understanding of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the upper airway and help characterize a signature for this viral infection.

### Sample Protocol
Nasopharyngeal swab samples were thawed and immediately treated with HALT™ phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Protein was precipitated by addition of methanol to a final concentration of 90% and pelleted by centrifugation at 15,000 x g for 10min. Protein pellets were re-suspended with 8M urea in 100mM Tris pH 8.0, probe sonicated to ensure the pellet completely dissolved, and protein content was estimated by BCA assay (Pierce, Waltham, MA). Disulfide bonds were reduced and alkylated with10mM TCEP and 10mM IAA at RT for 30min while protected from light. Trypsin/LysC Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) was added at a 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio and samples were digested overnight (16hr) at 37°C. The enzymatic digest was terminated by adding TFA to a final concentration of 0.2% and peptides were desalted using a 10mg Strata-x PSVDB cartridge (Phenomenex, Torrence, CA), dried, and reconstituted in 100µl of 50mM TEAB. Peptide concentration was determined using a Pierce Colormetric peptide assay and 95µg from each sample was labeled with 16-plex TMT (Thermo Scientific) for 1hr. TMT labeled peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed phase fractionation. Peptides (1.6mg) were separated on a 4.6mm x 50cm x 3.5µm Xbridge column (Waters, Milford, MA) with a 2hr gradient from 2 to 40% B mobile phase B (MPB). MPA was composed of 20mM ammonium formate in water and MPB was composed of 20mM ammonium formate in 80% ACN. A total of 96 fractions were collected and concatenated into 24. A 20µg equivalent of each fraction was set aside for global proteome analysis and the rest of each sample was concentrated to dryness prior to IMAC enrichment. Each fraction was subjected to IMAC-based phosphopeptide enrichment using Fe(III)-NTA resin (G5496-60082) on an AssayMap Bravo (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) platform following the manufacture instruction. Fractionated, TMT labeled peptides (5µg) were loaded onto a 20mm x 0.075mm PepMap C18 trap column with loading solvent composed of 0.1% TFA flowing at 20µl/min using an Ultimate 3000 nano HPLC (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). After 4 minutes, the 10-port valve was switched and peptides were eluted off the trap column onto a 50cm x 75µm ID PepMap EASY-Spray™ analytical column and peptides were separated with a 2hr gradient from 3 to 40% mobile phase B (MPB). At 2hr, MPB was increased to 80% over 10min, held for 15min, and then returned to 3% for 5 minutes to re-equilibrate the column. Eluting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) mass spectrometer operated in data dependent mode. MS1 survey scans were acquired from 370-1700 m/z with an orbitrap resolution of 60,000 (at 200m/z) at least every three seconds or when no more peptides were scheduled for fragmentation. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 1e6 and maximum ion fill time was set to 50ms. The most abundant peptides with a charge state between 2 and 7 were selected for fragmentation with high-energy collision induced dissociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 35% and a quadrupole isolation width of 0.7 m/z. The orbitrap resolution was set to 30,000, the maximum injection time was set to 54ms, and the AGC target was set to 2e5 whereas the dynamic exclusion was set to 30sec using a 10ppm mass window. For targeted PRM analysis, samples were prepared as stated above for global and phosphoproteomic analysis except phosphatase inhibitors were not used. Additionally, peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC set up identical to the configuration described above. For all samples, 250ng of protein was loaded on to the trap column with loading solvent flowing at 20µl/min and washed for 4 minutes. The valve was then switched and the peptides were eluted onto the analytical column and separated with a 20 minute gradient from 2 to 40% mobile phase B (MPB). Target peptides were monitored using an Orbitrap Eclipse (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer using and inclusion list with scheduled retention times. The parameters for the PRM scan were set as follows: AGC target was set to 5e4, maximum injection time was set to 54ms, orbitrap resolution was set to 30k, HCD normalized collision energy was set to 28%, and the quadrupole isolation was set to 1.6 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were processed in MaxQuant software version 1.6.7.0. Peptides were searched using the Andromeda search engine against the human Uniprot FASTA database downloaded July 24th, 2019. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification and N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylated serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Searches were performed with a false discovery rate of 1% for both peptides and proteins using a target-decoy approach. Peptide length was to at least 7 amino acids long and MS2 match tolerance was set to 0.02Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Protein data was extracted from the “proteinGroups.txt” file and differential quantitation was carried using a generalized linear model as previously described. For targeted PRM analysis, the chromatographic peaks were manually integrated using the Skyline-daily software package. Peak areas for the top 3 to 5 most intense fragment ions from each target peptide were exported and summed for relative quantitation between groups using a student’s t-test in R version 3.6.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus, Host response, Infection, Phosphoproteomics, Covid-19, Interferon, Upper airway

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Akhilesh Pandey
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA


