### Accession
PXD033489

### Title
Proteins of outer membrane vesicles of Bordetella pertussis

### Description
proteome analysis OMV extracted from B. pertussis Tohama I wildtype

### Sample Protocol
B. pertussis WT war cultured in Steine-Scholte medium. OMV were extracted by ultracentrifugation. Proteins were extracted using 5% SD. Protein digestion and peptide purification was accomplished using the SP3 protocol and ZipTipping. Peptides were analyzed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using MaxQuant against an B. pertussis Tohama I database from Uniprot

### Publication Abstract
Gram-negative pathogenic bacteria constitutively shed outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) which play a significant role in the host-pathogen interaction, eventually determining the outcome of the infection. We previously found that Bordetella pertussis, the etiological agent of whooping cough, survives the innate interaction with human macrophages remaining alive inside these immune cells. Adenylate cyclase (CyaA), one of the main toxins of this pathogen, was found involved in the modulation of the macrophage defense response, eventually promoting bacterial survival within the cells. We here investigated whether B. pertussis OMVs, loaded with most of the bacterial toxins and CyaA among them, modulate the macrophage response to the bacterial infection. We observed that the pre-incubation of macrophages with OMVs led to a decreased macrophage defense response to the encounter with the bacteria, in a CyaA dependent way. Our results suggest that CyaA delivered by B. pertussis OMVs dampens macrophages protective function by decreasing phagocytosis and the bactericidal capability of these host cells. By increasing the chances of bacterial survival to the innate encounter with the macrophages, B. pertussis OMVs might play a relevant role in the course of infection, promoting bacterial persistence within the host and eventually, shaping the whole infection process.

### Keywords
Infection, Proteomics, B. pertussis tohama i, Outer membrane vesicles

### Affiliations
University Medicine Greifswald

### Submitter
Kristin Surmann

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
University Medicine Greifswald


