### Accession
PXD006869

### Title
SWATH-MS analysis of transgenic tobacco overexpressing 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase

### Description
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS) is the second enzyme in the mevalonate pathway. While the recombinant Brassica juncea HMGS1 (BjHMGS1) mutant S359A displayed 10-fold higher enzyme activity than wild-type (wt) BjHMGS1, transgenic tobacco overexpressing S359A (OE-S359A) exhibited greater sterol content, growth rate and seed yield than OE-wtBjHMGS1. To explore the mechanism of HMGS and its mutant (S359A) in promotion of plant growth, SWATH-MS quantitative proteomics analysis was performed.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins and peptides were prepared following Zhu et al. (2016a, 2016b). Five biological repeats of 20-day-old tobacco seedlings (~100 mg fresh weight) for the WT, OE-wtBjHMGS1 (402) and OE-S359A (603) were used. Samples were frozen and ground in liquid nitrogen before sequential washes with 10× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 10% trichloroacetic acid in acetone and 80% methanol in 0.1 M ammonium acetate. After each wash, the sample was pelleted by centrifugation (16,000g) for 5 min at 4oC and the supernatant removed. The pellet was then homogenised with 8× volume of freshly prepared SDT (4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT and 0.1 M Tris-Cl pH 8.0) solution and protein extraction was assisted by incubating the mixture at 95oC for 5-10 min. Undissolved debris was removed by repeated centrifugation at 16,000g for 5 min at 4oC. The clear supernatant was mixed with 4× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 80% acetone to precipitate the protein overnight at -20oC. Subsequently, the sample was centrifuged at 1600g at 4oC for 15 min and the pellet was washed with 10× volume of pre-cooled (-20oC) 80% acetone. The protein pellet was air-dried at room temperature for about 10 min followed by addition of 100 µl of freshly prepared urea buffer (8M urea in 200 mM MOPS-Cl/4 mM CaCl2, pH 8.0). The pellet was sonicated for 1-2 min to assist dissolution. Protein concentration was measured according to the Bradford method (Bio-Rad).       Each protein sample (100 µg) was aliquoted and diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to 1 µg µl-1. Reduction of proteins was performed by mixing with 10 mM DTT, and incubating at 50oC for 40 min with gently shaking. After cooling to room temperature, the reduced protein samples were alkylated in the dark at room temperature for 30 min using 40 mM iodoacetamide. The samples were further diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate to decrease the urea concentration to below 2 M. Trypsin was applied to digest the protein at an enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37oC overnight. The peptide samples were acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid, desalted using the SepPak C18 cartridges (Waters) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and dried using a speed vacuum concentrator. The dried peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis or were stored at -80oC for later use.

### Data Protocol
All tobacco peptide samples were analysed by a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer coupled with an Eksigent NanoLC-2DPlus and a cHiPLC nanoFlex system (SCIEX, USA) following Zhu et al. (2016a, b). In brief, each peptide sample (2 µg) was loaded to a cHiPLC trap (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 0.5 mm × 200 µm) at 500 nl min-1 using 95% of solvent A (H2O containing 0.1% formic acid) and 5% of solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) for 15 min. The peptide sample was then separated on a cHiPLC column (3 µm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm × 75 µm) using a linear gradient from 5% to 35% solvent B for 120 min at 300 nl min-1. The column and trap temperature was kept at 30oC to stabilise the retention time. Nano-ion spray was performed using a voltage of 2300 V in positive ion mode. The Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method was applied to obtain the SWATH-MS spectral library (Gillet et al., 2012). The MS1 spectra were collected by survey scanning of 250 ms (TOF-MS) in the range of 350-1250 m/z. The top 40 precursor ions with a charge state (+2 to +5) were chosen for fragmentation with 50-ms accumulation time for each MS/MS experiment for 2.3-s total cycle time and MS/MS spectra were obtained in the range of 100-1800 m/z. Selected ions and their isotopes were excluded from further analysis for 18 s. Peptide ions were fragmented in a pre-scheduled rolling collision energy based on their m/z and charge state. For SWATH analysis, the same peptide sample (2 µg) was loaded and separated under the same conditions but the mass spectra data were collected with cyclic data-independent acquisition (DIA) method (Gillet et al., 2012). The MS1 spectra were obtained by survey scanning of 50 ms and all precursors were selected for fragmentation. MS/MS experiments were performed with accumulation time 56.6 ms per 15 Da swath (total 58) for 3.334 s total cycle time. Collision energy for each SWATH (DIA experiment) was optimised for a +2 ion centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV. For instance, a group of 58 overlapping windows were generated, containing the precursor mass range from 400 to 1250 Da.         All the DDA mass spectrometry data files were thoroughly searched against the N. tabacum genome protein sequences (Sierro et al., 2014) using ProteinPilot 5.0 (Sciex) to produce a reference spectral library. The search parameters were set as trypsin digestion, iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation and biological modification. Precursor and product ion mass tolerance were respectively set as 0.05 and 0.1 Da. The criteria for accepting peptide assignment and protein identification was < 1% of the global false discovery rate. The generated library together with all DIA data of all samples were subsequently loaded into the PeakView software v1.2 (SCIEX) for analysis. The data were analysed with the following settings: eight peptides, six transitions, 10 min for extraction of window, 50 ppm as ion library mass tolerance, 99% peptide confidence, and exclude shared peptides. The retention was realigned based on high abundance peptides that existed across all samples. The results were exported in MRKVW format which could be opened and normalised with MarkerView (SCIEX). In total, three files were generated: (1) sum of peptide areas for each protein; (2) sum of fragment ion areas for each protein; and (3) extracted peak area for individual fragment ion. The normalisation was done by averaging the total peak area of all samples. The relative quantitation of proteins between each sample pair (OE-wtBjHMGS1/WT, OE-S359A/WT, OE-S359A/OE-wtBjHMGS1) were expressed in form of Z-score. Proteins with a P value < 0.05 are considered as differentially expressed proteins (DEPs).

### Publication Abstract
Little has been established on the relationship between the mevalonate (MVA) pathway and other metabolic pathways except for the sterol and glucosinolate biosynthesis pathways. In the MVA pathway, 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA synthase (HMGS) catalyzes the condensation of acetoacetyl-CoA and acetyl-CoA to form 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A. Our previous studies had shown that, while the recombinant Brassica juncea HMGS1 (BjHMGS1) mutant S359A displayed 10-fold higher enzyme activity than wild-type (wt) BjHMGS1, transgenic tobacco overexpressing S359A (OE-S359A) exhibited higher sterol content, growth rate and seed yield than OE-wtBjHMGS1. Herein, untargeted proteomics and targeted metabolomics were employed to understand the phenotypic effects of HMGS overexpression in tobacco by examining which other metabolic pathways were affected. Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra quantitative proteomics analysis on OE-wtBjHMGS1 and OE-S359A identified the misregulation of proteins in primary metabolism and cell wall modification, while some proteins related to photosynthesis and the tricarboxylic acid cycle were upregulated in OE-S359A. Metabolomic analysis indicated corresponding changes in carbohydrate, amino acid and fatty acid contents in HMGS-OEs, and F-244, a specific inhibitor of HMGS, was applied successfully on tobacco to confirm these observations. Finally, the crystal structure of acetyl-CoA-liganded S359A revealed that improved activity of S359A likely resulted from a loss in hydrogen bonding between Ser359 and acyl-CoA, which is evident in wtBjHMGS1. This work suggests that regulation of plant growth by HMGS can influence the central metabolic pathways. Furthermore, this study demonstrates that the application of the HMGS-specific inhibitor (F-244) in tobacco represents an effective approach for studying the HMGS/MVA pathway.

### Keywords
Hmgs, Swath, Proteomics analysis, Nicotiana tabacum

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong
Plant molecular biology laboratory, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China

### Submitter
Pan Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Mee-Len Chye
Plant molecular biology laboratory, School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China


