### Accession
PXD036294

### Title
FOXL1+ TELOCYTES IN MOUSE COLON ORCHESTRATE ECM BIODYNAMICS AND WOUND REPAIR RESOLUTION

### Description
Recent studies identified FoxL1+-Telocytes (TCFoxL1+) as key players in gut epithelial-mesenchymal interactions impacting the microenvironment. Disruption of BMP-signaling in TCFoxL1+ alters the physical and cellular microenvironment leading to gut pathophysiology, suggesting a role for TCFoxL1+ in stromagenesis. However, profiling studies from whole tissue can be misleading when analyzing the specific contribution of TCFoxL1+.  We performed an ex vivo deconstruction of control and BmpR1a△FoxL1+ colons, isolated the mesenchyme-enriched fractions and determined the protein composition of in vivo ECM to compare the microenvironment. Matrisomic analysis of mesenchyme fractions revealed modulations in ECM proteins with functions associated to innate immunity, epithelial wound healing and collagen network.  These results show that TCFoxL1+ have a critical role in orchestrating the colon ECM biodynamics. Dysfunctional TCFoxL1+ reprogram the microenvironment driving the epithelium toward pathologies. This method allows to truthfully investigate how TCFoxL1+ impacts matrix dynamics leading to a comprehensive ECM profiling in diseases.

### Sample Protocol
ECM proteins enrichment by cell fractionation ECM proteins of the deconstructed mesenchymal compartment were isolated according to a previously described method (Hynes and Naba, 2012; Naba et al., 2015; Taha and Naba, 2019). The Compartmental Protein Extraction kit (Millipore) was used to obtain the ECM-enriched fraction. Snap frozen mesenchymal tissues were thawed on ice (N = 9) and Buffer C was added to sample tube (175ul/10mg wet tissue) and tissues were further minced.  Samples were then homogenized using the QIAGEN TissueLyser LT (2 X 50 oscillations/min for 3 minutes: 5mm stainless steel beads). Proteins were fractionated according to the modified protocol (Naba et al., 2015). The insoluble fractions containing associated stromal ECM proteins were then processed for mass spectrometry. Samples come from independent 90-day old mice, age-matched mice, either control or Bmpr1a△FoxL1+ mice (N = 9).    In-solution digestion of proteins to peptides for mass spectrometry analysis ECM-enriched fractions were deglycosylated and digested as described by Naba et al., with the exception of Lys-C digestion that was omitted (Naba et al., 2015). Briefly, ECM-enriched fractions were resuspended in 8M urea/10mM HEPES (22ul/mg wet weight), vortex for 15 seconds twice and sonicated while on ice (20% power, 10 pulse). Equivalent micrograms amount of proteins in a maximum volume of 50 l was used for subsequent steps (or maximum 50 g protein in 50 l final). DTT was added to 10mM finale and samples boiled at 95oC for 2 minutes, then incubated at 1400rpm for 2 hours at 37oC. After cooling the sample to room temperature, iodoacetamide was added to 25mM final and incubated at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. 50mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to reduce the final concentration of urea to 2M. Samples were deglycosylated by adding 2 l PNGaseF (New England Biolabs) and incubated 2hrs at 37oC at 1400 rpm. An amount of 1.5 g trypsin per sample was used to digest proteins at 30oC overnight with constant agitation at 1400rpm. All solutions were prepared in MS-grade water and low-bind tubes and tips were used.   Purification and desalting of the peptides on C18 columns Digestion was stopped by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 0.2%. Pierce C18 tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used to purify the peptides. The C18 tip was first moistened by 100% acetonitrile, then equilibrated with 0.1% TFA. Each peptide sample was allowed to bind on the equilibrated C18 tip by 10 succeeding up-and-downs of the sample. This step was performed until the entire sample was passed on the column. The C18 tip was then washed with 0.1% TFA. Elution of the peptides was performed in a new low-binding microtube, using 50% acetonitrile/1% formic acid as the elution buffer. The peptides were then concentrated by centrifugal evaporator at 60°C until complete drying and then resuspended in 1% formic acid. Peptide concentration measurement was performed using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and read at an absorbance of 205 nm. The peptides were then transferred to a glass vial and stored at -20°C until analysis by mass spectrometry.  LC-MS/MS Analysis  Purified peptides were analyzed at our in-house proteomics facility using the following parameters. For LC-MS/MS, 250 ng of each sample were injected into an HPLC (nanoElute, Bruker Daltonics) and loaded onto a trap column with a constant flow of 4 µl/min (Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column, 0.3 mm id x 5 mm, Dionex Corporation). The samples were then eluted onto an analytical C18 Column (1.9 µm beads size, 75 µm x 25 cm, PepSep). Peptides were thereafter eluted over a 2-hour gradient of acetonitrile (5-37%) in 0.1% FA at 500 nL/min while being injected into a TimsTOF Pro ion mobility mass spectrometer equipped with a Captive Spray nano electrospray source (Bruker Daltonics). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with a 100-1700 m/z mass range, with PASEF enabled with a number of PASEF scans set at 10 (1.27 seconds duty cycle) and a dynamic exclusion of 0.4 minutes, m/z dependent isolation window and collision energy of 42.0 eV. The target intensity was set to 20,000, with an intensity threshold of 2,500.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification by MaxQuant analysis The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 software (Cox and Mann, 2008) and the Uniprot mouse proteome database (25/03/2020, 55,366 entries). The settings used for the MaxQuant analysis (with TIMS-DDA type in group-specific parameters) were: 2 miscleavages were allowed; fixed modification was carbamidomethylation on cysteine; enzymes were Trypsin (K/R not before P); variable modifications included in the analysis were methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and protein carbamylation (K, N-terminal). A mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used for precursor ions and a tolerance of 20 ppm was used for fragment ions. Identification values "PSM FDR", "Protein FDR" and "Site decoy fraction" were set to 0.05. Minimum peptide count was set to 1. Label-Free-Quantification (LFQ) was also selected with a LFQ minimal ratio count of 2. Both the "Second peptides" and "Match between runs" options were also allowed.   Differential and statistical analyses of mass spectrometry data Following MaxQuant analysis, the LFQ intensities were sorted according to several parameters using Prostar software version 1.22.4 (Wieczorek et al., 2017). Proteins positive for the "Reverse", "Only.identified.by.site" or "Potential.contaminant" categories were eliminated, as well as proteins identified from only 1 unique peptide. A Structured Least Square Adaptative (SLSA) and DetQuantile imputation were performed for, respectively, POV (Partially Observed Value) and MEC (Missing in the Entire Condition) missing values. For the hypothesis testing, a Limma statistical test was selected, with a fold-change threshold of 2 (logFC -1 or 1) and a p-value of 0.05 to determine the list of differentially abundant proteins. The st.boot calibration plot was chosen for p-values distribution.   Matrisome identification The list of differentially abundant proteins was annotated using the Matrisome Annotator webtool (matrisomeproject.mit.edu) according to matrisome divisions (core matrisome or matrisome-associated) and categories (ECM glycoproteins, collagens and proteoglycans, ECM-affiliated, ECM regulators and secreted factors)  as proposed by Naba et al., (Naba et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have identified FoxL1<sup>+</sup>-telocytes (TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup>) as key players in gut epithelial-mesenchymal interactions which can determine the colonic microenvironment. Bone morphogenetic protein signaling disruption in TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> alters the physical and cellular microenvironment and leads to colon pathophysiology. This suggests a role for TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> in stromagenesis, but it is hard to identify the specific contribution of TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> when analyzing whole tissue profiling studies. We performed ex vivo deconstruction of control and BmpR1a<sup>&#x25b3;FoxL1+</sup> colon samples, isolated the mesenchyme-enriched fractions, and determined the protein composition of the in vivo extracellular matrix (ECM) to analyze microenvironment variation. Matrisomic analysis of mesenchyme fractions revealed modulations in ECM proteins with functions associated with innate immunity, epithelial wound healing, and the collagen network. These results show that TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> is critical in orchestrating the biodynamics of the colon ECM. TC<sup>FoxL1+</sup> disfunction reprograms the gut's microenvironment and drives the intestinal epithelium toward colonic pathologies. SIGNIFICANCE: In this study, the method that was elected to isolate ECM proteins might not encompass the full extent of ECM proteins in a tissue, due to the protocol chosen, as this protocol by Naba et al., targets more the insoluble part of the matrisome and eliminates the more soluble components in the first steps. However, this ECM-enrichment strategy represents an improvement and interesting avenue to study ECM proteins in the colon compared to total tissue analysis with a background of abundant cellular protein. Thus, the matrisomic approach presented in this study, and its target validation delivered a broader evaluation of the matrix remodeling occurring in the colonic sub-epithelial mesenchyme of the BmpR1a<sup>&#x25b3;FoxL1+</sup> mouse model.

### Keywords
Bmp signaling; extracellular matrix; mechanical microenvironment; matrisome, Foxl1+-telocytes; epithelial-mesenchymal communication

### Affiliations
University of Sherbrooke, FM Boisvert lab
Département d’Immunologie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada

### Submitter
Dominique Levesque

### Lab Head
Dr Nathalie Perreault
Département d’Immunologie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada


