### Accession
PXD012720

### Title
Synovial fluid proteome changes in ACL injury-induced posttraumatic osteoarthritis: proteomics analysis of porcine knee synovial fluid

### Description
In the current work, we used an isotopically labeled high resolution LC MS/MS-based proteomics approach to analyze the protein profile of synovial fluid at 6 and 12 months after ACL transection in untreated and repaired porcine knees. Our primary aim was to determine how the synovial fluid proteome differs between the two groups in an effort to identify candidate proteins that may be associated with the development of posttraumatic OA. We hypothesized that the development of macroscopic cartilage damage following surgical ACL transection would be accompanied by differential changes in synovial fluid proteome in untreated knees compared to repaired joints.

### Sample Protocol
A multiplexed Isobaric Tag for Relative and Absolute Quantitation (iTRAQ) coupled with liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) was used to identify the changes in synovial fluid protein levels. iTRAQ is a chemical labeling method, which uses multiplexed isobaric tagging reagent to label peptide mixtures which allows post label mixing of the samples (after enzymatic digestion) without adding complexity to the MS analysis. This will help minimizing the quantitation variability during sample preparation prior to LC MS/MS data collection. The iTRAQ-based quantitative proteomics approach has been widely used to identify biomarkers for several diseases including end stage OA and rheumatoid arthritis. Comparison of the peak areas and resultant peak ratios for MS/MS reporter ions was used to measure the relative abundance of proteins. Synovial fluid from each individual sample was reduced with DTT, alkylated with iodoacetamide, and digested with trypsin at 37°C overnight. Digested samples were separated across five different sets for comparison with each set consisting of seven unique samples.  A pooled sample consisting of equal amount of proteins from all 35 total samples was made to serve as a common eighth sample across the five different sets of comparison. Per each comparison set, equal amounts of total peptides were aliquoted and labeled with the 8-plex iTRAQ reagents (iTRAQ Reagents Multiplex kit, Applied Biosystems, CA), then pooled, dried and stored until analyzed by mass spectrometry. Total digested peptides in each sample were quantified by Amino Acid Analysis (AAA; Hitachi Model L-8900) prior to iTRAQ labeling to ensure equal amounts of total peptides for each sample. LC-MS/MS analysis of the iTRAQ labeled samples peptides were carried out using AB SCIEX TripleTOF® 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, Framingham, MA) coupled to a NanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Inc., Milford, MA). The dried peptide samples were dissolved in 70% formic acid/water, diluted with 13 µl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and quantitated at A280 absorption on a Nanodrop (ThermoFisher Scientific, Wilmington, DE). Peptides were loaded on a NanoACQUITY Symmetry C18 UPLC Trap column, washed in 9% Buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) then run for 160 minutes over a linear gradient 99%A to 65% A at 500 nL/min. The parameters utilized on the 5600 Triple-TOF were: 2300 V IonSpray Voltage Floating, Ion Source Gas 1 of 10, Curtain Gas of 20, Interface Heater Temperature 120, with a declustering potential of 60. MS cycle time was 250 milliseconds, with a maximum 20 MS/MS spectra taken each with a 100-millisecond accumulation time, and collision energy adjusted for iTRAQ reagents.

### Data Protocol
The ProteinPilot™ peptide summary was filtered to only include peptides with zero mis-cleavages, high confidence peptide identifications, and two or more iTRAQ reporter ion ratios measured. We then performed a cyclic Lowess normalization on the remaining peptides to compensate for any differences between iTRAQ labels. All peptides across the 5 sets were merged and normalized to the common pooled sample. This was done by subtracting the common pooled sample, replicated in each set, from the other 7 samples in each set. The purpose of this adjustment is to remove set-specific effects to facilitate comparisons between the experimental groups (i.e. Intact, ACLT and BEAR) and time points (i.e. 6 and 12 months) across all the sets. A linear mixed effect model was used to compare the normalized protein abundance levels between the groups at each time point (limma package in R v3.3.1, The R Foundation for Statistical Computing). Benjamini and Hochberg method was used to adjust the p-values to control the false discovery rate. P≤0.05 considered statistically significant and used to select differentially abundant proteins between the groups (i.e. Intact, ACLT 6 months, ACLT 12 months, BEAR 6 months and BEAR 12 months). Bivariate linear regression analyses were used to assess the correlations between the macroscopic cartilage damage (total lesion area assessed at 6 or 12 months after ACLT and BEAR) and normalized abundance levels of each identified secreted proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Surgical transection of the anterior cruciate ligament (ACL) in the porcine model leads to posttraumatic osteoarthritis if left untreated. However, a recently developed surgical treatment, bridge-enhanced ACL repair, prevents further cartilage damage. Since the synovial fluid bathes all the intrinsic structures of knee, we reasoned that a comparative analysis of synovial fluid protein contents could help to better understand the observed chondroprotective effects of the bridge-enhanced ACL repair. We hypothesized that post-surgical changes in the synovial fluid proteome would be different in the untreated and repaired knees, and those changes would correlate with the degree of cartilage damage. Thirty adolescent Yucatan mini-pigs underwent unilateral ACL transection and were randomly assigned to either no further treatment (ACLT, n = 14) or bridge-enhanced ACL repair (BEAR, n = 16). We used an isotopically labeled high resolution LC MS/MS-based proteomics approach to analyze the protein profile of synovial fluid at 6 and 12 months after ACL transection in untreated and repaired porcine knees. A linear mixed effect model was used to compare the normalized protein abundance levels between the groups at each time point. Bivariate linear regression analyses were used to assess the correlations between the macroscopic cartilage damage (total lesion area) and normalized abundance levels of each of the identified secreted proteins. There were no significant differences in cartilage lesion area or quantitative abundance levels of the secreted proteins between the ACLT and BEAR groups at 6 months. However, by 12 months, greater cartilage damage was seen in the ACLT group compared to the BEAR group (p = 0.005). This damage was accompanied by differences in the abundance levels of secreted proteins, with higher levels of Vitamin K-dependent protein C (p = 0.001), and lower levels of Apolipoprotein A4 (p = 0.021) and Cartilage intermediate layer protein 1 (p = 0.049) in the ACLT group compared to the BEAR group. There were also group differences in the secreted proteins that significantly changed in abundance between 6 and 12 months in ACLT and BEAR knees. Increased concentration of Ig lambda-1 chain C regions and decreased concentration of Hemopexin, Clusterin, Coagulation factor 12 and Cartilage intermediate layer protein 1 were associated with greater cartilage lesion area. In general, ACLT knees had higher concentrations of pro-inflammatory proteins and lower concentrations of anti-inflammatory proteins than BEAR group. In addition, the ACLT group had a lower and declining synovial concentrations of CILP, in contrast to a consistently high abundance of CILP in repaired knees. These differences suggest that the knees treated with bridge-enhanced ACL repair may be maintaining an environment that is more protective of the extracellular matrix, a function which is not seen in the ACLT knees.

### Keywords
Knee, Ptoa, Porcine, Acl injury, Synovial fluide

### Affiliations
Boston Children's Hospital

### Submitter
Ata Kiapour

### Lab Head
Dr Ata Kiapour
Boston Children's Hospital


