### Accession
PXD004608

### Title
Integrated cellular and plasma proteomics reveals common and systemic signatures in contrasting B-cell cancers

### Description
Approximately 800,000 leukaemia and lymphoma cases are diagnosed worldwide each year. Burkitt’s lymphoma and chronic lymphocytic leukaemia represent contrasting examples of B-cell cancers, modelled by Eμ-myc and Eμ-TCL1 mice, respectively. To better understand B-cell cancers and systemic effects of oncogenesis, tumours and plasma from these models were profiled by mass spectrometry proteomics. 8270 cellular and 2095 plasma proteins were fully quantitated by isobaric labelling, of which 695 and 279 demonstrated overabundance coinciding in both tumour models, respectively. Co-occurring upregulated cellular tumour processes included ribosome biogenesis, translation, cell cycle promotion and chromosome segregation. Tumour plasma overabundance highlighted immunity, inflammation, microenvironment interactions, a prolific tumour lysis signature and putative biomarkers of early-stage cancer. Integrative evaluation of tumours and plasma provided systemic insight not captured in isolation. Overall, these findings provide a detailed characterisation of systemic oncogenesis in two contrasting B-cell tumour models, identifying extensive common profiles in both tumour cells and plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma Isolation  700-1000 µl of blood was collected by an adaption of terminal bleeding from the vena cava [PMID:3951197] into 50 µg/ml sodium heparin in PBS. Blood was immediately placed on ice and centrifuged at 2000 g for 15 minutes at 4°C with plasma stored in liquid nitrogen. Samples were rejected if RBC lysis was visible by eye. Plasma Sub-proteome Enrichment SuPrE-SEC was adapted from that described previously [PMID:25072778]. 120 µl plasma pools were diluted with 380 µl of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride in 10% methanol and separated by 3 KW804 size exclusion chromatography (SEC) columns in series at 1.2 ml/min and 30°C. The low molecular weight sub-proteome was isolated during elution from 42-55 minutes and dialysed (2 kDa Mw cut-off) into ultrapure water (18.2MΩ cm-1) with 5 exchanges into 5 litres. Protein was lyophilised and re-solubilised in 0.5 M TEAB with 0.05% SDS with 30 µg digested and labelled for MS analysis. B-cell lysate isolation B-cells were isolated from healthy and tumourous splenocyte suspensions using the mouse negative selection B-cell isolation kits and MACS columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions, washed once at room temperature in red blood cell lysis buffer (155 mM  NH4CL, 10 mM NaHCO3, 0.1 mM Na2EDTA (pH 7.4) before 3 washes in PBS. B-cell isolation efficiency was assessed by flow cytometry immunostaining with CD19 and CD3. Snap frozen B-cell/tumour pellets were lysed on ice by trituration with a 23 gauge needle in 0.5 M TEAB with 0.05% SDS. Disrupted cells were sonicated and lysates cleared at 16,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C.  Peptide preparation and labelling 100 µg of cell lysate or 30 µg of plasma sub-proteome was reduced with 50 mM TCEP and alkylated with 200 mM MMTS, before digestion overnight at RT with a 30:1 ratio of proteomics grade trypsin. Plasma proteins were additionally digested for a further 2 hours at 37°C with 100:1 proteomics grade Lys-c. Peptides were incubated with either iTRAQ 8-plex (B-cell peptides) or TMT 10-plex isobaric tags (plasma peptides) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were then lyophilised and labelled peptides serially reconstituted, for each proteome, in 100 µl of 2% v/v ACN, 0.1% v/v NH4OH. Peptide Pre-fractionation Peptides were resolved using high-pH (0.1% v/v NH4OH) RP C8 chromatography (150 mm x 3 mm ID x 3.5 µm particle, XBridge, Waters) at 300 µl/min with a LC-20AD HPLC system (Shimadzu) maintained at 30°C, using the mobile phases (MP); A – 99.9% H2O, 0.1% NH4OH, B – 99.9% ACN, 0.1% NH4OH. The two hour gradient was as follows; 0 minutes; 2% B, 10 minutes; 2% B, 75 minutes; 30% B, 105 minutes; 85% B, 120 minutes; 2% B. Fractions were collected in a peak-dependent manner and lyophilised. Peptide Fraction Resolution and Characterisation by LC-MS/MS Lyophilized peptide fractions were individually reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% FA and ~500 ng of peptides loaded by a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Scientific) at 20 μl/minute for 4 minutes onto a C18 PepMap100 trapping cartridge (5 mm × 500 µm ID, 5 μm particle) (Thermo Scientific). After peptide loading, the trapping cartridge was brought in line with an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (50 cm × 75 μm ID, 3 μm particle) at a flow rate of 300 nl/minute with 2% MP B (94.9% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) in MP A (2% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA). Several reverse phase elution gradient lengths were used, proportional to the 100 minute gradient: 0 minutes; 2% B, 5 minutes; 2% B, 50 minutes; 22% B, 75 minutes; 45% B, 85 minutes; 85% B, 90 minutes; 85% B, 95 minutes; 2% B. For the B-cell characterisation a 2 cm x 100 μm ID C18 trapping column was loaded at 5 μL/min flow rate for 8 min. Peptides were resolved on an equivalent, 25 cm column with a gradient of 8-30 % (75 mins), and 35-85 % (10 mins) organic phase. Peptide elution was directly coupled to electrospray ionisation at 2.4 kV using a PicoTip nESI emitter (New Objective), and were characterised with an Orbitrap Elite Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). MS characterisation of eluting peptides was conducted between 350 and 1900 m/z at 120,000 mass resolution. The top 12 +2 and +3 precursor ions per MS scan (minimum intensity 1000) were characterised by tandem MS with high-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) (30,000 mass resolution, 1.2 Da isolation window, 40 keV normalised collision energy) and collision induced dissociation (CID) (ion trap MS, 2 Da isolation window, 35 keV). Additionally the DMSO ion at 401.922718 was used as a MS lockmass.

### Data Protocol
Target-decoy searching of raw spectra data was performed with Proteome Discoverer software version 1.4.1.14 (Thermo Scientific). Spectra were subject to a two stage search, both using SequestHT, with Percolator used to estimate FDR with a threshold of q ≤ 0.01. The first allowed only a single missed cleavage, minimum peptide length of 7, precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm, no variable modifications and searched against the mouse UniProt Swissprot database (downloaded 01/15), supplemented with the human sequences for myc and TCL1. The second search used only spectra with q > 0.01 from the first search, allowed 2 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 6, searched against the human/mouse UniProt trembl database (downloaded 01/15), precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and a maximum of 2 variable (1 equal) modifications of; TMT or iTRAQ (Y), oxidation (M), deamidation (N,Q) and phospho (S,T,Y). In both searches, fragment ion mass tolerances of 0.02 Da and 0.5 Da were used for HCD and CID spectra, respectively. Fixed modifications of Methythio (C), TMT or iTRAQ (K and N-terminus) were used. PhosphoRS was used to predict the probability of specific phosphorylated residues. Reporter ion intensities were extracted from non-redundant PSMs with a tolerance of 20 ppm.

### Publication Abstract
Approximately 800,000 leukemia and lymphoma cases are diagnosed worldwide each year. Burkitt's lymphoma (BL) and chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) are examples of contrasting B-cell cancers; BL is a highly aggressive lymphoid tumor, frequently affecting children, whereas CLL typically presents as an indolent, slow-progressing leukemia affecting the elderly. The B-cell-specific overexpression of the <i>myc</i> and <i>TCL1</i> oncogenes in mice induce spontaneous malignancies modeling BL and CLL, respectively. Quantitative mass spectrometry proteomics and isobaric labeling were employed to examine the biology underpinning contrasting E&#x3bc;-<i>myc</i> and E&#x3bc;-<i>TCL1</i> B-cell tumors. Additionally, the plasma proteome was evaluated using subproteome enrichment to interrogate biomarker emergence and the systemic effects of tumor burden. Over 10,000 proteins were identified (q&lt;0.01) of which 8270 cellular and 2095 plasma proteins were quantitatively profiled. A common B-cell tumor signature of 695 overexpressed proteins highlighted ribosome biogenesis, cell-cycle promotion and chromosome segregation. E&#x3bc;-<i>myc</i> tumors overexpressed several methylating enzymes and underexpressed many cytoskeletal components. E&#x3bc;-<i>TCL1</i> tumors specifically overexpressed ER stress response proteins and signaling components in addition to both subunits of the interleukin-5 (IL5) receptor. IL5 treatment promoted E&#x3bc;-<i>TCL1</i> tumor proliferation, suggesting an amplification of IL5-induced AKT signaling by TCL1. Tumor plasma contained a substantial tumor lysis signature, most prominent in E&#x3bc;-<i>myc</i> plasma, whereas E&#x3bc;-<i>TCL1</i> plasma contained signatures of immune-response, inflammation and microenvironment interactions, with putative biomarkers in early-stage cancer. These findings provide a detailed characterization of contrasting B-cell tumor models, identifying common and specific tumor mechanisms. Integrated plasma proteomics allowed the dissection of a systemic response and a tumor lysis signature present in early- and late-stage cancers, respectively. Overall, this study suggests common B-cell cancer signatures exist and illustrates the potential of the further evaluation of B-cell cancer subtypes by integrative proteomics.

### Keywords
Eµ-myc, Plasma, B-cell, Proteomics, Oncogenesis, Eµ-tcl1, Lymphoma, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
Clinical and Experimental Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK
Babraham Institute, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Harvey Johnston

### Lab Head
Dr Spiro Dennis Garbis
Clinical and Experimental Sciences Unit, Faculty of Medicine, University of Southampton, Southampton SO16 6YD, UK Centre for Proteomic Research, Institute for Life Sciences, University of Southampton, Highfield Campus, Southampton, SO17 1BJ, UK


