### Accession
PXD000640

### Title
Analysis of the interactome of RPS19 mutants

### Description
Ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19) is a 16-kDa protein found mainly as a component of the ribosomal 40 S subunit. Its mutations are responsible for Diamond Blackfan anemia, a congenital disease characterized by defective erythroid progenitor maturation. To clarify the function of RPS19, we compare the interactome of RPS19 wilde type and their two mutant proteins: RPS19-R62W and RPS19- R101H. Mutations R62W and R101H impair RPS19 ability to associate with the ribosome. We found striking differences between the interactomes of wild type and mutant RPS19 proteins. In particular, mutations abolish interactions with proteins having splicing, translational and helicase activity, thus confirming the role of RPS19 in RNA processing/metabolism and translational control.

### Sample Protocol
Wt and mutant proteins were produced as GST-fused proteins. Expression of fusion proteins and affinity purification were carried out. The pellets obtained by affinity purification were resuspended in SDS-PAGE sample buffer and pooled for one-dimensional electrophoresis. Protein electrophoretic patterns were then visualized and the gel lanes were cut to create 2mm slices. Each slice was subjected to enzymatic digestions. The peptide mixture were extracted andwere analyzed by MS using the LC/MSD Trap XCT Ultra. Mascot format text files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer platform, interfaced with an in-house Mascot server for protein identifications. Abundance of proteins present in the different interactomes were estimated by means of the spectral counting approach. The normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) generated from LCMSMS data sets was used.

### Data Protocol
Mascot format text files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.3; Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), interfaced with an in-house Mascot server (version 2.3, Matrix Science, London, UK) for protein identifications. All peak lists were processed against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (release 2012_05) with the following search parameters: Homo Sapiens as taxonomy, Precursor Mass Tolerance 300ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance 0.6Da, Charge State+2, and+3, Cysteine Carbamidomethylation as Static Modification, N-terminal Glutamine conversion to Pyro-glutammic acid and Methionine Oxidation as Dynamic Modifications, Enzyme Trypsin, allowing up to one Missed Cleavage . For label-free quantification, all peptides with FDR (False Discovery Rate) ≤ 0.01 and a peptide rank of 1 were included.        NSAF was then calculated as follows: NSAF=SAFi/∑i=1N(SAFi), where subscript i denotes a protein identity and N is the total number of proteins, while SAF was calculated as the protein spectral counts divided by its length. To avoid considering non specific interactions, the NSAF of each protein was normalized by dividing for the NSAF of the same protein in the GST lane

### Publication Abstract
Diamond-Blackfan anemia, characterized by defective erythroid progenitor maturation, is caused in one-fourth of cases by mutations of ribosomal protein S19 (RPS19), which is a component of the ribosomal 40S subunit. Our previous work described proteins interacting with RPS19 with the aim to determine its functions. Here, two RPS19 mutants, R62W and R101H, have been selected to compare their interactomes versus the wild-type protein one, using the same functional proteomic approach that we employed to characterize RPS19 interactome. Mutations R62W and R101H impair RPS19 ability to associate with the ribosome. Results presented in this paper highlight the striking differences between the interactomes of wild-type and mutant RPS19 proteins. In particular, mutations abolish interactions with proteins having splicing, translational and helicase activity, thus confirming the role of RPS19 in RNA processing/metabolism and translational control. The data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000640 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000640).

### Keywords
Diamond-blackfan anemia; protein-protein interaction in ribosome

### Affiliations
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Universita di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy
University of Naples 'Federico II'

### Submitter
Marianna Caterino

### Lab Head
Dr Margherita Ruoppolo
Dipartimento di Medicina Molecolare e Biotecnologie Mediche, Universita di Napoli Federico II, Napoli, Italy


