### Accession
PXD036774

### Title
LAMP3-associated extracellular vesicles induce apoptosis in Sjögren’s disease

### Description
Sjögren’s disease (SjD) is an autoimmune disease that affects exocrine tissues and is characterized by increased apoptosis and decreased expression of membrane proteins involved in secretory function, such as Na-K-Cl cotransporter-1 (NKCC1), in salivary and lacrimal glands. Although the pathogenic mechanism triggering SjD is not well understood, overexpression of lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3) is associated with the disease in a subset of SjD patients and the development of SjD-like phenotype in mice. In this study, histological analysis of minor salivary glands of SjD patients suggested that LAMP3-containing material is being ejected from cells. Follow-on in vitro experiments with cells exposed to larger extracellular vesicles (LEVs) derived from LAMP3-overexpressing cells showed increased apoptosis and decreased NKCC1 expression. Proteomics identified LAMP3 as a major component of LEVs derived from LAMP3-overexpressing cells. Live-cell imaging visualized release and uptake of LAMP3-containing LEVs from LAMP3-overexpressing cells to naïve cells. Furthermore, experiments with recombinant LAMP3 protein alone or complexed with Xfect protein transfection reagent demonstrated that internalization of LAMP3 was required for apoptosis in a caspase-dependent pathway. Taken together, we identified a new role for extracellular LAMP3 in cell-to-cell communication via LEVs, which provides further support for targeting LAMP3 as a therapeutic approach in SjD.

### Sample Protocol
SEVs and LEVs derived from LAMP1-overexpressing and LAMP3-overexpressing A253 cells were treated with 8 M urea to disrupt membranes and dissolve proteins. Proteins were reduced with 2.5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and cysteine alkylated with 25mM methyl methanethiosulfonate. The resulting solution was diluted with 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) to reduce the urea concentration to 4 M. To each sample, 5 µg Trypsin/Lys- C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 3 hours. The digestion solution was further diluted with 0.1 M TEAB to 0.8 M urea and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Tryptic digests were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to pH 4 and desalted using the C18 Spin Column (TT2 C18) (Glygen Corp., Columbia, MD, USA). Eluents from the C18 spin columns were vacuum dried and dissolved in 50 µL 0.05% TFA. Peptide amount was normalized based on reading at UV 280 nm before analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification were carried out using the Proteome Discoverer software package (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Raw data were searched against a human proteome database from UniProt (2019-05-15) along with a contaminant protein database with both Sequest HT and Mascot search engines. Cysteine alkylation with methylthio (+45.988) was set as a fixed modification. Methionine oxidation, asparagine, and glutamine deamidation were set as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was set to ± 20 ppm for the database search and was later filtered to 5 ppm for report; fragment mass tolerance was ± 0.6 Da. For relative quantification, label-free quantification was performed using the MINORA Feature Detection node followed by precursor intensity quantification of unique and razor peptides. Normalization between samples was carried out based on total peptide amount. Changes above two-fold were considered significant (based on ANOVA).

### Publication Abstract
Sj&#xf6;gren's disease (SjD) is an autoimmune disease that affects exocrine tissues and is characterized by increased apoptosis in salivary and lacrimal glands. Although the pathogenic mechanism triggering SjD is not well understood, overexpression of lysosome-associated membrane protein 3 (LAMP3) is associated with the disease in a subset of SjD patients and the development of SjD-like phenotype in mice. In this study, histological analysis of minor salivary glands of SjD patients suggested that LAMP3-containing material is being ejected from cells. Follow-on in vitro experiments with cells exposed to extracellular particles (EPs) derived from LAMP3-overexpressing cells showed increased apoptosis. Proteomics identified LAMP3 as a major component of EPs derived from LAMP3-overexpressing cells. Live-cell imaging visualized release and uptake of LAMP3-containing EPs from LAMP3-overexpressing cells to na&#xef;ve cells. Furthermore, experiments with recombinant LAMP3 protein alone or complexed with Xfect protein transfection reagent demonstrated that internalization of LAMP3 was required for apoptosis in a caspase-dependent pathway. Taken together, we identified a new role for extracellular LAMP3 in cell-to-cell communication via EPs, which provides further support for targeting LAMP3 as a therapeutic approach in SjD.

### Keywords
Sjögren’s syndrome, Lysosome-associated membrane protein 3, Large extracellular vesicle, Cell-to-cell communication, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
NIH/NIDCR

### Submitter
Yan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yan Wang
NIH/NIDCR


