### Accession
PXD025891

### Title
Comprehensive proteomics analyses of IL-15 driven activation of intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes

### Description
Intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) are an abundant population of tissue-resident T cells that protect the gut from pathogens and maintain intestinal homeostasis. The cytokine IL-15 is trans-presented by epithelial cells to IEL in complex with the IL-15 receptor α chain (IL-15Rα) and plays essential roles both in maintaining IEL homeostasis, and in inducing IEL activation in response to epithelial stress. When overproduced, IL-15 is a key driver of the gluten-induced enteropathy Coeliac disease, through cytotoxic activation of IEL. To better understand how IL-15 directly regulates both homeostatic and inflammatory functions of IEL, we performed quantitative proteomics of IL-15/Rα-stimulated murine IEL, sorted into their 3 main subpopulations, TCRγδ CD8αα, TCRαβ CD8αβ and TCRαβ CD8αα expressing IEL. The data reveal that high IL-15/Rα stimulation licenses cell cycle activation, upregulates the biosynthetic machinery in IEL, increases mitochondrial respiratory capacity and induces expression of cell surface immune receptors and adhesion proteins that potentially drive IEL activation.

### Sample Protocol
4 biological replicates were generated and IEL were isolated from 8 mice per biological replicate (male, C57BL/6, aged 10-12 weeks). IEL were isolated from the small intestine as previously described. For further enrichment of the CD8α+ IEL population, following Percoll density gradient centrifugation, an EasySep™ Release PE positive selection kit (STEMCELL Technologies) was used with a PE-conjugated anti-mouse CD8α antibody (BioLegend) as per the manufacturer’s instructions. Cells were stained with PerCP eFluor 710 (TCRγδ), APC (TCRβ), PE (CD8α), FITC (CD8β) and PE-Cy7 (CD4) for isolation of pure populations of TCRγδ CD8αα, TCRαβ CD8αα and TCRαβ CD8αβ IEL using fluorescent activated cell sorting (FACS) (Supplementary Fig. 1A). We purified ~10million TCRγδ CD8αα, ~5million TCRαβ CD8αα and ~5 million TCRαβ CD8αβ per biological replicate. 2 million cells from each purified cell population were pelleted and snap frozen in liquid N2 and the remaining cells treated with 100ng/mL IL-15/Rα for 24hrs as previously described then similarly pelleted and snap frozen. IEL cell pellets (both IL-15-treated and untreated) were lysed in 200µl lysis buffer (4% SDS, 10mM TCEP, 50mM TEAB (pH 8.5)). Lysates were boiled and sonicated (15 cycles of 30s on/30s off) and protein concentrations determined by EZQ® Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen). Lysates were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAA) for 1hr at room temperature in the dark. For protein clean-up, 200µg SP3 beads (Hughes et al., 2014) were added to lysates before elution in digest buffer (0.1% SDS, 50mM TEAB (pH 8.5), 1mM CaCl2) and digested with LysC and Trypsin, each at a 1:100 (µg enzyme:protein) ratio. Peptide clean-up was performed according to the SP3 protocol. Samples were resuspended in 2% DMSO and 5% formic acid. For fractionation, off-line high pH (9.5) reverse phase chromatography was used. Using an Ultimate 3000 HPLC (Thermo Scientific), peptides were separated into 16 concatenated fractions, then manually pooled to 8 orthogonal fractions, dried and eluted into 5% formic acid for analysis by LC-MS. Samples were sent to MRC-PPU Mass Spectrometry facility, University of Dundee, where each fraction was analysed by label-free quantification (LFQ) using an LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific) with a 240-minute gradient per fraction.

### Data Protocol
The MS data files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.6.0.3 against mouse reviewed proteome from Uniprot, downloaded on 25/07/2017. The following search parameters were used: Trypsin and LysC were selected as the proteases; up to two missed cleavages were permitted; the minimum peptide length was set to six amino acids; protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamate, and glutamine and asparagine deamidation were selected as variable modifications; carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification; MS tolerance of 20 parts per million (ppm) and MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da; and label- free quantification was enabled. False discovery rates were set to 0.01 and based on hits against the reversed sequence database. This cutoff was applied to individual spectra and whole proteins in the MaxQuant output. The match between runs function was enabled. Proteins were quantified on the basis of unique (found only in a specific protein group) and razor peptides (peptides assigned to a specific protein group without being unique to that group) with the re-quantification feature enabled.

### Publication Abstract
Intestinal intraepithelial lymphocytes (IEL) are an abundant population of tissue-resident T cells that protect and maintain the intestinal barrier. IEL respond to epithelial cell-derived IL-15, which is complexed to the IL-15 receptor &#x3b1; chain (IL-15/R&#x3b1;). IL-15 is essential both for maintaining IEL homeostasis and inducing IEL responses to epithelial stress, which has been associated with Coeliac disease. Here, we apply quantitative mass spectrometry to IL-15/R&#x3b1;-stimulated IEL to investigate how IL-15 directly regulates inflammatory functions of IEL. IL-15/R&#x3b1; drives IEL activation through cell cycle regulation, upregulation of metabolic machinery and expression of a select repertoire of cell surface receptors. IL-15/R&#x3b1; selectively upregulates the Ser/Thr kinases PIM1 and PIM2, which are essential for IEL to proliferate, grow and upregulate granzyme B in response to inflammatory IL-15. Notably, IEL from patients with Coeliac disease have high PIM expression. Together, these data indicate PIM kinases as important effectors of IEL responses to inflammatory IL-15.

### Keywords
Intraepithelial lymphocytes; interleukin-15; quantitative proteomics; coeliac disease; histone ruler; lfq

### Affiliations
MRC-PPU, University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit (PPU), School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.

### Submitter
Renata Soares

### Lab Head
Dr Mahima Swamy
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit (PPU), School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom.


