### Accession
PXD000934

### Title
A COFRADIC protocol to study protein ubiquitination

### Description
We here apply the COmbined FRActional DIagonal Chromatography (COFRADIC) technology to enrich for ubiquitinated peptides and identify sites of ubiquitination by mass spectrometry. Our technology bypasses the need to ectopically overexpress tagged variants of ubiquitin and the use of sequence-biased antibodies recognizing ubiquitin remnants. In brief, all protein primary amino groups are blocked by chemical acetylation after which ubiquitin chains are proteolytically and specifically removed by the catalytic core domain of the USP2 deubiquitinase (USP2cc). As USP2cc cleaves the isopeptidyl bond between the ubiquitin C-terminus and the ɛ-amino group of the ubiquitinated lysine, this enzyme re-introduces primary ɛ-amino groups in proteins. These amino groups are then chemically modified with a handle that allows specific isolation of ubiquitinated peptides during subsequent COFRADIC chromatographic runs. Our method allowed us to identify over 8,200 endogenous ubiquitination sites in more than 3,600 different proteins in a native human Jurkat cell lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Human Jurkat T cells (6 x 106 cells) were lysed with cell lysis buffer containing 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8), 100 mM NaCl, 0.8 % (wt/vol) CHAPS and the appropriate amount of the complete protease inhibitor mixture (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). A total of 4 mg of protein material was treated with guanidinium hydrochloride (final concentration of 4 M). Alkylation of cysteines was carried out by adding triscarboxyethylphosphine (Pierce, Rockford, IL) and iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) and to final concentrations of 15 mM and 30 mM respectively, for 30 min at 37 °C. Both samples were desalted on a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and eluted with 0.6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM sodium phosphate buffer (pH 8). The eluate was dried down to obtain a final guanidinium hydrochloride concentration of ~2 M. Next, the sample was N-acetylated and then de-ubiquitinated overnight with USP2cc as described above. Subsequently, samples were incubated in 40 mM Boc-Gly-OSu for 2 h at 30°C. The reaction was stopped by adding glycine (final concentration of 80 mM) and possible O-acylation was reversed by adding hydroxylamine (final concentration of 320 mM). Next, the sample was purified over a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare, Uppsala, Sweden) and eluted with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 7.6. Prior to digestion, protein concentration was measured using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay. The protein mixture was overnight digested at 37°C with trypsin (sequencing-grade modified trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:50 (w:w). The resulting peptide mixture was vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 100 µl 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5, followed by oxidation via H2O2 treatment (final concentration of 0.05% (w/w)) to uniformly convert methionine into its sulfoxide derivatives. The peptides were fractionated a first time by RP-HPLC with a linear water/acetonitrile gradient in 10 mM ammonium acetate as described previously. Fractions of 1 min were collected from 20 to 80 min after sample injection, and fractions eluting 20 min apart were pooled and vacuum-dried. Subsequently, the Boc group was removed by incubating peptides in 50 µl 10% TFA for 20 min, after which the samples were vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 10 mM ammonium acetate pH 5.5. Next, these 20 samples were re-separated on the same RP column using the same gradient as during the first peptide separation. Peptides that lost a Boc group were collected in six fractions during an interval ranging from 4 to 17 min before the collection interval of each initial peptide fraction. This resulted in 18 collected fractions per secondary run and 360 fractions in total. To reduce LC-MS/MS analysis time, peptide fractions eluting 15 min apart were pooled, dried and re-dissolved in 15 µl of 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% TFA. In total, 60 samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-HPLC system (Dionex, Amsterdam, The Netherlands).

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra  were searched against the Swiss-Prot database (taxonomy Homo sapiens; 20,264 entries; version of March 2014) with the MaxQuant software  (version 1.4.0.3), with a precursor mass tolerance set to 20 ppm for the first search (used for nonlinear mass re-calibration) and set to 4.5 ppm for the main search. ArgC was selected as enzyme setting as cleavage after lysine residues is obstructed by acylation of their side chains. Cleavages between arginine-proline residues and up to one missed cleavage were allowed. Methionine oxidation and carbamidomethylation of cysteines were searched as a fixed modifications, whereas N-terminal protein acetylation, lysine acetylation, N-terminal pyro-glutamate, Lys-Ɛ-Gly, and Gly on protein N-termini were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%; and the minimum peptide length was set to 7.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we apply the COmbined FRActional DIagonal Chromatography (COFRADIC) technology to enrich for ubiquitinated peptides and to identify sites of ubiquitination by mass spectrometry. Our technology bypasses the need to overexpress tagged variants of ubiquitin and the use of sequence-biased antibodies recognizing ubiquitin remnants. In brief, all protein primary amino groups are blocked by chemical acetylation, after which ubiquitin chains are proteolytically and specifically removed by the catalytic core domain of the USP2 deubiquitinase (USP2cc). Because USP2cc cleaves the isopeptidyl bond between the ubiquitin C-terminus and the &#x3b5;-amino group of the ubiquitinated lysine, this enzyme reintroduces primary &#x3b5;-amino groups in proteins. These amino groups are then chemically modified with a handle that allows specific isolation of ubiquitinated peptides during subsequent COFRADIC chromatographic runs. This method led to the identification of over 7500 endogenous ubiquitination sites in more than 3300 different proteins in a native human Jurkat cell lysate.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Cofradic, Jurkat

### Affiliations
VIB/UGent

### Submitter
Elisabeth Stes

### Lab Head
Dr Kris Gevaert
VIB/UGent


