### Accession
PXD015132

### Title
Secretome analysis of Candida glabrata aspartyl protease-deficient strains

### Description
The project is aimed at characterizing the effect of deletion of surface associated aspartyl protease(s) on the secretome of of the human opportunistic fungal pathogen Candida glabrata.

### Sample Protocol
The supernatants of YNB medium-grown logarithmic-phase cultures of Cgyps7Δ and Cgyps2ΔypsCΔ strains of C. glabrata cells were collected in duplicates and passed through 0.4 µm membrane or syringe filters to remove the residual cells. The resultant filtrates were concentrated using Amicon Ultra-15 and Ultra-0.5 (10 kDa cutoff) centrifugal filter units. The concentrated secretome fractions were run on a 12% SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. The gel lane containing all proteins was sliced into three sections, with each section containing a different size range (<50 kDa, 50-120 kDa and >120 kDa) of proteins. Proteins were identified, after in-gel trypsin digestion, via the microcapillary LC-MS/MS (Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry) method at the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA using the the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The acquired fragmentation pattern for each peptide was analysed using the Sequest software, and searches were run against the UniProt C. glabrata reference proteome database. The identified peptides were filtered to 1% false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Secretory proteins are key modulators of host-pathogen interaction. The human opportunistic fungal pathogen <i>Candida glabrata</i> lacks secreted proteolytic activity but possesses 11 glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored aspartyl proteases, also referred to as Yapsins (CgYps1-11), that are essential for its virulence. To delineate the role of CgYapsins in interaction with host cells, we have profiled, through liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) approach, the total secretome of <i>wild-type</i> and <i>Cgyps1-11</i>&#x394; mutant. The <i>wild-type</i> secretome consisted of 119 proteins which were primarily involved in cell wall organization, carbohydrate metabolism, proteolysis, and translation processes. Of eight CgYapsins identified in the secretome, the release of two major CgYapsins, CgYps1 and CgYps7, to the medium was confirmed by Western analysis. Further, comparative analysis revealed 20 common proteins, probably signifying the core fungal secretome, among <i>C. glabrata</i>, <i>Saccharomyces cerevisiae</i>, and <i>Candida albicans</i> secretomes. Strikingly, the <i>Cgyps1-11</i>&#x394; secretome was 4.6-fold larger, and contained 65 differentially abundant proteins, as revealed by label-free quantitative profiling, with 49 and 16 being high- and low-abundant proteins, respectively, compared to the <i>wild-type</i> secretome. Importantly, the CgMsb2 mucin, a putative CgYapsins' substrate, was six-fold underrepresented in the mutant secretome. Altogether, we demonstrate for the first time that CgYapsins are both bona fide constituents and key modulators of the <i>C. glabrata</i> secretome.

### Keywords
Cell wall proteins, Candida glabrata, Secretory proteins, Mucin msb2, Secretome of yeasts

### Affiliations
Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics, Hyderabad
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India

### Submitter
Rupinder Kaur

### Lab Head
Dr Rupinder Kaur
Laboratory of Fungal Pathogenesis, Centre for DNA Fingerprinting and Diagnostics (CDFD), Hyderabad, India


