### Accession
PXD014450

### Title
Proteomic study of Staphylococcus haemolyticus after the host-microbe co-colonisation

### Description
In this study, the adhesive and biofilm forming properties of ten clinical and ten commensal S. haemolyticus isolates were examined using standard adhesion and biofilm assays, in addition we selected one clinical S. haemolyticus isolate for bacterial surface shaving. The surface shaving approach was used to identify upregulated S. haemolyticus proteins subsequent to human keratinocyte colonization. Relative quantification of up and downregulated proteins was performed by labelling proteins with tandem mass tags (TMT), prior to Mass Spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Digested peptides were dissolved in 100 μL triethylammonium Bicarbonate (TEAB) (350 mM) and labelled using TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tagging reagents (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer instructions. The TMT-set were fractionated into twelve fractions using Pierce the High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s protocol but with a modified gradient.  The fractions were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer interfaced with Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 300 mm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch) using a gradient from 7% to 35% B over 70 min followed by an increase to 100% B for 5 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. Solvent A was 0.2% formic acid and solvent B 80% acetonitrile in 0.2% formic acid. The instrument operated in data-dependent mode where the precursor ion mass spectra were acquired at a resolution of 60 000, the 10 most intense ions were isolated in a 0.8 Da isolation window and fragmented using collision energy HCD settings at either 28 or 50. MS2 spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60 000, charge states 2 to 4 were selected for fragmentation and dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s with 10 ppm tolerance.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files for the TMT set were merged for identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The database matching was performed against Staphylococcus haemolyticus_7068_7_48 (GCA_001226325.1, 2537 sequences). Mascot 2.5 (Matrix Science) was used as a search engine with precursor mass tolerance of 5 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 200 mmu. Tryptic peptides were accepted with one missed cleavage and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, cysteine alkylation and fixed modifications of N-terminal TMT-label and lysine TMT-label were selected. Fixed Value of 13 was used for identification and the quantified proteins were filtered at 1% FDR resulting in a mascot score of at least 20. No missing values was present in the data set at Threshold of 2000. Proteins were grouped by sharing the same sequences to minimize redundancy. The resulting ratios were normalized in the Proteome Discoverer 1.4 and the sum of the samples co-cultivation with HaCaT was used as denominator. Only unique peptides were used for comparison between groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Staphylococcus haemolyticus, Tandem mass tag, Q exactive hf, Tmt, Surface shaving

### Affiliations
Roger Karlsson, PhD, Consultant at Nanoxis Consulting AB, Gothenburg, Sweden
University of Gothenburg

### Submitter
Sahlgrenska Academy Proteomics Core

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Karlsson
Roger Karlsson, PhD, Consultant at Nanoxis Consulting AB, Gothenburg, Sweden


