### Accession
PXD005728

### Title
Proteomics of 24 bacterial strains from an artificial microbiota reference to evaluate metaproteomics

### Description
This project contributes to the knowledge of the proteomic data of each of 24 microbial strains grown in its most favorable condition in aerobiosis condition and harvested at stationary phase. The bacteria used are  Bacillus cereus ATCC 14579, Bacillus subtilis ATCC 6633, Bacillus thuringiensis DSM 5815, Bordetella parapertussis Bpp5, Cellulophaga lytica DSM 7489, Deinococcus deserti VCD115, Deinococcus geothermalis DSM 11300, Deinococcus proteolyticus DSM 20540, Kineococcus radiotolerans SRS30216, Marivirga tractuosa DSM 4126, Oceanibulbus indolifex HEL-45, Oceanicola granulosus HTCC2516, Phaeobacter inhibens DSM 17395, Pseudomonas putida mt-2 KT2440, Pseudopedobacter saltans DSM 12145, Roseobacter denitrificans OCh 114, Roseovarius nubinhibens ISM, Ruegeria pomeroyi DSS-3, Sagittula stellata E 37, Salmonella bongori NCTC 12419, Shigella flexneri 2a 2457T, Sphingomonas wittichii RW1, Staphylococcus carnosus TM300, Vibrio harveyi ATCC 14126

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were loaded on a SDS-PAGE, sliced into polyacrylamide bands, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap XL tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were analyzed by MASCOT, the results were then parsed with IRMA.

### Publication Abstract
Correct identification of the microorganisms present in a complex sample is a crucial issue. Proteotyping based on tandem mass spectrometry can help establish an inventory of organisms present in a sample. Evaluation of bioinformatics strategies and tools for mining the recorded datasets is essential to establish confidence in the results obtained and to improve these pipelines in terms of sensitivity and accuracy. Here, we propose several tandem mass spectrometry datasets recorded on an artificial reference consortium comprising 24 bacterial species. This assemblage of environmental and pathogenic bacteria covers 20 different genera and 5 bacterial phyla. The dataset comprises difficult cases, such as the <i>Shigella flexneri</i> species, which is closely related to Escherichia coli, and several highly sequenced clades. Different acquisition strategies simulate real-life scenarios: from rapid survey sampling to exhaustive analysis. We provide access to individual proteomes of each bacterium separately to provide a rational basis for evaluating the assignment strategy of MS/MS spectra when recorded from complex mixtures. This resource should provide an interesting common reference for developers who wish to compare their proteotyping tools and for those interested in evaluating protein assignment when dealing with complex samples, such as microbiomes.

### Keywords
Shotgun proteomics; whole proteome; metaproteomics

### Affiliations
CEA, DRF, IBiTec-S, SPI, Li2D, Laboratory "Innovative technologies for Detection and Diagnostics"
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean ARMENGAUD
CEA, DRF, IBiTec-S, SPI, Li2D, Laboratory "Innovative technologies for Detection and Diagnostics"


