### Accession
PXD032220

### Title
Targeted experiment to validate genetic deletion in KO cells

### Description
Validation of genetic deletion by targeted proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Cells were grown in 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% confluent, after harvesting the cell pellet was snap frozen, lysed in 8 M urea and subjected to harsh sonication (3 times 1 minute, 80% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology), Benzonase (Sigma) activity (50U/ml) and centrifugation (14,000 × g for 15 minutes). The protein amount of the cleared supernatant was measured by the Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce) and 50 µg protein were subsequently reduced (5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). The protein sample was diluted to 1.5 M urea and proteolyzed with 0.5 μg of LysC (Wako) and 2 μg Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 column (Sep-Pak 1cc, Waters), dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis for quality control.  LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Acquity UPLC M-class system (Waters). Peptides were separated on ACQUITY UPLC M-Class column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter) with a 90 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (400-1500 m/z) at 120,000 resolution, 250 ms injection time and 3e6 AGC target, followed by time scheduled target PRM scans at 120,000 resolution, 247 ms injection time and 2e5 AGC target. Charge states lower than two and higher than seven were rejected. Selected ions were isolated using a quadrupole mass filter of 2.0 m/z isolation window and fragmented (HCD, Normalized Collision Energy 30%). Scan windows were set to 10 min for each peptide in the final PRM method. The inclusion list with target peptides analyzed is reported

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed in three independent biological replicates of cell lysate. Supplementary Table 3 reports the list of all target peptides and proteins measured in the analysis. PRM assay containing protein knockout in the cell line panel, housekeeping protein (Actin B) and iRT peptides was generated from spectra library data imported in Skyline (v.4.1)58. Spectra libraries were built using published spectral libraries59 and Mascot search results (v. 2.4.1, MatrixScience) after proteomic analysis of cell lysate and YAP1 affinity purified as described above. Briefly, for Mascot research with precursor tolerance of 15 ppm and fragment tolerance of 0.6 Da, a Mascot score >20 and an expectation value <0.05 were considered to identify the correctly assigned peptides. Peak group identification and automatic peak picking of six fragment per peptide was performed with mProphet 60 algorithm. The second best peaks were used as controls in training model. For peptide identification we used the follow criteria: retention time matching to spectra library within 5% of the gradient length and dot product between library spectra intensities and light peptides > 0.75. After identification, peptide abundance was obtained from the sum of integrated area of three fragment ion per peptide. Fragment ions with a signal to noise ratio less than 5 were filtered out for the quantification. Peptide value were normalized for the intensity of housekeeping peptides (Actin B) and for the intensity of iRT peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Prm, Ko cells

### Affiliations
ETH
Institute of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Federico Uliana
Institute of Biochemistry


