### Accession
PXD045231

### Title
RNF114 Co-IP experiments to identify binding partners

### Description
To identify the substrates of RNF114 in the context of PARylation-mediated DDR, we performed an IP-MS (immunoprecipitation coupled with MS) experiment, using cells treated with either H2O2 or H2O2+Talazoparib. We identified a large number of PARP1 peptides from the RNF114 immunoprecipitants only in H2O2-treated cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were collected and lysed in the IP lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and 1×protease inhibitor cocktail). After incubation for 1 h at 4 °C, cell lysates were centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were transferred and incubated with the corresponding agarose beads overnight at 4 °C. The beads were washed three times with the IP wash buffer. The TAP-IP-MS experiments were performed according to a previously described protocol (Nature protocols 1, 2820-2827 (2006)).

### Data Protocol
Search results were filtered to include < 1% matches (both peptide and protein level filtering) to the reverse database by the linear discriminator function using parameters including Xcorr, dCN, missed cleavage, charge state (exclude 1 + peptides), mass accuracy, peptide length, and fraction of ions matched to MS/MS spectra. Peptide quantification was performed by using the CoreQuant algorithm implemented in an in-house-developed software suite (Mol. Cell 65, 361–370 (2017)).

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have pointed to PARP1 trapping as a key determinant of the anticancer effects of PARP1 inhibitors (PARPi). We identified RNF114, as a PARylation-dependent, E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in DNA damage response. Upon sensing genotoxicity, RNF114 was recruited, in a PAR-dependent manner, to DNA lesions, where it targeted PARP1 for degradation. The blockade of this pathway interfered with the removal of PARP1 from DNA lesions, leading to profound PARP1 trapping. We showed that a natural product, nimbolide, inhibited the E3 ligase activity of RNF114 and thus caused PARP1 trapping. However, unlike conventional PARPi, nimbolide treatment induced the trapping of both PARP1 and PARylation-dependent DNA repair factors. Nimbolide showed synthetic lethality with <i>BRCA</i> mutations, and it overcame intrinsic and acquired resistance to PARPi, both in vitro and in vivo. These results point to the exciting possibility of targeting the RNF114-PARP1 pathway for the treatment of homologous recombination-deficient cancers.

### Keywords
Rnf114 chromatin parp1

### Affiliations
Columbia university
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics Columbia University Irving Medical Center

### Submitter
Chiho Kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yonghao Yu
Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Therapeutics Columbia University Irving Medical Center


