### Accession
PXD029258

### Title
PHF20 and PHF20L1 in NSL complex

### Description
The methyl lysine readers PHF (plant homeodomain finger) 20 (PHF20) and its homolog PHF20 Like 1 (PHF20L1) are known components of the NSL (non-specific lethal) complex that regulates gene expression through its histone acetyltransferase activity. In the current model, both PHF homologs coexist in the same NSL complex although this was not formally tested; nor have the functions of PHF20 and PHF20L1 regarding NSL complex integrity and transcriptional regulation been investigated. By performing an in-depth biochemical and functional characterization, we define the association and contributions of the two methyl lysine reader homologs PHF20 and PHF20L1 to the NSL complex.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were prepared as described in Li L, et al., Nat Genet, 2021 (PMID: 33986536). Brieﬂy, the agarose bead-bound proteins were washed several times with 50mM Triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 7.1, before being solubilized with 40 mL of 5% SDS, 50mM TEAB, pH 7.55 followed by a room temperature incubation for 30 minutes. The supernatant containing the proteins of interest was then transferred to a new tube, reduced by making the solution 10mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) (Thermo, #77720), and further incubated at 65°C for 10 minutes. The sample was then cooled to room temperature and 3.75 mL of 1M iodoacetamide acid was added and allowed to react for 20 minutes in the dark after which 0.5 mL of 2M DTT was added to quench the reaction. Then, 5 mL of 12% phosphoric acid was then added to the 50 mL protein solution followed by 350 mL of binding buffer (90% Methanol, 100mM TEAB ﬁnal; pH 7.1). The resulting solution was administered to an S-Trap spin column (Protiﬁ) and passed through the column using a bench top centrifuge (30s spin at 4,000xg). The spin column was then washed three times with 400 mL of binding buffer and centrifuged (1200rpm, 1min). Trypsin (Promega, #V5280) was then added to the protein mixture in a ratio of 1:25 in 50mM TEAB, pH = 8, and incubated at 37°C for 4 hours. Peptides were eluted with 80uL of 50mM TEAB, followed by 80 mL of 0.2% formic acid, and ﬁnally 80 mL of 50% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. The combined peptide solution was then dried in a speed vacuum (room temperature, 1.5 hours) and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid, 97.9% water and aliquoted into an autosampler vial. Peptide mixtures were analyzed by nanoﬂow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) using a nano-LC chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA). The nanoLC-MS/MS system was coupled on-line to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, San Jose, CA) through a nanospray ion source (Thermo Scientiﬁc). A trap-and-elute method was used to desalt and concentrate the sample, while preserving the analytical column. The trap column (Thermo Scientiﬁc) was a C18 PepMap100 (300um X 5mm, 5um particle size) while the analytical column was an Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 mm X 25 cm) (Thermo Scientiﬁc). After equilibrating the column in 98% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 2% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile (ACN)), the samples (2 mL in solvent A) were injected onto the trap column and subsequently eluted (400 nL/min) by gradient elution onto the C18 column as follows: isocratic at 2% B, 0-5 min; 2% to 32% B, 5-39 min; 32% to 70% B, 39-49 min; 70% to 90% B, 49-50 min; isocratic at 90% B, 50-54 min; 90% to 2%, 54-55 min; and isocratic at 2% B, until the 65 minute mark.

### Data Protocol
All LC-MS/MS data were acquired using XCalibur, version 2.1.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc) in positive ion mode using a top speed data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method with a 3 s cycle time. The survey scans (m/z 350-1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolution (at m/z = 400) in proﬁle mode, with a maximum injection time of 100 msec and an AGC target of 400,000 ions. The S-lens RF level was set to 60. Isolation was performed in the quadrupole with a 1.6 Da isolation window, and CID MS/MS acquisition was performed in proﬁle mode using rapid scan rate with detection in the ion-trap using the following settings: parent threshold = 5,000; collision energy = 32%; maximum injection time 56 msec; AGC target 500,000 ions. Monoisotopic precursor selection (MIPS) and charge state ﬁltering were on, with charge states 2-6 included. Dynamic exclusion was used to remove selected precursor ions, with a ± 10 ppm mass tolerance, for 15 s after acquisition of one MS/MS spectrum. Tandem mass spectra were extracted and charge state deconvoluted using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Fisher, version 2.4.035). Deisotoping was not performed. All MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Human database (version 06-2019, 20369 entries) using Sequest. Searches were performed with a parent ion tolerance of 5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.60 Da. Trypsin was speciﬁed as the enzyme, allowing for two missed cleavages. Fixed modiﬁcation of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modiﬁcations of oxidation (M) and deamidation were speciﬁed in Sequest.  Search results were imported into Scaffold (Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and searched with X!Tandem Alanine (2017.2.4) using the same conditions as described above. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. FDR was calculated using the decoy method.

### Publication Abstract
The methyl-lysine readers plant homeodomain finger protein 20 (PHF20) and its homolog PHF20-like protein 1 (PHF20L1) are known components of the nonspecific lethal (NSL) complex that regulates gene expression through its histone acetyltransferase activity. In the current model, both PHF homologs coexist in the same NSL complex, although this was not formally tested; nor have the functions of PHF20 and PHF20L1 regarding NSL complex integrity and transcriptional regulation been investigated. Here, we perform an in-depth biochemical and functional characterization of PHF20 and PHF20L1 in the context of the NSL complex. Using mass spectrometry, genome-wide chromatin analysis, and protein-domain mapping, we identify the existence of two distinct NSL complexes that exclusively contain either PHF20 or PHF20L1. We show that the C-terminal domains of PHF20 and PHF20L1 are essential for complex formation with NSL, and the Tudor 2 domains are required for chromatin binding. The genome-wide chromatin landscape of PHF20-PHF20L1 shows that these proteins bind mostly to the same genomic regions, at promoters of highly expressed/housekeeping genes. Yet, deletion of PHF20 and PHF20L1 does not abrogate gene expression or impact the recruitment of the NSL complex to those target gene promoters, suggesting the existence of an alternative mechanism that compensates for the transcription of genes whose sustained expression is important for critical cellular functions. This work shifts the current paradigm and lays the foundation for studies on the differential roles of PHF20 and PHF20L1 in regulating NSL complex activity in physiological and diseases states.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Phf20, U2os, Phf20l1

### Affiliations
Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.
UT MD Anderson Cancer Center

### Submitter
Margarida Almeida Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Margarida A. Santos
Department of Epigenetics and Molecular Carcinogenesis, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, 77030, USA.


