### Accession
PXD013320

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Plant Protein Complexes, fern

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from Size exlusion and Triple-phase ion exchange chromatographic separations of native fern (Ceratopteris richardii) frond extract.  The ion exchange separation used a concatenated series of 3 columns (WAX, WAX, CAT).

### Sample Protocol
Fern fronds were frozen and powdered in liquid nitrogen followed by extraction in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40, phosphatase inhibitors, and protease inhibitors.  For the triple phase ion exchange chromatography the extract was concentrated by ultrafiltration and then diluted to 114 mM NaCl and 1.5 mg was fractionated on a concatenated series of 2 PolyWAX LP and one PolyCAT A columns (Poly LC Inc.).  For Size exclusion chromatography extract was sonicated gently to shear DNA, and after clarification at 14,000 x g 1.2 mg of supernatant was fractionated on a BioSep SEC-s4000 column(Phenomenex).  Fractions were prepared for mass spec by a modified version of the SP3-bead prep of Hughes et al 2014 (Molecular Systems Biology 10(10):1-10) with reduction/alkylation preceeding bead binding of proteins and on-bead digestion with trypsin. Because high salt was incompatible with this protocol fraction 49-72 of the WaxWaxCat elution were diluted by addition of an equal volume of water before processing.  Peptides in all cases were desalted after digestion using lab-in-a-plate (Glygen) C18 in a 96-well format, and data collected by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion using a data-dependent 75 minute topspeed CID method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly, output from 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Size exclusion, Ceratopteris richardii, Fern, Ion exchange, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX USA


