### Accession
PXD049281

### Title
Preconception diet interventions in obese outbred mice and the impact on female offspring metabolic health and oocyte quality

### Description
Sensitivity of murine offspring’s oocytes to a maternal high-fat/high-sugar (HF/HS) diet and how preconception care interventions (diet normalization (DN) or caloric restriction (CR)) might influence this. A proteomic insight.

### Sample Protocol
Female 11w old F1 mice (n = 20/treatment; 4 litters/treatment) were injected intraperitoneally with 10IU PMSG (Pregnant Mate Serum Gonadotropin, Folligon 1000IU, MSD Intervet, Boxmeer, The Netherlands) 3 days before sample collection. Also, 48h after PMSG injection and 13-14h before oocyte collection, all mice were injected intraperitoneally with 10IU hCG (human chorionic gonadotropin, Pregnyl 5000IE, MSD Intervet) to induce superovulation. At 11w, mice were sacrificed and oviducts were collected from each mouse and immediately stored in a 15ml tube containing 1ml L15* medium (L15 + 50 IU/ml Penicillin G sodium salt). Then, this was transferred to a 60mm petri dish and the ampullae were punctured using a fine needle to collect the cumulus-oocyte complexes (COCs). Next, all COCs were transferred to a droplet of 100µl L15* + 6mg/ml polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) in a 35mm petri dish. In another droplet, 0.3 mg/ml hyaluronidase was added to L15* to denude the oocytes. The COCs were transferred to this mixture and left untouched for 1 minute. Then, the COCs were pipetted up and down using a 50µl pipette and stripper tips fitted on EZ-grip (Origio) to ensure denudation of the oocytes. The denuded oocytes (n = 10 – 81) were washed three times in droplets of PBS containing 1mg/ml PVP. Then, they were pooled together with the oocytes of all mice from the same litter (n = 64-309 oocytes/pool), resulting in 4 pools per treatment group. Next, these pools were transferred to a 1.5ml vial in minimal volume, immediately snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80°C. Cell lysis of the samples was performed by adding 50 μL RIPA buffer (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL), 0,5 μL HALT protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific), and 0,5 μL HALT phosphatase inhibitor (Thermo Scientific)), followed by a 3 x 10s sonication (Branson Sonifier SLPe ultrasonic homogenizer, Labequip, Ontario, Canada) on ice. Then, all samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 16000 x g at 4°C, and finally the supernatant was collected. 5 μL of 1% Rapigest SF surfactant (Waters, Milford, MA) was added to the supernatant, followed by 5min incubation at 100°C. Protein reduction was performed by adding 45 μl of 200 mM TEAB and 5 μl of 200 mM TCEP, followed by 1h incubation at 55°C. Then, the samples were alkylated with 5 μl of iodoacetamide and incubated for 30 minutes in the dark at room temperature. 1ml acetone (-20°C) was added and the samples were kept overnight at -20°C. The next day, the samples were centrifuged for 10min at 8000 x g (4°C) and the pellet was collected. Re-suspension of the precipitated protein was performed by adding 10 μl of 100 mM TEAB. The samples were digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C (enzyme:protein ratio = 1:40). Next, Pierce C18 spin columns (Thermo Scientific) were used to desalt the tryptic digests following manufacturer’s guidelines. Finally, all eluted samples were dried in a speedvac vacuum concentrator and kept at -20°C until TIMS-TOF Shotgun proteomic analysis by the Centre for Proteomics (CfP).

### Data Protocol
Using Maxquant (1.6.7), raw files were analyzed. Then, data were filtered, and log2-transformed, Spectra were analyzed against Mus musculus database, generated from Uniprot, with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.1. A peptide tolerance of 10 ppm was applied. Trypsin was specified as digesting enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Then, only proteins with valid values in >50% of the matrix were kept, and missing data were imputated. For each treatment group, the three samples with the best profiles were used for further analysis in Perseus (1.6.7) to detect differentially regulated proteins (P<0.05) between the different treatment groups using a multiple sample comparison.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Intervention, Mouse, High-fat diet, Preconception, Oocyte

### Affiliations
University of Antwerp
University of Antwerp, Department of Veterinary Sciences, Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Gamete Research Centre, Wilrijk, Belgium.

### Submitter
Ben Meulders

### Lab Head
Dr Jo Leroy
University of Antwerp, Department of Veterinary Sciences, Laboratory of Veterinary Physiology and Biochemistry, Gamete Research Centre, Wilrijk, Belgium.


