### Accession
PXD013093

### Title
Systematic Discovery of Deeply Conserved Protein Complexes, Selaginella

### Description
The associated files are mass spec data from two HPLC fractionations (Size Exclusion (SEC) or a triple phase ion exchange combination (WaxWaxCat)) of a single native protein extract from Selaginella moellendorfii.  The extract was made from frozen powdered green tissue in 50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EGTA, 10% glycerol, 1% NP40,  phosphatase inhibitors and plant-specific protease inhibitors.  1 mg total protein was separated by SEC and 1.25 mg (diluted to 50 mM NaCl) by a concatenated series of three columns:  PolyWaxLP, PolyWaxLP, and poly CAT A (PolyLC, Inc).  The triple column series was eluted with a NaCl gradient.  The ion exchange fractions # 55-60 were not processed for mass spectrometry becaue the A280 trace from the HPLC indicated insufficient protein present in those fractions.

### Sample Protocol
SEC fractions were prepared for mass spectrometry by a modified version of the SP3 bead protocol of Hughes et al. 2014(Molec. Syst. Biol. 10(10):1-10).  Details in our publication.  Briefly proteins were bound to beads for buffer exchange and subjected to on-bead digest with Trypsin, followed by elution of peptides and desalting as below. Samples were resuspended in 35 ul 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 5 ul analysed by LC-MS/MS on an orbitrap fusion using a data-depenedent 75' method.  Buffer exchange of ion exchange fractions was ccomplished with ultrafiltration on an AcroPrep Advane 96 filter plate 3k MWCO(Pall).  Reduction with TCEP and alkylation with iodoacetamide was performed prior to overnight Trypsin digestion for both sets of column fractions.  All samples were desalted using 40 ul C18 Lab-in-a-Plate (Glygen)and a vacuum manifold.  Ion exchange samples were resuspended in 40 ul 5% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and 5 ul was analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer using a 75 minute data-dependent top speed acquisition method.

### Data Protocol
Data from .RAW files was processed using an in-house pipeline to be reported.  Briefly output frm 3 search engines (Comet, MS-GF+, and X!Tandem) was combined using the MSBlender software and peptide assignments to in-house assigned orthogroups to enable inter-species comparison of proteins identified.  Where ion exchange fraction number 45 is missing there will be files beginning with 44 and the one with additional digits is the appropriate fraction.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cofractionation mass spec, Selaginella moellendorffii, Spike moss, Cf-ms

### Affiliations
University of Texas at Austin
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA

### Submitter
Ophelia Papoulas

### Lab Head
Dr Edward M. Marcotte
Molecular Biosciences and the Center for Systems and Synthetic Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA


