### Accession
PXD021332

### Title
Mechanism of extractive degradation by Phlebiopsis gigantea

### Description
Mass spectrometric analysis of extracellular proteins in culture filtrate was performed to elucidate the mechanisms of extractive degradation by Phlebiopsis gigantea of microcrystalline cellulose coated and uncoated with an acetone extract from the Pinus taeda (loblolly pine)

### Sample Protocol
The P. gigantea isolate 11061-1 was cultivated for 5 days with increasing concentration of loblolly pine extracts (AV1X/AV2X/AV4X) in constant microcrystalline cellulose background. For controls microcrystalline cellulose (LPAS) only or loblolly pine extracts (AV0X) only cultures were grown. Extracellular proteins were extracted via TCA precipitation followed by methanol:chloroform clean up, trypsin digested and analyzed via nanoLC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data were converted to mgf file format using MSConvert (ProteoWizard: Open Source Software for Rapid Proteomics Tools Development) for downstream analysis. Resulting mgf files were used to search against forward and decoyed-reversed P. gigantea protein database downloaded from the JGI portal (https://genome.jgi.doe.gov/portal/Phlgi1/Phlgi1.download.html) with a list of common lab contaminants (available at ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP ) to establish False Discovery Rates (23,858 total entries) using in-house Mascot search engine 2.2.07 [Matrix Science] with variable methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation, plus fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation. Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.7.5, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used for spectral based quantification and to validate MS/MS peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 89.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phlebiopsis gigantea, Lc-ms/ms, Plant cell wall degradation, Extracellular matrix, Pinus taeda wood extracts

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Madison WI

### Submitter
Greg Sabat

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Daniel Cullen
Institute for Microbial and Biochemical Sciences, USDA Forest Products Laboratory, Madison WI


