### Accession
PXD044182

### Title
Quantitative proteomic measurement of the Ca2+-dependent excretory-secretory antigen secretome of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Apicomplexan parasites discharge specialized organelles called rhoptries upon host cell contact to mediate invasion. The events that drive rhoptry discharge are poorly understood, yet essential to sustain the apicomplexan parasitic life cycle. Rhoptry discharge appears to depend on proteins secreted from another set of organelles called micronemes, which in Toxoplasma gondii includes MIC8 and the microneme-associated CRMP complex. Here, we examine the function of the microneme protein CLAMP, uncovering its essential role in rhoptry discharge. CLAMP forms a distinct complex with two other microneme proteins, the invasion-associated SPATR, and a previously uncharacterized protein we name CLAMP-linked invasion protein (CLIP). Using a quantitative mass spectrometry based approach to determine the calcium-dependent excretory-secretory antigen secretome (MS-ESA), we identify secretion of both known and previously unverified microneme proteins. Our MS-ESA assay demonstrates that depletion of CLAMP or CLIP limits secretion of other CLAMP complex members, while not affecting secretion of other microneme proteins. CLAMP-deficiency does not impact parasite adhesion, however, knockdown of any member of the CLAMP complex affects rhoptry discharge. Phylogenetic analysis suggests orthologs of the essential complex components, CLAMP and CLIP, are ubiquitous across apicomplexans. Nevertheless, SPATR, which appears to act as an accessory factor in Toxoplasma, is essential for invasion during Plasmodium falciparum blood stages. Our results reveal a new protein complex that mediates rhoptry discharge following host-cell contact.

### Sample Protocol
At the time of infection, ten 15 cm plates of HFF cells were infected with the CLAMP-HA cKD strain were treated with 50 nM rapamycin or vehicle control, such that there were six 15 cm tissue culture plates for rapa-treated parasites and 4 for the vehicle treated condition. After 2 h, the rapamycin was removed with 3x PBS washes and a D3C wash. For the CLIP-HA cKD strain, HFF cells were infected in presence of 0.5 ug/uL anhydrotetracycline or a vehicle control, with five 15 cm cell culture dishes infected for each treatment condition. Forty-eight hours later, extracellular parasites were filtered using 3 μm membranes to remove host cell debris. Parasites were pelleted at 1000 g for 5 min at 4°C, washed in DMEM with 0% serum (D0), centrifuged again and resuspended in 130 μL D0 for each plate of parasites. For the ESA fraction experiments, 75 μL of parasites for each condition were then pretreated with 75 μL of 300 μM BAPTA-AM in D0 or a DMSO vehicle control in 1.5 mL microcentrifuge tubes, and incubated in a 37°C water bath for 15 min. For the ESA fractions, 75 μL of 750 μM zaprinast or a DMSO vehicle control was added to each tube, then tubes were further incubated in a 37°C water bath for 30 min. The parasites were then spun down (4°C, 1000 g, 5 min) and the ESA-containing supernatant was pipetted into a protein LoBind tube. The supernatant was then spun down and the supernatant removed a second time to a new protein LoBind tube to ensure removal of all parasites.  During the zaprinast incubation, the remaining parasites not used for generation of the ESAs were spun down and lysed by resuspended in Ringer’s containing 0.85% NP-40 (155 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl2, 1 mM MgCl2, 3 mM NaH2PO4, 10 mM HEPES, 10 mM Glucose, 0.8% Igepal CA-630, Halt protease inhibitors (Life Technologies cat. no. 87786)).  For MS analysis, parasite lysates were treated with 25 units of benzonase nuclease for 10 min at room temperature, then both lysate and ESA samples were desalted and cleared of detergents using hydrophilic and hydrophobic SP3 beads (GE Healthcare cat. no. 45152105050250 and 65152105050250) as previously described (Hughes et al, 2019). Proteins were resuspended in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma cat. no. T7408), reduced for 1 h at 55°C using 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Pierce cat. no. 20490), alkylated for 1 h at 24°C using 25 mM iodoacetamide (CLAMP-HA cKD experiments, Sigma cat. no. I1149) or methyl methanethiosulfonate (CLIP-HA cKD experiments, Pierce cat. no. 23011), then digested overnight using sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega cat. no. V5113). Peptides were incubated for 1 h at 22°C in the presence of a 2:1 mass ratio of TMT10plex reagent (Life Technologies cat. no. 90111) to peptides, and excess TMT10plex reagent was quenched using addition of hydroxylamine to 0.3%. ESA samples were combined and desalted using a Sep-Pak Light cartridge (Waters cat. no. WAT023501) while lysate samples were combined, then desalted and fractionated using a reversed-phase fractionation kit (Pierce cat. no. 84868). Peptides were analyzed using a Thermo Orbitrap Exploris 480 Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files for each of the lysate fractions and the ESA samples were separately loaded into Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo FIsher Scientific). Sequence database search was performed using Sequest HT with static search modifications for the TMT6plex tag (+229.163 Da) label on peptide N-termini and Lysine side chains as well as methylthio or carbamidomethyl for alkylation as appropriate. Relative quantification used TMT reporter ion abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Apicomplexan parasites discharge specialized organelles called rhoptries upon host cell contact to mediate invasion. The events that drive rhoptry discharge are poorly understood, yet essential to sustain the apicomplexan parasitic life cycle. Rhoptry discharge appears to depend on proteins secreted from another set of organelles called micronemes, which vary in function from allowing host cell binding to facilitation of gliding motility. Here we examine the function of the microneme protein CLAMP, which we previously found to be necessary for Toxoplasma gondii host cell invasion, and demonstrate its essential role in rhoptry discharge. CLAMP forms a distinct complex with two other microneme proteins, the invasion-associated SPATR, and a previously uncharacterized protein we name CLAMP-linked invasion protein (CLIP). CLAMP deficiency does not impact parasite adhesion or microneme protein secretion; however, knockdown of any member of the CLAMP complex affects rhoptry discharge. Phylogenetic analysis suggests orthologs of the essential complex components, CLAMP and CLIP, are ubiquitous across apicomplexans. SPATR appears to act as an accessory factor in Toxoplasma, but despite incomplete conservation is also essential for invasion during Plasmodium falciparum blood stages. Together, our results reveal a new protein complex that mediates rhoptry discharge following host-cell contact.

### Keywords
Toxoplasma gondii, Ms-esa, Calcium, Rhoptry secretion.

### Affiliations
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA

### Submitter
Dylan Valleau

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastian Lourido
Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Department of Biology, Massachusetts Institute of Biology, Cambridge, MA, USA


