### Accession
PXD027049

### Title
GM-CSF nitration is a new driver of myeloid suppressor cell activity in tumors

### Description
Reactive oxygen species, including RNS, contribute to the control of multiple immune cell functions within the tumor microenvironment (TME). Tumor-infiltrating myeloid cells (TIMs) represent the archetype of tolerogenic cells that actively contribute to dismantle effective immunity against cancer are among the cells most influenced by these molecules. TIMs inhibit T cell functions and promote tumor progression by several mechanisms including the amplification of the oxidative/nitrosative stress within the TME.  In tumors, TIM expansion and differentiation is regulated by the granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), which is produced by cancer and immune cells. Nevertheless, the role of GM-CSF in tumors has not yet been fully elucidated. In this study, we show that GM-CSF activity is significantly affected by RNS-triggered post-translational modifications. The nitration of a single tryptophan residue in the sequence of GM-CSF nourishes the expansion of highly immunosuppressive myeloid subsets in tumor-bearing hosts. Importantly, tumors from colorectal cancer patients express higher levels of nitrated tryptophan compared to non-neoplastic tissues. Collectively, our data identify a novel and selective target that can be exploited to remodel the TME and foster protective immunity against cancer.

### Sample Protocol
Equal amounts of recombinant GM-CSF(1 µg) either untreated or treated with peroxynitrite or with degraded RNS were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin (Promega) with a protein/enzyme ratio of 50:1, as described in (18). Peptides were injected into a 10 cm pico-frit capillary column (75 μm, I.D. New Objective) packed in house with C18 material (ReproSil, 300A°, 3 μm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex – Thermo Fisher Sicentific) and separated using a linear gradient of acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid from 3% to 40% in 15 min at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. Eluted peptides were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online with the LC system through a nano-spray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS system operated in a data dependent mode, by acquiring a full MS scan at high resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer, followed by the MS/MS scans in the linear Ion Trap of the 10 most intense ions.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot Search Engine (Matrix Science) against the SwissProt database (Version 2013_04, 539829 sequences). Precursor and fragment ion tolerance were set to 10 ppm, and 0.6 Da respectively. An error tolerant search was done to highlight possible modifications and nitration of Tryptophan 30 (W30) was identified as one of the main post-translational modifications, which was present at high concentration only in the sample treated with peroxynitrite.  For annotating the MS/MS spectra, the search was done again using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced to Mascot search engine (v. 2.2.4) against the SwissProt database (version September 2020, 563082 sequences) and selecting nitration of W residues as a further variable modification. Percolator was used to assess the false discovery rate (FDR) and data were filtered to keep into account only proteins identified with at least 2 unique peptides with a q value <0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Post-translational modification; tme, Reactive nitrogen species; cytokines; immunosuppression

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy
University of Padova

### Submitter
Giorgio  Arrigoni

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Arrigoni
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Padova, Italy


