### Accession
PXD017931

### Title
Integrative Structural Model of DNA-PK Synapsis

### Description
In non-homologous end joining repair of DNA double strand breaks, DNA dependent protein kinase catalytic subunit (DNA-PKcs) and Ku70/80 binds the free DNA ends forming the holoenzyme DNA-PK. DNA-PK synapses across the break to tether the broken ends in the initial long range synaptic complex. We generated an integrative structural model of DNA-PK synapsis at a precision of 13.5Å with crosslinking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) restraints. While our hydrogen deuterium exchange (HX) analysis revealed an allosteric axis in DNA-PK connecting DNA binding (including the plug domain) to the kinase domain. Our model presents a symmetrical synapsis primarily through head to head interactions and protection of the DNA by previously uncharacterized a plug domain. The offset of the DNA in our model allows access to downstream processing enzymes, while the combination of DNA binding and kinase loading creates a tensed state that could have roles in the re-arrangement/dissociation of DNA-PKcs as the repair process progresses.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide Map Proteins, DNA-PKcs alone and DNA-PKcs with Ku70/80 and PAXX, were digested under quench conditions, pH 2.5 10°C, with recombinant Nepenthesin II for 3 minutes. Digest was loaded on a 200um x 2.5cm trap column packed with 3.6µm Jupiter C18 beads (Phenomenex). Peptides were separated on a self packed ~7cm x  150µm C18 column (New Objective Picofrit, Phenomenex Jupiter C18 3.6um beads) with a 10 minute 10-40% acetonitrile gradient (1000 nL/min).  Separation was done at 2°C, the trap in an offline cooler and the column in our in house Nano-HX cooler. Data-dependent acquisition was performed on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600 triggering on the top 10 peaks. A recursive analysis was completed for each map, DNA-PKcs and combined DNA-PKcs, Ku70/80 and PAXX. HX-MS DNA-PKcs complexes were pulled down on DNA bound to streptavidin agarose (Solulink agarose ultra-performance), except free DNA-PKcs which was added to the bead before labelling. The pulled down complexes were labelled with 45% D2O at room temperature for 5 minutes. After labelling the sample was quenched (2.5pH, 10°C) and digested with recombinant Nepenthesin II for 3 minutes 10°C, on beads. The beads were spun down and the supernantant loaded to be separated as above, and MS1 data collected on a Sciex Triple TOF 5600. Four replicates were run for each state.  XL-MS DNA-PKcs complexes were pulled down on streptavidin agarose beads as above. Samples were then crosslinked on beads with disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS), at concentrations of 1:1, 1:2, 1:3 and 1:6 lysine:DSS ratio, for 30 minutes 37°C. Crosslinking was quenched with ammonium bicarbonate. After quenching samples were digested on bead with trypsin overnight 37°C. Digested peptides were cleaned up with ZipTips before running on LC-MS/MS. Every sample was run on an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo), and to improve crosslink identifications a subset of samples were re-run on a Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo).  Peptides were separated over a 60-70 minute gradient. Data were collected rejecting charge states 1-3, with an MS/MS resolution of 7500 for the Velos and 30 000 for the Lumos.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Map Runs were searched using Mascot and PEAKS against a limited database of protein sequences (DNA-PKcs plus contaminants), with non-specific digestion, peptide tolerance ±15ppm, MS/MS tolerance ±0.06 Da.  Peptides with scores p < 0.05 were accepted.  Peptide identifications from all runs were pooled for each respective map. Differential HX Deuterium uptake values were determined using HX-DEAL in Mass Spec Studio (www.msstudio.ca). The deuterium uptake was normalized, to account for slight differences in bead volume and back exchange. Using a subset of peptides that showed no change in deuterium between states, for each peptide the ratio of deuterium of that replicate : deuterium of the replicate which consistently had the lowest deuterium was determined. The average of the ratio for that replicate was then used as a correction factor.  Statistical differences in deuterium uptake were determined with the HX statistical analysis package in Mass Spec Studio.  XL Crosslinks were identified using CRIMP in Mass Spec Studio using the default search parameters and an FDR of 1%. A small list of proteins which included the DNA-PKcs complex proteins and possible contaminant proteins, including trypsin, was used to search the data.

### Publication Abstract
In the non-homologous end-joining (NHEJ) of a DNA double-strand break, DNA ends are bound and protected by DNA-PK, which synapses across the break to tether the broken ends and initiate repair. There is little clarity surrounding the nature of the synaptic complex and the mechanism governing the transition to repair. We report an integrative structure of the synaptic complex at a precision of 13.5&#xa0;&#xc5;, revealing a symmetric head-to-head arrangement with a large offset in the DNA ends and an extensive end-protection mechanism involving a previously uncharacterized plug domain. Hydrogen/deuterium exchange mass spectrometry identifies an allosteric pathway connecting DNA end-binding with the kinase domain that places DNA-PK under tension in the kinase-active state. We present a model for the transition from end-protection to repair, where the synaptic complex supports hierarchical processing of the ends and scaffold assembly, requiring displacement of the catalytic subunit and tension release through kinase activity.

### Keywords
Dna-pk, Crosslinking, Hydrogen deuterium exchange

### Affiliations
University of Calgary
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary

### Submitter
Morgan Hepburn

### Lab Head
Dr David C. Schriemer
Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary Department of Chemistry, University of Calgary


