### Accession
PXD001857

### Title
Rest recruits neuronal Tet3 to induce chromatin remodeling and gene expression

### Description
Ten-eleven translocation (Tet) hydroxylases (Tet1-3) oxidize 5-methylcytosine (5mC) to 5-hydroxymethylcytosine (5hmC). In neurons increased 5hmC levels within gene bodies correlate positively with gene expression. The mechanisms controlling Tet activity and 5hmC levels are poorly understood. In particular, it is not known how the neuronal Tet3 isoform lacking a DNA binding domain is targeted to the DNA. To identify factors binding to Tet3 we screened for proteins that co-precipitate with Tet3 from mouse retina and identified the transcriptional repressor Rest as a highly enriched Tet3-specific interactor. Rest was able to enhance Tet3 hydroxylase activity after co-expression and overexpression of Tet3 activated transcription of Rest-target genes. Moreover, we found that Tet3 also interacts with Nsd3 and two other H3K36 methyltransferases and is able to induce H3K36 trimethylation. We propose a mechanism for transcriptional activation in neurons that involves Rest-guided targeting of Tet3 to the DNA for directed 5hmC-generation and Nsd3-mediated H3K36 trimethylation.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS analysis of peptides The samples were analyzed using an UltiMate 3000 nano liquid chromatography system (Dionex, Fisher Scientific) coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Fisher Scientific).  Of each eluate 15 µl were injected for the analysis. The samples were desalted and concentrated on a µ-precolumn cartridge (PepMap100, C18, 5 µM, 100 Å, size 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) and further processed on a custom made analytical column (ReproSil-Pur, C18, 3 µM, 120 Å, packed into a 75 µm i.d. x 150 mm and 8 µm picotip emitter).  A 57 min multi-step analytical separation was performed at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. In the first 50 minutes a linear gradient was ramped up from 5% solvent B (acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid) and 95% solvent A (water containing 0.1% formic acid) to 95% solvent B. This level was held for 5 min and then ramped down again to 5% solvent B within 2 min.  Mass spectrometric analyses were performed starting with a full mass scan in the mass range between m/z 300 and 1650. This survey scan was followed by three MS/MS scans using the FTMS mass analyzer and a high normalized collision energy of 70 in the HCD cell and three additional scans using the ion trap mass analyzer and a normalized collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and relative quantification method The Thermo Proteome Discoverer 1.1 software (Fisher Scientific) was used for protein identification and for relative quantification. The Sequest search engine was used in combination with a uniprot database (mus musculus, date of download: 04/2013). As limit of detection a ratio of threefold signal over the noise filter was applied. A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for the precursor mass and 0.5 Da for the fragment ion mass. Carbamylcysteine was set as static modification. Dynamic modifications were Cation: Na (D,E), Oxidation (M) as well as TMT 2-plex (N-term and K). Identified, non-redundant peptides, which were labeled with the TMT 2-reagent were used for relative quantification. The integration window tolerance was 20 ppm and the integration method was set to “most confident centroid”. The signals of the TMT 2 reporter ions 126 and 127 were used to calculate ratios and monitor either preferred or non-preferred binding of the identified proteins to the modified DNA-bases in comparison to the control strand.   LFQ data processing  The MaxQuant software (version 1.5.0.25) was used for LFQ. Quantification was performed with four biological replicates of the retinal tissue samples and biological triplicates of the transfected HEK cells. As control in the overexpressing HEK experiments served HEK cells transfected with GFP. The Andromeda search engine was used in combination with uniprot databases (mus musculus for the retinal full proteome analysis and homo sapiens for the overexpression analysis respectively). A maximum of two missed cleavage sites was allowed. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm. Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as static modification. Variable modifications were Acetyl (Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). Data of the cytoplasma and nucleus samples from the transfected HEK cells were analyzed as two different fractions of one experiment. The fast LFQ algorithm was applied with default settings. LFQ data was analyzed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.0.9). The LFQ intensities were log transformed and only proteins identified in at least three of the retinal tissue samples or in at least two of the transfected HEK lysates were retained.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rest tet3

### Affiliations
LMU Muenchen
LMU München

### Submitter
David Eisen

### Lab Head
Dr Stylianos Michalakis
LMU Muenchen


