### Accession
PXD024455

### Title
Comprehensive Structure-Activity Profiling of Micheliolide and its Targeted Proteome in Leukemia Cells via Probe-Guided Late-Stage C—H Functionalization

### Description
The plant-derived sesquiterpene lactone micheliolide was recently found to possess promising antileukemic activity, including the ability to target and kill leukemia stem cells. Efforts toward improving the biological activity of micheliolide and investigating its mechanism of action have been hindered by the paucity of preexisting functional groups amenable for late-stage derivatization of this molecule. Here, we report the implementation of a probe-based P450 fingerprinting strategy to rapidly evolve engineered P450 catalysts useful for the regio- and stereoselective hydroxylation of micheliolide at two previously inaccessible aliphatic positions in this complex natural product. Via P450-mediated chemoenzymatic synthesis, a broad panel of novel micheliolide analogs could thus be obtained to gain structure-activity insights into the effect of C2, C4, and C14 substitutions on the anti-leukemic activity of micheliolide, ultimately leading to the discovery of ‘micheliologs’ with improved potency against acute myelogenic leukemia cells. These late-stage C—H functionalization routes could be further leveraged to generate a panel of affinity probes for conducting a comprehensive analysis of the protein targeting profile of micheliolide in leukemia cells via pull-down experiments and proteomic analyses. These studies introduce new micheliolide-based anti-leukemic agents and shed light onto the biomolecular targets and mechanism of action of micheliolide in leukemia cells. More broadly, this work showcases the value of the present P450-mediated C—H functionalization strategy for streamlining late-stage diversification and elucidation of the biomolecular targets of a complex bioactive natural product.

### Sample Protocol
M9-ENL1 cells were harvested by centrifugation (500 x g, 10 min) and washed 5x with cold phosphate buffered saline to remove the culture medium. The cell pellet was lysed in cold RIPA buffer containing a protease inhibitor (pi) cocktail for 10 minutes at 4 ° C followed by sonication. The lysate was centrifuged (10,000 g, 10 min) to remove cell debris and the protein concentration was determined using the BCA reagent per manufacturer’s instruction (ThermoFisher). M9-ENL1 cell lysates (2 mg protein per sample) were incubated with 10 μM MCL (MCL-treated control) or just DMSO (sample) for 1 hour on ice with gentle shaking. The samples were then treated with the appropriate biotinylated MCL-based probe at a final concentration of 10µM (control and non-control groups). The lysate was incubated on ice for 2 hours with gentle shaking and transferred to a 3 kDa centrifugal filter unit. The samples were washed with cold PBS (+ pi) three times to remove any unreacted probe and incubated with 50 µl of ultra-high capacity neutravidin beads (100 µl of slurry, Pierce) for 60 minutes at 4 ° C with gentle shaking. Cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS) (+ pi) was added to the mixture and the samples were centrifuged for 2 min at 10,000 rpm (2x). Beads were successively washed with 1 mL of PBS containing pi and 2% SDS and the supernatant was removed via centrifugation (2 min, 10000 rpm, 4X). 40 μL of 1× laemli sample buffer was added to the beads and then beads were heated at 95 ° C for 10 minutes to elute the neutravidin bound proteins. The pull-down experiments were performed in triplicate for each probe.  Samples were run into a 4-12% SDS-PAGE gel to create a ~10 mm length region, allowing total protein to be evaluated in a single gel digest.  After staining with SimplyBlue SafeStain (Invitrogen), these regions were excised, cut into 1 mm cubes, de-stained, then reduced and alkylated with DTT and IAA, respectively (Sigma).  Gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile.  Aliquots of trypsin (Promega) were reconstituted to 10 ng/µL in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and added so that the solution was just covering the dehydrated gel pieces.  After half an hour at room temp, additional ammonium bicarbonate was added until the gel pieces were completely submerged and placed at 37 °C overnight.  Peptides were extracted the next day by addition of 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA, then dried down in a CentriVap concentrator (Labconco).  Peptides were desalted with homemade C18 spin columns, dried again, and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA. Peptides were injected onto a homemade 30 cm C18 column with 1.8 um beads (Sepax), with an Easy nLC-1000 HPLC (Thermo Fisher), connected to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).  Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, Solvent B : 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile.  Gradient: 3% B for 2 minutes, then ramp to 30% B over 41 minutes, then to 70% over 3 minutes, then 70% for 4 minutes, then re-equilibrated to 3%, for a total run time of 60 minutes.  The Q Exactive Plus was operated in data-dependent mode, with a full MS1 scan followed by 10 data-dependent MS2 scans.  The full scan was done over a range of 400-1400 m/z, with a resolution of 70,000 at m/z of 200, an AGC target of 1e6, and a maximum injection time of 50 ms.  The MS2 scans were performed at 17,500 resolution, with an AGC target of 5e4 and a maximum injection time of 120 ms.  The isolation width was 1.5 m/z, with an offset of 0.3 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 27.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using the SEQUEST search engine within the Proteome Discoverer software platform, version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher), using the SwissProt human database.  Trypsin was selected as the enzyme allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, with an MS1 mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and an MS2 mass tolerance of 25 mmu.  Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation of methionine was set as a variable modification.  Minora was used to determine relative protein abundance between samples. Normalization was performed using the Total Peptide Amount option in the Precursor Ions Quantifier Node. Percolator was used as the FDR calculator, filtering out peptides which had a q-value greater than 0.01. Missing values were imputed from the normal distribution using Perseus software. The identified proteins were evaluated using an unpaired t-test between the MCL treated (control) and DMSO treated (sample) groups with a p-value cutoff of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
The plant-derived sesquiterpene lactone micheliolide was recently found to possess promising antileukemic activity, including the ability to target and kill leukemia stem cells. Efforts toward improving the biological activity of micheliolide and investigating its mechanism of action have been hindered by the paucity of preexisting functional groups amenable for late-stage derivatization of this molecule. Here, we report the implementation of a probe-based P450 fingerprinting strategy to rapidly evolve engineered P450 catalysts useful for the regio- and stereoselective hydroxylation of micheliolide at two previously inaccessible aliphatic positions in this complex natural product. Via P450-mediated chemoenzymatic synthesis, a broad panel of novel micheliolide analogs could thus be obtained to gain structure-activity insights into the effect of C2, C4, and C14 substitutions on the antileukemic activity of micheliolide, ultimately leading to the discovery of "micheliologs" with improved potency against acute myelogenic leukemia cells. These late-stage C-H functionalization routes could be further leveraged to generate a panel of affinity probes for conducting a comprehensive analysis of the protein targeting profile of micheliolide in leukemia cells via chemical proteomics analyses. These studies introduce new micheliolide-based antileukemic agents and shed new light onto the biomolecular targets and mechanism of action of micheliolide in leukemia cells. More broadly, this work showcases the value of the present P450-mediated C-H functionalization strategy for streamlining the late-stage diversification and elucidation of the biomolecular targets of a complex bioactive molecule.

### Keywords
Biocatalysis, Sesquiterpene lactones, Leukemia stem cells, Multi-probe proteomics, Competitive pull-down, C-h functionalization

### Affiliations
University of Rochester
Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, United States

### Submitter
Kevin Welle

### Lab Head
Dr Rudi Fasan
Department of Chemistry, University of Rochester, United States


