### Accession
PXD030003

### Title
Whole-cell modeling in yeast predicts compartment-specific proteome constraints that drive metabolic strategies

### Description
Our comprehensive model identifies condition-dependent and compartment-specific constraints that can explain metabolic strategies and protein expression profiles from growth rate optimization, providin a framework to understand metabolic adaptation in eukaryal cells.

### Sample Protocol
We performed a series of experiments, using a wild-type S. cerevisiaer strain CEN.PK 113-7D, for collection of high-quality datasets of fluxes and protein levels.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw data files generated by XCalibur (version 3.1) were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.0.16). The resulting MaxQuant output was then analysed using the MSstats package (version 3.5.6) in the R environment (version 3.3.3).

### Publication Abstract
When conditions change, unicellular organisms rewire their metabolism to sustain cell maintenance and cellular growth. Such rewiring may be understood as resource re-allocation under cellular constraints. Eukaryal cells contain metabolically active organelles such as mitochondria, competing for cytosolic space and resources, and the nature of the relevant cellular constraints remain to be determined for such cells. Here, we present a comprehensive metabolic model of the yeast cell, based on its full metabolic reaction network extended with protein synthesis and degradation reactions. The model predicts metabolic fluxes and corresponding protein expression by constraining compartment-specific protein pools and maximising growth rate. Comparing model predictions with quantitative experimental data suggests that under glucose limitation, a mitochondrial constraint limits growth at the onset of ethanol formation-known as the Crabtree effect. Under sugar excess, however, a constraint on total cytosolic volume dictates overflow metabolism. Our comprehensive model thus identifies condition-dependent and compartment-specific constraints that can explain metabolic strategies and protein expression profiles from growth rate optimisation, providing a framework to understand metabolic adaptation in eukaryal cells.

### Keywords
Metabolic networks, Genetic regulation, Ms/ms

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
University of Manchester. Professor

### Submitter
Manuel Garcia-Albornoz

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Hubbard
University of Manchester. Professor


