### Accession
PXD018448

### Title
Structure and function of the topsoil metaproteome across global biomes: a survey of the topsoil metaproteome across global biomes

### Description
Herein, we evaluated the changes in biological functions in soils across global biomes through the identification and quantification of proteins. This knowledge is essential to provide one stepforward in soil microbial ecology in order to decipher the cellular and molecular mechanisms employed by soil microbial communities to adapt to their environment and to explain the potential responses of microbial communities, and their microbially-driven ecosystem services, to global change and land use. Our study aims to provide the most comprehensive assessment on the structure and function of the topsoil metaproteome across global biomes, and hence provide direct identification of the most domimant protein-encoded functions in terrestrial ecosystems.

### Sample Protocol
Soil and vegetation data were collected between 2016 and 2017 from 86 locations distributed across climate and vegetation types. These locations include a wide range of globally distributed soil, vegetation (including grasslands, shrublands, forests and croplands) and climate (tropical, temperate, continental, polar and arid) types. Sampling was designed to obtain wide gradients of edaphic characteristics (Bastida et al., 2019; Delgado-Baquerizo et al., 2019 PNAS). Mean annual temperature ranged between -1.8 and 21.6 ºC, and aridity index between 0.08 and 4.33. Soils utilized in this study belong to a global collaborative network of soil chronosequences (Delgado-Baquerizo et al., 2019 PNAS). A standardized protocol was used for soil survey (Maestre et al., 2012). In each location, we surveyed a 50 m × 50 m plot. Three parallel transects of the same length, spaced 25 m apart were added. The cover of perennial vegetation was measured in each transect using the line-intercept method (Maestre et al., 2012). Plant cover ranged between 0 and 100%. One composite topsoil (five 0-10 cm soil cores) sample was collected under the dominant ecosystem features across our plots (e.g., trees, shrubs, grasses, croplands). Following field sampling, soils were sieved (<2 mm) and frozen at -20 ºC. Protein extraction was performed according to the method described elsewhere (Chourey et al., 2010; Bastida et al., 2014). The cell lysis and disruption of soil aggregates were performed by boiling at 100ºC for 10 min in sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer. The proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and, after electrophoresis, the gels were stained using colloidal Coomassie brilliant blue. The gel area containing the protein mixture of each sample was sliced into one piece. The samples were further processed by in-gel reduction and alkylation of cysteine residues, in-gel tryptic cleavage, and elution as well as desalting of tryptic peptides (Bastida et al., 2016). The peptide lysates were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid prior to LC-MS measurement.

### Data Protocol
Separation of peptide lysates was performed using an 85-min, non-linear gradient from 3.2% to 80% acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid, on a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm inner diameter, 25 cm, C18, Thermo Scientiﬁc) in a UHPLC system (Ultimate nanoRSLC 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Idstein, Germany). Mass spectrometry was performed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled with a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion, Ltd., Harlow, UK) source in LC chip coupling mode. The mass spectrometer full scans were measured in the Orbitrap mass analyzer within the mass range of 350–1,550 m/z, at 60,000 resolution, using an automatic gain control target of 1×106 and a maximum fill time of 100 ms. An MS/MS isolation window for ions in the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z. The MS/MS scans were acquired using the higher energy dissociation mode at a normalized collision-induced energy of 28%, within a scan range of 200–2,000 m/z and using a resolution of 15,000. The exclusion time to reject masses from repetitive MS/MS fragmentation was set to 30 s. For data analysis, the raw files from the mass spectrometer were converted into peaklists in the mascot generic file format (MGF) using MSConverter. Protein database searches and subsequent data functional and phylogenetic analyses were carried out using the MetaProteomeAnalyzer (MPA, version 2.14) using the OMSSA and X!Tandem search engines. Search parameters were set to 10 ppm peptide ion tolerance and 0.1 Da fragment ion tolerance, carbamidomethyl as fixed and methionine oxidation as variable modification, using UniProtKB/SwissProt as protein database (556,000 proteins, 11/2017). The database searches were performed in target-decoy mode and a false discovery rate of 10% was used. Proteins were grouped if they were sharing at least one peptide across all samples. A comparison matrix was created listing non-redundant spectrum count per protein group per sample. The comparison matrix was exported and used for subsequent data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Fungi support a wide range of ecosystem processes such as decomposition of organic matter and plant-soil relationships. Yet, our understanding of the factors driving the metaproteome of fungal communities is still scarce. Here, we conducted a field survey including data on fungal biomass (by phospholipid fatty acids, PLFA), community composition (by metabarcoding of the 18S rRNA gene from extracted DNA) and functional profile (by metaproteomics) to investigate soil fungi and their relation to edaphic and environmental variables across three ecosystems (forests, grasslands, and shrublands) distributed across the globe. We found that protein richness of soil fungi was significantly higher in forests than in shrublands. Among a wide suite of edaphic and environmental variables, we found that soil carbon content and plant cover shaped evenness and diversity of fungal soil proteins while protein richness correlated to mean annual temperature and pH. Functions shifted from metabolism in forests to information processing and storage in shrublands. The differences between the biomes highlight the utility of metaproteomics to investigate functional microbiomes in soil. SIGNIFICANCE: Understanding the structure and the function of fungal communities and the driving factors is crucial to determine the contribution to ecosystem services of fungi and what effect future climate has. While there is considerable knowledge on the ecosystem processes provided by fungi such as decomposition of organic matter and plant-soil relationships, our understanding of the driving factors of the fungal metaproteome is scarce. Here we present the first estimates of fungal topsoil protein diversity in a wide range of soils across global biomes. We report taxonomic differences for genes delivered by amplicon sequencing of the 18S rRNA gene and differences of the functional microbiome based on metaproteomics. Both methods gave a complementary view on the fungal topsoil communities, unveiling both taxonomic and functional changes with changing environments. Such a comprehensive multi-omic analysis of fungal topsoil communities has never been performed before, to our knowledge.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Topsoil, Survey, Soil metaproteomics, Global microbiomes

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany
Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ

### Submitter
Nico Jehmlich

### Lab Head
Dr Nico Jehmlich
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research GmbH - UFZ Department of Molecular Systems Biology Permoserstraße 15 04318 Leipzig, Germany


