### Accession
PXD023084

### Title
High intensity interval training remodels the proteome and acetylome in human skeletal muscle

### Description
Exercise is an effective strategy in the prevention and treatment of metabolic diseases. Alterations in the skeletal muscle proteome, including post-translational modifications, regulate its metabolic adaptations to exercise. Here, we examined the effect of high-intensity interval training (HIIT) on the proteome and acetylome of human skeletal muscle, revealing the response of 3168 proteins and 1263 lysine acetyl-sites on 464 acetylated proteins. We identified novel protein adaptations to exercise training involved in metabolism and excitation-contraction coupling. Furthermore, HIIT increased the acetylation of mitochondrial proteins, particularly those of complex V, likely via non-enzymatic mechanisms. We also highlight the regulation of novel exercise-responsive histone acetyl-sites. These data demonstrate the plasticity of the skeletal muscle proteome and acetylome, providing insight into the regulation of contractile, metabolic and transcriptional processes within skeletal muscle. Herein, we provide a substantial hypothesis-generating resource to stimulate further mechanistic research investigating how exercise improves metabolic health.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic sample preparation Human skeletal muscles were lysed in a buffer consisting of 1% Sodium Deoxycholate (SDC), 10 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 40 mM Chloroacetamide (CAA) and 100 mM of Tris (pH 8.5). The muscles were homogenized with an Ultra Turrax homogenizer (IKA). Lysates were boiled at 95C for 10 min and sonicated using a tip sonicator. Lysates were then centrifuged at 16000g for 10 min. Proteins were digested using the endoproteinases LysC and trypsin (1:100 w/w) at 37C overnight with shaking. Digested peptides were acidified using 1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and precipitated SDC was removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using Sep-pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and were eluted in 50% acetonitrile. 20 µg of peptides were saved for total proteome analysis while 3 mg peptides were saved for enrichment of acetylated peptides. Acetylated peptide enrichment The acetyl peptide enrichment was performed on 3 mg of digested peptides using PTMscan Acetyl-Lysine Motif kit (Cell Signaling #13416). The peptides were mixed with 100 µl of 10x IP buffer (500 mM MOPS, pH 7.2, 100 mM Na-phosphate, 500 mM NaCl, 5% NP-40). The acetonitrile was removed and the volume was reduced to ~1ml, by vacuum centrifugation. The final volume was adjusted with water to a concentration of 3 mg/ml. The peptides were clarified by centrifugation at 20000g for 5 min. 20 µl of anti-acetylated lysine antibody was washed 3 times in 1 ml IP buffer and then mixed with the clarified peptides. Peptides were enriched overnight at 4C, washed 3 times in 1 mL ice-cold (4C) IP buffer, 4 times in 1 mL ice-cold IP buffer without NP-40, and once in 1 mL water. All wash buffer was removed via aspiration. Acetylated peptides were eluted with 100 µl 0.15% TFA. The elution procedure was repeated three times. The eluted peptides were de-salted on C18 stage-tips (Rappsilber et al., 2007), vacuum concentrated and resuspended in buffer A* (5% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid). High pH reversed-phase fractionation To generate a deep proteome library for data independent acquisition (DIA), 50 µg of peptide was pooled from pre- and post-HIIT samples, separately, and fractionated using high pH reversed-phase chromatography (Kulak et al., 2017). 24 fractions (per pool) were automatically concatenated using a rotor valve shift of 90 s. Approximately 0.3 µg of each fraction were subjected to LC-MS/MS measurements via data dependent acquisition (DDA). To obtain comprehensive coverage of the acetylome, acetylated peptides from each sample were fractionated into 8 fractions using a rotor valve shift of 90 s. For the first subject (both pre and post samples) all 8 fractions were analysed separately. After observing lower than expected peptide intensities for the first subject, the neighboring two factions were pooled together for each of the remaining samples (total four fractions/subject/timepoint) before LC-MS analysis. Mass spectrometry Peptides were measured using LC-MS instrumentation consisting of an Easy nanoflow HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled via a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) to a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Purified peptides were separated on a 50 cm C18 column (inner diameter 75 µm, 1.8 µm beads, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were loaded onto the column with buffer A (0.5% formic acid) and eluted with a 100 min linear gradient increasing from 2-40% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 0.5% formic acid). After the gradient, the column was washed with 90% buffer B and reequilibrated with buffer A. For the deep proteome library generation, mass spectra were acquired from each fraction via DDA with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS using a top 15 method. MS spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a mass range of 300-1750 m/z and 60,000 resolutions at m/z 200 with target of 3 x 106 ions and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. HCD peptide fragments acquired at 27 normalized collision energy were analyzed at 15000 resolution in the Orbitrap analyzer with target of 1 x 105 ions and a maximum injection time of 28 ms. The mass spectra for the acetylome experiments were also acquired from each fraction via DDA with a similar MS method used for deep proteome library generation, except the maximum injection time for the fragment ion spectra was set to the 250 ms. A DIA MS method was used for the total proteome measurements in which one full scan (300 to 1650 m/z, resolution = 60,000 at 200 m/z) at a target of 3 x 106 ions was first performed, followed by 32 windows with a resolution of 30000 where precursor ions were fragmented with higher-energy collisional dissociation (stepped collision energy 25%, 27.5%, 30%) and analyzed with an AGC target of 3 x 106 ions and maximum injection time at 54 ms in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files from the experiments measured in DDA mode (muscle library + acetylome), were processed using MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008). MS/MS spectra were searched by the Andromeda search engine (integrated into MaxQuant) against the decoy UniProt-human database (downloaded in december 2017) with forward and reverse sequences. In the main Andromeda search precursor, mass and fragment mass were matched with an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The search included variable modifications of methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. For the raw files from the acetylome experiments, acetylated lysine was also added as a variable modification. Acetylated peptides were filtered for a minimum Andromeda score of 40, as per the default settings for modified peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was estimated for peptides and proteins individually using a target-decoy approach allowing a maximum of 1% false identifications from a revered sequence database. Raw files acquired in the DIA mode (total proteome) were processed using Biognosys Spectronaut software version 13 (Bruderer et al., 2015). A single peptide library was generated in Spectronaut using the combined MaxQuant search results for the DDA runs from both of the fractionated muscle samples. The experimental DIA runs were then analyzed in Spectronaut using default settings.

### Publication Abstract
Exercise is an effective strategy in the prevention and treatment of metabolic diseases. Alterations in the skeletal muscle proteome, including post-translational modifications, regulate its metabolic adaptations to exercise. Here, we examined the effect of high-intensity interval training (HIIT) on the proteome and acetylome of human skeletal muscle, revealing the response of 3168 proteins and 1263 lysine acetyl-sites on 464 acetylated proteins. We identified global protein adaptations to exercise training involved in metabolism, excitation-contraction coupling, and myofibrillar calcium sensitivity. Furthermore, HIIT increased the acetylation of mitochondrial proteins, particularly those of complex V. We also highlight the regulation of exercise-responsive histone acetyl-sites. These data demonstrate the plasticity of the skeletal muscle proteome and acetylome, providing insight into the regulation of contractile, metabolic and transcriptional processes within skeletal muscle. Herein, we provide a substantial hypothesis-generating resource to stimulate further mechanistic research investigating how exercise improves metabolic health.

### Keywords
Exercise, Lysine acetylation, Proteome, Lcms, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Copenhagen University
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, Functional Proteomics in Metabolism Group, Department of Health and Medical Science. University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

### Submitter
atul shahaji deshmukh

### Lab Head
Dr Atul Shahaji Deshmukh
Novo Nordisk Center For Basic Metabolic Research, Functional Proteomics in Metabolism Group, Department of Health and Medical Science. University of Copenhagen, Denmark.


