### Accession
PXD035956

### Title
Defense mechanisms promoting tolerance to aggressive Phytophthora species in hybrid poplar

### Description
we analyzed hybrid poplar wood microcores collected thirteen months post-inoculation at the site of the active necrosis borders and identified proteins involved in molecular mechanisms responsible for preventing the Phytophthora invasion. This analysis provided novel insights into the plant-pathogen interaction and putative targets for improving tree resistance against Phytophthora

### Sample Protocol
Approximately 100 mg of homogenized tissue were extracted for omics analyses as described previously (Dufková, Saiz, Berka 2020), and portions of samples corresponding to 5 µg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system and the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
The measured spectra were recalibrated and searched against the P. trichocarpa 4.1 (10.1126/science.1128691), P. tremula x P. alba hybrid (sPta717 v2), P. cactorum, P. plurivora (10.1038/s41598-018-24939-2, 10.1093/gbe/evy162), and common contaminants databases, using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher). The quantitative differences were determined by Minora, employing precursor ion quantification followed by normalization and calculation of relative peptide/protein abundances.

### Publication Abstract
Poplars are among the fastest-growing trees and significant resources in agriculture and forestry. However, rapid growth requires a large water consumption, and irrigation water provides a natural means for pathogen spread. That includes members of <i>Phytophthora</i> spp. that have proven to be a global enemy to forests. With the known adaptability to new hosts, it is only a matter of time for more aggressive <i>Phytophthora</i> species to become a threat to poplar forests and plantations. Here, the effects of artificial inoculation with two different representatives of aggressive species (<i>P. cactorum</i> and <i>P. plurivora</i>) were analyzed in the proteome of the <i>Phytophthora</i>-tolerant hybrid poplar clone T-14 [<i>Populus tremula</i> L. 70 &#xd7; (<i>Populus &#xd7; canescens</i> (Ait.) Sm. 23)]. Wood microcore samples were collected at the active necrosis borders to provide insight into the molecular processes underlying the observed tolerance to <i>Phytophthora</i>. The analysis revealed the impact of <i>Phytophthora</i> on poplar primary and secondary metabolism, including carbohydrate-active enzymes, amino acid biosynthesis, phenolic metabolism, and lipid metabolism, all of which were confirmed by consecutive metabolome and lipidome profiling. Modulations of enzymes indicating systemic response were confirmed by the analysis of leaf proteome, and sampling of wood microcores in distal locations revealed proteins with abundance correlating with proximity to the infection, including germin-like proteins, components of proteosynthesis, glutamate carboxypeptidase, and an enzyme that likely promotes anthocyanin stability. Finally, the identified <i>Phytophthora-</i>responsive proteins were compared to those previously found in trees with compromised defense against <i>Phytophthora</i>, namely, <i>Quercus</i> spp. and <i>Castanea sativa</i>. That provided a subset of candidate markers of <i>Phytophthora</i> tolerance, including certain ribosomal proteins, auxin metabolism enzymes, dioxygenases, polyphenol oxidases, trehalose-phosphate synthase, mannose-1-phosphate guanylyltransferase, and rhamnose biosynthetic enzymes. In summary, this analysis provided the first insight into the molecular mechanisms of hybrid poplar defense against <i>Phytophthora</i> and identified prospective targets for improving <i>Phytophthora</i> tolerance in trees.

### Keywords
Phytophthora plurivora, Lipidome, Metabolome, Proteome, Populus, Biotic interaction, Phytophthora cactorum

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Department of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology, Mendel University in Brno, CZ


