### Accession
PXD037901

### Title
GABA regulates IL-1β production in macrophages

### Description
Neurotransmitters have been well-documented to determine immune cell fates; however, whether and how γ-amino butyric acid (GABA) shapes the function of innate immune cells is still obscure. Here, we demonstrated that GABA orchestrates macrophage maturation and inflammation. GABA treatment during macrophage maturation inhibits interleukin (IL)-1β production from inflammatory macrophages. Mechanistically, GABA enhances succinate-FAD-lysine demethylase1 (LSD1) signaling to regulate the histone demethylation of Bcl2l11 and Dusp2, lowering the formation of NLRP3-ASC-Caspase-1 complex. Meanwhile, GABA-succinate axis lowers succinylation of mitochondrial proteins to promote mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OXPHOS). We also found that GABA alleviates the LPS-induced sepsis as well as high-fat diet-induced obesity in mice. Our study proves that GABA is potential in lessening the pro-inflammatory macrophage responses associating with metabolic reprogramming and protein succinylation, thus providing a strategy for treating macrophage-related inflammatory diseases.

### Sample Protocol
For cell samples:  Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in darkness. The protein sample was then diluted by adding 100 mM TEAB to urea concentration less than 2M. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight and 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for a second 4 h-digestion. Pan antibody-based PTM enrichment: To enrich succinylation modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (Lot number PTM-419, PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid and 2%  acetonitrile in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (30-cm length, 100μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 24% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) in 70 min, 24% to 35% over 14 min, 35% to 80% in 3 min then holding at 80% for the last 3 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.75 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.04 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Succinate, Fad, Gaba, Succinylation, Macrophage

### Affiliations
South China Agricultural University

### Submitter
Jian Fu

### Lab Head
Dr Jian Fu
South China Agricultural University


