### Accession
PXD001870

### Title
Analysis of Plasma Membrane, Endosomal and Cytoplasmic fractions of mouse embryonic fibroblast

### Description
This project aimed to identify novel endosomal proteins and therefore cellular fractionation experiments were performed. Adherent mouse embryonic fibroblast were scraped on ice into hypotonic lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH pH 7.2, 0.25 M sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM MgOAc and protease & phosphatase inhibitors (PhosSTOP and Complete mini tablets from Roche). Cell membranes were fragmented with French Press and nuclei removed with 10 min 1000 x g centrifugation. Plasma membrane fraction was collected with 10 min 10 000 x g centrifugation and endosomal/cytoplasmic fractions with 1h 100,000 x g centrifugation. Membrane fractions were washed at least once with lysis buffer and cytoplasmic fractions were centrifuged twice. All fractionation steps were performed at +4°C or on ice. All fractions were dissolved in sample buffer for immunoblotting

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and allowed to migrate 20 mm into a 4–12% polyacrylamide gel. Following staining with InstantBlue (Expedeon), gel lanes were sliced into ten 2-mm bands and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were evaporated to dryness, dissolved in 1% HCOOH and 5 μl was submitted to LC-MS/MS analysis. The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a nanoflow HPLC system (EasyNano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nano-electrospray ionization source. Peptides were first loaded on a trapping column and subsequently separated inline on a 15 cm C18 column (75 m x 15 cm, Magic 5 μm 200 Å C18, Michrom BioResources Inc., Sacramento, CA, USA). The mobile phase consisted of water/acetonitrile (98:2 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent A) or acetonitrile/water (95:5 (v/v)) with 0.2% formic acid (solvent B). A linear 50 min gradient from 5% to 35% B was used to elute peptides.  MS data was acquired automatically using Thermo Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information dependent acquisition method consisted of a TOF MS survey scan of mass range 300-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
MS data was acquired automatically using Thermo Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). An information dependent acquisition method consisted of a TOF MS survey scan of mass range 300-2000 m/z. The data files were searched for protein identification using Proteome Discoverer (1.4) connected to in-house Mascot (v. 2.4) software.  Data was searched against the SwissProt database (release 2014_08). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was allowed as a variable modification. Only tryptic peptides were considered, with up to one missed cleavage permitted. Monoisotopic precursor mass values were used, and only doubly and triply charged precursor ions were considered. Data were validated in Scaffold (version 3.6) using a threshold of identification of at least 50% probability at the peptide level, at least 99% probability at the protein level and assignment of at least two unique, validated peptides. These acceptance criteria resulted in an estimated protein false discovery rate of 0.1% for all datasets.

### Publication Abstract
Integrin-containing focal adhesions transmit extracellular signals across the plasma membrane to modulate cell adhesion, signalling and survival. Although integrins are known to undergo continuous endo/exocytic traffic, the potential impact of endocytic traffic on integrin-induced signals is unknown. Here, we demonstrate that integrin signalling is not restricted to cell-ECM adhesions and identify an endosomal signalling platform that supports integrin signalling away from the plasma membrane. We show that active focal adhesion kinase (FAK), an established marker of integrin-ECM downstream signalling, localizes with active integrins on endosomes. Integrin endocytosis positively regulates adhesion-induced FAK activation, which is early endosome antigen-1 and small GTPase Rab21 dependent. FAK binds directly to purified endosomes and becomes activated on them, suggesting a role for endocytosis in enhancing distinct integrin downstream signalling events. Finally, endosomal integrin signalling contributes to cancer-related processes such as anoikis resistance, anchorage independence and metastasis.

### Keywords
Plasma membrane, Cytosol, Mouse embryonic fibroblasts, Cell fractionation, Endosomes

### Affiliations
University of Turku, Finland
University of Turku

### Submitter
Guillaume Jacquemet

### Lab Head
Dr Johanna Ivaska
University of Turku, Finland


