### Accession
PXD020803

### Title
Desulfovibrio ferrophilus IS5 electron uptake

### Description
Identification of putative proteins of interest that are involved in cathodic electron uptake by the novel iron-corroding strain D. ferrophilus IS5

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell suspensions were lysed with SDS to release protein, digested with trypsin, quenched with 1% formic acid, and resulting peptides were desalted with C18 Monospin reversed phase columns and dried. Mass Spectrometry was performed using Oribtrap Q-Exactive HFX mass spectrometry with liquic chromatography performed using a Acquity M-Class UPLC.

### Data Protocol
The .RAW data files were processed using Byonic (Protein Metrics, San Carlos, CA) to identify peptides and infer proteins against the NCBI Desulfovibrio ferrophilus database. Proteolysis was assumed to non-specific, and allowed for up to two missed cleavage sites. Mass accuracies for both precursors and fragments were held within 12 ppm. Proteins were held to a false discovery rate of 1%, using standard approaches (Elias & Gygi Nat. Meth. 2007).

### Publication Abstract
Direct electron uptake is emerging as a key process for electron transfer in anaerobic microbial communities, both between species and from extracellular sources, such as zero-valent iron (Fe<sup>0</sup> ) or cathodic surfaces. In this study, we investigated cathodic electron uptake by Fe<sup>0</sup> -corroding Desulfovibrio ferrophilus IS5 and showed that electron uptake is dependent on direct cell contact via a biofilm on the cathode surface rather than through secreted intermediates. Induction of cathodic electron uptake by lactate-starved D. ferrophilus IS5 cells resulted in the expression of all components necessary for electron uptake; however, protein synthesis was required for full biofilm formation. Notably, proteinase K treatment uncoupled electron uptake from biofilm formation, likely through proteolytic degradation of proteinaceous components of the electron uptake machinery. We also showed that cathodic electron uptake is dependent on SO<sub>4</sub> <sup>2-</sup> reduction. The insensitivity of Fe<sup>0</sup> corrosion to proteinase K treatment suggests that electron uptake from a cathode might involve different mechanism(s) than those involved in Fe<sup>0</sup> corrosion.

### Keywords
Desulfovibrio ferrophilus is5

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Civil and Environmental Engineering, James H Clark Center Room E250, Stanford University, CA United States

### Submitter
Ali McCully

### Lab Head
Dr Alfred Michael Spormann
Civil and Environmental Engineering, James H Clark Center Room E250, Stanford University, CA United States


