### Accession
PXD018940

### Title
Effect of HDAC inhibitors on acetylated histones in P. pacificus

### Description
Western Blot showed that epigenetic control of the mouth dimorphism in P. pacificus correlates with histone 4 acetylation. This result was validated by mass spectrometry. This experiment profiled histone acetylation in the presence and absence of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor Trichostatin A (TSA). Histone acetylation was also examined in the presence of another HDAC inhibitor (Na-butyrate), which served as an additional negative control because unlike TSA, it did not induce a phenotypic change.

### Sample Protocol
Histones were acid-extracted from 72-hour worm pellets that were treated with DMSO, Na-Butyrate, or TSA in two independent biological replicates. 50-100 µg of soluble histones were then reduced with 1 mM DTT/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 1 hour at room temperature, and then alkylated for 1 hour in the dark with 10 mM chloroacetamide/50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The reaction was neutralized with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes. A 10x Arg-C digestion buffer was then added to histones (1x=5 mM CaCl2, 0.2 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT), which were digested with 1:50 Arg-C protease (Promega, cat. #V1881):histone protein at 37°C for 12-16 hours. Digest completion was assessed by running an analytical SDS-PAGE of digested sample with undigested control sample. When complete, the reaction was stopped by adding 10% trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 0.5%. Digested histones were then purified on homemade desalting C18 stage-tips and run on an Easy-nLC 1200 system coupled to a QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer in three technical replicates per biological sample. Peptides were separated with a 127 minute segmented gradient from to 10-33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The 7 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation. In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 30 s. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 105 charges and 3x106 charges for the MS scan.

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 with integrated Andromeda search engine. Acetylation at lysine was specified as variable modification, and carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification. Endoprotease ArgC  was defined as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavages and the minimum peptide length was set to five. Data was mapped to the ‘El Paco’ protein annotation version 1. Initial maximum allowed mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 20 ppm for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach. The label-free algorithm was enabled, as was the “match between runs” option.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phenotypic plasticity, Epigenetics, Histones, Pristionchus pacificus

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Max-Planck-Ring 5, 72076 Tübingen
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Ralf J. Sommer
Max Planck Institute for Developmental Biology, Max-Planck-Ring 5, 72076 Tübingen


