### Accession
PXD031155

### Title
JMJD6 interactome screen from "Widespread hydroxylation of unstructured lysine-rich protein domains by JMJD6"

### Description
The Jumonji domaining-containing protein JMJD6 is a 2-oxoglutarate dependent dioxygenase that has been implicated in a broad range of biological functions. Cellular studies have implicated the enzyme in chromatin biology, transcription, DNA repair, mRNA splicing and co-transcriptional processing. Although not all studies agree, JMJD6 has been reported to catalyse both hydroxylation of lysine residues and demethylation of arginine residues. However, despite extensive study and the indirect implication of JMJD6 catalysis in many cellular processes, direct assignment of JMJD6 catalytic substrates has been limited. Examination of a site of reported prolyl hydroxylation within a lysine-rich region of the bromodomain protein BRD4 led us to conclude that hydroxylation was in fact on lysine and catalysed by Jmjd6. This prompted a wider search for JMJD6-catalysed protein modifications deploying mass spectrometric methods designed to identify novel substrate associations and facilitate analysis of lysine-rich regions by LC-MSMS. Using derivatization of lysine with propionic anhydride to improve the analysis of tryptic peptides and a pharmacological inhibitor of JMJD6 to stabilise enzyme/substrate associations, we report over 100 sites of JMJD6-catalysed lysyl hydroxylation on 48 protein substrates including 19 sites of hydroxylation on BRD4. Most hydroxylations were within lysine-rich regions that are predicted to be unstructured; in some multiple modifications were observed on adjacent lysine residues. Almost all of the JMJD6 substrates defined in this study have been associated with membraneless organelle formation. Taken together with findings implicating lysine-rich regions in subcellular partitioning by liquid-liquid phase separation, our findings raise the possibility that JMJD6 may play a role in regulating such processes in response to stresses, including hypoxia.  Note, this dataset corresponds to Figure 3 of the published manuscript; which employs a substrate-trapping methodology to identify novel substrates of JMJD6 by label free DIA approach.

### Sample Protocol
For the JMJD6 interactome experiments, FLAG-affinity eluates were precipitated by methanol/chloroform and resuspended in urea buffer (6M urea, 100 mM Tris pH7.8) prior to reduction/alkylation and trypsinolysis, which was performed in-solution under denaturing (1M urea) conditions. Peptide preparations were desalted by solid-phase extraction (Oasis HLB sorbent; Waters Corporation) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions, and resuspendedin aqueous 2% (v/v) MeCN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for mass spectrometric analysis.  Data independent acquisitions (DIA) were acquired on an Evosep One HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos. Reverse phase separation was performed at a flow rate of 500 nL/min on an EV1106 analytical column (150 μm x 15 cm, 1.9 μm particle size; Evosep) using the vendor’s predefined 44 min gradient method. Lumos instrument settings were as follows: MS1 data acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120k, max injection time of 20 ms, AGC target of 1e6, in positive ion mode, in profile mode, over the mass range of 393-907 m/z. DIA segments over this mass range (20 m/z wide/1 Da overlap/27 in total) were acquired in the Orbitrap following fragmentation in the HCD cell (32%), with 30k resolution over the mass range 200-2000 m/z and with a max injection time of 54ms and AGC target of 1e6.

### Data Protocol
DIA data corresponding to the FLAG-JMJD6 interactome were processed using Spectronaut (v14; Biognosys). DIA data were searched against a spectral library that was created by combining DIA plus DDA search results (DpD search) of FLAG-JMJD6 pulldowns obtained with the Spectronaut Pulsar search engine. DpD data were searched against the human proteome (Canonical Uniprot; downloaded August 2019) with the following modifications considered: fixed, carbamidomethyl (C); variable, oxidation (M), acetyl (N-terminal protein) and a maximum of 5 variable modifications and 2 missed cleavages permitted. A 1% FDR filter was applied at the peptide and protein level to yield a spectral library containing 14,996 precursors in 1517 protein groups determined by Spectronaut protein inference. DIA data were subsequently searched against the DpD library using default Spectronaut analysis settings, with the following modifications; (1) exclusion of protein identities based on less than 2 peptides; (2) quantitation: median peptide and precursor quantity, MS2 level area counts; (3) data filtering: Q-value percentile (fraction 0.16); (4) run-wise imputing strategy; (5) cross-run normalisation: no filter, local normalisation strategy and automatic selection. Protein level quantitation data were exported from Spectronaut as a pivot report for statistical analysis in R.  The display of proteins interacting with FLAG-tagged transgenes encoding: empty vector, wild-type JMJD6, or a catalytically inactive form, which are represented in Figure 3B, comprises all proteins manifesting: (i) differential interaction with wild type JMJD6 versus empty vector or enzyme dead JMJD6 or (ii) differential interaction with wild type JMJD6 in the presence or absence of DMOG, as identified using an empirical Bayes moderated t-statistic on log2 transformed protein abundance data with the limma package (3.44.1)10. The heatmap illustrates the Z-score of log2 transformed abundance data for each protein relative to all replicates and experimental conditions. Proteins were ordered according to the results of hierarchical clustering using Spearman’s rank correlation for the calculation of distance and applied Ward’s algorithm for clustering.

### Publication Abstract
The Jumonji domain-containing protein JMJD6 is a 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenase associated with a broad range of biological functions. Cellular studies have implicated the enzyme in chromatin biology, transcription, DNA repair, mRNA splicing, and cotranscriptional processing. Although not all studies agree, JMJD6 has been reported to catalyze both hydroxylation of lysine residues and demethylation of arginine residues. However, despite extensive study and indirect evidence for JMJD6 catalysis in many cellular processes, direct assignment of JMJD6 catalytic substrates has been limited. Examination of a reported site of proline hydroxylation within a lysine-rich region of the tandem bromodomain protein BRD4 led us to conclude that hydroxylation was in fact on lysine and catalyzed by JMJD6. This prompted a wider search for JMJD6-catalyzed protein modifications deploying mass spectrometric methods designed to improve the analysis of such lysine-rich regions. Using lysine derivatization with propionic anhydride to improve the analysis of tryptic peptides and nontryptic proteolysis, we report 150 sites of JMJD6-catalyzed lysine hydroxylation on 48 protein substrates, including 19 sites of hydroxylation on BRD4. Most hydroxylations were within lysine-rich regions that are predicted to be unstructured; in some, multiple modifications were observed on adjacent lysine residues. Almost all of the JMJD6 substrates defined in these studies have been associated with membraneless organelle formation. Given the reported roles of lysine-rich regions in subcellular partitioning by liquid-liquid phase separation, our findings raise the possibility that JMJD6 may play a role in regulating such processes in response to stresses, including hypoxia.

### Keywords
Human, Hela, Lc-msms, Interactome, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Jmjd6, Dia

### Affiliations
Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT
Francis Crick Institute

### Submitter
Matthew Cockman

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Ratcliffe
Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London NW1 1AT


