### Accession
PXD014133

### Title
Global lysine crotonylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation in phenotypically different Toxoplasma gondii parasites

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is a unicellular protozoan parasite of the phylum Apicomplexa. The parasite repeatedly goes through a cycle of invasion, division and induction of host cell rupture, which is an obligatory process for proliferation inside warm-blooded animals. It is known that the biology of the parasite is controlled by a variety of mechanisms ranging from genomic to epigenetic to transcriptional regulation. In this study, we investigated the global protein posttranslational lysine crotonylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation of two T. gondii strains, RH and ME49, which represent distinct phenotypes for proliferation and pathogenicity in the host. Proteins with differential expression and modification patterns associated with parasite phenotypes were identified. Many proteins in T. gondii were crotonylated and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated, and they were localized in diverse subcellular compartments involved in a wide variety of cellular functions such as motility, host invasion, metabolism and epigenetic gene regulation. These findings suggest that lysine crotonylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation are ubiquitous throughout the T. gondii proteome, regulating critical functions of the modified proteins. These data provide a basis for identifying important proteins associated with parasite development and pathogenicity.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite culture and protein extraction Tachyzoites of the T. gondii RH and ME49 strains were purified from peritoneal fluid by passing through 5.0 μm Nucleopore filters (Whatman, GE Healthcare, USA) and Percoll gradient centrifugation (GE Healthcare). The parasite cells were washed using cold, sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS-1X). After addition of lysis buffer (1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 8 M urea) to purified T. gondii cells, the cells were then sonicated three times on ice with a high-intensity sonicator (Scientz). To separate insoluble fragments, the lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 ×g at 4°C for 10 mins. Eventually, the supernatant in the centrifuge tube was collected, and the protein concentration was assayed using a BCA kit (Beyotime). Trypsin digestion and HPLC fractionation Before trypsinization, dithiothreitol was added to the protein solution to a final concentration of 5 mM, and the solution was reduced at 56°C for 30 mins; then, 11 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) was used to alkylate the proteins for 15 mins at 37°C in a darkroom. The urea concentration of the sample was diluted to less than 2 M with a 100 mM NH4HCO3 solution. Trypsin was added at a mass ratio of 1:50 (pancreatin: protein) for the first time and digested overnight. Then, trypsin was added again at a mass ratio of 1:100 (pancreatin: protein) and digested for 4 hours. The tryptic peptides were separated by high-pH reversed-phase fractionation (RPF) with a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). In the final step, peptides were divided into 60 fractions within 60 mins with a concentration gradient of 8% to 32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0) and then further divided into 4 fractions. Afterwards, the peptides were subjected to vacuum freeze drying for in-depth analysis.

### Data Protocol
Antibody-based PTM enrichment The peptides were dissolved in an immunoprecipitation (IP) buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatant was transferred to a pre-washed dihydroxyisobutyrylated resin (antibody resin product number PTM-804, PTM Bio). Then, the solution was placed on a rotary shaker at 4°C, gently shaken and incubated overnight. After incubation, the resin was washed 4 times with the IP buffer solution and twice with deionized water. Finally, the resin-bound peptides were eluted three times with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid eluate, and the eluate was collected and vacuum dried. After draining, a desalting operation was carried out according to the C18 ZipTips instructions, and the peptides were vacuum dried and prepared for LC-MS/MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analysis The peptides were dissolved in liquid phase A (0.1% (v/v) aqueous formic acid) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1000 ultra-performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system. Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) was run on the EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system, maintaining a flow rate of 400 nL/min, and the gradient was increased from 6% to 23% in 26 mins, increased from 23% to 35% in 8 mins and increased to 80% in 3 mins, then maintained at 80% for the last 3 mins. Using UPLC to separate the peptides, they were ionized by a nanospray ionization (NSI) ion source (voltage was 2.0 kV) and finally analysed using Q ExactiveTM HF-X mass spectrometry. The primary mass spectrometer scan range was 350-1,600 m/z (scan resolution set to 60,000), and the secondary scan resolution was up to 15,000. The top 20 peptides with the highest signal intensity were selected by the data-dependent scan (DDA) program to enter the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cells and then fragmented using 28% fragmentation energy after the first scan. Then, secondary mass spectrometry was performed in sequence. Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 5E4. Database search Secondary mass spectral data (repeated in three experiments) were retrieved using MaxQuant (v1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProtKB Toxoplasma gondii (strain ATCC 50611 / Me49) database (8,315 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database, and an anti-library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching. The enzyme digestion mode was set to Trypsin/P, which allowed up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass error tolerances of the main search and first search were set to 5 ppm and 20 ppm, respectively. The mass error tolerance of the secondary fragment ions was 0.02 Da. The label-free quantification method was LFQ, FDR was set to < 1%, and the lowest score of modified peptides was adjusted to > 40.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> is a unicellular protozoan parasite of the phylum Apicomplexa. The parasite repeatedly goes through a cycle of invasion, division and induction of host cell rupture, which is an obligatory process for proliferation inside warm-blooded animals. It is known that the biology of the parasite is controlled by a variety of mechanisms ranging from genomic to epigenetic to transcriptional regulation. In this study, we investigated the global protein posttranslational lysine crotonylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation of two <i>T. gondii</i> strains, RH and ME49, which represent distinct phenotypes for proliferation and pathogenicity in the host. Proteins with differential expression and modification patterns associated with parasite phenotypes were identified. Many proteins in <i>T. gondii</i> were crotonylated and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylated, and they were localized in diverse subcellular compartments involved in a wide variety of cellular functions such as motility, host invasion, metabolism and epigenetic gene regulation. These findings suggest that lysine crotonylation and 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation are ubiquitous throughout the <i>T. gondii</i> proteome, regulating critical functions of the modified proteins. These data provide a basis for identifying important proteins associated with parasite development and pathogenicity.

### Keywords
Crotonylation, 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Protein posttranslational modification, Function, Toxoplasma gondii, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University
Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110166, China

### Submitter
Qijun Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Qijun Chen
Shenyang Agricultural University, 120 Dongling Road, Shenyang 110166, China


