### Accession
PXD026228

### Title
Colon LC-MSMS of Mouse with experimental colitis

### Description
To detect the protein expression of Mouse with experimental colitis

### Sample Protocol
Data acquisition was performed with a Triple-TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (Sciex, United States) fitted with a Nanospray III source (Sciex, United States). The ion spray voltage was 2300 V, declustering potential 80 V, curtain gas 35 psi, nebulizer gas 5psi, and interface heater temperature 150 °C. Peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer using Nona 415 liquid chromatography (Sciex, United States). Chromatography solvents were water/acetonitrile/formic acid(A 98/2/0.1%, B 2/98/0.1%). 2 μL samples were injected onto a C18 desalted column (3 μm，120Å，350 µm×0.5 mm), and separated onto a C18 analysis column (3 μm，120Å，75 µm×150 mm) with a gradient from 5 to 16% buffer B in 25 min, from 16 to 26% buffer B in next 20 min, from 26 to 40% buffer B in next 3 min, from 40 to 80% buffer B in next 5 min, and 80 to 5% buffer B in next 7 min, over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.6 μL/min.

### Data Protocol
Peptides present in the data were identified by matching to the UniProt Macaca mulatta tcheliensis databases, and corresponding proteins were identified. The Paragon algorithm in Protein Pilot v 5.0 (SCIEX) was used to search the databases. Database search parameters: trypsin used for digestion, the state of cysteine alkylation, the “ID focus” which was typically “Biological modifications”, and the type of “Search effort” which was typically “Thorough”.

### Publication Abstract
Damage to intestinal epithelial cell proliferation or intestinal stem cell (ISC) maintenance may trigger inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and protecting the ISCs is critical for IBD treatment. Here, we found that in the dextran sulfate sodium (DSS)-induced ulcerative colitis mice model, colon epithelium and Lgr5<sup>+</sup> intestinal stem cells (ISCs) renew quickly during the first 3 days. We also found that during this renewing period, SMAD4 and bone morphogenetic protein 4 (BMP4) expression were significantly upregulated. An extra BMP4 treatment could preserve the Lgr5<sup>+</sup> ISCs and the colon epithelium turnover, and could significantly decrease colon mucosal damage. Moreover, we found that BMP4 regulated ID3 expression in the colon epithelium. Depletion of ID3 could significantly reduce the epithelium renewal and ratio of Lgr5<sup>+</sup> ISCs at the base of crypts. In conclusion, the present study showed that BMP4 could maintain epithelium cellular proliferation and the ISCs function through ID3 in mice with DSS-induced colitis. The administration of exogenous BMP4 supplement could alleviate DSS-induced colitis by restoring epithelium cellular proliferation and ISC function, suggesting the possible therapeutic function of BMP4 for ulcerative colitis.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Colon

### Affiliations
capital medical university, Beijing, China
Salivary Gland Disease Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Tooth Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School of Stomatology, Beijing 100050, China.

### Submitter
Lei Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Songlin wang
Salivary Gland Disease Center and Beijing Key Laboratory of Tooth Regeneration and Function Reconstruction, Capital Medical University School of Stomatology, Beijing 100050, China.


