### Accession
PXD007637

### Title
Molecular alterations elicited by chronic exposure to cigarette smoke in oral keratinocytes

### Description
Smoking is the leading cause of preventable death worldwide. It increases the risk for various diseases including respiratory diseases, vascular diseases and different cancers including lung, oral and bladder cancer. Despite being the leading cause of oral cancer, the molecular mechanisms resulting in malignancy upon cigarette smoke exposure are yet to be fully elucidated. It is crucial to note that disease development is observed upon chronic exposure to cigarette smoke, as opposed to a short-term exposure. Hence, we sought to investigate the effect of chronic smoke exposure on normal oral keratinocytes (OKF6/TERT1). We employed tandem mass tag-based quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic approaches to investigate the proteomic and signaling changes in OKF6/TERT1 cells chronically exposed to cigarette smoke compared to untreated cells. LC/MS2 analysis resulted in the quantification of 5,067 proteins among which expression of 360 proteins were found to be dysregulated in at least one replicate. Phosphoproteomic analysis revealed quantification of 3,647 phosphopeptides corresponding to 1,801 proteins. Majority of the dysregulated proteins were seen to be involved in cellular processes such as cell growth, cellular communication and energy metabolism. This study will aid in elucidating the effects of smoking in oral cancer and in the identification of potential candidates molecules which could serve as early detection biomarkers or therapeutic targets.

### Sample Protocol
OKF6/TERT1-parental, OKF6/TERT1-Smoke cells were grown to 80% confluence and serum starved for 8h. Post-starvation, cells were washed with 1X PBS thrice and harvested in lysis buffer (2% SDS, 5 mM sodium fluoride, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate in 50 mM TEABC). The cell lysates were sonicated and centrifuged and protein concentration was determined by BCA. In-solution trypsin digestion of samples from both conditions was carried out. Equal amounts of cell lysate from all conditions were reduced using 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated at 60°C for 20 mins. Buffer exchange with 8M urea was carried out using 30kDa Amicon Ultra filters to reduce the SDS concentration in the samples. The reduced protein lysate was alkylated using IAA (20mM) and incubated for 10 mins in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were then subjected to two more rounds of buffer exchange to further reduce SDS concentration to negligible amounts. A final round of buffer exchange with 50mM TEABC was performed to remove urea form sample followed by BCA-based estimation of protein concentration. Reduced and alkylated proteins were then subjected to trypsin digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:20. Trypsin digestion was carried out at 37°C for 12 – 16h. The digested peptides were labeled with TMT reagents as per manufacturers’ instructions. Briefly, peptide samples were dissolved in 50mM TEABC (pH 8.0) and added to TMT reagents dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. Peptides from OKF6/TERT1-parental and OKF6/TERT1-Smoke cells were labeled with TMT tags as detailed below – Condition     TMT label OKF6/TERT1-Parental (Rep1)  126 OKF6/TERT1-Parental (Rep2)  127 OKF6/TERT1-Smoke (Rep1)  128 OKF6/TERT1-Smoke (Rep2)  130  After incubation at room temperature for 1h, the reaction was quenched with 5% hydroxylamine, incubated for 15 mins at room temperature and dried. TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse phase LC. Briefly, the labeled peptides were resuspended in 1 mL of bRPLC solvent (10 mM TEABC pH 8.4) and fractionated using high pH reverse phase XBridge C18 column (5 μm, 250 × 4.6 mm2) (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) by employing an increasing gradient of bRPLC solvent B (10 mM TEABC in 90% ACN, pH 8.4). The fractionation was carried out using Agilent 1100 LC system with a flow rate of 1 mL/min. A total of 96 fractions were collected in 96-well plate containing 0.1% formic acid. The fractions were then concatenated to 12 fractions and vacuum-dried. One-tenth volume from each fraction was transferred to microcentrifuge tubes and evaporated to dryness for total proteome analysis. The remaining 90% volume from each fraction was dried and then subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment. Briefly, the TiO2 beads were washed in 5% 2, 5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB) for 2 hours on the rotator at room temperature. The bRPLC peptide fractions were dissolved in 5% DHB and incubated with TiO2 beads for 30 minutes on a rotator at room temperature. The phosphopeptide-TiO2 beads were washed several times and eluted thrice with 2% ammonia. The enriched peptides were concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and desalted using C18 StageTips. The enriched and desalted peptide samples were further subjected to mass spectrometry analysis. LC-MS2 analysis was performed on Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data obtained from all LC-MS analysis were searched against Human RefSeq70 database using Sequest and Mascot (version 2.4.1) search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Enzyme specificity was set as trypsin with maximum one missed cleavage allowed. The minimum peptide length was specified to be 6 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and TMT modification at N-terminus of the peptide and at lysine (K) were specified as fixed modifications and oxidation of methionine was included as variable modification. For phosphoproteomic data, phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine was considered as additional variable modifications. The mass error of parent ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment ions. The data was also searched against a decoy database and MS/MS identifications of < 1% false discovery rate (FDR) score threshold was considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Smoking is the leading cause of preventable death worldwide. Though cigarette smoke is an established cause of head and neck cancer (including oral cancer), molecular alterations associated with chronic cigarette smoke exposure are poorly studied. To understand the signaling alterations induced by chronic exposure to cigarette smoke, we developed a cell line model by exposing normal oral keratinocytes to cigarette smoke for a period of 12&#xa0;months. Chronic exposure to cigarette smoke resulted in increased cellular proliferation and invasive ability of oral keratinocytes. Proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses showed dysregulation of several proteins involved in cellular movement and cytoskeletal reorganization in smoke exposed cells. We observed overexpression and hyperphosphorylation of protein kinase N2 (PKN2) in smoke exposed cells as well as in a panel of head and neck cancer cell lines established from smokers. Silencing of PKN2 resulted in decreased colony formation, invasion and migration in both smoke exposed cells and head and neck cancer cell lines. Our results indicate that PKN2 plays an important role in oncogenic transformation of oral keratinocytes in response to cigarette smoke. The current study provides evidence that PKN2 can act as a potential therapeutic target in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma, especially in patients with a history of smoking.

### Keywords
High-throughput, Carcinogenesis, Chronic exposure, Orbitrap fusion, Smoking

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Unit-1, Discoverer building, ITPL, Bangalore - 560066, India

### Submitter
Aditi Chatterjee

### Lab Head
Dr Aditi Chatterjee
Institute of Bioinformatics, 7th floor, Unit-1, Discoverer building, ITPL, Bangalore - 560066, India


