### Accession
PXD037847

### Title
Environmental gradients reveal stress hubs predating plant terrestrialization

### Description
Plant terrestrialization brought forth the land plants (embryophytes). Embryophytes account for most of the biomass on land and evolved from streptophyte algae in a singular event. Recent advances have unraveled the first full genomes of the closest algal relatives of land plants; among the first such species was Mesotaenium endlicherianum. Here, we used fine-combed RNAseq in tandem with photophysiological assessment on Mesotaenium exposed to a continuous range of temperature and light cues. Our data establish a grid of 42 different conditions, resulting in 128 transcriptomes and ~1.5 Tbp (~9.9 billion reads) of data to study combinatory effects of stress response using clustering along gradients. We describe major hubs in genetic networks underpinning stress response and acclimation in the molecular physiology of Mesotaenium. Our data suggest that lipid droplet formation, plastid and cell wall-derived signals denominate molecular programs since more than 600 million years of streptophyte evolution—before plants made their first steps on land.

### Sample Protocol
For lipid droplet isolation 23 days old Mesotaenium cells grown on WHM-Medium at 70-80 µmol photons m-2 s-1 and 22 °C were homogenized using a Tenbroeck or potter homogenizer in lipid droplet isolation buffer (10 mM sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.5, 200 µM PMFS, 0.5 mM DSP, 10 mM N-Ethylmaleimide). The resulting centrifuged supernatant of a 100 x g spin for 1 min was considered as total extract (TE). After two further high speed centrifugations (SW40 Ti for 1h, 4°C at 100000 x g, TLA120 for 1h at 100000 x g and 4°C) the floating fat pad was precipitated at -20 °C using 100% ethanol overnight. The precipitated pellet was washed with 80% ethanol twice, dried and then suspended in 6M urea. Protein concentration was determined using BCA. An in-gel SDS gel digestion was done with trypsin adapted from Shevchenko et al. (1996). C18 Stage tip purification was done according (Rappsilber et al., 2003; 2007). Protein samples were analyses using LC-MS. For this, peptide samples were reconstituted in 20 µl LC-MS sample buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). 2 µl of each sample were subjected to reverse phase liquid chromatography for peptide separation using an RSLCnano Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Therefore, peptides were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 pre-column (100 µm x 2 cm, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) with 0.07% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 µL/min for 3 min. Analytical separation of peptides was done on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 µm x 50 cm, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The solvent composition was gradually changed within 94 min from 96 % solvent A (0.1 % formic acid) and 4 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) to 10 % solvent B within 2 minutes, to 30 % solvent B within the next 58 min, to 45% solvent B within the following 22 min, and to 90 % solvent B within the last 12 min of the gradient. All solvents and acids had Optima grade for LC-MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluting peptides were on-line ionized by nano-electrospray (nESI) using the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 1.5 kV (liquid junction) and transferred into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Full scans in a mass range of 300 to 1650 m/z were recorded at a resolution of 30,000 followed by data-dependent top 10 HCD fragmentation at a resolution of 15,000 (dynamic exclusion enabled). LC-MS method programming and data acquisition was performed with the XCalibur 4.0 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Afterwards the raw proteome data were analyzed using Max Quant software version 1.6.2.10 (Cox and Mann, 2008). The database for this analysis was our new V2 gene model data. The data were then further processed by the Perseus (1.6.2.2) software (Cox et al., 2008; Tyanova et al., 2016).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Plant evolution; stress physiology; streptophyte algae; lipid droplets

### Affiliations
University of Münster
Westphalian Wilhelms-University Münster Institute for Biology and Biotechnology of Plants Green Biotechnology Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster

### Submitter
Till Ischebeck

### Lab Head
Dr Till Ischebeck
Westphalian Wilhelms-University Münster Institute for Biology and Biotechnology of Plants Green Biotechnology Schlossplatz 8 48143 Münster


