### Accession
PXD023133

### Title
Tumor tissue collection and processing under physioxia allows highly relevant detection of signaling networks and drug sensitivity of cancer cells

### Description
Preclinical studies of primary cancer cells are always done after tumors are removed from patients or animals at ambient atmospheric oxygen (O2, ~21%). However, O2 concentrations in organs are in the ~3-10% range, with most tumors in an hypoxic or 1-2% O2 environment in vivo. Although effects of O2 tension on tumor cell characteristics in vitro have been studied, these studies are done only after tumors are first collected and processed in ambient air. Similarly, sensitivity of primary cancer cells to anti-cancer agents is routinely examined at ambient O2. Here, using both mouse models and human cancers, we demonstrate that tumors collected, processed and propagated at physiologic (physioxia) O2 compared to ambient air display very distinct differences in key signaling networks including Lgr5/Wnt, Yap, and Nrf2/Keap1, nuclear reactive oxygen species levels, alternative splicing, and sensitivity to several targeted therapies including PIK3CAalpha-specific and EGFR inhibitors. Significance: Extra-physiologic oxygen shock/stress (EPHOSS), as noted in cells collected/processed under ambient air, has been demonstrated to have significant impact on numbers and engrafting ability of hematopoietic stem cells. We report deleterious effects of EPHOSS on cancer cell behavior and EPHOSS-mediated effects on cancer cells give misleading information on signaling pathway activation that could severely impact the relevance of these findings. Cancer cells under EPHOSS show higher proliferation rate compared to cells under physioxia and thus are sensitive to anti-proliferative agents. Thus, drugs that show effectiveness on cancer cells collected in ambient air and subjected to EPHOSS may not be effective or as relevant in vivo, results that could partially explain the limited clinical translation of laboratory findings. Evaluating cell signaling and effects of drugs on cancer cells under physiologic O2 prior to in vivo studies could substantially reduce cost and aid in drug discovery relevant to the actual physioxia/pathological status of the tumor cells in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor tissues were dissociated using mouse tumor dissociation kit (130-096-730, Miltenyi Biotec) and gentleMACS dissociator (Miltenyi Biotec) according to manufacturer’s instructions, and processed into single cells under 3% O2 and ambient air. Red blood cells were lysed/removed by red blood cell lysis solution and Deoxyribonuclease I was used to remove DNA released by dead cells. In addition, dead cells were removed via magnetic separation using the MACS dead cell removal kit (130-090-101, Miltenyi Biotec) following manufacturer’s instructions. Prior to enrichment of EpCAM+ tumor cells, hematopoietic cells were removed via magnetic separation using mouse CD45 MicroBeads (130-052-301, Miltenyi Biotec) following manufacturer’s instructions. EpCAM+ tumor cells were separated using mouse CD326 (EpCAM) MicroBeads (130-105-958, Miltenyi Biotec) following manufacturer’s instructions. EpCAM+ tumor cells processed at respective O2 tensions were lysed in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4 and protease inhibitors solution. Cells were lysed in 8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor® sonication system from Diagende Inc. (30 sec/30 sec on/off cycles for 15 minutes, 4 °C).  Following centrifugation at 12,000 g for 15 minutes, protein concentrations were determined using a Bradford protein assay (cat. num. 5000002, Bio-Rad). Protein samples in equal amounts (20 μg) were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP) and alkylated with 10 mM chloroacetaminde (CAM).  Samples were diluted with 100 mM Tris-HCl to a final urea concentration of 2 M and digested overnight with Trypsin/Lys-C Mix Mass Spectrometry (1:100 protease:substrate ratio, cat. num. V5072, Promega). For phosphopeptide analysis (1 PyMtNormal and 1 PyMtHy sample), 360 ug of protein were prepared as described above. Peptide purification and labeling Peptides were desalted on 50 mg Sep-Pak® Vac (Waters Corporation) employing a vacuum manifold. After elution from the column in 70% acetonitrile (ACN) 0.1% formic acid (FA), peptides were dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 24 µL of 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB). Peptide concentration was measured using Pierce Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay Kit (cat. num. 23275, Thermo Fisher Scientific) to ensure that an equal amount of each sample was labeled. Samples were then Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeled with 0.2 mg and 2 mg of reagent for global and phosphoproteomic studies respectively for two hours at room temperature (Global: TMT lot UD278759A: PyMtNorm 126,PyMtHyp 127C, MyMtNorm2 128C, PyMtHyp2 129C, Her2Norm1 127N, Her2Norm2 128N, Her2Hyp1 129N, Her2Hyp2 130N; Phospho: TMTpro lot UL297970 PyMTNorm 126N, PyMtHy 128N). Labelling reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine at room temperature 15 minutes. Labelled peptides were then mixed by global and phosphor sets respectively and dried by speed vacuum. Phosphopeptide enrichment: Phosphopeptides were enriched by applying the larger samples prepared above to High-Select ™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, cat num A32993). Tips were washed and eluted using vendor described protocols. High pH basic fractionation The peptide mixtures (global and phospho peptide enriched) were resuspended in 0.1% TFA (trifluoroacetic acid) and fractionated on PierceTM High pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation spin columns using vendor methodology (cat. num. 84868). 8 global fractions and 4 phospho fractions were then dried by speed vacuum and resuspended in 24 µL 0.1% FA.  Nano-LC-MS/MS Analysis.

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed in Proteome Discover 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with FASTA databases including Swiss-Prot UniProt Mus musculus sequences plus common contaminants. Quantification methods utilized isotopic impurity levels available from Thermo Fisher. SEQUEST HT searches were conducted with a maximum number of 2 missed cleavages; precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine (C) residues; 2) TMT sixplex (global or TMTpro for phosphor) label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionines and acetylation of N-termini. Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. In the consensus workflow, peptides were normalized by total peptide amount with no scaling. Resulting grouped abundance values for each sample type, and abundance ratio values; were exported to Microsoft Excel and are available as supplemental files.

### Publication Abstract
Preclinical studies of primary cancer cells are typically done after tumors are removed from patients or animals at ambient atmospheric oxygen (O<sub>2</sub>, ~21%). However, O<sub>2</sub> concentrations in organs are in the ~3 to 10% range, with most tumors in a hypoxic or 1 to 2% O<sub>2</sub> environment in vivo. Although effects of O<sub>2</sub> tension on tumor cell characteristics in vitro have been studied, these studies are done only after tumors are first collected and processed in ambient air. Similarly, sensitivity of primary cancer cells to anticancer agents is routinely examined at ambient O<sub>2</sub>. Here, we demonstrate that tumors collected, processed, and propagated at physiologic O<sub>2</sub> compared to ambient air display distinct differences in key signaling networks including LGR5/WNT, YAP, and NRF2/KEAP1, nuclear reactive oxygen species, alternative splicing, and sensitivity to targeted therapies. Therefore, evaluating cancer cells under physioxia could more closely recapitulate their physiopathologic status in the in vivo microenvironment.

### Keywords
Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Tumor

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202. VA Roudebush Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Harikrishna Nakshatri, BVSc., PhD
Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202. VA Roudebush Medical Center, Indianapolis, IN 46202


