### Accession
PXD005240

### Title
Mass-Spectrometric analysis of SdeA Ubiquitin modification and Ubiquitination

### Description
Conventional ubiquitination involves the ATP-dependent formation of amide bonds between the ubiquitin C-terminus and primary amines in substrate proteins. Recently, SdeA, an effector protein of pathogenic Legionella pneumophila, was shown to mediate NAD-dependent and ATP-independent ubiquitin transfer to host proteins. Yet, the molecular mechanism of this ubiquitination reaction and its relevance for cellular processes remained elusive. Here, we report the identification of a phosphodiesterase (PDE) domain in SdeA that efficiently catalyses arginine phosphoribosylation  of ubiquitin via an ADP-ribose intermediate . The PDE domain also catalyzes a chemically and structurally distinct type of substrate ubiquitination by conjugating phosphoribosylated ubiquitin to serine residues of protein substrates via a phosphodiester bond. Furthermore, phosphoribosylation of ubiquitin prevents activation of E1 and E2 enzymes of the conventional ubiquitination cascade thereby diminishing numerous cellular processes including mitophagy, TNF signaling and proteasomal degradation. We propose that phosphoribosylation of ubiquitin is a potent modulator of ubiquitin functions in mammalian cells.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitin modification site detection: For in vitro and in vivo analysis of Ubiquitin modification, proteins were separated by 1D PAGE and the Ubiquitin band excised and trypsinated. The resulting peptides were analysed by high-resolution ETD fragmentation on an Orbitrap Fusion. TopDown analysis: For analysis of intact Ubiquitin, high molecular weight proteins were depleted by size exclusion chromatography. Ubiquitin was isolated and desalted with C18 StageTipping. Ubiquitin species were analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion.  Bridged peptides: For analysis of Serine Ubiquitination sites, mono Ubiquitin was depleted by size exclusion chromatography and the remaining proteins digested according to the FASP protocol. The resulting peptides were analyzed by high-resolution LC-MS/MS and HDF, ETD and CID fragmentation on an Orbitrap Fusion.

### Data Protocol
Ubiquitin modification site detection: Phosphoribosylation and ADP-ribosylation sites were detected with MaxQuant 1.5.3 and manually validated. TopDown analysis: TopDown spectra were manually analyzed with QualBrowser. Deconvoluted spectra were created with the Xtract Plugin. Bridged peptides: Novel Ubquitination site candiates were detected with Morpheus open search and StavroX 3.6 and manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
Conventional ubiquitination involves the ATP-dependent formation of amide bonds between the ubiquitin C terminus and primary amines in substrate proteins. Recently, SdeA, an effector protein of pathogenic Legionella pneumophila, was shown to mediate NAD-dependent and ATP-independent ubiquitin transfer to host proteins. Here, we identify a phosphodiesterase domain in SdeA that efficiently catalyzes phosphoribosylation of ubiquitin on a specific arginine via an ADP-ribose-ubiquitin intermediate. SdeA also catalyzes a chemically and structurally distinct type of substrate ubiquitination by conjugating phosphoribosylated ubiquitin to serine residues of protein substrates via a phosphodiester bond. Furthermore, phosphoribosylation of ubiquitin prevents activation of E1 and E2 enzymes of the conventional ubiquitination cascade, thereby impairing numerous cellular processes including mitophagy, TNF signaling, and proteasomal degradation. We propose that phosphoribosylation of ubiquitin potently modulates ubiquitin functions in mammalian cells.

### Keywords
Etd, Legionella pneumophila, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
University of Frankfurt
Institute for Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Science, Frankfurt, Germany

### Submitter
Florian Bonn

### Lab Head
Dr Ivan Dikic
Institute for Biochemistry II, University Hospital, Frankfurt, Germany Buchmann Institute for Molecular Life Science, Frankfurt, Germany


