### Accession
PXD013340

### Title
Impact of increased core fucosylation on the exosome proteome in prostate cancer

### Description
Prostate cancer is the most commonly diagnosed oncogenic malignancy in men worldwide, resulting in almost 30,000 cancer-related deaths in the United States each year. Wider examination of aberrant glycosylation in prostate cancer has revealed increased expression of the glycotransferase involved in core fucosylation, (1,6)fucosyltranferase (FUT8) associating with aggressive (AG) prostate cancer and castration-resistance, with functional analyses revealing FUT8 impacting cell motility and invasiveness in prostate cancer cells. Exosomes are extracellular microvesicles (30-150 nm) that are involved in in both proximal and distal intercellular communication via the transport of proteins and nucleic acids (mRNA, miRNA, and DNA). To gain insight into the impact of increased cellular FUT8 expression on exosome biogenesis and protein cargo profiles in prostate cancer, we paired Nanoparticle Tracking Analysis (NTA) and stable isotope labelling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) quantitative proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide digestion and basic-RP-HPLC fractionation   Exosomes from each cell line were subjected to a lysis and trpyic digestion. First, exosomes were resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2 ug/mL aprotinin, 10 ug/mL leupeptin, 1 mM PMSF, and 10 mM NaF) and homogenized using a Branson Sonifier 250 probe sonicator (Danbury, CT) with a Duty Cycle of 10%, Output Control 1 with 10s/50s ON/OFF cycle (n = 5), and the protein concentration of the exosome lysate was measured via BCA Protein Assay. 125ug of each exosome lysate from LAPC4-FUT8 and LAPC4-K6R10 were mixed in a 1:1 ratio and subjected to tryptic digestion via in-solution digestion. Samples were reduced with 10 mM Tris 2-carboxyethyl phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Tryptic digestion was performed overnight at 37 ºC.  Peptides were recovered, lyophilized and subjected to cleanup using C-18 SepPak columns and dried down. 50 ug of peptide material was reconstituted in a volume of 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10) and 2% acetonitrile (ACN) and loaded onto a 4.6 mm x 250 mm RP Zorbax 300 A Extend-C18 column with 3.5 um size beads (Agilent). Peptides were separated using an Agilent 1200 Series HPLC instrument using basic reversed-phase chromatography with Solvent A (2% ACN, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) and a non-linear gradient of Solvent B (90% ACN, 5 mM ammonium formate, pH 10) at 1 mL/min as follows: 0% Solvent B (9 mins), 6% Solvent B (4 min), 6% to 28.5% Solvent B, (50 min), 28.% to 34% Solvent B (5.5 min), 34% to 60% Solvent B (13 min), and then held at 60% Solvent B for 8.5 min. Collected fractions were concatenated into 12 fractions, dried down, and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) prior to ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis.  Intact Glycopeptide Enrichment For intact glycopeptide analysis, 100 ug of peptide material was subjected to intact glycopeptide enrichment using Oasis MAX Cartridges (particle size 25–35 um, 30 mg sorbent per cartridge, Waters). Peptides were resuspended in 80% ACN, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and adjusted to 95% ACN, 1% TFA. The MAX columns were equilibrated three times with 1 mL of ACN, three times with 100 mM triethylammonium acetate, three times with water, and finally three times with 95% ACN, 1% TFA. The samples were loaded on to MAX columns and washed four times with 1 mL of 95% ACN, 1% TFA. Bound intact glycopeptides were eluted in 400 μL of 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA, dried down, and resuspended in 3% ACN, 0.1% FA prior to ESI-LC-MS/MS analysis. nano-ESI-LC-MS/MS Analysis  For data acquisition, peptide samples were analysed using an Orbitrap Lumos Fusion system.  1 ug of peptide was separated using Easy nLC 1200 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) on an in-house packed 20 cm x 75 um diameter C18 column (1.9 um Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH); Picofrit 10 um opening (New Objective)). The column was heated to 50°C using a column heater (Phoenix-ST). The flow rate was 0.300 ul/min with 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile in water (A) and 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile (B). The peptides were separated with a 6–30% B gradient in 84 mins and analyzed using the Thermo Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Parameters were as followed MS1: resolution – 60,000, mass range – 350 to 1800 m/z, RF Lens – 30%, AGC Target 4.0e5, Max IT – 50 ms, charge state include - 2-6, dynamic exclusion – 45 s, top 20 ions selected for MS2; MS2: resolution – 50,000, high-energy collision dissociation activation energy (HCD) – 34 (global peptide) or 36 (intact glycopeptide), isolation width (m/z) – 0.7, AGC Target – 2.0e5, Max IT – 105 ms. Three replicates were analysed for the proteomic and glycoproteomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Global Protein Identification and Quantification  Global peptide .RAW files were searched against UniprotKB Swiss-Prot human protein database (version June 2017; 20,192 reviewed sequences) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) and most default search parameter settings: 20 ppm peptide and fragment mass tolerance, variable modification: methionine +15.99492, lysine +6.02013 (13C6), arginine +10.00827 (13C615N4), fixed modification: cysteine +57.02510, and semi-tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavages, minimum ratio count of two peptides for protein quantitation, and 1% FDR at the protein level. Proteins quantified in at least three replicates were considered for statistical analysis. Intact N-linked Glycopeptide Identification and Quantification  Intact N-linked glycopeptide identification was performed as previously described. In brief, intact glycopeptide .RAW files were converted to .mzML format using Proteowizard 28 with the “Peak Picking” option selected for all MS level and subjected to search using GPQuest 2.0 against a customized human database containing over 30,000 known N-linked glycopeptide sequences (including global variable and fixed modifications)  and 181 N-linked glycan compositions and can be accessed at the following website: http://nglycositeatlas.biomarkercenter.org/. Prior to intact glycopeptide quantitation using PyQuant, GPQuest 2.0 results were filtered to remove peptides above 1% FDR, peptides without the N-linked consensus sequence [N-X-T/S], and peptides without corresponding N-glycan structures. Following PyQuant quantitation, non-quantified PSMs were removed and reported PSM H/L ratios median normalized. For peptide-level quantitation, the median H/L ratios of matching PSMs (peptide + N-glycan structure; glycoforms) was calculated and peptide median normalized H/L ratios reported for individual glycoforms.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are involved in intercellular communication, transporting proteins and nucleic acids to proximal and distal regions. There is evidence of glycosylation influencing protein routing into EVs; however, the impact of aberrant cellular glycotransferase expression on EV protein profiles has yet&#xa0;to be evaluated. In this study, we paired extracellular vesicle characterization and quantitative proteomics to determine the systemic impact of altered &#x3b1;(1,6)fucosyltranferase (FUT8) expression on prostate cancer-derived EVs. Our results showed that increased cellular expression of FUT8 could reduce the number of vesicles secreted by prostate cancer cells as well as increase the abundance of proteins associated with cell motility and prostate cancer metastasis. In addition, overexpression of FUT8 resulted in altered glycans on select EV-derived glycoproteins. This study presents the first evidence of altered cellular glycosylation impacting EV protein profiles and provides further rationale for exploring the functional role of glycosylation in EV biogenesis and biology.

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteomics, Proteomic, Glycosylation, Exosomes, Cancer

### Affiliations
Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
The Johns Hopkins University

### Submitter
David Clark

### Lab Head
Dr Hui Zhang
Department of Pathology, The Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA


