### Accession
PXD003591

### Title
Systems toxicological assessment of the mentholated Tobacco Heating System 2.2 product revealed reduced cellular and molecular exposure effects compared to cigarette smoke [quantitative proteomics of rat nasal epithelium]

### Description
Aiming to reduce smoking-related health risks, potential reduced risk products (pRRPs) are being developed. The Tobacco Heating System (THS) 2.2 is a recently developed pRRP, which utilizes the heat-not-burn principle. In this study, systems toxicology approaches were engaged to assess the respiratory effects of a mentholated version of THS2.2 (THS2.2M) in a 90-day rat inhalation study (OECD test guideline 413). This is the quantitative proteomics data set for rat nasal epithelium. As described in the sample processing protocol, two different iTRAQ sets were defined and analyzed separately. See i_Rat-THS2.2M-TG413_protItraq_RNE.xlsx for sample annotations and file mappings.

### Sample Protocol
Proteome alterations were assessed by isobaric-tag based quantification using the iTRAQ® approach. For this, rat right nasal epithelial samples were homogenized and sonicated in tissue lysis buffer (BioRad, Hercules, CA, USA) in random order and the proteins were precipitated with acetone. Protein precipitates were resuspended in 0.5 M triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 1 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) and 0.1% SDS (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The amount of 50 µg was processed for iTRAQ 8-plex labeling procedure according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). Trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) was added in a 1:10 trypsin to protein ratio (w/w) to the samples followed by overnight digestion at 37°C. The tryptic digested samples were labeled with the reporter-ion tags for the different exposure groups for two separate iTRAQ analysis sets.</br></br>Two multiplexed iTRAQ analysis sets were prepared to allow for all relevant comparisons. iTRAQ set 1 contained all samples of the 90-day time point. Each 8-plex labeling replicate set included one sample of each 90-day exposed sample (Sham, RC(3R4F), MRC(LM), MRC(HM), THS2.2M(L), THS2.2M(M), THS2.2M(H)) and one pooled reference mix containing all replicates from the 90-day time point. For each of the 12 replicate belonging to iTRAQ set 1, either a male or female sample was randomly picked. Within each replicate labeling set, the sample to channel mapping was randomized. iTRAQ set 2 was focused on the exposure and 90+42d recovery effect for female rats only. Each 8-plex labeling set included one sample of each 90+42-day sample (Sham, RC(3R4F), MRC(HM), THS2.2M(H)) and the corresponding female samples from the 90-day time point. Again, the biological replicates were randomly assigned to the (six) replicate labeling sets and for each set the sample to channel mapping was randomized. Missing samples were randomly replaced by another replicate from the same group. These duplicated, placeholder samples were removed after data analysis and processing.</br></br>All the labeled samples belonging to one iTRAQ replicate set were pooled and dried in a SpeedVac. Samples were desalted through the use of 0.5 mL bed volume detergent removal columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) followed by the use of 1 cc C18 reversed phase SepPak columns (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s manuals. Samples were dried in a SpeedVac and resuspended in nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), 0.2% formic acid (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA)).</br></br>Samples were analyzed in random order using an Easy nanoLC 1000 instrument (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) connected online to a Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) mass-analyzer. Peptides were separated on a 50 cm long C18 RP RSLC Easyspray column (2 µm particle size; Thermo Scientific Waltham, MA, USA) at a flow rate of 200 nL/min with a 200 min gradient from nanoLC buffer A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) to 40% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid. Each sample was injected twice with 2 different analysis methods: a fast and a sensitive method as described by Kelstrup et al. (Kelstrup et al., 2012) on the same column.

### Data Protocol
Both mass-spectrometry runs were searched together as merged mass-lists against the rat reference proteome set (Uniprot, version October 2013, canonical isoforms only) using Proteome Discoverer vers. 1.4.0.288 software (Thermo Scientific). SequestHT (implemented in Proteome Discoverer) was used as search tool and iTRAQ-reporter ion intensities were determined from the Proteome Discoverer software. The Percolator node of the Proteome Discoverer software was used to estimate peptide-level adjusted p-values (q-values). iTRAQ peptide-level quantification data was exported and further processed in the R statistical environment (R Development Core Team, 2007). The quantification data was filtered for a q-value < 0.01 and for “unique” quantification results as defined by the Proteome Discoverer software. A global variance stabilizing normalization (VSN) was performed with the respective Bioconductor package in R (Huber et al., 2002; Hultin-Rosenberg et al., 2013). Each iTRAQ reporter ion set was normalized to its median and protein expression values were calculated as the median of these normalized peptide-level quantification values (Herbrich et al., 2013). For the detection of differentially expressed proteins, a linear model was fit for each exposure condition and its respective sham group and p-values from a moderated t-statistics were calculated with the empirical Bayes approach (Gentleman et al., 2004). The Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR) method was then used to correct for multiple testing effects. Proteins with an adjusted p-value < 0.05 were considered as differentially expressed.

### Publication Abstract
Modified risk tobacco products (MRTPs) are being developed with the aim of reducing smoking-related health risks. The Tobacco Heating System 2.2 (THS2.2) is a candidate MRTP that uses the heat-not-burn principle. Here, systems toxicology approaches were engaged to assess the respiratory effects of mentholated THS2.2 (THS2.2M) in a 90-day rat inhalation study (OECD test guideline 413). The standard endpoints were complemented by transcriptomics and quantitative proteomics analyses of respiratory nasal epithelium and lung tissue and by lipidomics analysis of lung tissue. The adaptive response of the respiratory nasal epithelium to conventional cigarette smoke (CS) included squamous cell metaplasia and an inflammatory response, with high correspondence between the molecular and histopathological results. In contrast to CS exposure, the adaptive tissue and molecular changes to THS2.2M aerosol exposure were much weaker and were limited mostly to the highest THS2.2M concentration in female rats. In the lung, CS exposure induced an inflammatory response, triggered cellular stress responses, and affected sphingolipid metabolism. These responses were not observed or were much lower after THS2.2M aerosol exposure. Overall, this system toxicology analysis complements and reconfirms the results from classical toxicological endpoints and further suggests potentially reduced health risks of THS2.2M.

### Keywords
Reduced risk tobacco product; systems toxicology; rat inhalation study; itraq

### Affiliations
Philip Morris International R&D, Philip Morris Products S.A., Quai Jeanrenaud 5, 2000 Neuchâtel, Switzerland
Philip Morris R&D, Neuchatel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Bjoern Titz

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Hoeng
Philip Morris R&D, Neuchatel, Switzerland


