### Accession
PXD033492

### Title
Fight-or-flight responses require augmentation of Ca2+ influx via Rad phosphorylation

### Description
Fight-or-flight responses involve β-adrenergic-induced increases in heart rate and contractile force. Despite decades of investigations, predominantly focusing on ryanodine receptor and phospholamban phosphorylation, the molecular mechanisms underlying the sympathetic nervous system control of cardiac contractility remain controversial and incompletely elucidated. Here, we identify the calcium-channel inhibitor Rad as a critical component. In cardiomyocytes isolated from knock-in mice expressing Rad with alanine-substitutions of the four PKA-phosphorylated serine residues (4SA-Rad), calcium currents cannot be increased by adrenergic agonists or phosphatase inhibitor. In these mice, basal cardiac contractility, exercise capacity and heart rate are reduced, and the augmentation of contractile force by adrenergic agonists is severely blunted. Expression of mutant calcium-channel β-subunits that cannot bind Rad is sufficient to restore calcium influx and cardiac contractility in 4SA-Rad mice to levels induced by adrenergic agonists in wild-type mice, revealing a potential therapeutic approach to enhance cardiac contractility while bypassing stimulation of adrenergic receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Proximity labeling was performed (Lam et al., 2015) with minor modifications as we have previously described (Kushner et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2020). Isolated ventricular cardiomyocytes from α1C-APEX2 mice were incubated in labeling solution with 0.5 μM biotin-phenol for 30 mins. During the final 10 mins of labeling, 1 μM isoproterenol or 100 nM calyculin A was added.  To initiate labeling, H2O2 was added to a final concentration of 1 mM for 1 min.  Exactly 1 min after H2O2 treatment, the labeling solution was decanted and cells were washed x3 with cold quenching solution containing 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, and 10 mM sodium azide. After cells were harvested by centrifugation, the quenching solution was aspirated and the pellet was flash-frozen and stored at -80°C until streptavidin pull-down. The cells were lysed with a hand-held tip homogenizer in a solution containing 50 mM Tris 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EGTA, 10 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100 (v/v), 0.1% SDS (w/v), 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 5 mM Trolox, and 10 mM sodium azide, phosphatase inhibitors, protease inhibitors, Calpain inhibitor I and Calpain inhibitor II. Proteins were prepared as previously described (Paek et al., 2017) with some modifications. A detailed protocol of the procedures used was published (Kalocsay, 2019). Proteins were precipitated with Trichloroacetic acid (TCA), and the pellet was repetitively washed with ACN and then resuspended in 8 M urea, 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, 100 mM NH4HCO3, and 1% SDS (w/v).  To reduce disulfides, 10 mM TCEP-HCl in Milli-Q water titrated to pH 7.5 with NaOH was added.  To alkylate free Cys, fresh 400 mM iodoacetamide stock solution in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 20 mM and incubated in the dark for 25 mins at RT. After alkylation, fresh dithiothreitol stock solution was added to 50 mM final concentration to quench alkylation. Water was added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 4 M urea and 0.5% (w/v) of SDS. Biotinylated proteins in 1 mg of sample were affinity purified overnight using streptavidin magnetic beads in solution containing a final concentration of 2 M urea, 0.25% SDS (w/v), 50 mM sodium phosphate pH 8. The beads were washed x3 with 4 M urea, 0.5% SDS (w/v), 100 mM sodium phosphate pH 8, and x3 with the same buffer without SDS. The beads were re-suspended in 50 μL of 200 mM EPPS buffer pH 8.5, 2% ACN (v/v) with 1 μL of LysC stock solution (2 mg/ml), vortexed briefly and incubated at 37°C for 3 hr. Then, 50 μL of trypsin stock diluted 1:100 (v/v) in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5 was added. After mixing, digests were incubated at 37°C overnight and beads were magnetically removed. Peptides were directly labeled after digest. For this, ACN was added to a concentration of 30% (v/v) and peptides were labeled with TMTpro 16-plex for 1 hr. Reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine at a final concentration of 0.3% (v/v) for 15 mins and 1% of labeled peptides were analyzed for efficiency of label incorporation and relative ratios by mass spectrometry. After quenching, peptide solutions were acidified with formic acid, trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to a concentration of 0.1% and peptides were desalted and fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography. After loading of labeled peptides onto pre-conditioned columns and a single wash with water, excess unincorporated TMT label was removed by washing reversed phase columns once with 0.1% trimethylamine (TEA) buffer containing 5% ACN. Samples were fractionated under alkaline conditions into 12 fractions with increasing concentrations of ACN: 10%, 12.5%, 15%, 17.5%, 20%, 25%, 30%, 35%, 40%, 50%, 65% and 80%. Fractions 1 and 7, 2 and 8, 3 and 9, 4 and 10, 5 and 11, 6 and 12 were pooled to obtain 6 final pooled fractions for subsequent analysis. Pooled fractions were dried to completion and further purified and desalted by acidic C18 solid phase extraction (StageTip). Labeled peptides were finally re-suspended in 1% formic acid (v/v) and 3% ACN (v/v). Data collection followed a MultiNotch MS3 TMT method (McAlister et al., 2014) using an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an EASY-nLC 1200 liquid chromatography (LC) system. The capillary column used was packed with C18 resin (35 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, matrix 2.6 μm Accucore (Thermo Fisher Scientific)). Peptides of each fraction were separated for 4 hr over acidic ACN gradients by LC prior to mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. The scan sequence started with an MS1 scan (Orbitrap analysis; resolution 120,000; mass range 400−1400 Th). MS2 analysis followed CID CE=35 with a maximum ion injection time of 150-300 ms and an isolation window of 0.4 m/z. In order to obtain quantitative information, MS3 precursors were fragmented by HCD and analyzed in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 50,000 at 200 Th. Further details on LC and MS parameters and settings used were described previously (Beausoleil et al., 2006).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were searched with a SEQUEST (v.28, rev. 12) based software against a size-sorted forward and reverse database of the M. musculus proteome (Uniprot 07/2014) with added common contaminant proteins. For this, spectra were first converted to mzXML. Searches were performed using a mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursors and a fragment ion tolerance of 0.9 Da. For the searches maximally 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. Carboxyamidomethylation on cysteine was set as a static modification (+57.0214 Da) and we searched dynamically for oxidized methionine residues (+15.9949 Da). We applied a target decoy database strategy and a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for peptide-spectrum matches following filtering by linear discriminant analysis (LDA) (Beausoleil et al., 2006; Huttlin et al., 2010). The FDR for final collapsed proteins was 1%. MS1 data were calibrated post search and searches performed again. Quantitative information on peptides was derived from MS3 scans. Quant tables were generated requiring an MS2 isolation specificity of >70% for each peptide and a sum of TMT signal to noise (s/n) of >200 over all channels for any given peptide and exported to Excel and further processed therein. Details of the TMT intensity quantification method and further search parameters applied were described previously (Paulo et al., 2016). Proteomics raw data and search results were deposited in the PRIDE archive (Deutsch et al., 2017; Perez-Riverol et al., 2019).  The relative summed TMT s/n for proteins between two experimental conditions was calculated from the sum of TMT s/n for all peptides quantified of a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Phosphorylation, Phosphatases, Calcium, Contractility, Pka, Adrenergic, Ion channels, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine; Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, 622 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032. Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Signaling, Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Gary Bradshaw

### Lab Head
Dr Steven O. Marx
Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine; Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons, 622 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032. Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Signaling, Columbia University, Vagelos College of Physicians and Surgeons


