### Accession
PXD036366

### Title
CMTM4 is a subunit of the IL-17 receptor and mediates autoimmune pathology

### Description
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) is a key mediator of protective immunity to yeast and bacterial infections but also drives the pathogenesis of several autoimmune diseases, such as psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis. Here, we show that the tetra-transmembrane protein CMTM4 is a subunit of the IL-17 receptor (IL-17R). CMTM4 constitutively associated with IL-17R subunit C (IL-17RC) to mediate its stability, posttranslational modification, and plasma membrane localization. Both mouse and human cell lines deficient in CMTM4 were largely unresponsive to IL-17A, due to their inability to assemble the IL-17 receptor signaling complex. Accordingly, CMTM4-deficient mice were largely resistant to experimental psoriasis. Collectively, our data identified CMTM4 as an essential component of the IL-17 receptor and a potential therapeutic target for treating IL-17-mediated autoimmune diseases.

### Sample Protocol
To isolate IL-17RSC, ST2 cells were grown on 6x15 cm dishes per condition, washed and incubated in serum-free DMEM for 30 minutes and activated with murine SF-IL-17A (500 ng/ml in 10 ml per condition) for 15 minutes, and solubilized in 1% DDM lysis buffer or left untreated and IL-17A was added post lysis. Lysates were incubated on ice for 30 min and cleared by centrifugation (21,130 g, 30 min, 2°C). ST2 cells expressing SF-IL-17RC or control SF-GFP were grown on 3x15 cm dishes per condition. Cells were washed with serum-free medium and lysed in 1% DDM lysis buffer.  The first immunoprecipitation step was carried out by overnight incubation of samples with 50 µl of anti-FLAG M2 affinity agarose gel (Sigma). The beads were washed 3× with 0.1% DDM containing lysis buffer and isolated proteins were eluted by incubation of the beads in 250 µl of 1% DDM containing lysis buffer supplemented with 100 µg/ml of 3xFlag peptide (Sigma) overnight. The supernatant was collected and the elution step was repeated once again for 8 h. The second purification step was carried out upon incubation of the samples with 50 µl of Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA Lifesciences) overnight. The samples were subsequently washed 3× with 0.1% DDM containing lysis buffer and 1× with lysis buffer alone. Bound proteins were eluted upon incubation of the beads with 220 µl of MS Elution buffer (2% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM Tris pH 8.5). The eluted protein samples (200 µl) were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine at 60 °C for 60 minutes and alkylated with 10 mM methyl methanethiosulfonate at room temperature for 10 min. Proteins were cleaved overnight with 1 µg of trypsin (Promega) at 37°C. To remove sodium deoxycholate, samples were acidified with 1% trifluoroacetic acid, mixed with an equal volume of ethyl acetate, centrifuged (15 700 g, 2 min) and an aqueous phase containing peptides was collected48. This step was repeated two more times. Peptides were desalted using in-house-made stage tips packed with C18 disks (Empore)49 and resuspended in 20 µl of 2% acetonitrile with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. The digested protein samples (12 µl) were loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim PepMap300, C18, 5 µm, 300 Å Wide Pore, 300 µm x 5 mm) using 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 15 μl/min for 4 min. Subsequently, peptides were separated on Nano Reversed-phase column (EASY-Spray column, 50 cm x 75 µm internal diameter, packed with PepMap C18, 2 µm particles, 100 Å pore size) using a linear gradient from 4% to 35% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min for 60 minutes. Ionized peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 350 to 1400 m/z were performed at 120K resolution settings with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Four different types of tandem MS were performed according to precursor intensity. First three types were detected in Ion trap in rapid mode, and the last one was detected in Orbitrap with 15000 resolution settings: 1) For precursors with intensity between 1x103 to 7x103 with CID fragmentation (35% collision energy) and 250 ms of ion injection time. 2) For ions with intensity in range from 7x103 to 9x104 with CID fragmentation (35% collision energy) and 100ms of ion injection time. 3) For ions with intensity in range from 9x104 to 5x106 with HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) and 100 ms of ion injection time. 4) For intensities 5x106 and more with HCD fragmentation (30% collision energy) and 35ms of ion injection time. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles.

### Data Protocol
All MS data were analyzed and quantified with the MaxQuant software (version 1.6.5.0)50. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides and the minimum length was specified as seven amino acids. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against the murine Swiss-Prot database (downloaded from Uniprot in June 2019). Trypsin specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing the cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. β-methylthiolation, N-terminal protein acetylation, carbamidomethylation, and Met oxidation were included as variable modifications. Label-free quantification was performed using the Intensity Based Absolute Quantification (iBAQ) algorithm, which divides the sum of all precursor-peptide intensities by the number of theoretically observable peptides17. Data analysis was performed using Perseus 1.6.14.0 software51. Complex stoichiometry was estimated based on the iBAQ Intensity ratio between individual components of the complex and IL-17RC.

### Publication Abstract
Interleukin-17A (IL-17A) is a key mediator of protective immunity to yeast and bacterial infections but also drives the pathogenesis of several autoimmune diseases, such as psoriasis or psoriatic arthritis. Here we show that the tetra-transmembrane protein CMTM4 is a subunit of the IL-17 receptor (IL-17R). CMTM4 constitutively associated with IL-17R subunit C to mediate its stability, glycosylation and plasma membrane localization. Both mouse and human cell lines deficient in CMTM4 were largely unresponsive to IL-17A, due to their inability to assemble the IL-17R signaling complex. Accordingly, CMTM4-deficient mice had a severe defect in the recruitment of immune cells following IL-17A administration and were largely resistant to experimental psoriasis, but not to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Collectively, our data identified CMTM4 as an essential component of IL-17R and a potential therapeutic target for treating IL-17-mediated autoimmune diseases.

### Keywords
Cmtm4, Il-17rc, Il-17 receptor signaling complex, Il-17a

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Immunity & Cell Communication, BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic
BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University

### Submitter
Peter Draber

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Draber
Laboratory of Immunity & Cell Communication, BIOCEV, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, Vestec, Czech Republic


