### Accession
PXD035202

### Title
Proteome profiling of HaCaT keratinocytes

### Description
An important step in the proteomic analysis is the optimal extraction and the processing of protein material in order to ensure the highest sensitivity in downstream protein detection. Cell lysis is important for proteomic profiling with an eventual aim to discover differently expressed proteins (DEPs). Herein for cell lysis, two sample preparation protocols were compared: 0.2% SDS-based solubilization combined with the 1DE-gel concentration (Protocol 1) and osmotic shock (Protocol 2). HaCaT keratinocytes were cultured with/without sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and used to test the hypothesis that SDS might be associated with the initiation and development of malignancies. Protocol 1 increased sensitivity and coverage of HaCaT proteome, it permitted us to reveal the provided new insights into the skin impact of SDS (widely used and rather non-toxic component of household chemicals, cosmetic products, shampoos and so on). Our results suggest the possible role of SDS in skin cancerogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
**Cell cultivation and SDS exposure** Immortalized keratinocyte lines НаСаТ before (control) and after exposure with SDS (25 μg/ml) during 48 h were used in the study.  **Protein Extraction** In order to ensure sufficient HaCaT protein concentration for proteomic analysis in this study, we pooled the cells from three flasks (of each group: control and SDS-exposed, treated with Protocols 1 and 2) in a single tube for further processing.  Protocol 1: HaCaT cells pellet was placed into 500 μl of 0.2% SDS in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH = 7.4), 120 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 1% PMSF and manually homogenized in a glass homogenizer. After sonication (in an ice-cold bath, active time 25 s), the samples were incubated for 30 min at + 4°C on an orbital shaker with a platform rotation of 1000 rpm. After heating at 95°C for 4 min, it was centrifuged at 14000 x g for 20 min (+4°C). The lysate was collected, and the procedure was repeated starting from the sonication step. Lysates were pooled and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 60 min (+ 4°C); the finished supernatant was collected.  Protocol 2 — The water cell homogenate of HaCaT keratinocytes (180 μL of cold water, 65 mM DDT, and 1% protease inhibitor E64, freshly prepared every time) was prepared by sonication as in Protocol 1. The lysate was centrifuged at 15,000× g at +4°C for 15 min twice to remove debris.  The total protein concentration of HaCaT extracts was determined by the bicinchoninic acid assay on an Agilent 8453 UV-visible spectrophotometer with BSA as a standard.  **1DE-gel-concentration and in-gel digestion** The 1DE-gel concentration protocol was then carried out to remove SDS described earlier, alkylation was carried out with iodoacetamide (Shkrigunov et al., CIMB 2022).  The mixture of proteolytic peptides from each gel band was used for liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS) analysis.  **In-Solution Tryptic Digestion** The pair of water extracts (175 μg of protein) for each study group, namely control and SDS-exposed HaCaT cells, were in-solution digested in accordance with the standard protocol, alkylation was carried out with 4-vinylpyridine (Shkrigunov et al., CIMB 2022).  Peptide digest mixtures were analyzed without further processing using LC–MS/MS.  **LC–MS/MS Analysis** Separation and identification of the peptides were performed on a Ultimate 3000 nano-flow HPLC system (Dionex, USA), connected to a Orbitrap Q Exactive mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA) equipped with a Nanospray Flex NG ion source (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The initial RAW files were converted to MGF files with the ProteoWizard MSConvert program (v. 3.0.20310, https://proteowizard.sourceforge.io/). Files were imported into the SearchGUI (v. 4.1.8) platform, the processing was performed with X!Tandem and MS-GF+ search algorithms, against the UniProt human database (v. 22.03.2022, https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000005640, FASTA format). The following search parameters were set: enzyme — trypsin; the maximum number of missed cleavages — 1; fixed modification — piridylethylation of C (in-solution tryptic digestion) or carbamidomethylation of C (in-gel digestion); variable modification — oxidation methionine; parent and fragment ions tolerances — ±5 ppm and ±0.01 Da, respectively. The PeptideShaker integrator was utilized to generate Excel spreadsheet tables with the results. Results were imported into Funrich software to build Venn diagrams and perform GO enrichment analysis (database v.12.12.2021, http://geneontology.org/docs/downloads/) and COSMIC search (against database v.21.06.2022, https://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cosmic). The R language (v. 2022.02.0+443, https://www.r-project.org/) packages were applied to visualize violin plots (beanplot, https://CRAN.R-project.org/package=beanplot) and process Disease Ontology analysis — (DOSE, https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DOSE.html). NSAF fold change distribution presented in box and whiskers plot was built with Prism 9 GraphPad (version 9.4.0, https://www.graphpad.com/scientific-software/prism/). Cytoscape platform (https://cytoscape.org, accessed on 05.07.2022) was used to build protein-protein interaction network.

### Publication Abstract
An important step in the proteomic analysis of missing proteins is the use of a wide range of tissues, optimal extraction, and the processing of protein material in order to ensure the highest sensitivity in downstream protein detection. This work describes a purification protocol for identifying low-abundance proteins in human chorionic villi using the proposed "1DE-gel concentration" method. This involves the removal of SDS in a short electrophoresis run in a stacking gel without protein separation. Following the in-gel digestion of the obtained holistic single protein band, we used the peptide mixture for further LC-MS/MS analysis. Statistically significant results were derived from six datasets, containing three treatments, each from two tissue sources (elective or missed abortions). The 1DE-gel concentration increased the coverage of the chorionic villus proteome. Our approach allowed the identification of 15 low-abundance proteins, of which some had not been previously detected via the mass spectrometry of trophoblasts. In the post hoc data analysis, we found a dubious or uncertain protein (PSG7) encoded on human chromosome 19 according to neXtProt. A proteomic sample preparation workflow with the 1DE-gel concentration can be used as a prospective tool for uncovering the low-abundance part of the human proteome.

### Keywords
Hacat keratinocytes; sodium dodecyl sulfate; 1de-gel concentration; osmotic shock, Lc-ms/ms; searchgui; double-strand break repair via break-induced replication pathway; mcm family

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow, Russia 
Laboratory of Microsomal Oxidation, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow 119121, Russia

### Submitter
Timur Shkrigunov

### Lab Head
Dr Natalia Petushkova
Laboratory of Microsomal Oxidation, Institute of Biomedical Chemistry, Moscow 119121, Russia


