### Accession
PXD032972

### Title
Differential RNA aptamer affinity profiling on plasma as a potential diagnostic tool for bladder cancer

### Description
APTASHAPE is a new method for characterising the composition of complex biofluids Biomarker discovery is performed using blood from bladder cancer patients APTASHAPE can distinguish blood samples from patients with different stages of bladder cancer

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylation of aptamers was performed by 3′-end ribose oxidation using sodium-metaperiodate followed by reaction with EZ-link Biotin-LC-Hydrazide using the standard protocol of the provider (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 400 pmol of biotinylated aptamer was captured on 100 uL of streptavidin magnetic beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in HBS buffer for 30 minutes. Beads were washed 3 times with 500 uL SWB and incubated with SB buffer supplemented with 10% plasma sample for 30 minutes. Beads were then washed 3 times with 500 uL SWB and protein material eluted with HBS 50 mM EDTA. Eluates were analysed by SDS-PAGE using NuPAGE 4–12% Bis-Tris Gels (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry-based protein identification. Bands of interest were excised from Coomassie blue stained SDS-PAGE gels, cut in small cubes, and washed in water. The gel pieces were then incubated in acetonitrile and rehydrated in 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate. Finally, the gel pieces were swelled in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 25 mg/ml trypsin before ammonium bicarbonate was added to cover the pieces. The samples were digested for approximately 16 hours at 37 °C. Following digestion, the tryptic peptides were purified on C18 stage tips. LC-MS was performed using online reverse-phase separation of peptides over a 15 cm column packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3 uM resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running in data-dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification MS files were converted to the generic Mascot format (MGF) using Raw converter (version 1.1.0.18, Scripps Research Institute) (20), and the generated peak lists were searched against the human Swiss-Prot database (21) using the Mascot search engine (Matrix Science) and the following search parameters: MS tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da, trypsin digestion with one missed cleavages, carbamidomethyl as a fixed modification, and oxidized methionine as a variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
The molecular composition of blood is a signature of human health, reflected in the thousands of blood biomarkers known for human diseases. However, establishing robust disease markers is challenging due to the diversity of individual samples. New sequencing methods have simplified biomarker discovery for circulating DNA and RNA while protein profiling is still laborious and costly. To harness the power of high-throughput sequencing to profile the protein content of a biological sample, we developed a method termed APTASHAPE that uses oligonucleotide aptamers to recognize proteins in complex biofluids. We selected a large pool of 2'Fluoro protected RNA sequences to recognize proteins in human plasma and identified a set of 33 cancer-specific aptamers. Differential enrichment of these aptamers after selection against 1 &#x3bc;l of plasma from individual patients allowed us to differentiate between healthy controls and bladder cancer-diagnosed patients (91% accuracy) and between early non-invasive tumors and late stage tumors (83% accuracy). Affinity purification and mass spectrometry of proteins bound to the predictive aptamers showed the main target proteins to be C4b-binding protein, Complement C3, Fibrinogen, Complement factor H and IgG. The APTASHAPE method thus provides a general, automated and highly sensitive platform for discovering potential new disease biomarkers.

### Keywords
Pulldown, Aptamer, Biofluids, Bladder cancer

### Affiliations
Aarhus University
Centre for Cellular Signal Patterns (CellPat) Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre (iNANO) Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Aarhus University

### Submitter
Søren Fjelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Jørgen Kjems
Centre for Cellular Signal Patterns (CellPat) Interdisciplinary Nanoscience Centre (iNANO) Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics Aarhus University


