### Accession
PXD038423

### Title
The submandibular and sublingual glands maintain oral microbial homeostasis through multiple antimicrobial proteins

### Description
Oral microbial homeostasis is a key factor affecting oral health, and saliva plays a significant role in maintaining oral microbial homeostasis. The submandibular gland (SMG) and sublingual gland (SLG) together produce the most saliva at rest. Organic ingredients, including antimicrobial proteins, are rich and distinctive and depend on the type of acinar cells in the SMG and SLG. However, the functions of the SMG and SLG in maintaining oral microbial homeostasis have been difficult to identify and distinguish, given their unique anatomical structures. Therefore, we  analyzed each gland using proteomics and tried to find differentially secreted proteins in the SMG and SLG.

### Sample Protocol
A total of six submandibular and sublingual glands were collected for proteomic analysis, obtained from three C57BL/6N mice, which were euthanized using CO2. The submandibular and sublingual glands were washed with sterile phosphate-buffered saline to rinse the blood and adhesive tissue.

### Data Protocol
Genecreate Biological Engineering Co., Ltd uses label-free quantification to detect the differences within the same protein among multiple samples, including protein extraction, reductive alkylation, protein quantification, enzyme de-salting, Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) mass spectrometry system analysis, database retrieval analysis using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 software. In the quantitative results, the significant difference was selected according to up_regulate ≥2 or down_regulate ≤0.500, adj. p-value ≤0.05. Principal coordinate analysis (PCoA) was performed using Bray-Curtis distance metrics. Functional enrichment analysis included biological process category of the gene ontology (GO), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway, and InterPro (IPR). They were performed for all proteins with significant differences. The database of KEGG pathways from http://www.kegg.jp/. The database of GO from http://www.geneontology.org/.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oral microbial homeostasis, Submandibular glands, Sublingual glands, Saliva, Antimicrobial proteins

### Affiliations
Stomatological Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
yanan li

### Lab Head
Dr yanan li
Stomatological Hospital of Chongqing Medical University


