### Accession
PXD034101

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of SARS-CoV-2 infection of primary human airway ciliated cells and lung epithelial cells demonstrates the effectiveness of SARS-Cov-2 innate immune evasion

### Description
We used two model systems to characterise the changes caused by SARS-CoV-2 using quantitative proteomics. We used primary human epithelial cells differentiated at the air-liquid interface, first describing the relative abundance of proteins found in each major cell type of the epithelium, and then characterised the infection of ciliated cells specifically as these showed the greatest susceptibility to SARS-CoV-2 infection. We also used a lung epithelial cell line, CaLu-3, and compared the infection with B.29 and B.1.1.7 (Alpha) variant over a time-course of infection. In each case, immunostaining for nucleoprotein combined with FACS allowed for the purification of infected cells from uninfected ‘bystander’ cells.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed and digested using S-Traps (Protifi) essentially according to the manufacturers instructions. Samples were then labelled with TMT reagents (11 or 16 plex) and pooled before C18 SPE clean-up and fractionation by basic pH reverse phase chromatography. Fractions were analysed using an Obritrap fusion Instrument.

### Data Protocol
Data were analysed by PeaksXPro (Bioinfor). FDR of 0.01% was used for protein identification.  Quantitative data were exported to R and subjected to statistical analysis by LIMMA (a moderated t-test) and corrected for multiple hypothesis testing (Benjamini-Hochberg).

### Publication Abstract
In addition to their roles in protecting nerves and increasing conduction velocity, peripheral glia plays key functions in blood vessel development by secreting molecules governing arteries alignment and maturation with nerves. Here, we show in mice that a specific, nerve-attached cell population, derived from boundary caps (BCs), constitutes a major source of mural cells for the developing skin vasculature. Using Cre-based reporter cell tracing and single-cell transcriptomics, we show that BC derivatives migrate into the skin along the nerves, detach from them, and differentiate into pericytes and vascular smooth muscle cells. Genetic ablation of this population affects the organization of the skin vascular network. Our results reveal the heterogeneity and extended potential of the BC population in mice, which gives rise to mural cells, in addition to previously described neurons, Schwann cells, and melanocytes. Finally, our results suggest that mural specification of BC derivatives takes place before their migration along nerves to the mouse skin.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Calu, Hbec, Sars cov-2

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus Puddicombe Way Cambridge CB2 OAW
University of Cambridge

### Submitter
James Williamson

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Lehner
Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre Cambridge Biomedical Campus Puddicombe Way Cambridge CB2 OAW


