### Accession
PXD001815

### Title
Quantitative Phosphoproteomics Reveals Targets of Protein Kinase SnRK1 in Arabidopsis under Submergence

### Description
SNF1 RELATED PROTEIN KINASE 1 (SnRK1) is proposed as a central integrator of regulatory pathways in plant stress and energy starvation signaling. We observed in this study that the Arabidopsis SnRK1.1 dominant negative mutant (SnRK1.1K48M) had lower tolerance to submergence than the wild-type, suggesting that SnRK1.1-dependent phosphorylation of target proteins is important in energy starvation signaling triggered by submergence. To gain further insight into submergence signaling mechanisms, we determined the temporal response to energy starvation through AMP/ATP quantification and used quantitative phosphoproteomics to compare the global changes in phosphopeptides in Col-0 and SnRK1.1K48M. We found that the phosphorylation levels of 59 peptides increased and the levels of 96 peptides decreased in Col-0 within 0.5–3 h of submergence. Among the 59 peptides with increased phosphorylation in Col-0, 49 did not show increased phosphorylation levels in SnRK1.1K48M under submergence. These proteins are involved in sugar synthesis, glycolysis, osmotic regulation, ABA signaling, protein synthesis and ROS signaling. In particular, the phosphorylation of MAPK6, which is involved in regulating ROS responses under different abiotic stresses, was disrupted in the SnRK1.1K48M mutant. In addition, PTP1, a negative regulator of MAPK6 activity that directly dephosphorylates MAPK6, was also regulated by SnRK1.1. These results reveal insights into the function of SnRK1 and the downstream signaling factors of submergence.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extraction was performed according to (Lan et al., 2012). Total proteins were extracted from 9-d-old whole seedlings of Col-0 and SnRK1.1K48M treated with 0 h, 0.5 h, 1 h and 3 h submergence. For quantitative phosphoproteome analysis, 3 mg protein of each sample was reduced and alkylated by using dithiothreitol (DTT) and iodoacetamide (IAA), and the DNA and RNA in the sample were degraded by mixing with benzonase nuclease (Novagen) at room temperature for 2 h. Subsequently, endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) was added and the mixture was incubated at room temperature for 4 h. The peptide solution was further incubated with modified trypsin (Promega) at room temperature overnight. The resulting peptide solution was acidified with 10% trifluoroacetic acid and desalted on Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters). For general quantitative proteome analysis, 100 mg of digested peptides from each sample were used. Phosphopeptides were enriched from each of the digested peptides using a TiO2 affinity chromatography according to the instruction manual for the Titansphere Phos-TiO kit (GL Sciences). Eluted peptides were desalted and lyophilized in a centrifugal speed vacuum concentrator. Subsequently, desalted peptides were chemically labeled with iTRAQ reagents (Applied Biosystems) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples of Col-0 that underwent different durations of submergence (0 h, 0.5 h, 1 h, and 3 h) were labeled 113, 114, 115, or 116, respectively, and samples from SnRK1.1K48M that underwent different durations of submergence were labeled 117, 118, 119, or 121, respectively.  After labeling, each reaction mixture was aliquoted into two parts in equal volume and these aliquots were mixed into 3 fractions as follows: Fraction 1: 113,114,115 and 116; Fraction 2:117,118,119 and 121; Fraction 3: 113,114,117,and 118.

### Data Protocol
The Proteome Discoverer software (ver. 1.3, Thermo Scientific) with integrated SEQUEST database search algorithm and an in-house version of Mascot (ver. 2.3, Matrix Science) accessed via the internet were used for protein identification, phosphorylation modification, and quantitative analyses. MS data were searched against the Arabidopsis protein database, TAIR10, downloaded from the Arabidopsis Information Resource Center website (http://www.arabidopsis.org/).  The parameters for database searches were set as follows: full trypsin digestion with 2 maximum missed cleavage sites, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 50 mmu, dynamic modification: oxidation (M) and static modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) and 8plex-iTRAQ (N-terminus and K), and dynamic phosphorylation (S, T, and Y) for phosphorylation modification analysis. The identified peptides were validated using Percolator algorithm, which automatically conducted target and decoy database searches and rescored peptide spectrum matches (PSM) using q-values and posterior error probabilities. All PSMs were filtered with a q-value threshold of 0.01 (1% false discovery rate).  For iTRAQ quantification, the ratios of iTRAQ reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra from raw datasets were used to calculate the fold changes between control and treatment.  Only unique peptides were used for peptide/protein quantiﬁcation. The protein ratio was calculated from three biological replicates. In the phosphoproteome quantitative analysis, to integrate fraction 1 and fraction 3 in each batch, the values of fraction 3 were normalized by the average value of 117/113 in fraction 2 to get the ratio of 118/113, 119/113, and 121/113. The identified peptides detected in two of three biological experiments were selected for bootstrap statistical analysis(de la Fuente van Bentem et al., 2008; Cleries et al., 2012). The time point data that is not significantly different (P < 0.05) is marked as “nosig”. The time point data that is not detected in the three batches or detected once in three batches is marked as NA (not available). The Simple Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for proteins were extracted by AGRIGO and TAIR.

### Publication Abstract
SNF1 RELATED PROTEIN KINASE 1 (SnRK1) is proposed to be a central integrator of the plant stress and energy starvation signalling pathways. We observed that the Arabidopsis SnRK1.1 dominant negative mutant (SnRK1.1 (K48M) ) had lower tolerance to submergence than the wild type, suggesting that SnRK1.1-dependent phosphorylation of target proteins is important in signalling pathways triggered by submergence. We conducted quantitative phosphoproteomics and found that the phosphorylation levels of 57 proteins increased and the levels of 27 proteins decreased in Col-0 within 0.5-3h of submergence. Among the 57 proteins with increased phosphorylation in Col-0, 38 did not show increased phosphorylation levels in SnRK1.1 (K48M) under submergence. These proteins are involved mainly in sugar and protein synthesis. In particular, the phosphorylation of MPK6, which is involved in regulating ROS responses under abiotic stresses, was disrupted in the SnRK1.1 (K48M) mutant. In addition, PTP1, a negative regulator of MPK6 activity that directly dephosphorylates MPK6, was also regulated by SnRK1.1. We also showed that energy conservation was disrupted in SnRK1.1 (K48M) , mpk6, and PTP1 (S7AS8A) under submergence. These results reveal insights into the function of SnRK1 and the downstream signalling factors related to submergence.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Energy starvation, Snrk1, Submergence

### Affiliations
Molecular and Biological Agricultural Sciences Program, Taiwan International  
 Graduate Program, National Chung-Hsing University, Academia Sinica,    
 Taiwan

Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Hsing Yi Cho

### Lab Head
Dr Ming Che Shih
Agricultural Biotechnology Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


