### Accession
PXD042045

### Title
The assessment of hiPSC-derived Neural Stem Cells after a repeated-dose bisphenol A exposure

### Description
The present study evaluated the effects of a repeated-dose exposure of environmentally relevant BPA concentrations during the in vitro 3D neural induction of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), emulating a chronic exposure scenario. Quantitative proteomics at D21 revealed several differentially abundant proteins across all BPA-treated groups with important functions in NSC proliferation and maintenance.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 8 M urea/0.5 M NH4HCO3 by ultrasonication (18 cycles of 10s) using a Sonopuls HD3200 (Bandelin, Berlin, Germany). Proteins were quantified using Pierce 660 nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA).  20µg of protein was reduced with 4 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated with 8 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in the dark. DTT was added to a final concentration of 10 mM to quench residual IAA during 15 min incubation in the dark. Proteins were digested with modified porcine trypsin (1:50 enzyme/protein ration, Promega) for 16h at 37°C.

### Data Protocol
1 μg of the digest was injected on an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system coupled online to a Q-Exactive HF-X instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were first transferred to a PepMap 100 C18 trap column (100 µm×2 cm, 5 µM particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and separated on an analytical column (PepMap RSLC C18, 75 µm×50 cm, 2 µm particles, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 250 nl/min flow-rate with an 80-min gradient of 5-20% of solvent B followed by a 9-min increase to 40%. Solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B of 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. MS spectra were acquired using a top 15 data-dependent acquisition method on a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Raw file processing was performed using MaxQuant using the human SwissProt reference proteome downloaded in October 2022. All statistical analyses and data visualization were performed in R using custom scripts. Proteins with at least two peptides detected in at least three samples of each condition were tested for differential abundance using the MS-EmpiRe algorithm as described previously. To handle missing values for peptides with measurements in all replicates of one condition and insufficient measurements in the other condition, data imputation with random numbers from the normal distribution (downshift 1.8, width 0.3) was performed. Proteins with a Benjamini– Hochberg corrected P-value ≤ 0.05 and fold-change ≥ 1.3 were regarded as significantly altered. For unsupervised clustering, hierarchical clustering (ComplexHeatmap R package) was used. The k-means algorithm was used for partitioning the heatmap into homogeneous regions. Over-representation analysis was performed using the WebGestaltR package and the functional category ‘GO Biological Process nonRedundant’. The false discovery rate was controlled using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
Bisphenol A (BPA) exposure is associated with a plethora of neurodevelopmental abnormalities and brain disorders. Previous studies have demonstrated BPA-induced perturbations to critical neural stem cell (NSC) characteristics, such as proliferation and differentiation, although the underlying molecular mechanisms remain under debate. The present study evaluated the effects of a repeated-dose exposure of environmentally relevant BPA concentrations during the <i>in vitro</i> 3D neural induction of human induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs), emulating a chronic exposure scenario. Firstly, we demonstrated that our model is suitable for NSC differentiation during the early stages of embryonic brain development. Our morphological image analysis showed that BPA exposure at 0.01, 0.1 and 1&#xa0;&#xb5;M decreased the average spheroid size by day 21 (D21) of the neural induction, while no effect on cell viability was detected. No alteration to the rate of the neural induction was observed based on the expression of key neural lineage and neuroectodermal transcripts. Quantitative proteomics at D21 revealed several differentially abundant proteins across all BPA-treated groups with important functions in NSC proliferation and maintenance (e.g., FABP7, GPC4, GAP43, Wnt-8B, TPPP3). Additionally, a network analysis demonstrated alterations to the glycolytic pathway, potentially implicating BPA-induced changes to glycolytic signalling in NSC proliferation impairments, as well as the pathophysiology of brain disorders including intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorders, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). This study enhances the current understanding of BPA-related NSC aberrations based mostly on acute, often high dose exposures of rodent <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> models and human GWAS data in a novel human 3D cell-based model with real-life scenario relevant prolonged and low-level exposures, offering further mechanistic insights into the ramifications of BPA exposure on the developing human brain and consequently, later life neurological disorders.

### Keywords
Bisphenol a, Dohad, New approach methodology, Neural stem cells, Human-induced pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Bachuki Shashikadze

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Fröhlich
Laboratory for Functional Genome Analysis (LAFUGA), Gene Center, LMU Munich, 81377 Munich, Germany


