### Accession
PXD018363

### Title
Proteome-scale correlation analysis between urinary extracellular vesicle (uEV) and kidney

### Description
We profiled the proteomes of uEV and kidney from twelve rats. Six of them were under a standard diet while the other six under a high potassium diet for 4 days. During the revision stage of this project, we further put five rats in metabolic cages for two days, fed with the high potassium diet for 2 days. We made proteome-scale correlation analyses of uEV and kidney using absolute label-free quantification algorithm iBAQ under these three conditions: control, high K 4day, and high K 2 day. We also did label-free quantification (LFQ) to investigate the protein abundance changes in uEV and kidney between control and high K 4day.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve rats were housed in metabolic cages for four days, with six of them under standard diet and six under high potassium diet (potassium citrate). During the revision stage of this project, we further put five rats in metabolic cages for two days, fed with the high potassium diet (potassium citrate). Urines were collected for the last day, and kidneys were harvested on day four (or day two). Following protein extraction from twelve urine samples and twelve kidney samples, FASP was used to digest all samples. LC-MS/MS shotgun proteomics coupled with extensive pre-fractionation was used to profile the proteomes of all samples individually.

### Data Protocol
For iBAQ analysis, three groups of analyzes were made: control, high K 2day and high K 4 day. All raw files from one sample were combined and searched in MaxQuant (v 1.6.3.4) with the iBAQ algorithm enabled. Database was rat Uniprot database downloaded on 11 September 2020. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification, while acetylation of protein N-term, oxidation of methionine, carbamylation of lysine and peptide N-terminus, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications. Peptide and protein false discovery rates were both set at 0.01. All other parameters were default. For LFQ analysis, 48 raw files from rats on control diet (6 rats*8 fractions) and 48 raw files from rats fed a high K+ diet (4 days) were combined into one MaxQuant (v 1.6.3.4) search, with 48 designated as fractions in control experiment and the other 48 as fractions in high K experiment. Since high K 2day data was acquired on a different instrument (Orbitrap Fusion), they were not included in LFQ analysis. uEV and kidney samples were searched separately. All search parameters were the same as described in iBAQ section, with the following additional LFQ settings: LFQ, fast LFQ, stabilize large LFQ ratios enabled, and LFQ minimum ratio count set at 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urinary extracellular vesicle (uev), Correlation, Proteome, Kidney

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Qi Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Robert A. Fenton
Department of Biomedicine, Aarhus University, Denmark


