### Accession
PXD039944

### Title
Liver epithelial cell-specific loss of mTOR aggravates tumor development in a murine model of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis related hepatocellular carcinoma

### Description
Due to the global obesity epidemic the incidences of nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and NASH-related hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) are on the rise. Non-invasive treatment options for HCC are scarce and innovative therapy regimes are urgently needed. The mechanistic target of rapamycin (mTOR) is of fundamental importance for the regulation of cellular metabolism and mTOR pathway activation is frequently observed in HCCs. However, mTOR inhibition failed to benefit the clinical course of HCC patients, demonstrating the need for a better understanding of the molecular and functional consequences of blocking mTOR signaling in primary liver cancer. To address this, we established a tumor cell-specific inactivation of mTOR in a murine model of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH)-driven HCC. After 30 weeks of diet, tumor, and liver volumes as well as whole body fat percentage were evaluated by non-invasive in vivo micro-computed tomography (µCT), and livers were collected for subsequent analyses. Unexpectedly, the tumor load exploded in mTORLEC livers and knock-out mice showed improved glucose tolerance among other signs of major metabolic alterations. Detailed proteome analysis indicated extensive changes in arachidonic and bile acid metabolism in the liver. The simulation of metformin intervention via kinetic modeling predicted the existence of a therapeutic window, in which the drug selectively targets mTORLEC HCC tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Tumor nodules and surrounding liver tissue samples were preserved as described above. Individual samples were lysed in ice-cold 8 M urea in 50 mM ammoniumbicarbonate (ABC) for 30 minutes on ice and then subjected to 10 sonication cycles (30 sec on/30 sec off) in a bioruptor device. The lysates were then centrifuged for 15 min at 4°C at 21000g. The resulting supernatants were quantified by using a bicinchoninic acid assay (Thermo Scientific). 1 mg of each lysate was reduced with 4 mM DTT in 50 mM ABC for 30 min at 56°C followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ABC for 30 min in the dark. The samples were then digested with LysC (1:100 w/w, Wako) in 8 M urea for 4 hours at 37°C followed by dilution in 3 volumes of 50 mM ABC to yield a 2 M urea solution. Trypsin was added (1:100 w/w, Thermo Scientific) and left for digestion overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified with 10% formic acid (FA), cleaned using Sep-Pak C18 1 cc Vac Cartridges (Waters) and lyophilized. 100 µg of each sample were subjected to fractionation using a high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, cat.no. 84868). Eight fractions per sample were generated according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All fractions were lyophilized, resuspended in 3% FA/5% Acetonitril (ACN) and loaded onto a nanoLC system (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometry measurement was performed as described previously (34). Briefly, the peptides were first trapped on a trapping column (Acclaim PepMap100, C18, 5 µm, 100 Å, 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, Thermo Scientific). The peptides were then separated on an analytical column at 45°C (Easyspray 50 cm column (ES803; Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was carried out using a 165-minute gradient 0–10 min: 5% buffer B (buffer A: 0.1 % FA; buffer B: 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % FA), 10–100 min: 5–20 % buffer B, 100-138 min: 20-35 % buffer B, 138-141 min.: 35-99 % buffer B, 141-146 min: 99% buffer B, 146-149 min: 99-5 % buffer B, 149-165 min: 5 % buffer B. Subsequent analyses were performed on a Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in data dependent mode. Spray settings: spray voltage:2 kV; and the capillary temperature: 250 °C. All samples were analyzed on a MS settings: 70,000 resolution; AGC target, 1e6; maximum injection time, 50 milliseconds; scan range, 350-1600 m/z. dd-MS2 settings were: 17,500 resolution; AGC target: 1e5; maximum injection time: 55 milliseconds; top 20 precursor fragmentation; isolation window, 2.0 m/z; collision energy, 27. dd settings were: minimum AGC, 5e2; 20 second dynamic exclusion; only 2+ to 5+ peptides. Analysis of raw data was carried out using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) with the built-in Andromeda search engine. The search was conducted against the Mus musculus UniProt database version 12/2020 (only reviewed and canonical sequences) using MaxQuant default settings. Specific settings: Specific protease: Trypsin (two missed cleavages); fixed modification: Carbamidomethylation (Cys); variable modifications: Oxidation (Met) and N-terminal protein acetylation. FDR: 0.01 on both protein and PSM level; minimum peptide length: seven amino acids. Quantification was done using the label free quantitation algorithm from MaxQuant.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant results file (proteinGroups.txt) was imported into Perseus (version 1.6.14.0). Entries comprised of reversed hits, contaminants, and “only identified by site” were removed. The resulting data was filtered for entries that were identified in all five biological replicates of at least one group (four groups: tumor/non-tumor mTORLEC(DMBA-WD) and tumor/non-tumor WT(DMBA-WD)(labelled tko, ko, twt and wt, respectively)). This resulted in 4430 protein groups, where missing values were subjected to imputation using the Perseus default settings and two-sample tests were performed on the four different groups. These resulting data were then used for generating Volcano plots (Fig. 8 and supplementary figure 5 B-C; generated using Instant Clue with the following settings: p-value ≤ 0.05 and a ratio of ≥2-fold change (> 1.30103 (–log (10) p-value) and > 2 (log (2) ratio). Proteins whose ratios were fulfilling these requirements, were considered significantly regulated. STRING (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) analysis for interactions and enrichments was performed using the stringApp (version 1.7.1 (confidence score cutoff 0.40, no additional interactors) on STRING (v11) with default values in Cytoscape (version 3.8.2).

### Publication Abstract
Obesity and associated nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) are on the rise globally. NASH became an important driver of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in recent years. Activation of the central metabolic regulator mTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) is frequently observed in HCCs. However, mTOR inhibition failed to improve the outcome of HCC therapies, demonstrating the need for a better understanding of the molecular and functional consequences of mTOR blockade. We established a murine NASH-driven HCC model based on long-term western diet feeding combined with hepatocellular mTOR-inactivation. We evaluated tumor load and whole-body fat percentage via &#xb5;CT-scans, analyzed metabolic blood parameters and tissue proteome profiles. Additionally, we used a bioinformatic model to access liver and HCC mitochondrial metabolic functions. The tumor burden was massively increased via mTOR-knockout. Several signs argue for extensive metabolic reprogramming of glucose, fatty acid, bile acid and cholesterol metabolism. Kinetic modeling revealed reduced oxygen consumption in KO-tumors. NASH-derived HCC pathogenesis is driven by metabolic disturbances and should be considered separately from those caused by other etiologies. We conclude that mTOR functions as tumor suppressor in hepatocytes especially under long-term western diet feeding. However, some of the detrimental consequences of this diet are attenuated by mTOR blockade.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Liver, Hcc, Proteome, Label free

### Affiliations
Proteomics Facility, IZKF Aachen, University Clinic RWTH Aachen
Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University Clinic RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Preisinger

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Kroh
Department of General, Visceral and Transplantation Surgery, University Clinic RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany


