### Accession
PXD010793

### Title
Estimating the Contribution of Proteasomal Spliced Peptides to the HLA-I Ligandome

### Description
Spliced peptides are short protein fragments spliced together in the proteasome by peptide bond formation. True estimation of the contribution of proteasome-spliced peptides (PSPs) to the global Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) ligandome is critical. A recent study suggested that PSPs contribute up to 30% of the HLA ligandome. We performed a thorough reanalysis of the reported results using multiple computational tools and various validation steps and concluded that only a fraction of the proposed PSPs passes the quality filters. To better estimate the actual number of PSPs, we present an alternative workflow. We performed de-novo sequencing of the HLA-peptide spectra and discarded all de-novo sequences found in the UniProt database. We checked whether the remaining de-novo sequences could match spliced peptides from human proteins. The spliced sequences were appended to the UniProt fasta file, which was searched by two search tools at a FDR of 1%. We find that 2-6% of the HLA ligandome could be explained as spliced protein fragments. The majority of these potential PSPs have good peptide-spectrum match properties and are predicted to bind the respective HLA molecules. However, it remains to be shown how many of these potential PSPs actually originate from proteasomal splicing events.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analyses and identification of selected synthetic HLA-Ip. Synthetic peptides (PEPotech Heavy grade 3, Thermo Fisher Scientific) (listed in Supplemental Table 3) corresponding to peptides identified from Fib data were mixed and desalted on a C-18 spin column (Harvard Apparatus, 74-4101) and measured at a total amount of 10 and 20 pmol. Synthetic peptides were separated by a nanoflow HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Odense) and coupled on-line to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). We packed a 20 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter column with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) in buffer A (0.5% acetic acid). Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 2–30% buffer B (80% ACN and 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min over 90 min. Data was acquired using a data-dependent ‘top 10’ method. We acquired full scan MS spectra at a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with an Auto gain control (AGC) target value of 3e6 ions. Ten most abundant ions were sequentially isolated, activated by Higher-energy collisional dissociation and accumulated to an AGC target value of 1e5 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms. In case of unassigned precursor ion charge states, or charge states of four and above, no fragmentation was performed. The peptide match option was disabled. MS/MS resolution was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z. Selected ions form fragmentation were dynamically excluded from further selection for 20 seconds. We employed the MaxQuant settings mentioned above for synthetic peptides identification.

### Data Protocol
Confirmation of identification of spliced peptides using MaxQuant and Comet. We employed the MaxQuant platform (17) version 1.5.5.1 and the Comet software release 2016.01  (18) to search the peak lists against a fasta file containing the UniProt database (Homo_sapiens_UP000005640_9606, 21,026 entries) and a  list of 247 frequently observed contaminants. For each sample, we added to the fasta file the list of DeNovo_spliced peptide sequence candidates. For Fib, we also added the 1,154 spliced peptides identified by Liepe et al. (3), which we named LM_spliced. The list of spliced peptides was kindly provided to us by the authors of (3) (Supplemental Data 6, type = “psp”). Peptides with a length between 8 and 25 AA were allowed. MaxQuant parameters: The second peptide identification option in Andromeda was enabled. The enzyme specificity was set as unspecific. A FDR of 1% was required for peptides and no protein FDR was set. The initial allowed mass deviation of the precursor ion was set to 6 ppm and the maximum fragment mass deviation was set to 20 ppm. For Fib, Methionine oxidation (15.994915 Da) were set as variable modification, however modified peptides were removed at first for the direct comparison to the Liepe’s data. For the additional modification searches in all samples, methionine oxidation N-terminal acetylation, as well as glutamine/asparagine deamidation (+0.98402 Da) were set as variable modifications. Comet parameters: activation method: HCD, peptide mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02, fragments: b- and y-ions, precursor tolerance, and modifications were the same as in MaxQuant settings. The output files summarizing MaxQuant and Comet result files are provided as Supplemental Data 7-16, and explanation of the column headers are provided in Supplemental Table 2.  Comparison of MS/MS annotations of endogenous HLA-Ip and their synthetic counterparts. To investigate if spliced peptides match the MS/MS spectra better than possible alternative sequences we first compared the MS/MS scans identified by Liepe et al. as spliced peptides and those identified by MaxQuant. The mapping to the relevant MS scans and their Mascot ion scores were kindly provided to us by the authors of (3) (Supplemental Data 6). For the Fib data, we selected three MS/MS scans of LM_spliced peptides identified both by MaxQuant and by Liepe et al., and 21 MS/MS scans corresponding to LM_spliced peptides that MaxQuant identified instead as UniProt peptides. This selection was not biased and was not based on prior knowledge, which would favor MaxQuant. We synthesized the 21 pairs of peptide sequences and the three LM_spliced peptide sequences and analyzed them by MS as mentioned above. For visual inspection we printed the endogenous and synthetic spectra to pdf files. For each of the 21 pairs, we calculated the similarity between the spectrum of the eluted peptide from Fib, annotated as LM_spliced and the spectrum of the synthetic LM_spliced peptide. We also calculated the similarity between the spectrum of the eluted peptide from Fib annotated as a UniProt peptide, and the spectrum of the synthetic Uniprot peptide. Similarly, we calculated the similarity between the three spectra of the identically identified spliced sequences and the spectra of their synthetic counterparts. The similarity was computed by the cosine score (value between 0 and 1, where a value of 0 corresponds to spectra with no peaks in common and a value of 1 to identical spectra) (19). The MzJava class library (20) was used to read the .mgf spectrum files and to calculate the similarity.

### Publication Abstract
Spliced peptides are short protein fragments spliced together in the proteasome by peptide bond formation. True estimation of the contribution of proteasome-spliced peptides (PSPs) to the global human leukocyte antigen (HLA) ligandome is critical. A recent study suggested that PSPs contribute up to 30% of the HLA ligandome. We performed a thorough reanalysis of the reported results using multiple computational tools and various validation steps and concluded that only a fraction of the proposed PSPs passes the quality filters. To better estimate the actual number of PSPs, we present an alternative workflow. We performed <i>de novo</i> sequencing of the HLA-peptide spectra and discarded all <i>de novo</i> sequences found in the UniProt database. We checked whether the remaining <i>de novo</i> sequences could match spliced peptides from human proteins. The spliced sequences were appended to the UniProt fasta file, which was searched by two search tools at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. We find that 2-6% of the HLA ligandome could be explained as spliced protein fragments. The majority of these potential PSPs have good peptide-spectrum match properties and are predicted to bind the respective HLA molecules. However, it remains to be shown how many of these potential PSPs actually originate from proteasomal splicing events.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidomics, Lc-msms, Proteasomal splicing, Hla-i peptides

### Affiliations
UNIL/CHUV
Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne

### Submitter
Michal Bassani-Sternberg

### Lab Head
Dr Michal Bassani-Sternberg
Center of experimental therapeutics Department of oncology UNIL CHUV Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Biopôle 3 Chemin des Boveresses 155, CH-1066 Lausanne


