### Accession
PXD003348

### Title
Quantification of sulfenic acid on model protein

### Description
Aldolase contains eight free cysteine residues without disulfide formation in its native state, which makes it a suitable model to manipulate the oxidative modifications on cysteine. H2O2 was chosen to treat aldolase since the principle product between which is sulfenic acid.To assess the reduction of the newly formed sulfenic acids on aldolase by arsenite, a differential alkylation strategy was adapted.To further investigate the formation of other reversible cysteine oxidations such as disulfide on aldolase, arsenite was replaced by DTT in the differential alkylation method to reduce all the reversible cysteine oxidations.To further validate the selectivity of the reducing ability of arsenite on sulfenic acid but not other oxidative modifications especially disulfide, lysozyme was employed in the differential alkylation method. Lysozyme has 8 cysteine residues all bound into disulfide bonds, thereby was not treated with H2O2 to avoid further oxidation.

### Sample Protocol
Typically, aldolase (1.6 µL from a stock of 25 µg/ µL in H2O) in Tris buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.05 M GuanidineHCl, pH 6.5) was treated with 10 µM or 20 µM H2O2 (Figure 1, right panel) for 1 h at 37°C to convert free thiols into sulfenic acid or subsequently disulfides. Then the mixture was blocked by adding a 100-fold molar ratio of NEM for 1 h at 37°C (reagent excess here refers to molar excess over the number of cysteines per protein) to block the free thiols. Excess NEM was removed using Amicon Centrifugal Filter Units with 30 kDa cutoff (Millipore, Canada) and three times buffer exchange with 200 µL Tris buffer. After that, sulfenic acids were reduced by adding a 1000-folde molar ratio of arsenite and alkylated with 3100-fold molar ratio of iodoacetamide (IAA). The pKa of cysteine typically falls into the range of 8.3~8.5 and the conjugate base derived from cysteine, the thiolate, exhibits the high reactivity with sulfenic acid. As both those processes should be avoided, an acidic environment is favored; therefore the pH of the whole buffer system in this study was set to 6.5. In parallel, this protocol was repeated with arsenite replaced by DTT. Samples were then labeled with IAA and digested with trypsin (30:1 (w/w) protein : trypsin) overnight at 37°C and analyzed by LTQ-FT. In the mean time, H2O2 treated aldolase was also reacted with a 1000-fold molar ratio of dimedone to label sulfenic acid directly for 1 h at 37°C.   On the other hand, lysozyme (1.8 µl from a stock of 20 µg/µL) in Tris buffer (50 mM Tris, 0.05 M GuanidineHCl, pH 6.5) also went through differential alkylation method. Three reducing conditions were applied on lysozyme including non-reducing, arsenite, and DTT. Digested peptides were analyzed by LTQ-FT.

### Data Protocol
Based on the spectra of the samples analyzed by LC-MS/MS, the peak area of a thiol group with a modification (i.e. IAA modification or NEM modification) was determined as follows: the ion chromatograms of the cysteine-containing (cys-containing) peptide with different charge states in the full MS scan were extracted and their peak areas were summed up as the total peak area of this specific cysteine. To quantitatively assess the extent of sulfenic acid modification, the IAA-modification percentage was calculated based on the equation: IAA-modification percentage = peak area of IAA-modification/(peak area of IAA-modification + peak area of NEM-modification).

### Publication Abstract
Physiological stimuli such as thrombin, or pathological stimuli such as lysophosphatidic acid (LPA), activate platelets. The activated platelets bind to monocytes through P-selectin-PSGL-1 interactions but also release the contents of their granules, commonly called "platelet releasate". It is known that monocytes in contact with platelet releasate produce reactive oxygen species (ROS). Reversible cysteine oxidation by ROS is considered to be a potential regulator of protein function. In a previous study, we used THP-1 monocytic cells exposed to LPA- or thrombin-induced platelet releasate and a modified biotin switch assay to unravel the biological processes that are influenced by reversible cysteine oxidation. To gain a better understanding of the redox regulation of monocytes in atherosclerosis, we have now altered the modified biotin switch to selectively quantify protein sulfenic acid, a subpopulation of reversible cysteine oxidation. Using arsenite as reducing agent in the modified biotin switch assay, we were able to quantify 1161 proteins, in which more than 100 sulfenic acid sites were identified. Bioinformatics analysis of the quantified sulfenic acid sites highlighted the relevant, previously missed biological process of monocyte transendothelial migration, which included integrin &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>. Flow cytometry validated the activation of LFA-1 (&#x3b1;<sub>L</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>) and Mac-1 (&#x3b1;<sub>M</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>), two subfamilies of integrin &#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> complexes, on human primary monocytes following platelet releasate treatment. The activation of LFA-1 was mediated by ROS from NADPH oxidase (NOX) activation. Production of ROS and activation of LFA-1 in human primary monocytes were independent of P-selectin-PSGL-1 interaction. Our results proved the modified biotin switch assay to be a powerful tool with the ability to reveal new regulatory mechanisms and identify new therapeutic targets.

### Keywords
Sulfenic acid, Aldolase, Arsenite, Lysozyme

### Affiliations
Univerisity of British Columbia
Professor, University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Ru Li

### Lab Head
Dr Juergen Kast
Professor, University of British Columbia


