### Accession
PXD006536

### Title
Proteome, Metabolite, and Cell Wall Profiling of an Elongating Rice Stem Internode

### Description
LC-MS/MS proteomics data was generated as part of an Isobaric tag (iTRAQ 4-plex) labeling experiment conducted on Oryza sativa ssp. japonica cv. Kitaake.

### Sample Protocol
Stem internodes II at booting stage (BBCH stage 45) were harvested as the elongating stem internode for cell wall, proteomics, and soluble metabolite profiling.

### Data Protocol
Data was searched with MSGF+ using PNNL's DMS processing pipeline

### Publication Abstract
Internodes of grass stems function in mechanical support, transport, and, in some species, are a major sink organ for carbon in the form of cell wall polymers. This study reports cell wall composition, proteomic, and metabolite analyses of the rice elongating internode. Cellulose, lignin, and xylose increase as a percentage of cell wall material along eight segments of the second rice internode (internode II) at booting stage, from the younger to the older internode segments, indicating active cell wall synthesis. Liquid-chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) of trypsin-digested proteins from this internode at booting reveals 2,547 proteins with at least two unique peptides in two biological replicates. The dataset includes many glycosyltransferases, acyltransferases, glycosyl hydrolases, cell wall-localized proteins, and protein kinases that have or may have functions in cell wall biosynthesis or remodeling. Phospho-enrichment of internode II peptides identified 21 unique phosphopeptides belonging to 20 phosphoproteins including a leucine rich repeat-III family receptor like kinase. GO over-representation and KEGG pathway analyses highlight the abundances of proteins involved in biosynthetic processes, especially the synthesis of secondary metabolites such as phenylpropanoids and flavonoids. LC-MS/MS of hot methanol-extracted secondary metabolites from internode II at four stages (booting/elongation, early mature, mature, and post mature) indicates that internode secondary metabolites are distinct from those of roots and leaves, and differ across stem maturation. This work fills a void of in-depth proteomics and metabolomics data for grass stems, specifically for rice, and provides baseline knowledge for more detailed studies of cell wall synthesis and other biological processes characteristic of internode development, toward improving grass agronomic properties.

### Keywords
Metabolomics, Internode, Proteomics, Cell wall

### Affiliations
University of Oklahoma
Pacific Northwest National Laboratory

### Submitter
Matthew Monroe

### Lab Head
Dr Laura E. Bartley
University of Oklahoma


