### Accession
PXD011996

### Title
Depletion of high molecular mass proteins for the identification of small proteins and small open reading frame encoded peptides in cellular proteomes

### Description
We present an acetonitrile-based precipitation methodology which depletes the majority of proteins above ca. 15 kDa. Parameters such as depletion mixture composition, pH and temperature, were optimized using a model protein mixture and the method was evaluated in comparison to the established differential solubility method. The approach was applied to the analysis of the low molecular weight proteome of the archaea Methanosarcina mazei by means of LC-MS. The data clearly show a beneficial effect of reduction of complexity, especially in terms of the quality of MS/MS based identification of small proteins. This fast, detergent-free method allowed for, with minimal sample manipulation, the successful identification of several not yet identified short open reading frame encoded peptides in M. mazei.

### Sample Protocol
A simple protein mixture consisting of six proteins (bovine insulin, bovine serum albumin, lactoglobulin and casein from bovine milk, equine cytochrome C, and ovalbumin) was utilised for method optimisation. For the initial experiments, the six-protein mixture was solubilised in triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) at a concentration of 100 mM.  Cultivation of M. mazei Gö1 under nitrogen limiting conditions was performed as described earlier on minimal media in an anaerobic environment until an OD@600nm of 0.6 was reached. The cells were concentrated via centrifugation, washed in 100 mM TEAB, and then disrupted via freeze thaw cycling and homogenisation in a mixing mill with glass beads in lysis buffer (100 mM TEAB, 1 x protease inhibitor cocktail, pH 7.4). The protein concentration was determined via BCA protein assay and aliquots of the samples were stored at -20°C until required.    Depletion of the high molecular mass proteome, SDS-PAGE and protein digestion Following optimization of the parameters for the depletion of the larger molecular mass proteome the following standardised procedure was performed for all samples. During the optimisation process, minor alterations to the procedure were employed. These are stated where appropriate.   Aliquots of 100 µg of total protein lysate were concentrated to near (but not complete) dryness via vacuum evaporation (speedvac). The samples were then made up to a volume of 20 µl of either 210 mM NaCl (acidic depletion mixture with final concentrations of 50mM NaCl/0.1%TFA), or 420 mM TEAB (basic depletion mixture with a final concentration of 100 mM TEAB). The samples were vortexed to ensure solubilisation in the solution prior to the addition of 64 µl of ACN plus 0.1 % TFA. The samples were vigorously vortexed for 30 sec before incubation at 20ºC on a temperature controlled shaker (1300 rpm) for 1 h. Following incubation the samples were centrifuged (21,000 x g for 20 min at 20ºC) and the supernatants were transferred to new eppendorf tubes. The samples were dried down via vacuum centrifugation prior to further analysis.  For visualisation of the isolated proteins, SDS-PAGE was performed, and the gels were stained with either Coomassie Brilliant Blue (CBB) or Silver staining. For the analysis of proteins via LC-MS, protein samples were suspended in 100mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, and reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) (10 mM, 56°C, 1 h), before alkylation was performed with iodoacetamide (50 mM, RT, 30 min). Enzymatic digestion was performed with Trypsin (enzyme to protein ratio of 1:50, 37°C, overnight). All samples were then cleaned on a single use solid phase extraction cartridge (as per manufactures protocol) before the peptides were eluted (60% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and dried down via vacuum centrifugation.   Depletion of high molecular weight protein using the different solubility method In order to evaluate our high mass protein depletion procedure we performed also and established differential solubility (DS) procedure which is based on precipitation under denaturing conditions followed by re-solubilisation. An aliquot of our sample was diluted 1:2 with 20μL of denaturating solution (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, and 20 mM DTT), slowly dropped into 900 μL ice-cold acetone, and immediately stirred at 4 °C for 1 h, followed by centrifugation at 19,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The precipitate was taken up in 200 μL of 70% ACN containing 12 mM HCl and mixed at 4 °C for 1 h, then centrifuged again at 19,000 x g for 15 min at 4 °C. The low molecular mass proteins/peptides were extracted into the supernatant.  LC-MS conditions and database settings  Separation of samples via liquid chromatography was performed on a Dionex U3000 UHPLC system (Thermo, Dreieich, Germany) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap 100 column (2 μm, 75 μm× 500 mm) coupled online to a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo, Bremen, Germany) utilizing HCD fragmentation at a normalised collision energy (NCE) of 27.5. A full scan MS acquisition was performed (resolution 70,000, AGC target 3e6, max IT 50ms) with subsequent MS/MS (resolution 17,500 AGC target 1e5, max IT 100ms) of the top 15 most intense ions, dynamic exclusion was enabled (30 sec duration). The eluents used for LC were eluent A: 0.05% formic acid (FA), eluent B: 80% ACN + 0.04% FA. The separation was performed over a programmed 215-minute run. Initial chromatographic conditions were 4% B for 2 minutes followed by linear gradients from 4% to 20% B over 120 minutes and 20% to 40% B over 60 minutes, an 8-minute increase to 90% B, and 9 minutes at 90% B. An inter-run equilibration of the column was achieved by 15 minutes at 4% B. A flow rate of 300 nl/min was used. Before injection the samples were re-suspended in loading eluent (3% ACN, 0.1% TFA), and approximately 1 μg of sample was injected per run.

### Data Protocol
The output data files from the mass spectrometer were processed using the Proteome Discoverer software package (Version 2.2.0.388). The individual files were searched using the Sequest search algorithm against a protein database containing the canonical proteins of M. mazei (M. mazei Gö1 accessed from UniProt on the 2017/06/26) as well as a collection of predicted sORF protein products and the cRAP list of common laboratory contaminants. Enzyme: Trypsin (full), precursor mass tolerance: 7 ppm, fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da, Fixed modification: Carbamidimethyl (C), Dynamic modification: Oxidation (M) / Deamidation (N, Q) / Acetyl (protein N-terminus).  The Percolator node was used for false discovery rate (FDR) calculation and a target protein target FDR of 0.01 was sought

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetonitrile precipitation, Peptidomics, Short open reading frame, Methanosarcina mazei

### Affiliations
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany
Systematic Proteome Research & Bioanalytics, University of Kiel

### Submitter
Andreas Tholey

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Tholey
Systematische Proteomforschung & Bioanalytik - Institut für Experimentelle Medizin (IEM) Christian-Albrechts-Universität zu Kiel Niemannsweg 11 (Campus UK-SH, Kiel) 24105 Kiel, Germany


