### Accession
PXD010612

### Title
CIP2A negatively regulates Th17 differentiation

### Description
Interleukin 17 (IL-17) producing T helper 17 (Th17) cells are critical drivers of pathogenesis in a variety of autoimmune and inflammatory diseases. Strategies to mitigate excessive Th17 response thus remain an attractive target for immunotherapies. Here we report that Cancerous Inhibitor of Protein Phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) regulates IL-17 production by Th17 cells in human and mouse. Using CIP2A knock-out (KO) mice and siRNA-mediated CIP2A silencing in human primary CD4+ T cells, we demonstrated that CIP2A silencing results in a significant increase in IL-17 production. Interestingly, CIP2A deficient Th17 cells were characterized by increased strength and duration of STAT3 (Y705) phosphorylation. Genome-wide gene expression profile as well as the p-STAT3 (Y705) interactome of CIP2A deficient Th17 cells identified that CIP2A regulates the strength of the interaction between Acylglycerol kinase (AGK) and STAT3, and thereby, modulates STAT3 phosphorylation as well as expression of IL-17 in Th17 cells. Our results uncover the physiological function of CIP2A in Th17 cells and provides new opportunities for therapeutic intervention in Th17 cell mediated diseases.

### Sample Protocol
For STAT3 and CIP2A pull downs an IgG-bound phospho-specific (Y705) STAT3 antibody and CIP2A specific antibody respectively were used, with an equivalent IgG antibody used as control. The pull downs were made using a Pierce™ MS-Compatible Magnetic IP Kit, (Thermo Scientific cat#90409). The IP eluent samples from four biological replicates were denatured with urea, reduced, alkylated and tryptic digested for proteomics analysis by LC-MS/MS. An EASY-nLC 1200 UPLC system with a Q Exactive HF quadrupole – Orbitrap mass spectrometer was used.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was made using MaxQuant with an inbuilt Andromeda search engine (Cox and Mann, 2008; Cox et al., 2011). The mass spectrometry raw files were searched against a UniProt human protein sequence database (version June 2016, 20,237 entries). The database search parameter allowed two missed cleavage, cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation as a variable modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 at peptide and protein level was applied. MaxQuant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate the relative protein intensity profiles across the samples (Cox J et al Mol Cell Proteomics 2014)  The “match between run” option was enabled to perform matching across the mass spectrometric measurements.   The Perseus statistics and informatics platform was used to filter proteins detected by site only, or reversed sequences, and removing contaminants and proteins detected with less than two unique peptides (Cox et al., 2014; Tyanova et al., 2016)

### Publication Abstract
Cancerous Inhibitor of Protein Phosphatase 2A (CIP2A) is an oncogene and a potential cancer therapy target protein. Accordingly, a better understanding of the physiological function of CIP2A, especially in the context of immune cells, is a prerequisite for its exploitation in cancer therapy. Here, we report that CIP2A negatively regulates interleukin (IL)-17 production by Th17 cells in human and mouse. Interestingly, concomitant with increased IL-17 production, CIP2A-deficient Th17 cells had increased strength and duration of STAT3 phosphorylation. We analyzed the interactome of phosphorylated STAT3 in CIP2A-deficient and CIP2A-sufficient Th17 cells and indicated together with genome-wide gene expression profiling, a role of Acylglycerol Kinase (AGK) in the regulation of Th17 differentiation by CIP2A. We demonstrated that CIP2A regulates the strength of the interaction between AGK and STAT3, and thereby modulates STAT3 phosphorylation and expression of IL-17 in Th17 cells.

### Keywords
Th17 cell differentiation, Stat3 phosphorylation

### Affiliations
Turku Centre for Biotechnology, Turku, Finland
Academy Professor, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland

### Submitter
Santosh Bhosale

### Lab Head
Dr Riitta Lahesmaa
Academy Professor, Turku Centre for Biotechnology, University of Turku and Abo Akademi University, Turku, Finland


