### Accession
PXD027888

### Title
Analysis of exosomes secreted during cardiac differentiation

### Description
Exosomes were isolated from differentiating stem cells at various stages such as pluripotency, mesoderm, cardiac mesoderm, and cardiomyocytes. Proteomics were done on isolated exosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Exosome proteins were processed using filter-aided Sample preparation, with Trypsinization done for 12 h.Digested samples were run through a C18 column. An IDA method of data acquisition with TOF MS and MS MS was used.

### Data Protocol
Protein Pilot was used for data processing. An FDA of 5% was set so that only proteins with unused scores of over 1.4 were used for analysis. All data was normalized with respective to protein concentration of the exosomes and albumin content.

### Publication Abstract
Efforts to direct the specification of human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) to therapeutically important somatic cell types have focused on identifying proper combinations of soluble cues. Yet, whether exosomes, which mediate intercellular communication, play a role in the differentiation remains unexplored. We took a first step toward addressing this question by subjecting hPSCs to stage-wise specification toward cardiomyocytes (CMs) in scalable stirred-suspension cultures and collecting exosomes. Samples underwent liquid chromatography (LC)/mass spectrometry (MS) and subsequent proteomic analysis revealed over 300 unique proteins from four differentiation stages including proteins such as PPP2CA, AFM, MYH9, MYH10, TRA2B, CTNNA1, EHD1, ACTC1, LDHB, and GPC4, which are linked to cardiogenic commitment. There was a significant correlation of the protein composition of exosomes with the hPSC line and stage of commitment. Differentiating hPSCs treated with exosomes from hPSC-derived CMs displayed improved efficiency of CM formation compared to cells without exogenously added vesicles. Collectively, these results demonstrate that exosomes from hPSCs induced along the CM lineage contain proteins linked to the specification process with modulating effects and open avenues for enhancing the biomanufacturing of stem cell products for cardiac diseases.

### Keywords
Exosome, Cardiac differentiation, Lcms, Human pluripotent stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University
Tufts University

### Submitter
Preeti Ashok

### Lab Head
Dr Emmanuel Tzanakakis
Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Tufts University


