### Accession
PXD024060

### Title
Alteration of microbiota antibody-mediated immune selection contributes to dysbiosis in IBD

### Description
The goal of this project is to find out whether human intestinal IgA1 and IgA2 secretion, transport and reactivity towards the microbiota might be involved in dysbiosis induction during Crohn’s disease and Ulcerative colitis. Mass spectrometry was used to characterize SIgA from Crohn’s disease patient and Ulcerative colitis patient, in term of O- and N-glycosylation in order to study their reverse transcytosis capacity and their role in intestinal inflammation.

### Sample Protocol
IgA1 and IgA2 were purified from Crohn’s disease patients and Ulcerative colitis patients. Samples were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide then digested with trypsin.  Peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system coupled with a Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Higher-energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) and Electron-Transfer Higher-energy Collision Dissociation (EThcD) were used to characterize the glycosylation patterns.

### Data Protocol
Data processing was performed using SEQUEST Proteome Discoverer 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against Homo sapiens database (Uniprot) for protein identification. The search parameters were: mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively for MS and MS/MS modes, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) and N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da) set as variable modifications, and cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021Da) set as fixed modification, two missed cleavages allowed. Byonic’s Glycopeptide Search (Byonic™ 2.6 in Proteome Discoverer, Protein Metrics Inc., San Carlos, CA) was used to characterize the glycoforms against a custom database including Human Ig alpha 1 heavy chain, Ig alpha 2 heavy chain, Immunoglobulin J chain and Polymeric Immunoglobulin Receptor sequences. The search parameters were set as follows: 10 ppm and 20 ppm mass tolerance for MS and MS/MS respectively, cysteine carbamidomethylation set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Two internal databases of N-linked and O-linked glycans containing 182 common human N-glycans and 70 human O-glycans respectively were used during automatic glycan search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycosylations, Intestinal disease, Immune mucosal response, Iga modifications

### Affiliations
University of Bordeaux
CBMN UMR5248 CNRS-Univ. Bordeaux

### Submitter
Katell Bathany

### Lab Head
Dr Caroline TOKARSKI
CBMN UMR5248 CNRS-Univ. Bordeaux


