### Accession
PXD009158

### Title
Characterisation of protein ubiquitination using UbiSite technology

### Description
We present a novel immune-affinity-based method UbiSite for capture and further identification of ubiquitination sites by MS for any cell line or tissue sample. Implementing the UbiSite methodology for a large-scale experiment we successfully mapped 62000 unique ubiquitination sites on protein substrates for two different human cell lines. 

### Sample Protocol
Cultured cells (40 - 50 mg of total protein for one large-scale experiment) were harvested, washed two times with PBS and lysed in 10 ml lysis buffer (8 M Guanidine-HCl, 25 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8.0), sonicated and centrifuged at 15000 RCF for 30 min. Proteins were reduced with DTT at room temperature (2 mM for 30 min) and alkylated with CAA at RT (Chloroacetamide 11mM 30 min). Samples were diluted to 2M Guanidine-HCl with 25 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH8.5 and the lysates were filtrated through 0.45 µm PVDF filters (Millipore). Endopeptidase LysC were added for digestion in a 1:100 protein ratio for incubation overnight at room temperature. The peptides mixture was purified using C18 cartridges (WATERS) in accord with manufacturer's instructions and lyophilized for 24 - 36 hours. The lyophilized peptides were dissolved in 20-25 ml of IAP buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) with 0.1% Triton X-100. The dissolved peptides were spun down and filtrated through the a 0.45 µm low protein binding filter. About 400 µl of UbiSite conjugated matrix was used for immunoprecipitation for 5 hours at 4°C. After IP UbiSite beads were washed 3 times with IAP buffer without detergent and 3 times with wash solution (150 mM NaCl). Immunoprecipitated peptides were eluted from beads by incubation with 0.1% TFA (3 times for 5 minutes incubation). Pooled elutions LysC-digested peptides were either neutralized with 1 M Ammonium Bicarbonate solution to 25 mM and subjected to trypsin digestion overnight at 37°C or used directly for fractionation and LC-MS/MS analysis. Search sne files can be opened and viewed with Spectronaut Viewer (free upon registration).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were analyzed using the Spectronaut software from Biognosys using default settings. The library was generated from the fractionated DDA experiments.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Q exactive, Proteome, Jurkat, Hep2, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU)
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Christian Kelstrup

### Lab Head
Dr Blagoy Blagoev
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark (SDU)


