### Accession
PXD027499

### Title
Proteomic characterization of media conditioned by embryonic sympathetic ganglia and dorsal root ganglia

### Description
Embryonic malignant transformation is concomitant to organogenesis, often affecting multipotent and migratory progenitors. Neuroblastoma (NB) is an emblematic example, arising from neural crest progenitors and characterized by a high heterogeneity and a widely disseminated clinical presentation. Metastatic triggers from the embryonic environment are suspected but yet unknown due to limited investigation access in patients and current models. Using combinations of ex vivo and in vivo models mimicking the embryonic context coupled to proteomic and transcriptomic analyses, we identify Olfactomedin1 (OLFM1) released by sympathetic derivatives at the core of a gene program promoting NB cells decohesion, primary tumor escape and dissemination.

### Sample Protocol
Samples are conditonned media harvested from E6, E8 and E10 chick embryo and from E15.5 mouse embryo sympathetic ganglia and dorsal root ganglia cultures. The culture medium used is a Ham's F-14 medium supplemented with NDiff Neuro-2 (Sigma). Samples have been concentrated using a 10K-centricon (Merck Millipore). Proteins were then solubilized in Laemmli buffer and heated for 10 min at 95°C. They were separated by SDS-PAGE (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies), stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The very intense band containing human Transferrin (from NDiff Neuro-2 supplement, Sero-Band) was prepared separately from the rest of the sample (Complement). Resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (UltiMate 3000 and LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 µm x 5 mm precolumn (PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 µm x 250 mm column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch) using a 50-min gradient for the Transferrin bands and a 140-min gradient for the rest of the samples.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using Xcalibur (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against Uniprot database (Gallus gallus and Homo sapiens taxonomies), classical contaminant database (homemade) and the corresponding reversed databases. The Proline software was then used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide score ≥ 25, peptide length ≥ 7 amino acids, peptide-spectrum-match identification false discovery rate < 1% as calculated on scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform a compilation and grouping of the protein groups identified in the different samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Dorsal root ganglia, Conditioned medium, Mouse, Nanolc-ms/ms, Chicken, Sympathetic ganglia

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


