### Accession
PXD031816

### Title
Conoid extrusion serves as gatekeeper for entry of glideosome components into the pellicular space to control motility and invasion in Apicomplexa

### Description
Members of the apicomplexans are defined by apical cytoskeletal structures and secretory or-ganelles, tailored for motility and invasion. Gliding is powered by the actomyosin-dependent rearward translocation of apically secreted transmembrane adhesins. In Toxoplasma gondii, the conoid, composed of a cone of spiraling tubulin fibers and apposed preconoidal rings (PCRs), is an enigmatic, dynamic organelle of undefined function. Here we mapped five new components of the PCRs and deduce that the structure serves as a pivotal hub for actin polymerization and glideosome assembly. F-actin produced by Formin1 on the PCRs is used by Myosin H to generate the force for conoid extrusion. A set of conserved B-box-type zinc finger domain containing proteins in Apicomplexa is indispensable for PCRs formation, co-noid extrusion and motility in Toxoplasma and Plasmodium. Conoid dynamics directs the flux of F-actin to the pellicular space, acting as dynamic gatekeeper to tightly control parasite motility during invasion and egress.

### Sample Protocol
HDX-MS experiments were performed at the UniGe Protein Platform (University of Geneva, Switzerland) following a well-established protocol with minimal modifications. HDX reactions were done in 50 μl volumes using 380 pmol (7.6 μM) of recombinant purified PCR1/2 complex. The same procedure was applied to both PCR1/2 complexes: WT and PCR2MUT1. Briefly, 12 μl of protein complex was preincubated at RT before addition of 38 μl of deuterated buffer (20 mM Tris pH 7.5, 800 mM NaCl / D2O). Reactions were carried-out for 3, 30 and 300 sec at room temperature, and terminated by the sequential addition of 20 μl of ice-cold quenching buffer (4 M Guanidine-HCl/ 1 M NaCl/ 0.1 M NaH2PO4 pH 2.5/ 1 % formic acid). Samples were immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80 °C for up to one week. To quantify deuterium uptake, protein samples were thawed and injected in UPLC system immersed in ice. The protein was digested via two immobilized pepsin columns (Thermo #23131), and peptides were collected onto a VanGuard pre-column trap (Waters). The trap was subsequently eluted and peptides separated with a C18, 300Å, 1.7 μm particle size Fortis Bio column 100 x 2.1 mm over a gradient of 8 – 30 % buffer B over 20 min at 150 μl/ min (Buffer A: 0.1% formic acid; buffer B: 100% acetonitrile). Mass spectra were acquired on an Orbitrap Velos Pro (Thermoscientific), for ions from 400 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at 270 °C, 5 kV of ion spray voltage.

### Data Protocol
Peptides identified by data-dependent acquisition after MS/MS were analyzed by Mascot. A 73 % and 69 % sequence coverage for PCR2 and PCR1 respectively was obtained. Deuterium incorporation levels were quantified using HD examiner software (Sierra Analytics), and quality of every peptide was checked manually.

### Publication Abstract
Members of Apicomplexa are defined by apical cytoskeletal structures and secretory organelles, tailored for motility, invasion and egress. Gliding is powered by actomyosin-dependent rearward translocation of apically secreted transmembrane adhesins. In the human parasite Toxoplasma gondii, the conoid, composed of tubulin fibres and preconoidal rings (PCRs), is a dynamic organelle of undefined function. Here, using ultrastructure expansion microscopy, we established that PCRs serve as a hub for glideosome components including Formin1. We also identified components of the PCRs conserved in Apicomplexa, Pcr4 and Pcr5, that contain B-box zinc-finger domains, assemble in heterodimer and are essential for the formation of the structure. The fitness conferring Pcr6 tethers the PCRs to the cone of tubulin fibres. F-actin produced by Formin1 is used by Myosin H to generate the force for conoid extrusion which directs the flux of F-actin to the pellicular space, serving as gatekeeper to control parasite motility.

### Keywords
Apicomplexa, Hdx-ms, Plasmodium berghei, Motility, F-actin, Toxoplasma gondii, Preconoidal rings, Alphafold, Egress, Micronemes, Conoid extrusion, Invasion

### Affiliations
University of Geneva, Department of Molecular Microbiology, Geneva, Switzerland
University of Geneva, Faculty of Medicine

### Submitter
Oscar Vadas

### Lab Head
Dr Oscar Vadas
University of Geneva, Department of Molecular Microbiology, Geneva, Switzerland


