### Accession
PXD036410

### Title
Identification of proteins interacting with the NEK1-C21ORF2 complex

### Description
We and others have found that the NEK1 kinase interacts with the C21ORF2 protein. Gel filtration indicated there may be other proteins in the complex. We tried to identify such proteins by immunoprecipitating endogenous NEK1 from cells and subjecting the precipitates to mass spectrometry. We also immunoprecipitated endogenous NEK1 from cells and subjected the precipitates to mass spectrometry.  To find the full complement of NEK1 interactors, NEK1 was immunoprecipitated from ARPE-19 parental cells, and NEK1-KO cells were to control for non-specific binding. Five biological replicates were used per cell line, and after trypsinization of the precipitates, peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT) enabling quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of the 10 samples which were pooled and analysed in parallel.  To find the full complement of C21ORF2 interactors, C21ORF2 was immunoprecipitated from ARPE-19 parental cells, and C21ORF2-KO cells were to control for non-specific binding. Five biological replicates were used per cell line, and after trypsinization of the precipitates, peptides were labelled with tandem mass tags (TMT) enabling quantitative mass spectrometric analysis of the 10 samples which were pooled and analysed in parallel.

### Sample Protocol
All details regarding sample processing can be found in the accompanying manuscript.

### Data Protocol
All details regarding data processing can be found in the accompanying manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The NEK1 kinase controls ciliogenesis, mitosis, and DNA repair, and <i>NEK1</i> mutations cause human diseases including axial spondylometaphyseal dysplasia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. <i>C21ORF2</i> mutations cause a similar pattern of human diseases, suggesting close functional links with <i>NEK1</i> Here, we report that endogenous NEK1 and C21ORF2 form a tight complex in human cells. A C21ORF2 interaction domain "CID" at the C-terminus of NEK1 is necessary for its association with C21ORF2 in cells, and pathogenic mutations in this region disrupt the complex. AlphaFold modelling predicts an extended binding interface between a leucine-rich repeat domain in C21ORF2 and the NEK1-CID, and our model may explain why pathogenic mutations perturb the complex. We show that NEK1 mutations that inhibit kinase activity or weaken its association with C21ORF2 severely compromise ciliogenesis, and that C21ORF2, like NEK1 is required for homologous recombination. These data enhance our understanding of how the NEK1 kinase is regulated, and they shed light on NEK1-C21ORF2-associated diseases.

### Keywords
Kinase, Ciliogenesis, Dna repair, Nek1, C21orf2

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK

### Submitter
Frederic Lamoliatte

### Lab Head
Dr John Rouse
MRC Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, UK


