### Accession
PXD027895

### Title
Matrisome age-related changes in the mouse gastrocnemius muscle

### Description
In recent years, thanks to the great development of mass spectrometry (MS)-based high-throughput proteomic techniques, a large-scale protein characterization is less challenging. Proteomic approaches have been successfully applied to SM in different experimental models [21–24]; however, to date, there is little information on ECM proteins and how they change during ageing. The identification and quantification of ECM components and their interactions are es-sential steps to understand the role of the matrisome in sarcopenia. In this context, we combined a proteomic approach (i.e., LC-MS/MS and bioinformatic analyses) with mor-phological and morphometrical evaluations at fluorescence and transmission electron microscopy of the gastrocnemius muscle in adult and old mice. This age range has been selected since it has been observed that most of changes in muscle protein expression take place after middle age. The gastrocnemius muscle was selected for analysis since it is prevalently composed of fast-twitch fibre, which are especially affected by atrophy during aging. Our findings highlighted several modifications of ECM protein composition and organization in old mice, which likely play a role in the alteration of muscle properties during aging.

### Sample Protocol
The gastrocnemius muscles were quickly removed from 3 mice for each age groups and freezed for proteomic analysis. Each muscle underwent a three-step sequential extraction. Frozen muscle was homogenized on ice in phosphate buffer (PBS; 1:10 w/v) using a glass homogenizer, after recovering the supernatants (PBS extract), the resulting pellets were resuspended in urea-tiourea buffer (1:10 w/v) and incubated at 4°C for 24 hrs under continuous shaking. After a centrifugation at 15000g for 20 min at 4°C, the supernatant (U/T extract) was recovered, and the pellet were furthermore homogenized in guanidinium-HCl buffer (pH=8.5, 1:5 w/v) and heated at 100°C for 10 min.  For each sequential extraction a gel-tube digestion was performed as already described . The protein embedded in gel-tube were reduced by incubation with 10 mM DTT/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 45 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide/100 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 min at RT in the dark. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 using sequencing grade trypsin at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio (Promega, Madison, MI). Peptides were extracted from gel-tube with 100% acetonitrile and dried with a SpeedVac (Eppendorf AG). Peptides obtained from each fraction were resuspended in water/formic acid solution (95:3:2). An UHPLC ultimate 3000 system coupled online to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was used. Chromatographic separation of peptides took place in a reverse-phase C18 column (100 mm × 2.1 μm ID, 1.9 μm, HyperG Thermo Fischer Scientific) and elution was performed using a binary system of solvent. Solvent A was 0,1% formic acid and solvent B was pure acetonitrile. A linear binary gradient was applied: solvent A and 0-20% solvent B for 240 min and further 60 min of 20-40% solvent B. The precursor ion detection was done in an m/z-range from 400 to 1800 and the acquisition range for fragment ions was m/z from 200 to 2000. The sample injection flow was 0.5 mL/min, and the column was kept at a constant temperature of 30 °C. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur 2.0.7 Software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Six independent experiments (three for adult and three for old muscle) were performed and each fraction obtained from each muscle was analysed in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS data (.raw) were inspected using BatMass (v. 0.3.0). Replicate were aligned using FreeStyle (v.1.5) to check quality of runs. Raw files were further converted by msConvert ProteoWizard (v.3.0.19239) in MGF file using default settings and uploaded to MASCOT server (v.2.7.0) for MS/MS Ion Search. Search was performed using Uniprot (2018_05) restricted to Mus musculus (Taxonomy ID: 10090) and cRAP database to detect most commonly adventitious proteins (https://www.thegpm.org/GPM/index.html). Parameters for identification included: i) trypsin as enzyme with 1 as maximum missed cleavage; ii) mass error tolerances for precursor and fragment ions set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; iii) peptide charge (2+, 3+, 4+); iv) protein mass no restriction; v) carbamidomethyl cysteine (C) was set as fixed modification while deamidation of asparagine and glutamine (NQ), oxidation of methionine (M) and cysteine propionamide (C) were considered as variable modifications. Only confident peptide identified with a false discovery rate ≤ 1 and protein with at least one unique peptide were exported. Mascot results (.dat) obtained for each extraction were imported in Skyline-daily (v.21.0.9.139) to generate the spectral libraries using the following parameters: 0,95 as spectra cut-off score; peptide length of 8-25 amino acids; precursor ion charge 2+,3+,4+; MS1 filters were set to “use high selectivity extraction” with a resolving power of 60000 at 300 m/z; repeated and duplicate peptides were removed. Accordingly, to Skyline “DDA peptide search” workflow, raw file (.raw) were imported and matched to spectral libraries in order to recovery precursor ion intensity. Precursor ion intensity is the sum of areas under the curve of extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) containing precursor ion isotope peaks (M, M+1, M+2). Fasta file containing proteins with 1% FDR were imported to Skyline in order to maintain and fix FDR. Finally, quantitative analysis was performed on proteins with at least two peptides. Indeed, protein inference is mainly based on the unique peptides that are not shared by multiple proteins. However, one peptide can be incorrectly quantified across LC-MS runs, producing improper quantification. In this perspective, first of all a proteome discovery study was performed releasing a list of proteins identified with at least one unique peptide and secondly a label free quantification study was performed only on proteins with at least two peptides in order to reduce incorrect quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Aging is characterized by a progressive decline of skeletal muscle (SM) mass and strength which may lead to sarcopenia in older persons. To date, a limited number of studies have been performed in the old SM looking at the whole, complex network of the extracellular matrix (i.e., matrisome) and its aging-associated changes. In this study, skeletal muscle proteins were isolated from whole gastrocnemius muscles of adult (12 mo.) and old (24 mo.) mice using three sequential extractions, each one analyzed by liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry. Muscle sections were investigated using fluorescence- and transmission electron microscopy. This study provided the first characterization of the matrisome in the old SM demonstrating several statistically significantly increased matrisome proteins in the old vs. adult SM. Several proteomic findings were confirmed and expanded by morphological data. The current findings shed new light on the mutually cooperative interplay between cells and the extracellular environment in the aging SM. These data open the door for a better understanding of the mechanisms modulating myocellular behavior in aging (e.g., by altering mechano-sensing stimuli as well as signaling pathways) and their contribution to age-dependent muscle dysfunction.

### Keywords
Aging; extracellular matrix; proteomics; ultrastructure; skeletal muscle; sarcopenia

### Affiliations
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia

### Submitter
Francesco Demetrio Lofaro

### Lab Head
Dr Federica, Boraldi
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia


