### Accession
PXD006901

### Title
Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma aggressiveness associated with differential expression of collagen and STAT1

### Description
Background: Vulvar squamous cell carcinoma (vSCC) is a rare but debilitating disease. One vSCC subtype comprises tumor cells that grow and expand as a cohesive sheet of cells that “pushes” and compresses the associated lymphoplasmacytic (LPC) stroma. Another vSCC subtype features tumor cells that grow in loose association with other tumor cells and infiltrate the associated fibromyxoid (FMX) stroma consisting mainly of extracellular matrix. Clinically, infiltrative vSCC with FMX stroma (Inf/FMX) is significantly associated with lymph node metastases and recurrence. Methods: An unbiased proteomic approach was used to identify pathways that could produce these different vSCC subtypes. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues from 10 cases of pushing vSCC with LPC stroma (Push/LPC) and 8 cases of Inf/FMX were subjected to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Results: Analysis identified 2,265 different proteins in the 18 samples of vSCC. Of these, 344 proteins were differentially expressed (p<0.05) by at least 4-fold between vSCC subtypes. Of these, 59 were higher and 285 lower in Inf/FMX compared to Push/LPC tumors. Consistent with the desmoplastic morphology and increased picrosirius red staining, expression of subunits of several collagens (Col 1, 3, 6, 14, 18) was higher in the more aggressive Inf/FMX tumors. In contrast, signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1), an important regulator of several inflammatory pathways, was expressed at lower levels in the Inf/FMX tumors. This finding was confirmed by immunohistochemistry using an antibody to STAT1. An informatics analysis of the differing profiles identified differences in the integrin signaling pathway and inflammation mediated by chemokine and cytokine signaling pathway. This analysis also linked decreased expression of proteins involved antigen processing and presentation and increased expression of those with cell-matrix adhesion as processes with the more aggressive Inf/FMX vSCC subtype. Conclusions: Comparing the proteomic profiles of vSCC morphologic subtypes indicates that increased expression of collagen subunits and decreased expression of STAT1 are associated with a more aggressive tumor subtype. Informatic analyses further identify alterations in cell interaction with matrix and immune function differ with tumor aggressiveness. Identification of these pathways provides a molecular basis for understanding aggressiveness of vSCC.

### Sample Protocol
Reducing agent, beta-mercaptoethanol (BME), was added to each protein extract, and samples were incubated at 90°C. Sample and SeeBlue pre-stained protein standard (Novex) were loaded onto a pre-cast 1.0 mm 4-20% Tris/glycine gel (Novex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) and electrophoresed at 125V for 105 min. Gels were stained with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and imaged using a Kodak Image Station 4000 MM Pro. Analysis of sample extracts was performed essentially as described previously [11]. Briefly, each sample gel lane was cut into 20 2-mm sections and subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion [11]. Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) on a 100 x 0.075 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters).  Peptides were eluted using a 30 min gradient from 97:3 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio [Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile; buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile.] Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (1.9 kV) followed by MS/MS analysis using collision induced dissociation on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo). MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 60,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z.  MS/MS data were acquired for the top 15 peaks from each MS scan using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range with a normalized collision energy of 35.0. The proteomics data was generated in the UAMS Proteomics Core.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching the UniProtKB database (restricted to Homo sapiens, 157537 entries) using the Andromeda search engine in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8). Search parameters were as follows: trypsin digestion with up to three missed cleavages; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl of cysteine; variable modifications of oxidation on methionine and acetyl on N-terminus; first search set to 5 ppm precursor ion tolerance and the main search was set to 3 ppm; selected label-free quantitation with intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) with a minimum ratio of 1. A contaminants database was used for the first search to identify commonly identified contaminants. The 4 most abundant proteins (hemoglobin alpha and beta, keratin, and actin) were subtracted from the sum total intensity values because these proteins were in high abundance in all samples and commonly identified from tumor samples. Individual protein intensities were then corrected to account for differences in overall protein mass between samples using a normalization factor calculated from the sample with the lowest sum iBAQ intensity. Missing intensity values (i.e., for proteins not identified in a particular sample) were replaced with the lowest protein intensity detected in any sample as a minimal threshold value to facilitate further analysis. The data were then log2 transformed for statistical analysis using the Student’s t-test [11]. Fold change of proteins was calculated by subtracting the average log2 normalized iBAQ of Inf/FMX from the log2 normalized iBAQ of Push/LPC.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Stroma immune, Cytokine, Cell adhesion, Ffpe tissue

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Steven R. Post
Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR, USA


