### Accession
PXD020410

### Title
Sentinel Lymph Node and Endometrial Cancer Grade in depth Proteomic Analyses : A Novel Approach for Molecular Diagnosis

### Description
Endometrial cancer is the most common gynecological cancer worldwide. In women from developed countries, endometrial cancer is usually detected after the age of 60 years. Nearly 90% of the diagnosed cases are sporadic, while 10% are attributed to genetic factors. Thus, it is necessary to develop a diagnostic platform. Currently, the lymph node status is a major prognostic factor in assessing endometrial cancer. However, despite its high sensitivity, it is still in debate. In order to increase its selectivity and specificity, in-depth proteomic study has been performed on patients sentinel lymph node (SNL) samples and on grade I to grade III endometrial carcinoma (EC) samples. We identified specific markers of bad diagnosis that clearly correlate SNL to EC i.e. PRSS3, PTX3, ASS1, YBX2, RBM25, MUC5B. These markers have also been detected in TCGA. By contrast, we also detected good prognosis markers for the overall survival such as CD74, GOLM1, SLC9A3R2, SP100 proteins. Markers for EC and SNL cancer-grading have also been identified. Taken together, it is now possible to propose a novel approach for molecular diagnosis, prognosis and patient’s stratification in EC which will be of excellent utility in therapeutic decision.

### Sample Protocol
NanoLC-ESI-MS²   After liquid extraction, samples were freeze-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator (SPD131DPA, ThermoScientific, Waltham, Massachusetts, USA), reconstituted with 10µL 0.1% TFA and subjected to solid phase extraction to remove salts and concentrate the peptides. This was done using a C-18 Ziptip (Millipore, Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines, France), eluted with ACN/0.1% TFA (8:2, v/v) and then the samples were dried for storage. Before analysis, samples were suspended in 20µL ACN/0.1% FA (2:98, v/v), deposited in vials and 10µL were injected for analysis. The separation prior to the MS used online reversed-phase chromatography coupled with a Proxeon Easy-nLC-1000 system (Thermo Scientific) equipped with an Acclaim PepMap trap column (75 μm ID x 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and C18 packed tip Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (75 μm ID x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using an increasing amount of acetonitrile (5%-40% over 140 minutes) and a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The LC eluent was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column and a voltage of 2 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. The chromatography system was coupled to a Thermo Scientific Q-Exactive mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was programmed to acquire in a data dependent mode. The survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer operated at 70,000 (FWHM) resolving power. A mass range of 200 to 2000 m/z and a target of 3E6 ions were used for the survey scans. Precursors observed with an intensity over 500 counts were selected “on the fly” for ion trap collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation with an isolation window of 4 amu. and a normalized collision energy of 30%. A target of 5000 ions and a maximum injection time of 120 ms were used for CID MS2 spectra. The method was set to analyze the top 10 most intense ions from the survey scan and a dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Data Analyses   All MS data were processed with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008; Tyanova et al., 2015) (Version 1.5.6.5) using the Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) search engine. The proteins were identified by searching MS and MS/MS data against the Decoy version of the complete proteome for Homo sapiens in the UniProt database (Release March 2017, 70941 entries) combined with 262 commonly detected contaminants. Trypsin specificity was used for digestion mode, with N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation selected as variable. We allowed up to two missed cleavages. An initial mass accuracy of 6 ppm was selected for MS spectra, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the HCD data. FDR at the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and protein level was set to 1%. Relative, label-free quantification of the proteins was conducted into Max-Quant using the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014) with default parameters. Analysis of the identified proteins was performed using Perseus software (http://www.perseus-framework.org/) (version 1.6.12.0). The file containing the information from the identification were used and hits from the reverse database, proteins with only modified peptides and potential contaminants were removed. The LFQ intensity was logarithmized (log2[x]). Categorical annotation of the rows was used to define the different group. Principal component analysis (PCA) was done to compare the protein content of each sample. Statistical multiple-sample tests were performed using ANOVA with a p-value of 5%. Normalization was achieved using a Z-score with matrix access by rows. Only proteins that were significant by ANOVA were used. The hierarchical clustering and profile plot of only the statistically significant proteins were all performed and visualized by Perseus. Functional annotation and characterization of the identified proteins were performed using FunRich software (version 3) and STRING (version 9.1, http://stringdb.org) (Szklarczyk et al., 2011). Pearson’s correlation coefficient and matrix representation were generated in R software using corrplot package.

### Publication Abstract
Endometrial cancer (EC) is one of the most common gynecological cancers worldwide. Sentinel lymph node (SLN) status could be a major prognostic factor in evaluation of EC, but several prospective studies need to be performed. Here we report an in-depth proteomics analysis showing significant variations in the SLN protein landscape in EC. We show that SLNs are correlated to each tumor grade, which strengthens evidence of SLN involvement in EC. A few proteins are overexpressed specifically at each EC tumor grade and in the corresponding SLN. These proteins, which are significantly variable in both locations, should be considered potential markers of overall survival. Five major proteins for EC and SLN (PRSS3, PTX3, ASS1, ALDH2, and ANXA1) were identified in large-scale proteomics and validated by immunohistochemistry. This study improves stratification and diagnosis of individuals with EC as a result of proteomics profiling of SLNs.

### Keywords
Ghost proteome, Sentinel lymph nodes, Endometrial cancer, Proteomic, Small prot, Protein mutations, Diagnosis

### Affiliations
PRISM
PRISM laboratory Inserm U1192, France, Lille University

### Submitter
Soulaimane Aboulouard

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Salzet
PRISM laboratory Inserm U1192, France, Lille University


