### Accession
PXD007258

### Title
Human hepatic stellate cell-derived extracellular vesicles LC-MSMS

### Description
Activation and migration of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) followed by matrix deposition are characteristics of liver fibrosis. Several studies have shown the importance of hepatocyte and endothelial cell-derived extracellular vesicles (EVs) in liver pathobiology. However, less is known about the role of HSC-derived EVs in liver diseases. In this study, we investigated the molecules released through HSC-derived EVs and whether these can promote fibrosis.

### Sample Protocol
Purified EVs from human primary hepatic stellate cells treated with vehicle vs. PDGF-BB were lysed in 6X sample buffer at 95°C during 5 minutes. Equal number of EVs (2 x 1011) per condition was loaded onto 4-20% 1D-SDS-PAGE gel (Life Technologies). After migration at 100V, silver stain was performed on the gel following manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Scientific #24612). Each lane was cut into 6 gel sections using prominent bands present in both samples as the boundaries for gel sections.  Gel sections were digested with trypsin and analyzed by label-free data-dependent LC-MS/MS on a Q-Exactive-Plus using a top-15 method on precursors of charge 2-5 (15kRP, 1E5,60 ms max fill time, 25s precursor exclusion).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was searched against the SwissProt Human database (from Feb. 2017) that was appended with ABRF common contaminants.  A decoy database (reversed sequences) was appended to the end of the target database.  Searches were done with Mascot v2.4 and X!Tandem.  PSMs from each engine were combined using Scaffold (Proteome Software). Raw data files from each gel section for each of the 2 sample conditions were combined into single biological samples (V and P).  Scaffold scores were thresholded for a 0.1% local peptide FDR, and a 1.0% protein-level FDR, while requiring a minimum of 2 peptides for each protein.  mzIdentML files were created using the export tool within Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Liver, Extracellular vesicles, Hepatic stellate cells

### Affiliations
Division Chair of GI/Hepatology Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN USA 55905
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Enis Kostallari

### Lab Head
Dr Vijay H. Shah, M.D.
Division Chair of GI/Hepatology Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN USA 55905


