### Accession
PXD012063

### Title
Analysis of podocytes from doxorubicin treated mice

### Description
Podocyte injury is a major cause of chronic kidney disease, but the involved signaling pathways are largely unknown. Here, we used ultrasensitive proteomics to investigate the response of native podocytes from mice with Doxorubicin-induced injury. We observed perturbations of known propagating pathways of glomerular disease such as Jak-Stat signaling and cell adhesion but also in metabolism and proteins responding to mechanical stress. Using a phenotype-guided approach, we prioritized candidates by aligning proteinuria in individual mice with corresponding podocyte protein expression data. The protein Tropomodulin was decreased and correlated negatively with urinary albumin, and Villin and the mechanosensor protein Filamin-B were increased and correlated positively. We employed Drosophila nephrocytes for further functional analysis of prioritized proteins and studied filtration function and endocytosis. Loss of Villin and Tropomodulin led to an impaired function and reduced expression of endocytosis machineries as evidenced by nephrocyte garland proteomes. Loss of Cher, the orthologue of Filamin-B, led to increased endocytosis in nephrocytes, and Filamin-B abundance in single glomeruli correlated with the amount of deposited albumin in the same glomerulus in proteinuric rats. Filamin-B expression could also be increased by applying mechanical stress to podocytes in vitro, but Filamin-B was not increased in podocyte proteomes in LPS-induced injury despite similar regulation of pathways on the global proteome level. In conclusion, this study identified conserved mechanisms of podocyte stress response employing functional proteomics in purified native mouse podocytes and Drosophila nephrocytes.

### Sample Protocol
Podocyte pellets were solubilized with 40µL 8% SDS and heated at 95°C for 5 minutes to solubilize and denature all proteins. Next, 25µU Benzonase were added to the solution. Garland nephrocytes from single L3 larvae (5 larvae per genotype) were solubilized with 40µl 8% SDS followed by heating at 95°C. Podocyte and nephrocyte samples were reduced with 5mM DTT at 37°C for 30 minutes.  Then, proteins were alkylated at room temperature with 10mM IAA in the dark. Proteins were prepared and digested using Trypsin and LysC using the SP3 ultrasensitive proteomics technique (SP3) as previously described by Hughes et al.

### Data Protocol
Raw files generated by the mass spectrometry were processed using MaxQuant v. 1.5.3.8 35. Briefly, raw data generated by the mass spectrometer were searched against a database consisting of mouse uniprot reference database without isoforms (downloaded in January 2017 ), including common contaminants. Default search parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Podocytes, Fsgs, Chronic kidney disease

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne


