### Accession
PXD027639

### Title
Translocation of polyubiquitinated protein substrates by the hexameric Cdc48 ATPase

### Description
The hexameric Cdc48 ATPase (p97 or VCP in mammals) cooperates with its cofactor Ufd1/Npl4 to extract polyubiquitinated proteins from membranes or macromolecular complexes for degradation by the proteasome. Here, we clarify how the Cdc48 complex unfolds its substrates and translocates polypeptides with branchpoints. The Cdc48 complex recognizes primarily polyubiquitin chains, rather than the attached substrate. Cdc48 and Ufd1/Npl4 cooperatively bind the polyubiquitin chain, resulting in the unfolding of one ubiquitin molecule (initiator). Next, the ATPase pulls on the initiator ubiquitin and moves all ubiquitin molecules linked to its C-terminus through the central pore of the hexameric double-ring, causing transient ubiquitin unfolding. When the ATPase reaches the isopeptide bond of the substrate, it can translocate and unfold both N- and C-terminal segments. Ubiquitins linked to the branchpoint of the initiator dissociate from Ufd1/Npl4 and move outside the central pore, resulting in the release of unfolded, polyubiquitinated substrate from Cdc48.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  Stock solutions of proteins [Cdc48-UN-substrate complex, 15 µM Cdc48, 16 µM UN, and 36 µM Ub(n)-Dendra; Cdc48-UN complex, 10 µM Cdc48 and 10 µM UN; Ub(n)-Dendra, 9.5 µM] were first incubated with indicated nucleotides in equilibration buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM TCEP, 100% H2O pH 7.5) at 30ºC for 30 min. To initiate HDX, 1.0 µL of each sample was diluted directly from stock solutions with 18 μL labeling buffer (25 mM Tris/HCl, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2 and 0.5 mM TCEP, 99.9% D2O pD 7.4). for labeling at 94.7% D2O, pD=7.40, 20 °C. At each labeling time (5 sec, 10 sec, 1 min, 10 min, 4 hr), 19 μL of quench buffer was added (150 mM potassium phosphate pH 2.49, H2O). All subsequent steps were performed at 0 °C; the average back exchange was 30-35%. Two undeuterated controls were performed.   LC/MS:  All LC steps were performed with a Waters HDX system containing an HDX unit and two Acquity I-class UPLC pumps. Deuterated and control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using a porcine pepsin column packed in-house (POROS 20AL beads, 2.1 mm × 50 mm). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 10 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  The back pressure averaged ~8,500 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the pepsin column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt XS HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 2.5 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 35 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative. The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.20 Da in this experimental setup.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from replicate HDMSE analyses (as detailed in Table S1) of undeuterated control samples using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN).  Peptide masses were identified from searches using non-specific cleavage, no missed cleavages, no PTMs, a minimum of 135 ion counts for low energy threshold, and a 20 ion count threshold for their fragment ions, no set minimum peptide length. No false discovery rate (FDR) control was performed. The peptides identified in PLGS (excluding all neutral loss and in-source fragmentation identifications) were then analyzed in DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered with minimum consecutive products of 2, minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.25. A database containing only the sequences from the Saccharomyces cerevisiae proteins being analyzed [available Uniprot codes: Cdc48, P25694; Npl4, P33755; Ufd1, P53044; Ub, P0CG63] was used with no cleavage specificity and no PTMs considered to refine the peptide list. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all spectra and data processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps. No statistical tests were applied to the HDX MS measurements.  Rather, based on measurements of mean methodological error (+/- 0.14 Da; [Houde D, Berkowitz SA, Engen JR. J. Pharm. Sci. 2011;100(6):2071-2086]) we chose a value (+/- 0.50 Da) well above that as the threshold for calling differences in relative deuterium incorporation measurements meaningful.  See also explanations of this methodology in (Engen JR, Wales TE. Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem. 2015;8:127-148).

### Publication Abstract
The hexameric Cdc48 ATPase (p97 or VCP in mammals) cooperates with its cofactor Ufd1/Npl4 to extract polyubiquitinated proteins from membranes or macromolecular complexes for degradation by the proteasome. Here, we clarify how the Cdc48 complex unfolds its substrates and translocates polypeptides with branchpoints. The Cdc48 complex recognizes primarily polyubiquitin chains rather than the attached substrate. Cdc48 and Ufd1/Npl4 cooperatively bind the polyubiquitin chain, resulting in the unfolding of one ubiquitin molecule (initiator). Next, the ATPase pulls on the initiator ubiquitin and moves all ubiquitin molecules linked to its C terminus through the central pore of the hexameric double ring, causing transient ubiquitin unfolding. When the ATPase reaches the isopeptide bond of the substrate, it can translocate and unfold both N- and C-terminal segments. Ubiquitins linked to the branchpoint of the initiator dissociate from Ufd1/Npl4 and move outside the central pore, resulting in the release of unfolded, polyubiquitinated substrate from Cdc48.

### Keywords
Translocation, Ubiquitin, Vcp, Hdx-ms, Hydrogen deuterium exchange mass spectrometry, Ufd1, Unfolding, Npl4, P97, Aaa atpase

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


