### Accession
PXD020375

### Title
Gender differences in human endothelial cell secretome

### Description
We performed proteomic and gene ontology (GO) analyses of secretome from human serum-deprived male and female endothelial cells (ECs).

### Sample Protocol
Human Umbilical Vein ECs (HUVECs) were freshly isolated from umbilical cords. Cells were pooled from two or more donors - to minimize variability associated with cells derived from a single male or female newborn donor - and used at passages 1-5. HUVECs were routinely grown in 199 medium supplemented with 20% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 25 µg/ml endothelial cell growth supplement (ECGS), and 50 mg/ml heparin on 0.1% gelatin-coated surfaces. All the experiments were performed on conditioned media collected after an overnight incubation in the absence of serum. Secretome samples for proteomic analysis were desalted, concentrated and digested as previously described by Brioschi et al (Journal of Proteomics. 2013;78:346–61). After lyophilization, the secreted protein pellets were dissolved in 25 mmol/L NH4HCO3 containing 0.1% RapiGest (Waters Corporation), sonicated, and centrifuged at 13,000g for 10 min. Samples were then incubated 15 min at 80°C and reduced with 5 mmol/L DTT at 60°C for 15 min, followed by carbamidomethylation with 10 mmol/L iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the darkness. Then, sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) was added to each sample (1 g every 50 g of proteins) and incubated overnight at 37°C. After digestion, 2% TFA was added to hydrolyze RapiGest and inactivate trypsin. Tryptic peptides were used for label-free mass spectrometry analysis, LC-MSE, performed on a hybrid quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer coupled with a nanoUPLC system and equipped with a Trizaic source (Waters Corporation).

### Data Protocol
Peak peaking, peptide identification and statistical analysis have been performed by means of Progenesis QIP v 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics) using a Uniprot human protein sequence database (v2017-1).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Secretome, Gender, Endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Unit of Proteomics- Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS

### Submitter
Maura Brioschi

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina banfi
Unit of Proteomics- Centro Cardiologico Monzino IRCCS


