### Accession
PXD011401

### Title
Asian citrus psyllid proteomics: Shotgun MS/MS analysis of impact of plant host on insect proteome + DIGE analysis of impact of plant host on insect proteome

### Description
The Asian citrus psyllid (Diaphorina citri) is a pest of citrus and the primary insect vector of the bacterial pathogen, ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’ (CLas), which is associated with citrus greening disease. Variability in CLas titer in insects collected from infected plants has been attributed in part to the host plant from which the insects were collected. CLas accumulates to high titers in infected Citrus macrophylla, and in D. citri feeding on the infected plants of this species. In contrast, in the citrus relative Murraya paniculata, CLas titers remain low in infected plants and in D. citri exposed to infected plants. In this study, top-down and bottom-up proteomics methods were used to investigate the impact of these different host plants on D. citri protein expression. Difference in gel electrophoresis (DIGE) was used to identify protein spots on two-dimensional gels that were larger in one of three insect sample classes compared to the other two: D. citri continuously reared on C. macrophylla, D. citri reared continuously on M. paniculata, and D. citri transferred to M. paniculata for five days feeding after continuous rearing on C. macrophylla. Peptide mass spectrometry was used to identify and quantify proteins in target spots upregulated in each sample class. Shotgun proteomics was used to identify and quantify proteins from analysis of tryptic peptide samples prepared from whole insects from four sample classes: the reciprocal host switch condition (D. citri transferred to C. macrophylla for five days feeding after continuous rearing on M. paniculata) in addition to the three sample classes used in DIGE analysis. Integration of the results of both analyses reveals proteins identified by separate experimental workflows to be upregulated in insects adapted to each host plant, and in insects adapting to a novel host plant. A peptidoglycan-degrading protein involved in the immune response to bacterial pathogens was found to be upregulated in M. paniculata-reared D. citri. In the absence of CLas infection, host plant factors specific to M. paniculata may prime the antibacterial immune response in D. citri. Understanding the insect proteins involved in the adaptation of D. citri to host plants with variation in their susceptibility to CLas will inform the development of control strategies aimed at stopping the spread of citrus greening disease.

### Sample Protocol
DIGE- D. citri ground w/ mortar & pestle in LN2. Proteins extracted by TCA-acetone, precipitated overnight. Proteins washed acetone 3x, centrifuged and decanted between each wash.  Pellets dried + solubilized in 7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 4% CHAPS overnight at RT. Supernatant collected after centrifugation + protein concentration determined via Bradford Assay. Samples labeled w/ cyanine dyes. Combined IS (equimolar protein from each sample) labeled for relative quant. Dye swap design was used to account for labeling bias.  Analytical gels for quantitative analysis, and preparative gels for spot picking were run. Picking gels were fixed with a solution of 10% methanol, 7% acetic acid for 30 min, then stained overnight with NOVEX Colloidal Blue Staining Kit, and destained in water for 24 H prior to spot picking.  Gel scans analyzed w/ Progenesis SameSpots.  114 spots had ANOVA p-value ≤ 0.01, Max fold change ≥ 2, and unique upregulation in standardized expression (Murraya: 45 spots; Cmac: 41 spots; Murraya Host Switch: 28 spots). Spots were selected for manual picking from the preparative gels for mass spectrometry analysis, using aligned DIGE scans as visual reference. Picked gel plugs washed in 50% 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 50% acetonitrile and incubated for 10 min at RT. Plugs then washed in ACN, incubated 5 min at RT, then dried. Proteins were digested using 100ng trypsin in 40mM ABC, 10% ACN, and placed on ice for 20 min before digesting overnight at 30˚C. Supernatant collected, and peptides extracted from gel plugs by adding 50% ACN, 2.5% FA and incubating 45 min at RT. Plates sonicated and briefly centrifuged, and extract combined with earlier supernatant. 2nd extraction performed using 90% ACN, 0.1% FA, incubated 30 min, and supernatant again combined with earlier extracts. Extracted peptide samples were dried. LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) was coupled to EASY-nLC system.  LC configured with 180-μm id fused silica capillary trap containing 3 cm Aqua 5-μm C18 material, and a self-pack PicoFrit™ 100-μm analytical column with an 8-μm emitter packed to 15cm with Aqua 3-μm C18 material. MP A was 2% acetonitrile/0.1% FA and MP B consisted of 90% acetonitrile/ 0.1% FA. 5uL of each sample in MP A was injected onto the trap column. Peptides were separated using a linear gradient at a flow rate of 400 nL/min: 5% B for 1 min, 5% B to 35% B over 20 min, 35% B to 75% B over 5 min, held at 75% B for 5 min, 75% B to 8% B over 1 min and the final 5 min held at 8% B. Eluted peptides were electrosprayed with 2.5 kV spray voltage and a capillary temp 250 C. Each full-scan mass spectrum (Res=60,000; 400-1700 m/z) was followed by MS/MS spectra for top 6 masses. CID used with normalized CE 35, isolation width 3.0 and activation time 30 ms. 90 seconds dynamic exclusion with exclusion list size of 500, repeat count 1 and exclusion mass width 10ppm used. Monoisotopic precursor selection for charge states 2+ and greater, and profile mode were used. SHOTGUN HOST SWITCH- TCA-acetone extraction as above.  After final wash, pellets dried and resolubilized in 8M urea, 50mM triethylammonium bicarbonate overnight at RT. Supernatant collected after centrifugation and protein concentration was determined via Bradford Assay.  Samples reduced by adding TCEP and incubated 55˚C 1 H. Samples centrifuged and allowed to cool to RT before alkylating with IDA, RT, dark, 1 H. Samples diluted to < 1M urea with TEAB then digested with trypsin overnight 37˚C. Sample clean up with Oasis MCX, then dried.  Samples solubilized in 500 µl of 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN to give estimated 0.4 µg/µl. The sample run order was randomized without inter-blanks. MS was performed on LTQ-Orbitrap-Fusion. 3 uL loaded to a 150-μm Kasil trap packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 Å C18-AQ 3 micron beads to 2 cm, 2 µl/min 5 min. After trapping, peptides directed to pulled fused-silica capillary tip (75-μm i.d.) packed with 30 cm of same chromatography material mounted in a nanospray source with the column and trap at 50°C. Peptides eluted using a Waters Nanoacquity UPLC with 5-13% ACN in 0.1% FA over 10 min, followed by 13–28% gradient over 40 min, then 28–60% over 10 min. Trap and column then washed 5 min each with 60% and 95% ACN in 0.1% FA, at a flow rate of 250 nl/min. The MS was operated using electrospray ionization (2 kV) with transfer tube at 275°C using DDA in “Top Speed” mode.  AGC for MS in the orbitrap was 2e5, for MS/MS it was 1e4, and the max fill times were 50 and 35 msec. MS/MS spectra were acquired using quadrupole isolation width of 1.2 m/z and HCD normalized CE 30%. Precursor ion threshold intensity was 5e3 to trigger MS/MS acquisition. MS/MS acquisitions were allowed for precursor charge states 2-7. DE was set for 10s.  Fragment ions were analyzed in the linear trap using “rapid” scan rate. Each sample was analyzed in duplicate, where the orbitrap was used for MS/MS acquisition the second time. MS/MS conditions for the orbitrap were similar.

### Data Protocol
DIGE: Data Processing Protocol  Thermo *.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using MSConvert in ProteoWizard. Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 (Matrix Science, Boston, MA) was used to search .mzML files against the psyllid MCOT database (including all predicted Diaphorina citri, ‘Candidatus Liberibacter asiaticus’, ‘Candidatus Profftella armatura’, ‘Candidatus Carsonella rudii’, and Wolbachia proteins). MS/MS search parameters included ESI-TRAP instrument, fixed modifications (cysteine: carbamidomethyl), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), maximum of one missed cleavage, MS/MS tolerance of +/- 0.5 Da, peptide tolerance of +/- 30ppm, and peptide charges of 2+ and 3+. Files with the *.csv extension were exported from Mascot, requiring bold red, and including protein hit information such as emPAI scores.  SHOTGUN HOST SWITCH: Data Processing Protocol  Thermo *.raw files were converted into Mascot Generic Format (.mgf) using MSConvert in ProteoWizard, and Mascot Daemon 2.3.2 was used to search .mgf files against the psyllid MCOT database. MS/MS search parameters for the samples run on the Orbi included ESI-FTICR instrument, fixed modifications (cysteine: carbamidomethyl), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), maximum of one missed cleavage, MS/MS tolerance of +/- 0.02 Da, peptide tolerance of +/- 25ppm, and peptide charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+. MS/MS search parameters for the samples run on the Velos Linear trap included ESI-TRAP instrument, fixed modifications (cysteine: carbamidomethyl), variable modifications (asparagine, glutamine: deamidated; methionine: oxidation), maximum of one missed cleavage, MS/MS tolerance of +/- 0.6 Da, peptide tolerance of +/- 25ppm, and peptide charges of 2+, 3+, and 4+. Files with the *.dat extension were exported from Mascot and loaded into Scaffold Q+ (version 4.6.1, Proteome Software, Portland, OR) and used to calculate normalized spectral counts for each protein from each sample. Scaffold protein and peptide thresholds were set to 95%, with a minimum of two peptides per protein. The Orbi and Linear datasets were merged together, and once combined had a protein false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.8% and a peptide FDR of 0.07%.

### Publication Abstract
The Asian citrus psyllid (<i>Diaphorina citri</i>) is a pest of citrus and the primary insect vector of the bacterial pathogen, '<i>Candidatus</i> Liberibacter asiaticus' (<i>C</i>Las), which is associated with citrus greening disease. The citrus relative <i>Murraya paniculata</i> (orange jasmine) is a host plant of <i>D. citri</i> but is more resistant to <i>C</i>Las compared with all tested <i>Citrus</i> genotypes. The effect of host switching of <i>D. citri</i> between <i>Citrus medica</i> (citron) and <i>M. paniculata</i> plants on the acquisition and transmission of <i>C</i>Las was investigated. The psyllid <i>C</i>Las titer and the proportion of <i>C</i>Las-infected psyllids decreased in the generations after transfer from <i>C</i>Las-infected citron to healthy <i>M. paniculata</i> plants. Furthermore, after several generations of feeding on <i>M. paniculata</i>, pathogen acquisition (20 to 40% reduction) and transmission rates (15 to 20% reduction) in psyllids transferred to <i>C</i>Las-infected citron were reduced compared with psyllids continually maintained on infected citron. Top-down (difference gel electrophoresis) and bottom-up (shotgun MS/MS) proteomics methods were used to identify changes in <i>D. citri</i> protein expression resulting from host plant switching between <i>Citrus macrophylla</i> and <i>M. paniculata</i>. Changes in expression of insect metabolism, immunity, and cytoskeleton proteins were associated with host plant switching. Both transient and sustained feeding on <i>M. paniculata</i> induced distinct patterns of protein expression in <i>D. citri</i> compared with psyllids reared on <i>C. macrophylla</i>. The results point to complex interactions that affect vector competence and may lead to strategies to control the spread of citrus greening disease.

### Keywords
Asian citrus psyllid, Citrus greening, Insect vector, Huanglongbing, Candidatus liberibacter asiaticus, Diaphorina citri

### Affiliations
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University
USDA-ARS

### Submitter
Kevin Howe

### Lab Head
Dr Michelle Heck
USDA-ARS, Boyce Thompson Institute, Cornell University


