### Accession
PXD015281

### Title
Phosphoproteomics across the yeast life cycle

### Description
Phosphoproteomics was performed to generate a comprehensive resource for mapping protein abundance and phosphorylation dynamics across the life cycle of haploid Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Our dataset includes not only the exponential growth phase and the diauxic shift, but also the less understood post-diauxic growth phase and the stationary phase. Our dataset recapitulates well-known phospho-regulation events and expands our knowledge about the number of proteins that are differentially phosphorylated.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were obtained in triplicate at four time points across life cycle of haploid yeast: 6 hr (exponential growth phase), 12 hr (diauxic shift), 20 hr (post-diauxic growth phase) and 48 hr (stationary phase), yielding 12 sample in total. Samples were homogenized, proteins were digested with trypsin and the resulting peptides were analysed by two different strategies. First, phosphopeptides were enriched using an online IMAC liquid chromatography (LC) strategy followed by 1D reverse-phase LC-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), yielding 12 MS data files in total. Secondly, each sample was analysed by online high/low pH-based 2D-LC-MS/MS, with 5 fractions per sample, yielding 60 MS data files in total. In both cases, peptide separation was performed using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) using a TriVersa NanoMate (Advion Biosciences) as ionization source.

### Data Protocol
In general, LC-MS data files were first imported and aligned in Progenesis LC-MS v2.0, followed by feature detection and MGF file export of associated MS/MS spectra. Peptide identification at 1% FDR was performed with Proteome Discoverer v2.1 interfaced to a Mascot server and identification results, exported as pep.xml files, were imported into Progenesis. Progenesis was used to perform label-free quantification of phosphopeptides based on peak area. For the 2D-LC-MS/MS data each set of 12 raw files, corresponding to the same fraction among all time points, was first separately imported and aligned in 5 separate Progenesis project files, followed by MS/MS spectra export, peptide identification and import of the search results. The 5 fraction results were thereafter combined into a single project file followed by assembly into proteins and label-free absolute protein quantification based on a spiked protein standard and peak areas (top 3 most intense peptides per protein). Phosphopeptide abundances were subsequently corrected by the corresponding average protein level at each time point.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Online 2d-lc, Budding yeast, Imac, Phosphoproteomics, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Growth curve

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark
University of Southern Denmark

### Submitter
Richard Sprenger

### Lab Head
Dr Christer S. Ejsing
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Southern Denmark


