### Accession
PXD000710

### Title
Proteogenomics of Venturia pirina

### Description
This dataset relates to a proteogenomic analysis for Venturia pirina, a fungus that causes scab disease on European pear (Pyrus communis). V. pirina is host specific and infection is thought to be mediated by small, secreted effector proteins. To focus on these effectors we analysed extracts from V. pirina grown in vitro, on cellophane sheets, that mimics the growth habit in infected leaves. LC-MS/MS data was queried against a protein database generated by combining in-silico predicted transcripts with six-frame translations of a  whole genome sequence for V. pirina.

### Sample Protocol
V. priina Cultures were grown on agar and cellophane for two weeks before harvesting. Secreted proteins were harvested from V. pirina growing in and on the cellophane sheets and from the agar medium beneath the sheets. Protein harvesting was performed by gentle washing of the cellophane sheets and the roughly chopped agar, both containing fungal material and secreted proteins. Cellophane and agar pieces were placed separately in 50 mL falcon tubes containing 20 mL of 0.5M Tris buffer solution containing protease inhibitors.  All falcon tubes were then placed in a mini-rotator (Thermo Scientific) for 48 h at 4 degrees C. The proteins were later separated using centrifugation at 12,000 rpm or various filtration steps (Miracloth, EMD Millipore, U.S.A) was used to remove large debris then the solutions containing the secreted proteins were passed through sterile 0.2 micrometer filters (Merck Millipore). The collected proteins in solution were stored at -80C for further use. V. pirina secretome samples (30 g) were loaded onto a precast NuPAGE 4 - 12% Bis-Tris gel in 1x MES SDS running buffer. A constant voltage of 150 V was used for running the gel followed by visualization of the protein bands by Coomassie stain (Bio-Rad). The gel was stained for 1 h followed by destaining (20% ethanoic acid and 7.5% acetic acid in Milli-Q water) overnight. The gel lane was excised into 20 bands followed by in-gel reduction, alkylation and trypsinization as described previously (Cite: 24115447). Briefly, reduction was performed by using 10 mM DTT (Bio-Rad) for 30 min followed by alkylation for 20 min with 25 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) and digested with 150 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37C. The resulting peptides were extracted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 100 l of 50% acetonitrile and finally concentrated to 20 microL using the SpeedVac Concentrator. Samples were analysed using 3 different LC-MS/MS platforms, an Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Fisher), an Ion-Trap (HCT ultra PTM Discovery System, Bruker Daltonics) and a MALDI-TOF/TOF instrument (Ultraflex III, Bruker Daltonics). Peptides resulting from the 20 gel bands were resuspended in 10 micro L. 8 micro L of each peptide solution was analysed on the HCT. The remaining 2 micro L from gel bands 1 to 10 and 11 to 20 were pooled together to create 2 samples (20 micro L volume each). These 2 samples were analysed by LC-ESI-MS/MS on the orbitrap Elite and by LC-MALDI (10 l injections). For ESI-MS the data were collected in Data Dependent Acquisition mode using m/z 300 - 1500 as MS scan range, CID for MS/MS of the 20 most intense ions for the Orbitap or top 3 for the HCT.   For LC-MALDI, the peptides were fractionated using a MALDI plate spotter (Proteineer Fc, Bruker Daltonics) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 nano-LC system (Dionex).  Spectra were then acquired in data dependent mode for all spots on the plate.

### Data Protocol
Prior to database searching, raw data from each instrument was converted from native instrument format to mzML.  All conversions were performed using msconvert with vendor peak picking enabled, and the MS2Denoise function with default settings to remove noise. Database searches were performed on each output file from each instrument run, using 3 search engines, Mascot (version 2.4.0 Matrix Science), X!Tandem (Cyclone 2013.02.01.1) and MS-GF+ (v9517).  Settings for all search engines were; variable modifications (oxidised methionine, N-terminal acetylation), fixed modification (carbamidomethylation of cysteine), precursor ion mass tolerance (10 ppm Orbitrap, 80 ppm MALDI , 1.2 Da HCT), fragment ion mass tolerance (0.5 Da Orbitrap, 0.8 Da HCT  and 0.3 Da MALDI), up to 1 missed tryptic cleavage was allowed.  For X!Tandem and MS-GF+ only, semi-tryptic searches were enabled thereby permitting peptides with a single trypsin cut site. Raw search results for each run were then converted to pepXML and processed with PeptideProphet using decoy sequences to help fit the negative distribution.  Since we were not interested in assigning peptides to specific extracted fractions, all files were combined by processing with iProphet (default settings) to produce a single pepXML file.  This was subsequently analysed with ProteinProphet to produce a single protXML file containing information about all peptides identified.  For submission to ProteomeExchange we converted each peptide prophet output to mzIdentML using the idconvert tool from the proteowizard suite.  In addition to these mzIdentML files the protXML file obtained by combining all identifications across all instruments and search engines is included.

### Publication Abstract
A proteogenomic analysis is presented for Venturia pirina, a fungus that causes scab disease on European pear (Pyrus communis). V. pirina is host-specific, and the infection is thought to be mediated by secreted effector proteins. Currently, only 36 V. pirina proteins are catalogued in GenBank, and the genome sequence is not publicly available. To identify putative effectors, V. pirina was grown in vitro on and in cellophane sheets mimicking its growth in infected leaves. Secreted extracts were analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry, and the data (ProteomeXchange identifier PXD000710) was queried against a protein database generated by combining in silico predicted transcripts with six frame translations of a whole genome sequence of V. pirina (GenBank Accession JEMP00000000 ). We identified 1088 distinct V. pirina protein groups (FDR 1%) including 1085 detected for the first time. Thirty novel (not in silico predicted) proteins were found, of which 14 were identified as potential effectors based on characteristic features of fungal effector protein sequences. We also used evidence from semitryptic peptides at the protein N-terminus to corroborate in silico signal peptide predictions for 22 proteins, including several potential effectors. The analysis highlights the utility of proteogenomics in the study of secreted effectors.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteogenomics, Effectors, Venturia pirina, Ave1

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
James Cook University

### Submitter
Ira Cooke

### Lab Head
Dr Suresh Mathivanan
La Trobe University


