### Accession
PXD000164

### Title
A Metaproteomics Approach to Elucidate Host and Pathogen Protein Expression during Catheter-Associated Urinary Tract Infections

### Description
Long term-catheterization leads inevitably to a catheter-associated bacteriuria caused by multispecies bacterial biofilms growing on and in the catheters. The overall goal of the presented study was (I) to unravel bacterial community structure and function of such an uropathogenic biofilm and (II) to elucidate the interplay between bacterial virulence and the human immune system within the urine. To this end, a metaproteomics approach combined with in vitro proteomics analyses was employed to investigate both, the pro- and eukaryotic protein inventory. Our proteome analyses demonstrated that the biofilm of the investigated catheter is dominated by three bacterial species, i.e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Morganella morganii and Bacteroides sp., and identified iron limitation as one of the major challenges in the bladder environment. In vitro proteome analysis of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii isolated from the biofilm revealed that those opportunistic pathogens are able to overcome iron restriction via the production of siderophores and high expression of corresponding receptors. Notably, a comparison of in vivo and in vitro protein profiles of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii also indicated that the bacteria employ different strategies to adapt to the urinary tract. Whilst P. aeruginosa seems to express secreted and surface-exposed proteases to escape the human innate immune system and metabolizes amino acids, M. morganii is able to take up sugars and to degrade urea. Most interestingly, a comparison of urine protein profiles of three long-term catheterized patients and three healthy control persons demonstrated the elevated level of proteins associated to neutrophils, macrophages and complement system in the patient urine, which might point to a specific activation of the innate immune system in response to biofilm-associated urinary tract infections. We thus hypothesize that the often asymptomatic nature of CAUTI´s might be based on a fine-tuned balance between the expression of bacterial virulence factors and the human immune system. Long term-catheterization leads inevitably to a catheter-associated bacteriuria caused by multispecies bacterial biofilms growing on and in the catheters. The overall goal of the presented study was (I) to unravel bacterial community structure and function of such an uropathogenic biofilm and (II) to elucidate the interplay between bacterial virulence and the human immune system within the urine. To this end, a metaproteomics approach combined with in vitro proteomics analyses was employed to investigate both, the pro- and eukaryotic protein inventory. Our proteome analyses demonstrated that the biofilm of the investigated catheter is dominated by three bacterial species, i.e. Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Morganella morganii and Bacteroides sp., and identified iron limitation as one of the major challenges in the bladder environment. In vitro proteome analysis of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii isolated from the biofilm revealed that those opportunistic pathogens are able to overcome iron restriction via the production of siderophores and high expression of corresponding receptors. Notably, a comparison of in vivo and in vitro protein profiles of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii also indicated that the bacteria employ different strategies to adapt to the urinary tract. Whilst P. aeruginosa seems to express secreted and surface-exposed proteases to escape the human innate immune system and metabolizes amino acids, M. morganii is able to take up sugars and to degrade urea. Most interestingly, a comparison of urine protein profiles of three long-term catheterized patients and three healthy control persons demonstrated the elevated level of proteins associated to neutrophils, macrophages and complement system in the patient urine, which might point to a specific activation of the innate immune system in response to biofilm-associated urinary tract infections. We thus hypothesize that the often asymptomatic nature of CAUTI´s might be based on a fine-tuned balance between the expression of bacterial virulence factors and the human immune system.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction from Catheter Biofilm Small pieces of the catheter tip (two times one cm) were transferred to 1 ml of urea-containing buffer (11 M urea, 3 M thiourea, 70 mM dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), 4% (w/v) 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl)dimethyl¬ammonio]-1-propanesulfonate (CHAPS)). The sample was incubated on ice for 5 min, mixed intensively for 30 s and then incubated on ice for 10 min; those steps were repeated twice. Sonication was performed for 30 s and repeated five times to dissolve and lyse the cells using a Sonicator (Type UW 2070, Bandelin electronics, Berlin). Subsequently, the catheter pieces were removed and the remaining cell lysate was mixed with ice-cold acetone (1:7, v/v). After centrifugation (14,000 x g, 40 min) the resulting protein pellet was dried and solubilized in urea-containing buffer supplemented with 1% SDS. Total protein concentration was determined according to Bradford (42) employing the Coomassie PlusTM Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA). The absorbance was measured at 595 nm. The protein concentration was calculated using a bovine serum albumin (BSA) standard (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Metaproteomics analysis was performed in three technical replicates, i.e. the protein extract from the catheter biofilm was divided into three sub-samples.  Protein Extraction from Urine Urine samples (200 ml) from three urinary drainage bags from catheterized patients or collected from three healthy control persons were centrifuged for 20 min at 4 °C at 6000 x g and the resulting supernatants were mixed with 20% (w/v) trichloroacetic acid and kept overnight at 4 °C. Subsequently, samples were centrifuged for 40 min at 14.000 x g at 4 °C, the resulting protein pellets were washed twice with 70% EtOH and thereafter solubilized in an urea-containing buffer with 1% SDS. Protein concentrations were determined as described above. Metaproteomics analyses were performed in three technical replicates, i.e. the protein extracts from urine were divided into three sub-samples.  Protein Extraction from P. aeruginosa and M. morganii Planktonic Cultures and in vitro Biofilms All in vitro proteomics analyses were performed with protein extracts of three biological replicates. Planktonic cultures of the P. aeruginosa and M. morganii isolates (see below) were grown in artificial urine medium (AUM) based on the recipe of Brooks and Keevil (43) with slight modiﬁcations (uric acid 0.333 g/l, Na2SO4 1.4 g/l). To this end, 100 ml media were inoculated to an OD600nm of 0.01 with freshly grown AUM cultures and subsequently incubated at 180 rpm at 37 °C. Cells were harvested in the early stationary growth phase by centrifugation at 6.000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. Proteins were extracted from the resulting cell pellet as described above. The corresponding supernatants were filtered through a 0.2 µm pore filter and concentrated by a vivaspin 20 concentrator (3 kDa MWCO, GE Healthcare) followed by protein precipitation with ice-cold acetone (1:7, v/v) for the investigation of the secretome.  Biofilms were grown on silicone catheters, which were placed into planktonic AUM cultures, inoculated to an OD600nm of 0.01 and cultivated for 24 h at 50 rpm at 37 °C. Before harvesting the biofilm, the catheter was washed three times with ¼ ringer solution. Protein extraction from biofilm-grown P. aeruginosa and M. morganii was performed as described above.   1-D SDS-PAGE and Tryptic Digestion  The extracted proteins (30 - 40 µg of protein per biological or technical replicate) were separated on a 12% SDS polyacrylamide gel (44) and stained overnight with Colloidal Coomassie Brilliant Blue G-250 as described previously (45). Gel blocks were excised from the gel and proteins were digested with trypsin as follows: the excised gel pieces were destained using 50% (v/v) methanol in 100 mM NH4HCO3. Proteins were reduced in 50 mM NH4HCO3 by using 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 60 °C and carbamidomethylated/alkylated in 50 mM NH4HCO3 containing with 50 mM iodoacetamide for 60 min in the dark at RT. Subsequently, gel pieces were dehydrated using 100% ACN and allowed to dry. Modified trypsin (sequencing grade, Promega, Germany) was added to a final ratio of 1:10 (trypsin/ sample) in 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5 and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were iteratively extracted from the gel by a six step procedure, using ACN, 1% (v/v) formic acid in H2O, acetonitrile, 10% (v/v) formic acid and two times acetonitrile. Peptide-containing supernatants were pooled and completely dried using a Speedvac concentrator (Eppendorf AG). Samples were subsequently resolved in buffer A (5% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) and desalted using ZipTips (C18, Millipore). Finally, peptides were again vacuum-dried and stored at -20 °C.

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometric Analyses The tryptic digest was applied to a reversed phase (RP) chromatographic system (Easy-nLC II operated in “one column setup” (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA)) equipped with a self-packed RP C18 separation column (100-μm i.D. x 200 mm length) as published by Teeling et al., 2012 (46). Peptides were loaded and desalted on the column followed by elution from the column by a binary gradient of buffer A (0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) and B (99.9% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid) over a time of 100 min at 300 nl/min. For the analysis of peptide mixtures derived from gel blocks of one gel lane (corresponding to one sample) injection volumes were kept constant. The chromatographic system was on-line coupled to an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Samples were measured in data-dependent manner with repeated cycles of overview scans in the Orbitrap (R = 30000) with the lock-mass option enabled, followed by MS/MS acquisition of the 20 most intensive precursor ions in the linear ion trap. Dynamic exclusion was enabled.  Database Assembly and Data Analysis Phylogenetic information obtained by 16S rRNA gene sequencing was used for the construction of a sample-specific virtual metagenome database designated as “catheterDB” as described by Okuda et al. (47). This database contained 342.642 non-redundant protein entries, i.e. all available proteins from Homo sapiens, P. aeruginosa, M. morganii, and Bacteroides sp. extracted from the NCBInr protein database (version 18.01.13). A second database used for protein assignments from urine samples was designated as “urineDB” and contained 46.415 entries, i.e. reference proteomes of H. sapiens, P. aeruginosa, M. morganii, E. faecalis, E. coli, P. mirabilis and B. fragilis (Uniprot, version 17.10.14 ). Since we were in particular interested in human proteins identified in the urine, the additional microbial entries (compared to “catheterDB”) were thought to minimize false positive assignments to human proteins.  Proteome discovererTM software (version 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Sequest HT database searches were performed with raw files as MudPit experiments. The following search parameters were used: enzyme type, trypsin (KR); peptide tolerance, 10 ppm; tolerance for fragment ions, 0.6 Da; b- and y-ion series; variable modification, methionine (15.99 Da) and carbamidomethylation (57 Da); a maximum of three modifications per peptide was allowed. The percolator node was used to filter peptide identifications based on a fixed FDR of 1% depending on a target-decoy approach. Peptide identifications were accepted when they could be established on Sequest: deltaCn scores of greater than 0.05 and XCorr scores of greater 2.2, 3.3, 3.75 (XCorr filter) for doubly, triply and quadruply charged peptides. Protein identifications were based on at least two identified distinct peptides per protein. Moreover, only proteins were taken into account that were identified in two out of three technical or biological replicates (replicate filter). After application of the filters (XCorr and replicate filter) the initial FDR of 1% was reduced to 0.0001%. Proteins that contained identical peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped together.  Quantification was based on integration of the area under the curve (AUC) from MS1 spectrum peaks performed by the “Precursor Ions Area Detector” node integrated in the proteome discoverer software. Proteome discoverer identification and quantification results (*.msf) were imported into Scaffold (version 4.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) and protein quantities were determined as the average of the three highest peptide intensity values for a protein (48). If only two peptides could be quantified, the average of the two highest peptide intensity values for a protein was calculated. Identical distinct peptides identified and quantified from different gel blocks or retention times within a sample were considered.  Normalization of these data was achieved by using the following equation: 〖 (NAUC)〗_k=〖AUC〗_k/(∑_(i=1)^N▒〖AUC〗_i ) NAUC is the normalized intensity value (AUCk) for a protein divided by the sum of all intensity values per sample (AUCi). AUCk is the average of the three highest peptide intensity values for a protein.

### Publication Abstract
Long-term catheterization inevitably leads to a catheter-associated bacteriuria caused by multispecies bacterial biofilms growing on and in the catheters. The overall goal of the presented study was (1) to unravel bacterial community structure and function of such a uropathogenic biofilm and (2) to elucidate the interplay between bacterial virulence and the human immune system within the urine. To this end, a metaproteomics approach combined with in vitro proteomics analyses was employed to investigate both, the pro- and eukaryotic protein inventory. Our proteome analyses demonstrated that the biofilm of the investigated catheter is dominated by three bacterial species, that is, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Morganella morganii, and Bacteroides sp., and identified iron limitation as one of the major challenges in the bladder environment. In vitro proteome analysis of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii isolated from the biofilm revealed that these opportunistic pathogens are able to overcome iron restriction via the production of siderophores and high expression of corresponding receptors. Notably, a comparison of in vivo and in vitro protein profiles of P. aeruginosa and M. morganii also indicated that the bacteria employ different strategies to adapt to the urinary tract. Although P. aeruginosa seems to express secreted and surface-exposed proteases to escape the human innate immune system and metabolizes amino acids, M. morganii is able to take up sugars and to degrade urea. Most interestingly, a comparison of urine protein profiles of three long-term catheterized patients and three healthy control persons demonstrated the elevated level of proteins associated with neutrophils, macrophages, and the complement system in the patient's urine, which might point to a specific activation of the innate immune system in response to biofilm-associated urinary tract infections. We thus hypothesize that the often asymptomatic nature of catheter-associated urinary tract infections might be based on a fine-tuned balance between the expression of bacterial virulence factors and the human immune system.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institue for Microbiology
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Christian Lassek

### Lab Head
Dr Katharina Riedel
University of Greifswald, Institue for Microbiology


