### Accession
PXD025993

### Title
Proteomics of rat neonatal cardiac fibroblasts

### Description
Gβγ subunits are involved in many different signalling processes in various compartments of the cell, including the nucleus. To gain insight into the functions of nuclear Gβγ, we investigated the functional role of Gβγ signalling in regulation of GPCR-mediated gene expression in primary rat neonatal cardiac fibroblasts. Following activation of the angiotensin II type I receptor in these cells, Gβγ dimers interact with RNA polymerase II (RNAPII). Our findings suggest that Gβ1γ recruitment to RNAPII negatively regulates the fibrotic transcriptional response, which can be overcome by strong fibrotic stimuli. In these specific proteomics experiments, we compared the differential protein abundance in Gβ1 knockdown and WT cardiac fibroblasts following angiotensin II treatment using a bottom-up data-dependent approach.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were processed using the Sample Extraction by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED) method, as previously described (Doellinger et al. 2020). Briefly, fibroblast cell pellets were resuspended and lysed in 20 uL trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) for 10 minutes with gentle mixing. Homogenous lysates were neutralized by addition of 200uL 2M Tris. Samples were reduced and alkylated with addition of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 2-chloroacetamide (CAA) to final concentrations of 10 mM and 40 mM respectively, followed by incubation at 95 °C for 5 min. Protein concentrations were calculated using turbidity measurements at 360 nm on a DeNovix DS-11 Spectrophotometer. All samples were normalized to 25 μg in 240 uL by dilution in 1:10 TFA/2M Tris, and then were diluted 1:2 with dH2O to reduce salt concentration prior to digestion. Proteomics grade trypsin (ThermoScientific) was added in a 1:20 (w/w) ratio, and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 20 hours. Digestions were stopped by addition of TFA to a final concentration of 2%, and samples were desalted using Pierce C18 Spin Columns (ThermoScientific). Samples were eluted from the spin columns in 50% ACN / 0.1% formic acid, and eluates were dried in a Savant SpeedVac DNA 130 (ThermoScientific). Dried pellets were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and peptide concentrations were measured according to 280 nm absorbance. 1 μg of peptides were loaded onto a C18 μ-precolumn and eluted onto an Acclaim PepMap100 C18 column (75 μm × 15 cm) with a 120 min 5–40% gradient of acetonitrile (ACN) in 0.1% formic acid at 300 nl min−1. Eluted peptides were analyzed with an Impact II Q-TOF spectrometer equipped with a CaptiveSpray electrospray source and ACN-enriched NanoBooster gas (Bruker). Data was acquired using data-dependent auto-MS/MS with an m/z range of 150–2,200, a fixed cycle time of 3 s, and active exclusion settings to exclude after 1 spectra, release after 2 mins, and reconsider precursors if 3-fold more intense. An m/z-dependent isolation window of 1.5–5 m/z and collision energy in the range of 25–75 eV were also used (Beck et al 2015). Washes were performed in between each sample run.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Andromeda, integrated into MaxQuant (version 1.6.10.43). Searches for tryptic (before K,R) peptides were performed against the R. norvegicus proteome (29,936 proteins; ID: UP000002494), with a minimum peptide length of 7 a.a. and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Protein N-term acetylation and methionine oxidation were chosen as variable modifications. MaxQuant instrument parameters for Bruker Q-TOF were used, including a first search peptide mass tolerance of 0.1 Da, main search peptide tolerance of 0.006 Da, and isotope match tolerance of 0.005 Da. All other instrument parameters were left at their default values. Peptide spectral match and protein false discovery rate thresholds were set to 1 %. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed using a minimum ratio count of 2 peptides, and the FastLFQ algorithm with a minimum of 3 and average of 6 neighbors. Only unique peptides were used for protein quantification. Match Between Runs was also implemented with default values. Unless stated, all other MaxQuant settings were left at their default values. MaxQuant LFQ values were analyzed using LFQ-Analyst as previously described (Shah et al. 2020). To summarize, data was pre-filtered to remove contaminants, reverse sequences, proteins only “identified by site”, proteins quantified with only a single peptide, and any proteins with a high proportion of missing values. All LFQ values were transformed to a log2 scale, and missing values were imputed using the “Missing Not at Random” (MNAR) method, frequently used in Perseus software (Tyanova et al. 2016), where values are randomly drawn from a normal distribution left shifted by 1.8 standard deviation, with a width of 0.3. Protein-wise linear models combined with empirical Bayes statistics were used for the differential expression analyses. The limma package from R Bioconductor was used to generate a list of differentially expressed proteins for each pair-wise comparison.

### Publication Abstract
G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; subunits mediate many different signaling processes in various compartments of the cell, including the nucleus. To gain insight into the functions of nuclear G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; signaling, we investigated the functional role of G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; signaling in the regulation of GPCR-mediated gene expression in primary rat neonatal cardiac fibroblasts. We identified a novel, negative, regulatory role for the G&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub>&#x3b3; dimer in the fibrotic response. Depletion of G&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> led to derepression of the fibrotic response at the mRNA and protein levels under basal conditions and an enhanced fibrotic response after sustained stimulation of the angiotensin II type I receptor. Our genome-wide chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments revealed that G&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub> colocalized and interacted with RNA polymerase II on fibrotic genes in an angiotensin II-dependent manner. Additionally, blocking transcription with inhibitors of Cdk9 prevented association of G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; with transcription complexes. Together, our findings suggest that G&#x3b2;<sub>1</sub>&#x3b3; is a novel transcriptional regulator of the fibrotic response that may act to restrict fibrosis to conditions of sustained fibrotic signaling. Our work expands the role for G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; signaling in cardiac fibrosis and may have broad implications for the role of nuclear G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; signaling in other cell types.

### Keywords
Gnb1, Rat cardiac fibroblasts, Angiotensin ii, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
McGill University
McGill University  Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics Montreal, QC

### Submitter
Andrew Bayne

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Francois Trempe
McGill University  Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics Montreal, QC


