### Accession
PXD031766

### Title
Mouse inner organ injury Peritomeum, Liver, Cecum

### Description
Internal organs heal injuries with new connective tissue. However the cellular and molecular events, and the sources of this tissue, remain obscure. Here we tagged extracellular matrix around the mesothelium lining various mouse tissues: peritoneum, liver, and cecum, and applied various injury models. We discovered that preexisting matrix is transferred across organs into wounds. Using proteomics, genetic lineage-tracing and by selectively injuring juxtaposed organs, we demonstrate that the matrix tissue of origin likely dictates the final healing outcome: whether scarring or regeneration.

### Sample Protocol
Tissues were marked locally with an EZ-LINK-NHS 100:1 FITC-NHS mixture. After 24 hours the organs were removed. Tissue pieces from the original marking were separated from moved matrix fractions and snap frozen. Tissue lysis was performed as described above. Samples were digested by a modified FASP procedure. After reduction and alkylation using DTT and IAA, the proteins were centrifuged on Microcon centrifugal filters (Sartorius Vivacon 500 30 kDa), washed thrice with 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5 and twice with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The proteins on the filter were digested for 2 hours at room temperature using 0.5 µg Lys-C (Wako Chemicals, Neuss, Germany) and for 16 hours at 37°C with 1 µg trypsin (Promega, Mannheim, Germany). Peptides were collected by centrifugation (10 min at 14,000 g), acidified with 0.5% TFA and stored at -20 °C until measurements. The digested peptides were loaded automatically onto an HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano trap column (100 µm ID x 2 cm, Acclaim PepMAP 100 C18, 5 µm, 100Å/size, LC Packings, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in 95% buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in HPLC-grade water) and 5% buffer B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA in HPLC-grade water) at 30 µl/min. After 5 min, the peptides were eluted and separated on the analytical column (nanoEase MZ HSS T3 Column, 100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters) at 250 nl/min flow rate in a 105 minute non-linear acetonitrile gradient from 3 to 40% in 0.1% formic acid. The eluting peptides were analyzed online in a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to the HPLC system with a nano spray ion source and operated in the data-dependent mode. MS spectra were recorded at a resolution of 60,000 and after each MS1 cycle, the 10 most abundant peptide ions were selected for fragmentation

### Data Protocol
Raw spectra were imported into Progenesis QIsoftware (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics, Waters). After feature alignment and normalization, spectra were exported as Mascot Generic files and searched against the SwissProt mouse database (16,872 sequences) with Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.6.2) with the following search parameters: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance, two missed cleavages allowed, carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, camthiopropanoyl, methionine and proline oxidation were allowed as variable modifications. A Mascot-integrated decoy database search calculated an average false discovery of  <1% when searches were performed with a mascot percolator score cut-off of 13 and an appropriate significance threshold p.

### Publication Abstract
Internal organs heal injuries with new connective tissue, but the cellular and molecular events of this process remain obscure. By tagging extracellular matrix around the mesothelium lining in mouse peritoneum, liver and cecum, here we show that preexisting matrix was transferred across organs into wounds in various injury models. Using proteomics, genetic lineage-tracing and selective injury in juxtaposed organs, we found that the tissue of origin for the transferred matrix likely dictated the scarring or regeneration of the healing tissue. Single-cell RNA sequencing and genetic and chemical screens indicated that the preexisting matrix was transferred by neutrophils dependent on the HSF-integrin AM/B2-kindlin3 cascade. Pharmacologic inhibition of this axis prevented matrix transfer and the formation of peritoneal adhesions. Matrix transfer was thus an early event of wound repair and provides a therapeutic window to dampen scaring across a range of conditions.

### Keywords
Liver, Mouse peritomeum, Cecum lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Helmholtz-Muenchen
Institute Regenerative Biology and Medicine, Helmholtz Zentrum München

### Submitter
Safouane Kadri

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Yuval Rinkevich
Institute Regenerative Biology and Medicine, Helmholtz Zentrum München


