### Accession
PXD024662

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Functional Inward Rectifier Potassium Channel (Kir) 2.1 for Posttranslational Modification Discovery

### Description
Kir2.1 has been implicated in a number of channelopathies including Andersen-Tawil Syndrome, Short QT Syndrome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. We developed a mass spectrometry-based assay to identify phosphorylation sites and test the functional consequence of removing those sites by site-directed mutagenesis. Our study identified novel sites of phosphorylation and suggests that the site of phosphorylation can influence channel function. We envision our approach can be readily adapted to study additional mutations and other ion channels.

### Sample Protocol
One to three 150 mm plates of HEK cells (~25-50 million cells) stably expressing MYC-WT Kir2.1 or MYC-S425A Kir2.1 as described in the results were grown to ~80% confluence (~15-45 million cells) followed by a 2 h incubation in a PKA stimulating cocktail of 100 µM forskolin and 10 µM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX). Cells were then washed once with Tris-buffered saline solution, pelleted at 1,000 g for 5 min and lysed in 500-750 µL DDM buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% DDM, the phosphatase inhibitors Sodium Fluoride (50 mM) and Sodium Orthovanadate (5 mM), and EDTA free protease inhibitor cocktail (Bimake.com), for at least 20 min on ice with intermittent vortexing.  Insoluble debris was pelleted at 16,000 g for 10min. The soluble fraction was then bound ~50 uL MYC resin washed and pre-equilibrated in DDM buffer and rotated overnight. Bound beads were washed in 250 µL DDM buffer for 20 min (3X) followed by a 250 µL wash with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to remove residual DDM buffer, before being eluted in 30 µL 1% Formic Acid containing 5 mM TCEP for 10 min with intermittent vortexing. This was done 3X to obtain 90 µL total eluent for MS. The sample was stored at 4 °C for less than a day or snap-frozen and stored at -80 °C (best results were achieved with no freeze-thaw, but the successful analysis was observed after storage for a few weeks).   Samples were concentrated to 50 µL using a vacuum centrifugal concentrator. Proteins (10 µL aliquot) were separated with a home-packed analytical column (250 x 0.250 mm, PLRP-S, 5 µm, 1000 Å) heated to 50 °C using a flow rate of 6 μL/min on a Waters nanoAcquity HPLC (M-Class). The following conditions provided effective separation: 0–5 min 20% B, 5–45 min 20–60% B, 45–50 min 95% B, 50–60 min 95% B, 60-61 min 20% B, 61-65 min 20% B. Mobile phase solvent A consisted of 99.8% water and 0.2% formic acid, while mobile phase solvent B consisted of 49.9% acetonitrile, 49.9% isopropanol, and 0.2% formic acid. Proteins eluting were directly infused into a maXis II ETD Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics) via electrospray ionization with a capillary voltage of 4500 V and an endplate offset of 500 V. MS1 scans were collected from 200-3000 m/z at 1 Hz.  Tandem MS (MS2) was performed via collisionally activated dissociation (CAD) using different current biases to optimize fragmentation (14, 16, 18 eV). Precursor selection was performed in the quadrupole with a narrow window of 2 m/z. Electron transfer dissociation was also performed using a precursor ion accumulation of 1000 ms with a reagent (3,4-hexanedione) injection duration of 7 ms with a 4 m/z (isolating both the mono- and bis-phosphorylated species) as well as a wide isolation window of 20 m/z (for increased signal-to-noise of fragment ions).  The sample was diluted with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 0.05% 4-hexylphenylazosulfonate (photocleavable surfactant) and the pH adjusted to ~8 with ammonium hydroxide. After reduction with 5 mM TCEP and alkylation with 15 mM 2-chloroacetamide, Kir2.1 samples were digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme:protein) or Asp-N (1:50 enzyme:protein) overnight at 37 °C. The surfactant was degraded with 5 min of UV irradiation using a 100 W mercury lamp (Nikon housing with Nikon HB-10101AF power supply; handle with caution), the peptides were desalted using a C18 Tips (100 µL bed) according to the manufacture's protocol and dried using a vacuum centrifugal concentrator. The sample was reconstituted in 30 µL of mobile phase solvent A (99.8% water and 0.2% formic acid) and 200 ng were loaded onto an Ion Optics column (25 cm x 75 µm, C18 1.6 µm) heated to 55 °C. The separation was performed using the following gradient: 0-60 min 2-17% B, 60-90 min 17-25% B, 90-100 min 37% B, 100-110 min 37-85% B, and 110-120 min 85% B using a flow rate of 400 nL/min and mobile phase B consisting of 99.8% ACN and 0.2% formic acid. Eluting peptides were directly ionized via electrospray ionization (CaptiveSpray) using a capillary voltage of 1500V, dry gas of 3.0 l/min, and dry temp of 180 °C. Ions measured from 100-1700 m/z using a timsTOF Pro Q-TOF (Bruker Daltonics) operating in PASEF mode (42) with an ion mobility range (1/k0) of 0.60 to 1.60 Vs/cm2.

### Data Protocol
The MS spectra were deconvoluted by the Maximum Entropy algorithm with a low resolving power of 1000 (as the isotopic resolution was no achieved) using Bruker DataAnalysis 4.3 and the average mass was reported. All fragment ions were processed using MASH Explorer. Deconvolution and peak picking were performed using the eTHRASH algorithm with the following settings: Signal/Noise 3; Delete Intensity Threshold 10; Min Charge 1; Max Charge 50, Num Peaks for Shoulder 1, Min m/z 1; Max m/z 10000; Min Fit (%) 60. The assignment of fragment ions was accepted with a mass accurate cutoff of ± 25 ppm and verified manually. The monoisotopic mass was reported for fragment ions.   For searches, we used the reviewed human UniProt sequences (https://www.uniprot.org, December 4, 2020) using a 1% false discovery rate. All searches were performed with caramidomethyl (C) has a fixed modification and oxidation (M), protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation (STY) set as variable modifications. Match between run as enabled. The data was further filtered using a cutoff of 100 for phosphorylation site identifications. Otherwise, the MaxQuant parameters were not changed from their default values. Tandem MS spectra were inspected manually and annotated using Skyline 20.2 (43).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Top-down proteomics, Ion channel, Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University ofWisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705, USA
uw madison

### Submitter
kyle brown

### Lab Head
Dr Ying Ge
Department of Cell and Regenerative Biology, University ofWisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, 53705, USA


