### Accession
PXD008218

### Title
Dynamics of venom composition across a complex life cycle

### Description
Nematostella vectensis is a venomous organism with a complex life cycle. We harness different approaches to study venom composition dynamics along its life cycle. Our methods include but not limited to transcriptomica and proteomics. Here we perform semi quantitative analysis of Nematostella proteom at 4 developmental stages to compare abundance of different toxins.

### Sample Protocol
Egg packages were washed with 4% cysteine solution in 16‰ ASW for 30 min at room temperature to dissolve the jelly. Unfertilized eggs, 4 days old planulae, 9 days old primary polyps, adult males (5 individuals), and adult females (5 individuals) were lysed in 8M urea, 400 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution and centrifuged (22000 g, 20 min, 4⁰C). Protein concentrations were measured with BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 10 µg of protein were reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide. Tryptic digestion (0.3 µg trypsin/ sample) was performed overnight at 37⁰C, followed by addition of 0.05 % ProteaseMAX Surfactant (Promega Corp., USA) and further incubation for 1 h at 37⁰C. The tryptic peptides were desalted on self-made C18 StageTips (Rappsilber J, Mann M, Ishihama Y. Nat Protoc. 2007;2(8):1896-906.). A total of 1.25 µg of peptides from each sample were injected into the mass spectrometer. MS analysis was performed using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled on-line to a nanoflow UHPLC instrument (Ultimate 3000 Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Eluted peptides were separated over a 180-min gradient run at a flow rate of 0.2 µl/min on a reverse phase PepMap RSLC C18 column (50 cm×75 µm, 2 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The survey scans (380–2,000 m/z, target value 3E6 charges, maximum ion injection times 50 ms) were acquired and followed by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) based fragmentation (normalized collision energy 25). A resolution of 70,000 was used for survey scans and up to 15 dynamically chosen most abundant precursor ions were fragmented (isolation window 1.6 m/z). The MS/MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 (target value 5E4 charges, maximum ion injection times 57 ms). Dynamic exclusion was 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data were processed using the MaxQuant computational platform, version 1.5.3.12 (Cox, J. & Mann, M. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372 (2008)). Peak lists were searched against predicted coding sequences from N. vectensis transcriptome. The search included cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications. Peptides with minimum of seven amino-acid length were considered and the required FDR was set to 1% at the peptide and protein level. Protein identification required at least 2 unique or razor peptides per protein group. The dependent-peptide and match-between-runs options were used.

### Publication Abstract
Little is known about venom in young developmental stages of animals. The appearance of toxins and stinging cells during early embryonic stages in the sea anemone <i>Nematostella vectensis</i> suggests that venom is already expressed in eggs and larvae of this species. Here, we harness transcriptomic, biochemical and transgenic tools to study venom production dynamics in <i>Nematostella</i>. We find that venom composition and arsenal of toxin-producing cells change dramatically between developmental stages of this species. These findings can be explained by the vastly different interspecific interactions of each life stage, as individuals develop from a miniature non-feeding mobile planula to a larger sessile polyp that predates on other animals and interact differently with predators. Indeed, behavioral assays involving prey, predators and <i>Nematostella</i> are consistent with this hypothesis. Further, the results of this work suggest a much wider and dynamic venom landscape than initially appreciated in animals with a complex life cycle.

### Keywords
Nematostella vectensis

### Affiliations
Sars International Centre for Marine Molecular Biology
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behaviour,  The Hebre University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel

### Submitter
Maria Sachkova

### Lab Head
Dr Yehu Moran
Department of Ecology, Evolution and Behaviour,  The Hebre University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel


