### Accession
PXD033476

### Title
A proteomics approach reveals digestive and nutritional responses to food intake in anadromous Coilia nasus

### Description
The estuarine tapertail anchovy, Coilia nasus, is an anadromous fish that undertakes over a 600-km spawning migration along the Yangtze River of China. They generally cease feeding during this process, but we recently documented that a small proportion of them appear to feed. Research on proteomic responses is essential for understanding the phenomenon of C. nasus feeding. In this study, we used an iTRAQ-based proteomics approach to study the changes in protein expression in response to food intake in C. nasus following voluntary fasting. Coilia nasus in the feeding group (CSI) were fed shrimp or small fish, whereas those in the control group (CSN) were starved. We identified 3279 proteins in the gastric tissue/stomach, of which 279 were significantly differentially expressed. In all, 133 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were upregulated and 146 proteins were downregulated in CSI compared with those in CSN C. nasus. In addition to gastric acid secretion caused by gastric distention, a functional analysis suggested that a series of DEPs were involved mainly in the regulation of protein digestion (e.g., carboxypeptidase A1 and chymotrypsin A-like), immune response (e.g., lysozyme and alpha 2-macroglobulin), and nutrition metabolism (e.g., glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, glycogenin, long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase, and creatine kinase). Real-time PCR confirmed that the mRNA levels of the DEPs were similar those obtained using iTRAQ. These results indicate that the nutrients obtained through food were effectively utilized by C. nasus, thereby providing energy for swimming, gonadal maturation, primary metabolism, and an enhanced immune function to better resist pathogen interference. This research contributes to the elucidation of nutritional regulation mechanisms of C. nasus to better protect the wild population.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling was conducted in the Anqing section (30°28ʹ11″N, 117°11ʹ57″E) of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River during the anadromous period (from July 2 to 4, 2018). With the help of a local fisherman, C. nasus individuals were collected using drifting gill nets with a mesh size of 40 mm. The captured fish were immediately placed among ice bags to retard RNA degradation. All fish were rapidly dissected to check for food in their stomachs and intestinal contents. Based on the gastrointestinal content, we selected three C. nasus individuals with shrimp and/or fish in the stomach as the feeding group (CSI) and three individuals with empty stomachs as the control group (CSN). Three biological replicates of the feeding and control groups were subjected to proteomic analyses using iTRAQ.

### Data Protocol
The original MS/MS file data were processed using the MASCOT version 2.3.02 search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and protein identification was performed using RNA-seq results in the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Sequence Read Archive No. GSE138446 (F18FTSECWLJ2177_I-eXplh005_canonical. fasta) (Ma et al., 2020). The setting parameters were as follows: an MS/MS ion search, tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, iTRAQ8plex (N-term) and carbamidomethyl (C) as fixed modifications, and oxidation(M) and iTRAQ8plex (Y) as variable modifications. A peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ions and fragment mass tolerance of 0.05 Da were allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The estuarine tapertail anchovy, Coilia nasus, is an anadromous fish that undertakes over a 600-km spawning migration along the Yangtze River of China. They generally cease feeding during this process, but we recently documented that a small proportion of them appear to feed. Research on proteomic responses is essential for understanding the phenomenon of C. nasus feeding. In this study, we used an iTRAQ-based proteomics approach to study the changes in protein expression in response to food intake in C. nasus following voluntary fasting. Coilia nasus in the feeding group (CSI) were fed shrimp or small fish, whereas those in the control group (CSN) were starved. We identified 3279 proteins in the gastric tissue/stomach, of which 279 were significantly differentially expressed. In all, 133 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were upregulated and 146 proteins were downregulated in CSI compared with those in CSN C. nasus. In addition to gastric acid secretion caused by gastric distention, a functional analysis suggested that a series of DEPs were involved mainly in the regulation of protein digestion (e.g., carboxypeptidase A1 and chymotrypsin A-like), immune response (e.g., lysozyme and alpha 2-macroglobulin), and nutrition metabolism (e.g., glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase, glycogenin, long-chain acyl-CoA synthetase, and creatine kinase). Real-time PCR confirmed that the mRNA levels of the DEPs were similar those obtained using iTRAQ. These results indicate that the nutrients obtained through food were effectively utilized by C. nasus, thereby providing energy for swimming, gonadal maturation, primary metabolism, and an enhanced immune function to better resist pathogen interference. This research contributes to the elucidation of nutritional regulation mechanisms of C. nasus to better protect the wild population.

### Keywords
Coilia nasus, Food intake, Proteomics, Itraq, Protein digestion, Nutritional responses

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University
Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Fengjiao Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Fengjiao Ma
Wuxi Fisheries College, Nanjing Agricultural University


