### Accession
PXD003868

### Title
Quantitative global proteomics of yeast PBP1 deletion mutants and their stress responses reveals glucose metabolism, translation and stress granule changes

### Description
The yeast protein PBP1 has been implicated in diverse pathways such as polyadenylation, translation, RNA-DNA hybrid formation, stress granule homeostasis, mitochondrial dysfunction, and TORC1 sequestration. Intriguingly, its deletion mitigates the toxicity of human neurodegeneration factors, but the molecular mechanisms of these effects are poorly understood. Here we performed label-free quantitative global proteomics to identify crucial downstream factors, comparing two PBP1 deletion strains (DB and SM) and two cell stress conditions (heat and NaN3). In all four  analyses, downregulations of key bioenergetics enzymes (CIT1, SDH1, MLS1), cell wall mannoproteins (HSP150, PST1) and the prion protein RNQ1 as well as upregulations of the leucine biosynthesis enzyme LEU1 and the transcription factor TAF6 were documented. Consistently for both unstressed PBP1-deleted strains, over 2-fold dysregulations were documented for potential PBP1 interactors such as MKT1 or RPL39 and the stress granule component NRP1. Upregulation of the ribosomal biogenesis factor NOP10 was observed as in the mouse mutant.  Consistently for both PBP1 deletion strains, heat stress triggered changes of the stress granule component GIS2 and several of its interactors.

### Sample Protocol
Tryptic digest of yeast strains under different conditions

### Data Protocol
LFQ MaxQuant analysis, Perseus statistics, vulcano blots

### Publication Abstract
The yeast protein PBP1 is implicated in very diverse pathways. Intriguingly, its deletion mitigates the toxicity of human neurodegeneration factors. Here, we performed label-free quantitative global proteomics to identify crucial downstream factors, either without stress or under cell stress conditions (heat and NaN<sub>3</sub>). Compared to the wildtype BY4741 strain, PBP1 deletion always triggered downregulation of the key bioenergetics enzyme KGD2 and the prion protein RNQ1 as well as upregulation of the leucine biosynthesis enzyme LEU1. Without stress, enrichment of stress response factors was consistently detected for both deletion mutants; upon stress, these factors were more pronounced. The selective analysis of components of stress granules and P-bodies revealed a prominent downregulation of GIS2. Our yeast data are in good agreement with a global proteomics and metabolomics publication that the PBP1 ortholog ATAXIN-2 (ATXN2) knockout (KO) in mouse results in mitochondrial deficits in leucine/fatty acid catabolism and bioenergetics, with an obesity phenotype. Furthermore, our data provide the completely novel insight that PBP1 mutations in stress periods involve GIS2, a plausible scenario in view of previous data that both PBP1 and GIS2 relocalize from ribosomes to stress granules, interact with poly(A)-binding protein in translation regulation and prevent mitochondrial precursor overaccumulation stress (mPOS). This may be relevant for human diseases like spinocerebellar ataxias, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and the metabolic syndrome.

### Keywords
Pbp1, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Exp. Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Auburger
Exp. Neurology, Goethe University Medical School, Frankfurt am Main, Germany


