### Accession
PXD026618

### Title
βIV-spectrin as a stalk cell-intrinsic regulator of VEGF signaling

### Description
Defective angiogenesis underlies over 50 malignant, ischemic and inflammatory disorders yet long-term therapeutic applications inevitably fail, thus highlighting the need for greater understanding of the vast crosstalk and compensatory mechanisms. Based on proteomic profiling of angiogenic endothelial components, here we report βIV-spectrin, a non-erythrocytic cytoskeletal protein, as a critical regulator of sprouting angiogenesis. Early loss of endothelial specific βIV-spectrin promotes embryonic lethality in mice due to hypervascularization and hemorrhagic defects whereas neonatal depletion yields higher vascular density and tip cell populations in developing retina. During sprouting, βIV-spectrin expresses in stalk cells to inhibit their tip cell potential by enhancing VEGFR2 turnover in a manner independent of most cell-fate determining mechanisms. Rather, βIV-spectrin recruits CaMKII to the plasma membrane to directly phosphorylate VEGFR2 at Ser984, a previously undefined phosphoregulatory site that strongly induces VEGFR2 internalization and degradation. These findings support a distinct spectrin-based mechanism of tip-stalk cell specification during vascular development.

### Sample Protocol
To determine changes in EC proteome upon bIV-spectrin depletion, cell lysates were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel and stained with Bio-Safe Coomassie G-250 Stain. Each lane of the SDSPAGE gel was cut into 5 slices. The gel slices were subjected to trypsin digestion and the resulting peptides were purified by C18-based desalting exactly as previously described (PMID:28550165 & 31018989).

### Data Protocol
Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and charge states were assigned using the ProteoWizard 3.0 msConvert script using the default parameters. The fragment mass spectra were searched against the mus musculus SwissProt_2018_01 database (16965 entries) using Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.6.0) using the default probability cut-off score. The search variables that were used were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses and 0.5 Da for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine. Cross-correlation of Mascot search results with X! Tandem was accomplished with Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.7; Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA). Probability assessment of peptide assignments and protein identification were made using Scaffold. Only peptides with ≥ 95% probability were considered. Label-free peptide/protein quantification and identification. Progenesis QI for proteomics software (version 2.4, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK) was used to perform ion-intensity based label-free quantification as previously described (PMID: 33410333).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sprouting angiogenesis; vegf signaling; tip-stalk cell specification; spectrins

### Affiliations
University of Arizona
University of Arizona College of Medicine-Tucson

### Submitter
Paul Langlais

### Lab Head
Dr Nam Lee
University of Arizona College of Medicine-Tucson


