### Accession
PXD041349

### Title
Dll4iDEC mouse liver endothelial cells

### Description
Myc and its target Odc1 were among the most 250 strongly upregulated genes in Dll4 mutant ECs, compared with Notch1 and Rbpj mutants. Myc is known to activate important ribosome biogenesis and protein translation pathways, favoring cell growth. Dll4iDEC livers showed upregulation of a large range of canonical E2F, Myc, and mTORC1 target genes and ribosomal genes, particularly in the activated, proliferating, and endothelial tip-cell clusters. This hypermetabolic transcriptional status was confirmed by in-depth proteomics analysis of protein lysates obtained from freshly isolated liver ECs, providing the first proteomics analysis of the endothelial tip-cell state induced by targeting Dll4.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of protein extracts and on-filter tryptic digestion: Cells were boiled for 10 min in lysis buffer (4% SDS, 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) supplemented with 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) to block reduced Cys residues. After centrifugation at 16,000g, supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined by the RC/DC Protein Assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Samples were subjected to tryptic digestion using a modification of the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) technology (Expedeon). Briefly, the protein extracts (100 μg) were diluted in urea sample solution (USS, 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl at pH 8.5) and loaded onto the filters. After centrifugation and a washing step with USS, the oxidized Cys residues were reduced with 50 mM DTT (GE Healthcare) in USS for 1 h at room temperature. The samples were then centrifuged, washed with USS, and subsequently alkylated with 50 mM S-methyl methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in USS for 1 h at room temperature. Thereafter, the filters were washed three times with USS and three times with ABC Buffer (50 mM NH4HCO3 at pH 8.8). Proteins were digested using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at a 1:40 (w/w) trypsin:sample ratio at 37°C overnight with gentle agitation.    Multiplexed stable isotope labeling of tryptic peptides: The resulting tryptic peptides were mixed with 40 µl of trypsin digestion buffer and recovered by centrifugation at 10,000g for 5 min, after which 50 µl of 500 mM NaCl were added and the filters centrifuged for 15 min at 16,000g. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1%, and the peptides were desalted on C18 Oasis HLB extraction cartridges (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) and dried down. The eluted, cleaned-up peptides were subjected to stable isotope labeling using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ using 8-plex reagents from AB Sciex). The six differentially tagged samples were then pooled and desalted on Waters Oasis HLB C18 cartridges.  Peptide fractionation: For peptide fractionation, the labeled sample was separated into five fractions using the high pH reversed-phase peptide fractionation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Bound peptides were eluted with 1) 12.5% (v/v) ACN; 2) 15% (v/v) ACN; 3) 17.5% (v/v) ACN; 4) 20% (v/v) ACN; and 5) 50% ACN. The fractions obtained were vacuum-dried and stored at -20°C for later use.  Liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry: The tryptic peptide mixtures were subjected to nanoscale liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). High-resolution analysis of samples was performed on an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer. Peptides were suspended in 0.1% formic acid, loaded onto a C18 RP nano-precolumn (Acclaim PepMap100, 75 μm internal diameter, 3 μm particle size and 2 cm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific), and separated on an analytical C18 nano-column (EASY-Spray column PepMap RSLC C18, 75 μm internal diameter, 3 μm particle size and 50 cm length, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a continuous gradient: 8-27% B for 240 min, 31-100% B for 2 min, 100% B for 7 min, 100-2% B for 2 min and 2% B for 30 min (where A is 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water and B is 90% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water). Full MS spectra were acquired over the 400-1500 mass-to-charge (m/z) range with 120,000 resolution, 200,000 automatic gain control, and 50 ms maximum injection time. Data-dependent MS/MS acquisition was performed at 50,000 automatic gain control and 120 ms injection time, with a 2 Da isolation window and 30 s dynamic exclusion. Higher-energy collisional dissociation of peptides was induced with 31% normalized collision energy and analyzed at 35,000 resolution in the orbitrap.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification based on database searching: Proteins were identified in the raw files using the SEQUEST HT algorithm integrated in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS/MS scans were matched against the mouse (UniProtKB 2017-07 release) protein database supplemented with pig trypsin and human keratin sequences. Parameters for database searching were as follows: trypsin digestion with maximum 2 missed cleavage sites allowed, precursor mass tolerance of 800 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. N-terminal and Lys iTRAQ 8-plex modifications were chosen as fixed modifications, whereas Met oxidation, Cys carbamidomethylation, and Cys methylthiolation were chosen as variable modifications. SEQUEST results were analyzed with the probability ratio method. An FDR for peptide identification was calculated based on searching against the corresponding inverted database using the refined method after precursor mass tolerance postfiltering at 20 ppm. Quantitative information was extracted from the intensity of iTRAQ reporter ions in the low-mass region of the MS/MS spectra.  Statistical analysis of proteomics data: Comparative analysis of protein abundance changes was conducted with the SanXoT software package, designed for the statistical analysis of high-throughput, quantitative proteomics experiments and based on the Weighted Scan, Peptide and Protein (WSPP) statistical model. As input, WSPP uses a list of quantifications in the form of log2-ratios (each cell sample versus the mean of the three WT cell samples) with their statistical weights. From these, WSPP generates the standardized forms of the original variables by computing the quantitative values expressed in units of standard deviation around the means (Zq). Known artifact proteins (keratin contaminants and trypsin) were excluded from the data sets after the analysis. For the study of coordinated protein alterations, we used the Systems Biology Triangle (SBT) algorithm, which estimates functional category averages (Zc) from protein values by performing the protein-to-category integration, as described. The protein category database was built up using annotations from the Gene Ontology (GO) database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Dll4idec liver endothelial cells

### Affiliations
Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory & Proteomics Unit Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Madrid, Spain
Proteomics Unit
Vascular Pathophysiology Area
CNIC

### Submitter
Emilio Camafeita

### Lab Head
Dr Jesús Vázquez
Cardiovascular Proteomics Laboratory & Proteomics Unit Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Cardiovasculares Madrid, Spain


