### Accession
PXD025075

### Title
Barley embryo proteome analysis

### Description
To provide a more detailed insight into molecular changes in seeds exposed to the accelerated ageing process, we excised embryos and compared the differences in the proteome composition. Seeds collected from four contrasting locations were exposed to accelerated ageing. Next, embryos were dissected and analyzed in five biological replicates [1-5].  
Sample description:
CAS [1-5] - location n. 5 - (Caslav) - high yield, above average temperature and high rainfall; a significant decrease in germination energy after the accelerated ageing test. 
UHO [1-5] - location n. 11 (Uhersky Ostroh) - low yield, high temperature and low rainfall; very low decrease in germination energy after the accelerated ageing test.
CH [1-5] - location n. 2 (Chrastava) - average yield, low temperature, very high rainfall; a significant decrease in germination energy after the accelerated ageing test.
K [1-5] - location n. 8 (Krasne Udoli) - average yield, low temperature, average rainfall; a significant decrease in germination energy after the accelerated ageing test.

### Sample Protocol
Portions of samples corresponding to 2.5 μg of peptide were analyzed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry using a 15 cm C18 Zorbax column (Agilent), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano-UPLC system (Thermo) and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
The acquired spectra were recalibrated and searched against the reference barley  database (Hordeum vulgare IBSC_v2) and common contaminants database by Proteome Discoverer 2.5, employing Sequest HT and MS Amanda 2.0.

### Publication Abstract
To counter projected reductions in yields of the major crop barley, it is essential to elucidate the mechanisms of its resilience. To assist such efforts, we collected grains from plants grown in fields at 12 testing stations, with suitable temperature and precipitation gradients for identifying environmentally induced changes in their protein and metabolite contents. We then subjected the grains to detailed molecular analysis. The results showed that numerous metabolites and at least a quarter of the grain protein content was modulated by the environment, and provided insights into barley seed production under abiotic stress, including alterations in ribosomal proteins, heatshock protein 70 family proteins, inhibitors, storage proteins, and lipid droplet formation. Potential positive and negative markers of yield were also identified, including the phenolic compound catechin and storage protein levels, respectively. Complementary analyses of barley seedlings and Arabidopsis seeds, respectively, confirmed the role of the identified proteins in abiotic stress responses and highlighted evolutionarily conserved mechanisms. In addition, accelerated ageing experiments revealed that variations in the environment had stronger effects on seed longevity than the genotype. Finally, seeds with the highest longevity differed from the others in gibberellin contents, H2O2 metabolism, and levels of &gt;250 proteins, providing novel targets for improving resilience.

### Keywords
Hordeum vulgare, Accelerated aging

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Mendel University in Brno


