### Accession
PXD001078

### Title
Middle infrared radiation on human metastatic breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cells

### Description
Breast cancer is one of the cancer-related leading causes of death worldwide. Treatment of breast cancer is complex and challenging especially when metastasis is developed. In this study, we established a new concept of using infrared radiation as an alternative approach to breast cancer treatment. We used middle infrared (MIR) in the wavelength range of 3 to 5 μm to irradiate breast cancer cells. MIR significantly inhibited cell proliferation in several breast cancer cells, but did not affect the growth of normal breast epithelium cells. We performed iTRAQ-coupled LC-MS/MS system to investigate the MIR-triggered molecular mechanisms in breast cancer cells. A total of 1,749 proteins were quantified and 167 proteins were considered to be regulated by MIR. Applying the functional enrichment analysis on the proteomics results, we confirmed that MIR caused G2/M cell cycle arrest, remodeled microtubule network to an astral pole arrangement, altered actin filament formation and focal adhesion molecule localization, and reduced cell migration activity and invasion ability. Together, our results uncover the collaborative effects of MIR regulated physiological responses in concentrated networks, demonstrating the potential implementation of infrared radiation in breast cancer therapy.

### Sample Protocol
MDA-MB-231 cells exposed to MIR for 48 hours were harvested and lysed with lysis buffer containing 1% (v/v) SDS (Bioman, Taipei, Taiwan), 50 mM Tris-HCl (Bioman), 10% (v/v) glycerol (Sigma-Aldrich), and protease inhibitor (Bioman). Cells were homogenized on ice by homogenizer. 200 μg protein from control and MIR treatment were used and adjusted to same volume by lysis buffer. 1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEABC, Sigma-Aldrich) was added to a final concentration of 50 mM for adjusting the pH. Protein samples were then reduced by 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP, Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 30 minutes and alkylated by 5 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature in dark for 30 minutes. Gel-assisted protein digestion was applied to obtain peptides. Acrylamide/ bisacrylamide (40%, v/v, 37.5:1), 10% (w/w) APS and TEMED were mixed with protein solution and waited to polymerize as gel. Gels were cut into small pieces and washed by 25 mM TEABC and 25 mM TEABC/50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fisher Scientific) sequentially. Gels were dehydrated by 100% ACN and dried completely with a centrifugal evaporator. Proteins were digested with 20 μg Trypsin was dissolved in 25 mM TEABC at 37°C water bath for 16 hours. Peptides was extracted by vigorous vortex and the remaining gels were treated with 50% (v/v) ACN/5% (v/v) TFA and 100% ACN sequentially. The extracted peptide solution was dried and resuspended in dissolution buffer to reach the final concentration of 1~1.5 μg/μl. 100 μg peptides were required for each iTRAQ labeling according to user manual. Peptides from control labeled with iTRAQ reagent 114 and iTRAQ reagent 115; peptides from MIR treatment labeled with iTRAQ reagent 116 and iTRAQ reagent 117. The labeled peptides were resuspended in 2 ml buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4 and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) and fractionated by PolySULFOETHYL A™ column (200×2.1 mm, 5 μm, 300 Å, Poly LC, Columbia, MD, USA). Peptides were fractionated with a flow rate of 200 μl/min and a gradient of 0-25% buffer B (5 mM KH2PO4, 350 mM KCl and 25% (v/v) ACN, pH 3) for 30 minutes, 25-100% buffer B for 20 minutes, 100% buffer B for 10 minutes, 100-0% buffer B for 5 minutes and 0-100% buffer A for 10 minutes sequentially. The eluents were collected every minute and dried with a centrifugal evaporator. After desulting using ZipTip, the dried peptideswere resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and analyzed by LC-nanoESI-FTICR-MS/MS (LTQ Orbitrap XLTM; Thermo Fisher Scientific) composed of a 3-pumping Micromass/Waters CapLC™ system with an autosampler, a stream select module configured for precolumn plus analytical capillary column, and a Micromass Q-Tof Ultima™ API mass spectrometer fitted with nano-LC sprayer, operated under MassLynx™ 4.0 control. Injected samples were first trapped and desalted isocratically on an LC-Packings PepMap™ C18 μ-Precolumn™ Cartidge (5 μm, 300 μm I.D. x 5mm; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) for 2 min with 0.1% formic acid delivered by the auxillary pump at 30 μl/min after which the peptides were eluted off from the precolumn and separated on an analytical C18 capillary column (15 cm x 75 μm I.D., packed with 5 μm, Zorbax 300 SB C18 paticles, Micro-Tech Scientific, Vista, CA, USA) connected inline to the mass spectrometer, at 300 nl/min using a 120 min gradient of 5% to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Online nanoESI-MS survey scan and data dependent acquisition of HCD MS/MS were fully automated and synchronized with the nanoLC runs under the full software control of MassLynx™ 4.0. Prior to online analysis, the nanoLC sprayer and Z-spray source parameters were tuned and optimized with [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B (Sigma-Aldrich). Calibration was performed using the product ions generated from fragmentation of the doubly charged molecular ion of [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B at m/z 785.8. The 1 second survey scans were acquired over the mass range m/z 400 – 2000 and a maximum of 3 concurrent MS/MS acquisitions could be triggered for 2+, 3+ and 4+ charged precursors detected at an intensity above the predefined threshold.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectral information was submitted to Proteome Discoverer™ (Version 1.4.0.288; Thermo Fisher Scientific), the software for Mascot search and data analysis. Data files were combined and searched in Swiss-Prot human database (Dec, 2013) allowing maximum 2 missed cleavage sites. Precursor mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set to 50 mmu. Dynamic modifications were set as carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), iTARAQ4plex (K) and iTRAQ4plex (N-term). Strict target FDR of decoy database search was set at 0.01 and relaxed target FDR was set at 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Breast cancer is one of the leading cancer-related causes of death worldwide. Treatment of triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is complex and challenging, especially when metastasis has developed. In this study, we applied infrared radiation as an alternative approach for the treatment of TNBC. We used middle infrared (MIR) with a wavelength range of 3-5 &#x3bc;m to irradiate breast cancer cells. MIR significantly inhibited cell proliferation in several breast cancer cells but did not affect the growth of normal breast epithelial cells. We performed iTRAQ-coupled LC-MS/MS analysis to investigate the MIR-triggered molecular mechanisms in breast cancer cells. A total of 1749 proteins were identified, quantified, and subjected to functional enrichment analysis. From the constructed functionally enriched network, we confirmed that MIR caused G2/M cell cycle arrest, remodeled the microtubule network to an astral pole arrangement, altered the actin filament formation and focal adhesion molecule localization, and reduced cell migration activity and invasion ability. Our results reveal the coordinative effects of MIR-regulated physiological responses in concentrated networks, demonstrating the potential implementation of infrared radiation in breast cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Ltq orbitraq, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University

### Submitter
Hsin-Yi Chang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Department of Life Science, National Taiwan University


