### Accession
PXD004183

### Title
Identification of Plasmodium yoelii ALBA4 Binding partners by Immunoprecipitation/nano LC-MS/MS

### Description
RNA-binding proteins, such as DOZI/CITH and Puf2, have been shown to play critical roles in the life cycle in Plasmodium species. One of the characterized functions of these RNA-binding proteins is to bind to mRNAs and regulate their fates, and it is hypothesized that this regulation of mRNA homeostasis of specific transcripts is important for successful infection of both vectors and hosts by these parasites. To further understand the role that other RNA-binding proteins may play in translational repression and other critical processes in the parasite, we investigated ALBA4, another RNA-binding protein implicated in translational repression. We appended a C-terminal GFP-tag to ALBA4 (ALBA4::GFP), and then performed immunoprecipitations on chemically cross-linked samples using Streptavidin-coated beads coated with a biotin-conjugated anti-GFP antibody to capture the ALBA4 complex(es). We performed these experiments in multiple life cycle stages, including sexual stages (gametocytes) and asexual stage (schizonts). In gametocytes, we determined that ALBA4 associates with translational repression machinery. This is also the case in schizonts, however ALBA4 also associates with complexes involved in active translation, mRNA export, and mRNA degradation. We hypothesize that ALBA4 plays a multi-faceted role in mRNA homeostasis by associating with multiple protein complexes in a stage-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Schizonts or gametocytes were collected from mice infected with either WT-GFP or ALBA4::GFP parasites, and purified by gentle centrifugation over a discontinuous gradient. Immediately following purification, samples were chemically cross-linked with a 1% formaldehyde solution. Prior to immunoprecipitation, parasites were chemically and mechanically ruptured, and the resulting lysates were exposed to empty streptavidin-coated beads to pre-clear any spurious streptavidin interactions. Lysates were then exposed to streptavidin-coated beads coated with a biotin-conjugated anti-GFP antibody. Bound proteins were then eluted off the beads and cross-links were reversed by incubation at 45˚C overnight in a sample buffer containing β-mercaptoethanol and 200mM NaCl. Elutions were then processed for nano LC-MS/MS, which included SDS-PAGE followed by reduction and alkylation treatments, and finally in-gel trypsin digest. Samples were run on a Thermo Fisher LTQ-Orbitrap Elite. Three biological replicates were performed for each life cycle stage (gametocytes or schizonts) for each parasite line (WT-GFP or ALBA4::GFP).

### Data Protocol
Following nano LC-MS/MS, Thermo .RAW files were converted to .mzml files using msconvert in ProteoWizard. Files were then uploaded and analyzed through the Transproteomic Pipeline (TPP. version 4.8.0). Two database searches were perfomed using either the Comet or Tandem workflows against a decoy database. Search results were then individually analyzed for peptide identification confidence using PeptideProphet. Resulting files were then combined, and protein identifications were inferred by ProteinProphet. We also performed searches for phosphorylation on proteins. This was done by manually curating a reference sequence file containing proteins previously inferred below a 1% FDR. A decoy database was generated, and a search using the Tandem workflow was performed to include mass shifts of +79.966 Da to identify phosphorylations on serines, threonines, and/or tyrosines.

### Publication Abstract
Transmission of the malaria parasite occurs in an unpredictable moment, when a mosquito takes a blood meal. Plasmodium has therefore evolved strategies to prepare for transmission, including translationally repressing and protecting mRNAs needed to establish the infection. However, mechanisms underlying these critical controls are not well understood, including whether Plasmodium changes its translationally repressive complexes and mRNA targets in different stages. Efforts to understand this have been stymied by severe technical limitations due to substantial mosquito contamination of samples. Here using P. yoelii, for the first time we provide a proteomic comparison of a protein complex across asexual blood, sexual and sporozoite stages, along with a transcriptomic comparison of the mRNAs that are affected in these stages. We find that the Apicomplexan-specific ALBA4 RNA-binding protein acts to regulate development of the parasite's transmission stages, and that ALBA4 associates with both stage-specific and stage-independent partners to produce opposing mRNA fates. These efforts expand our understanding and ability to interrogate both sexual and sporozoite transmission stages and the molecular preparations they evolved to perpetuate their infectious cycle.

### Keywords
Plasmodium, Rna-binding protein, Gametocytes, Alba4

### Affiliations
Penn State University
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.

### Submitter
Scott Lindner

### Lab Head
Dr Scott Eugene Lindner
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Department, Eberly College of Science, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA, USA.


