### Accession
PXD007678

### Title
Multifaceted activity of cytokinin at distinct phases of leaf development shapes its size and structure in Arabidopsis thaliana

### Description
To get an insight into cytokinin-induced alterations of molecular networks underlying size and structure of a leaf, transgenic Arabidopsis lines (Col-0 background) CaMV35S>GR>ipt, and CaMV35S>GR>HvCKX2 were cultivated in a growth chamber under controlled environmental conditions (50-60% relative humidity, long day, 21/19 °C day/night temperature, 110 µmol m-2 s-1). Plants were activated at 14 DAS by watering once with 50 ml of distilled water supplemented with 10 µM dexamethasone dissolved in 5x10-4% (v/v) DMSO (DEX samples). Corresponding mock-treated control plants were watered with DMSO in water.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomic analysis was performed using a gel-free shotgun protocol based on nano-HPLC and MS/MS as described in Baldrianová et al. (2015). Briefly, two independent replicates each consisting of approximately 100 mg of homogenized leaf 3 of 21-day-old Arabidopsis plants were extracted by acetone/TCA and phenol extraction then digested in solution with immobilized trypsin beads (Promega). The resulted peptides were desalted, dried and dissolved in 0.5% (v/v) formic acid in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, then analyzed by nanoflow C18 reverse-phase liquid chromatography using a 15 cm Ascentis Express Column (0.1 mm inner diameter; Sigma-Aldrich) and a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system (Thermo) directly coupled to a CaptiveSpray nanoESI source (Bruker) and an UHR maXis impact q-TOF mass spectrometer (Bruker). Peptides were eluted with a 4% to 99% acetonitrile gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw files obtained from the MS analysis were analyzed by Profile Analysis 2.1 (Bruker) and MS precursors with significant differences (P-values < 0.05; Student´s t test) were targeted and identified in consecutive MS/MS analyses. Peptide spectra were searched within the TAIR10 Arabidopsis database using the Mascot algorithm and Bruker’s ProteinScape inbuilt percolator algorithm (target FDR<1%). Only high confidence peptides with better than 10 ppm precursor mass accuracy met identification criteria. Quantitative differences were manually validated by comparing respective peptide ion signal peak areas in Skyline 1.4 (MacCossLab Software; https://skyline.gs.washington.edu), and considered to be significant if there was an absolute DEX/mock ratio ≥1.4 with Student´s t test P-values < 0.05. Please, note that the ProteinScape processing step is not included in the ProteomeXchange files (not supported).

### Publication Abstract
The phytohormone cytokinin has been shown to affect many aspects of plant development ranging from the regulation of the shoot apical meristem to leaf senescence. However, some studies have reported contradictory effects of cytokinin on leaf physiology. Therefore cytokinin treatments cause both chlorosis and increased greening and both lead to decrease or increase in cell size. To elucidate this multifaceted role of cytokinin in leaf development, we have employed a system of temporal controls over the cytokinin pool and investigated the consequences of modulated cytokinin levels in the third leaf of Arabidopsis. We show that, at the cell proliferation phase, cytokinin is needed to maintain cell proliferation by blocking the transition to cell expansion and the onset of photosynthesis. Transcriptome profiling revealed regulation by cytokinin of a gene suite previously shown to affect cell proliferation and expansion and thereby a molecular mechanism by which cytokinin modulates a molecular network underlying the cellular responses. During the cell expansion phase, cytokinin stimulates cell expansion and differentiation. Consequently, a cytokinin excess at the cell expansion phase results in an increased leaf and rosette size fueled by higher cell expansion rate, yielding higher shoot biomass. Proteome profiling revealed the stimulation of primary metabolism by cytokinin, in line with an increased sugar content that is expected to increase turgor pressure, representing the driving force of cell expansion. Therefore, the developmental timing of cytokinin content fluctuations, together with a tight control of primary metabolism, is a key factor mediating transitions from cell proliferation to cell expansion in leaves.

### Keywords
Leaf development, Arabidopsis, Transcriptome, Proteome, Cytokinin

### Affiliations
Mendel University in Brno
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology CEITEC & Phytophthora Research Center Mendel University in Brno Zemedelska 1 613 00 Brno Czech Republic

### Submitter
Martin Cerny

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Cerny
Dept. of Molecular Biology and Radiobiology CEITEC & Phytophthora Research Center Mendel University in Brno Zemedelska 1 613 00 Brno Czech Republic


