### Accession
PXD008261

### Title
proteins pulled down by CREB, part 2

### Description
Hepatocarcinoma is the third leading cause of death in cancer in the world. In recent years, research on CREB in hepatocellular carcinoma has become a hotspot, so our research group wants to use the mass spectrometry analysis what proteins can bind with CREB, and then explore the links between CREB and hepatocellular carcinoma.

### Sample Protocol
First, the overexpression plasmid of CREB was used to infect hepatocarcinoma cells. After 24 hours, the protein was collected, washed for 30 min on ice, centrifuged at 13000 rpm for 15 min, protein A / G was used for immunoprecipitation, 4 ° shaker overnight, Liquid wash 4 times, multiplate the sample buffer 100 degrees cook 10min, with 1.0 glue run western blot, when the gel ran to half, cut, stained with Coomassie dyeing, and then bleaching, the gel should be cut into small pieces. Desalted dehydration and then air-dried, adding protein precipitation before add to column analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC system (Nano Pump, Ultimate 3000, Dionex, Thermofisher) coupled with an ESI-Q-TOFmass spectrometer (maXis, Impact, Bruker Daltonik,Germany).The proteins that were precipitated by CREB were analyzed by matching software, and the scores were compared. The common proteins were found from the three replicates and the proteins in the blank samples were removed. That is, the rest of the available protein, access to literature, find out transcription factor proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) response element-binding protein (CREB) is overexpressed and has an oncogenic role in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Interleukin enhancer binding factor 2 (ILF2) has become research hotspot in liver cancer recently. However, it is still unclear whether and how CREB and ILF2 interact with each other. And how this interaction exerts its role in occurrence and development of liver cancer is still unclear. Here, we found that ILF2 directly bound with CREB, and this binding was essential for the malignant phenotypes of liver cancer cells. Moreover, we found that ILF2 acted as one of the upstream proteins of CREB and promoted CREB only in the protein level, whereas ILF2 expression was not regulated by CREB. Mechanistically, ILF2 bound to the pKID domain of CREB and stimulated its phosphorylation at Ser133. Taken together, our study finds a novel interaction between CREB and ILF2 in liver cancer, and this interaction might play a role in the diagnosis and remedy of liver cancer.

### Keywords
Lc-msms

### Affiliations
shanghai municipal hospital of TCM
Shanghai Municipal Hospital of TCM, Shanghai University of TCM

### Submitter
hui du

### Lab Head
Dr hui du
shanghai municipal hospital of TCM


