### Accession
PXD022838

### Title
Application of harmonic FT-ICR-MS signal acquisition for improved proteome research

### Description
Proteomics experiments benefit from having both high resolving power and high scan speed. Harmonic detection provides a method to obtain twice the resolution for the same data acquisition period, or the same resolution in half the data acquisition period. We show that in a complex hela cell lysate sample, that we obtain 36% to 45% more unique peptides detected using harmonic detection with enhanced scan rate or resolution respectively.

### Sample Protocol
Hela cells were grown to confluency in DMEM, and then harvested from the plate using PBS supplmented with EDTA. The pellet was then resuspended in a lysis bugger containing 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 8M Urea, and lysed by sonication. The resulting lysate was reduced with TCEP and alkylated with iodoacetamide. It was then digested overnight with trypsin at a 1:200 (w/w) ratio at 37C. The digest was then desalted using a sep-pak cartridge (Waters). The peptides were resuspended in 2% Acetonitrile/0.1% Formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXMLs using ReAdW. The mzXMLs were then searched with comet to generate .txt output files containin the top 5 hits per spectrum.

### Publication Abstract
Fourier transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry (FT-ICR MS) coupled with liquid chromatography (LC) is a powerful combination useful in many research areas due to the utility of high mass resolving power and mass measurement accuracy for studying highly complex samples. Ideally, every analyte in a complex sample can be subjected to accurate mass MS/MS analysis to aid in identification. FT-ICR MS can provide high mass resolving power and mass accuracy at the cost of long data acquisition periods, reducing the number of spectra that can be acquired per unit time. Frequency multiple signal acquisition has long been realized as an attractive method to obtain high mass resolving power and mass accuracy with shorter data acquisition periods. However, one of the limitations associated with frequency multiple signal acquisition is reduced signal intensity as compared to a traditional dipole detector. In this study, we demonstrated the use of a novel ICR cell to improve frequency multiple signal intensity and investigated the potential use of frequency multiple acquisition for proteome measurements. This novel ICR cell containing both dipole and frequency multiple detection electrodes was installed on a 7T FT-ICR MS coupled to an LC system. Tryptic digests of HeLa cell lysates were analyzed using dipole and frequency multiple detectors by holding either the mass resolving power or signal acquisition time constant. Compared to dipole detection, second frequency multiple detection yielded 36% or 45% more unique identified peptides from HeLa cell lysates at twice the scan rate or twice the mass resolving power, respectively. These results indicate that frequency multiple signal acquisition with either the same resolving power or the same signal acquisition duration as used with dipole signals can produce a significant increase in the number of peptides identified in complex proteome samples.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Fticr

### Affiliations
University of Washington
University of Washington - Department of Genome Sciences

### Submitter
Sung-Gun Park

### Lab Head
Dr James E. Bruce
University of Washington - Department of Genome Sciences


