### Accession
PXD002557

### Title
Akt2 partners L6 myoblasts -  Novel Endogenous, Insulin-Stimulated Akt2 Protein Interaction Partners in L6 Myoblasts

### Description
Insulin resistance and Type 2 diabetes are marked by an aberrant response in the insulin signaling network.  The phosphoinositide-dependent serine/threonine kinase, Akt2, plays a key role in insulin signaling and glucose uptake, most notably within skeletal muscle.  Protein-protein interaction regulates the functional consequence of Akt2 and in turn, Akt2’s role in glucose uptake.  However, only few insulin-responsive Akt2 interaction partners have been identified in skeletal muscle cells.  In the present work, rat L6 myoblasts, a widely used insulin sensitive skeletal muscle cell line, were used to examine endogenous, insulin-stimulated Akt2 protein interaction partners. Akt2 co-immunoprecipitation was coupled with 1D-SDS-PAGE and fractions were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS to reveal Akt2 protein-protein interactions.  The pull-down assay displayed specificity for the Akt2 isoform; Akt1 and Akt3 unique peptides were not detected.  A total of 330 proteins were significantly enriched as bonafide Akt2 protein interaction partners.  Among them, 226 were novel for any cell types.  Furthermore, 59 were detected with a significantly increased (57) or decreased (2) association with Akt2 following insulin administration (n=4; p<0.05).  Multiple pathways were identified for the novel Akt2 interaction partners, such as the EIF2 and ubiquitination pathways.  These data suggest that multiple new endogenous proteins may associate with Akt2 under basal as well as insulin-stimulated conditions, providing further insight into the insulin signaling network.

### Sample Protocol
The study started with L6 cell culturing, insulin treatment, cell lysis, and supernatant isolation; followed by immunoprecipitation of the “bait” protein (Akt2); followed by 1D-SDS-PAGE to resolve Akt2 co-interaction proteins; in-gel trypsin digestion to generate peptide fragments used in HPLC-ESI-MS/MS analysis for identification of co-immunoprecipitating proteins. The supernatant was pre-cleared by immunoprecipitation with non-specific antibodies (NIgG) to remove and identify non-specific proteins, which may contaminate the Atk2 Co-IP and minimizes false positives.  Extensive bioinformatics and literature search were used to analyze proteomic data and to identify significantly enriched pathways, in which identified Akt2 interaction partners were involved.

### Data Protocol
The gel lanes resulting from each experiment were cut into 4 slices for Akt2 and 3 slices for NIgG of approximately equal size. Each slice was cut into 1 mm cubes prior to digestion. The gel pieces were destained and subjected to trypsin digestion at 37 ºC overnight. The resulting peptides were extracted and purified by solid-phase extraction (C18 ZipTip, Millipore, Billerica, MA), followed by high-performance liquid chromatography-electrospray ionization-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS).  HPLC-ESI-MS/MS was performed on a Thermo Finnigan LTQ-Orbitrap Elite fitted with a nanospray flex Ion source (Thermo Fisher, San Jose, CA).  A “top 20” data-dependent tandem mass spectrometry approach was utilized to identify peptides in the samples. In a top 20 scan protocol, a full scan spectrum (survey scan, 300–1650 Th) is acquired followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) mass spectra of the 20 most abundant ions in the survey scan. Tandem mass spectra were extracted from Xcalibur ‘RAW’ files and searched against the forward and reversed Uniprot rat protein database (downloaded from www.uniprot.org) using Andromeda, the database search engine within the MaxQuant, one of the popular quantitative proteomics software packages.  The search variables used were: 6 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ion masses; 0.5 Da mass tolerance for product ion masses; digestion with trypsin; a maximum of two missed tryptic cleavages; variable modifications of oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminus, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine, as well as fixed modification of carbamidomethylation.  Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and protein FDR were both set at 0.01.  Peak areas for each protein were obtained by selecting the Label-free quantification (LFQ) option in MaxQuant. Only proteins identified with minimum 2 unique peptides and with FDR at 0.01 were considered.   To be considered as an Akt2 interaction partner, a protein has to further satisfy following criteria: 1). Identified with LFQ peak area (PA) in  at least 5 out of 8 total (basal and insulin-stimulated) Akt2 IP samples, and 757 proteins met this criterion; 2). With an enrichment ratio >10.  The enrichment ratio was calculated as: 1st, PA for a protein identified in a gel lane was normalized against the sum of the peak areas for all proteins identified in the same gel lane to obtain normalized ratio for each protein.  Since we used NIgG as a control, the first level of identification will be to search for proteins exclusively detected in the Akt2 immunoprecipitates. However, this will result in false negatives. Due to the high sensitivity of our approach, even if a trace amount of a protein was non-specifically bound on the NIgG beads, it may be identified with minimum 2 unique peptides with FDR at 0.01. Nonetheless, if this protein is a true component of the Akt2 complex, higher peak area will be assigned to this protein in the Akt2 sample than in the NIgG sample. The normalization strategy is widely used in proteomics studies involving protein- protein interactions, and uses the same concept used in Western blotting, in which the Western blot signal for an interaction protein is normalized against that for the protein serving as the “bait.” The normalized peak area for each Akt2 interaction partner, Norm:j, was log2 transformed and compared between basal and insulin-treated conditions to assess effects of insulin on protein-protein interactions involving Akt2. Pathway analysis on Akt2 interaction partners were performed using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (Ingenuity Systems, Inc., Redwood City, CA; www.ingenuity.com), which considers a pathway to be derived from a set of genes.  IPA is widely used and contains biological and chemical/pharmacological interactions and functional annotations created by manual curation of the scientific literature. To calculate statistical significance, IPA uses a hypergeometric distribution (Fisher's Exact Test), which calculates the probability (p) of finding a given number of genes (n) from the input data in each of the pathways. Ingenuity queries a proprietary database of Canonical Pathways; a pathway was considered as significantly enriched if both the false discovery rate (FDR) for the pathway was less than 0.01, and the pathway included at least 4 of the identified Akt2 partner genes.

### Publication Abstract
Insulin resistance and Type 2 diabetes are marked by an aberrant response in the insulin signaling network. The phosphoinositide-dependent serine/threonine kinase, Akt2, plays a key role in insulin signaling and glucose uptake, most notably within skeletal muscle. Protein-protein interaction regulates the functional consequence of Akt2 and in turn, Akt2's role in glucose uptake. However, only few insulin-responsive Akt2 interaction partners have been identified in skeletal muscle cells. In the present work, rat L6 myoblasts, a widely used insulin sensitive skeletal muscle cell line, were used to examine endogenous, insulin-stimulated Akt2 protein interaction partners. Akt2 co-immunoprecipitation was coupled with 1D-SDS-PAGE and fractions were analyzed by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS to reveal Akt2 protein-protein interactions. The pull-down assay displayed specificity for the Akt2 isoform; Akt1 and Akt3 unique peptides were not detected. A total of 49 were detected with a significantly increased (47) or decreased (2) association with Akt2 following insulin administration (n = 4; p&lt;0.05). Multiple pathways were identified for the novel Akt2 interaction partners, such as the EIF2 and ubiquitination pathways. These data suggest that multiple new endogenous proteins may associate with Akt2 under basal as well as insulin-stimulated conditions, providing further insight into the insulin signaling network. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002557.

### Keywords
Akt2, Rock2, Hplc-esi-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of Phamaceutical Sciences Wayne State University
Wayne State University

### Submitter
Michael Caruso

### Lab Head
Dr Zhengping Yi
Department of Phamaceutical Sciences Wayne State University


