### Accession
PXD001409

### Title
Comparative proteomics analysis of Brassica napus in response to drought stress

### Description
Drought is one of the most severe stresses leading to retardation of plant growth and development and loss of crop yield. Here we examined the proteome changes of an important oil seed crop canola Brassica napus under drought stress over a 14 day period. Using iTRAQ LC-MS/MS, we identified 2,244 proteins expressed during drought stress. Among them, 412 proteins showed significant changes in abundance under stress, and 67, 243, 287, and 79 proteins were differentially expressed in 3rd, 7th, 10th, and 14th day of drought stress, respectively. Functional analysis of the 412 proteins indicated that the number of proteins associated with “Metabolism”, “Protein synthesis”, and “Signaling” decreased, while those related to “Photosynthesis” and “Stress and defense” increased in response to drought stress. In particular, the proteome profiles at the 7th and 10th day were similar to each other, although there were much more post-translational modifications (PTM) at the 10th day of drought. Interestingly, 286 of 2,244 proteins exhibited PTMs in response to drought stress, 82 of which were differentially changed in drought-stressed plants, and 60 were observed at the 10th day. Furthermore, comparison of protein expression changes with those of gene transcription showed that there was positive correlation in B. napus, although there were different patterns between transcripts and proteins at each time point. As drought stress prolongs, most of the protein abundance changes may be attributed to gene transcription, and PTMs clearly contribute to the protein diversity and functions.

### Sample Protocol
Seedlings of Brassica napus var. Global were grown on a Metro-Mix 500 potting mixture (The Scotts Co., Marysville, OH, USA) in a growth chamber under a photosynthetic flux of 160 μmol of photons m-2s-1 and a short-day condition (8 hours of light at 22°C /16 hours of darkness at 20°C).  Six-week-old plants were treated with drought via no watering, and leaves were harvested on 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, and 14 day after drought treatment along with control groups and immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen. At least three independent biological replicates for each treatment were included for all the experiments.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data were processed by a thorough search considering biological modification and amino acid substitution against a non-redundant Brassica decoy database with decoy sequences (389,401 entries) using the ProteoIQ v2.6.01 (Premier Biosoft, Palo Alto, CA, USA) and Proteome Discoverer v1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the Sequest algorithm49 and the following parameters: peptide tolerance at 10 ppm,; tandem MSmass spectrometry tolerance at ± 0.5 D,; peptide charge of 2+ or 3+,; trypsin as the enzyme and allowing up to one missed cleavage;, iTRAQ label and methyl methanethiosulfonate (C) as a fixed modifications,; and oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as a variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Drought is one of the most widespread stresses leading to retardation of plant growth and development. We examined proteome changes of an important oil seed crop, canola (Brassica napus L.), under drought stress over a 14-day period. Using iTRAQ LC-MS/MS, we identified 1976 proteins expressed during drought stress. Among them, 417 proteins showed significant changes in abundance, and 136, 244, 286, and 213 proteins were differentially expressed in the third, seventh, 10th, and 14th day of stress, respectively. Functional analysis indicated that the number of proteins associated with metabolism, protein folding and degradation, and signaling decreased, while those related to energy (photosynthesis), protein synthesis, and stress and defense increased in response to drought stress. The seventh and 10th-day profiles were similar to each other but with more post-translational modifications (PTMs) at day 10. Interestingly, 181 proteins underwent PTMs; 49 of them were differentially changed in drought-stressed plants, and 33 were observed at the 10th day. Comparison of protein expression changes with those of gene transcription showed a positive correlation in B. napus, although different patterns between transcripts and proteins were observed at each time point. Under drought stress, most protein abundance changes may be attributed to gene transcription, and PTMs clearly contribute to protein diversity and functions.

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Drought stress, Brassica napus, Proteomes, Itraq

### Affiliations
University of Florida

### Submitter
Jin Koh

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Koh
University of Florida


