### Accession
PXD014731

### Title
Aspartate residues far from the active site drive O-GlcNAc transferase substrate selection

### Description
Here we use protein microarray technology and proteome-wide glycosylation profiling to show that conserved aspartate residues in the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) lumen of OGT drive substrate selection. Changing these residues to alanines alters substrate selectivity and unexpectedly increases rates of protein glycosylation. Our findings support a model where sites of glycosylation for many OGT substrates are determined by TPR domain contacts to substrate side chains five to fifteen residues Cterminal to the glycosite. In addition to guiding design of inhibitors that target OGT’s TPR domain, this information will inform efforts to engineer substrates to explore biological functions.

### Sample Protocol
Following in vitro glycosylation of HeLa cell extracts, cellular lysates (5mg) were precipitated with methanol (3 mL) for 1 hour at -80 ˚C. The precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (10 min, 21,130 × g) at 4 ˚C and the supernatant was discarded. The resulting protein pellet was resuspended by probe tip sonication in 2% RapiGest/PBS (600 μL). A pre-mixed solution of the click chemistry reagents (200 μL in PBS; final concentration of 200 μM IsoTaG silane probe7 (3:1 heavy:light mixture), 500 μM CuSO4, 100 μM THPTA, 2 mM sodium ascorbate) was added to the resuspended proteins and the reaction was incubated with rotation for 3 hours at 24 °C. Methanol (3.0 mL) was added to quench the reaction and the proteins were precipitated for 1 hour at -80 °C. Precipitated proteins were pelleted by centrifugation (10 min, 21,130 × g) at 4 ˚C and the supernatant was discarded. Pelleted proteins were air-dried for 10 min at 24 °C. Dried protein pellets were resuspended in 2% RapiGest/PBS (400 μL) and solubilized by probe sonication in an ice bath until the proteins were resuspended. The resuspended proteins were diluted with an additional aliquot of PBS (400 μL). Streptavidin–agarose resin [300 μL of the slurry, washed with PBS (3 × 1 mL)] was added to the protein solution, and the resulting mixture was incubated for 12 hours at 24 °C with rotation. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (3000 × g, 3 min) and the supernatant containing uncaptured proteins was separated. The beads were washed with 1% RapiGest/PBS (1 mL), 6 M urea (2 × 1 mL), and PBS (5 × 1 mL), and the beads were pelleted by centrifugation (3000 × g, 3 min) between washes. Washed beads were resuspended in 5 mM DTT/PBS (200 μL) and incubated for 30 min at 24 °C with rotation. Iodoacetamide (10 mM final concentration) was added to the reduced proteins and allowed to react for 30 min at 24 °C with rotation in the dark. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (3000 × g, 3 min), washed once with PBS (1 mL) and resuspended in 0.5 M urea/PBS (200 μL). Trypsin (3 μL, 1.5 μg) was added to the resuspended beads, and the digestion proceeded for 16 hours at 37 °C with rotation. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation (3000 × g, 3 min), and the supernatant digest was discarded. The beads were washed with PBS (1 × 200 μL) and H2O (2 × 200 μL). The IsoTaG silane probe was cleaved with 2% formic acid/H2O (2 × 200 μL) for 30 min at 24 °C with rotation and the eluent was collected. The beads were washed with 50% acetonitrile–water + 1% formic acid (2 × 500 μL), and the washes were combined with the eluent to obtain the cleavage fraction. The cleavage fraction was concentrated using a vacuum centrifuge (40 °C) to dryness and then resuspended with 2% formic acid/water (50 μL). Samples were desalted with a ZipTip P10 and stored at –20 °C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Desalted samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water (20 μL), and half of the sample (10 μL) was injected onto a C18 trap column (WATERS cat #186008821 nanoEase MZ Symmetry C18 Trap Column, 100 Å, 5 μm × 180 μm × 20 mm) and separated on an analytical column (WATERS cat #186008795 nanoEase MZ Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130 Å, 1.7 μm × 75 μm × 250 mm) with a Waters nanoAcquity system connected in line to a ThermoScientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid. The column temperature was maintained at 50 ˚C. Peptides were eluted using a multi-step gradient at a flow rate of 0.15 μL/min over 120 min (0−5 min, 2−5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid in water; 5−95 min, 5−50%; 95−105 min, 50−98%; 105−115 min, 98%; 115– 116 min, 98–2%; 116–120 min, 2%). The electrospray ionization voltage was set to 2 kV and the capillary temperature was set to 275 ˚C. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, repeat duration of 30s, exclusion list size of 400, and exclusion duration of 30 s. MS1 scans were performed over 400–2000 m/z at resolution 120,000 and the top twenty most intense ions (+2 to +6 charge states) were subjected to MS2 HCD fragmentation at 27%, for 75 ms, at resolution 50,000. Other relevant parameters of HCD include: isolation window (3 m/z), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True). If oxonium product ions (138.0545, 204.0867, 345.1400, 347.1530, 366.1396, 507.1930, or 509.2060 m/z) were observed in the HCD spectra, ETD (250 ms) with supplemental activation (35%) was performed in a subsequent scan on the same precursor ion selected for HCD. Other relevant parameters of EThCD include: isolation window (3 m/z), use calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters (True), Orbitrap resolution (50k), first mass (100 m/z), and inject ions for all available parallelizable time (True).

### Publication Abstract
O-GlcNAc is an abundant post-translational modification found on nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins in all metazoans. This modification regulates a wide variety of cellular processes, and elevated O-GlcNAc levels have been implicated in cancer progression. A single essential enzyme, O-GlcNAc transferase (OGT), is responsible for all nucleocytoplasmic O-GlcNAcylation. Understanding how this enzyme chooses its substrates is critical for understanding, and potentially manipulating, its functions. Here we use protein microarray technology and proteome-wide glycosylation profiling to show that conserved aspartate residues in the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR) lumen of OGT drive substrate selection. Changing these residues to alanines alters substrate selectivity and unexpectedly increases rates of protein glycosylation. Our findings support a model where sites of glycosylation for many OGT substrates are determined by TPR domain contacts to substrate side chains five to fifteen residues C-terminal to the glycosite. In addition to guiding design of inhibitors that target OGT's TPR domain, this information will inform efforts to engineer substrates to explore biological functions.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, O-glcnac

### Affiliations
Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 and Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo and Suzanne Walker
Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Harvard University, 12 Oxford Street, Cambridge, MA 02138 and Department of Microbiology, Harvard Medical School, 4 Blackfan Circle, Boston, MA 02115


