### Accession
PXD022225

### Title
Combining mass spectrometry and machine learning to discover bioactive peptides

### Description
Mammalien peptidome map using seven metabolic active tissues and four different strains. 150.000+ identified peptides. Machine learning applied to score peptides based on similarity to known peptides. Functional validation of high scoring peptides.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides separated from co-purified proteins using mwco-filters. Resulting peptide mixture analyzed using online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using high-resolution higher-energy collisional dissociation fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Rawfiles processed using MaxQuant (ver.1.6.0.1) and Mascot (ver. 2.6.2). Peptides identified searching MS/MS spectra against a forward/reverse fasta file of Mouse complete proteome with ID: UP000000589 (downloaded from uniprot.org 28th of June, 2017). No enzyme specificity was used as search parameter.

### Publication Abstract
Peptides play important roles in regulating biological processes and form the basis of a multiplicity of therapeutic drugs. To date, only about 300 peptides in human have confirmed bioactivity, although tens of thousands have been reported in the literature. The majority of these are inactive degradation products of endogenous proteins and peptides, presenting a needle-in-a-haystack problem of identifying the most promising candidate peptides from large-scale peptidomics experiments to test for bioactivity. To address this challenge, we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the mammalian peptidome across seven tissues in four different mouse strains and used the data to train a machine learning model that predicts hundreds of peptide candidates based on patterns in the mass spectrometry data. We provide in silico validation examples and experimental confirmation of bioactivity for two peptides, demonstrating the utility of this resource for discovering lead peptides for further characterization and therapeutic development.

### Keywords
Mouse, Peptidomics, Tissues, Bioactive peptides, Peptidome

### Affiliations
Global Research Technologies, Novo Nordisk A/S, Maaloev, Denmark.
Novo Nordisk A/S Translational Technologies (Dept. 6905) Novo Nordisk Park 1 DK-2760 Måløv  Denmark

### Submitter
Christian Madsen

### Lab Head
Dr Mads Grønborg
Novo Nordisk A/S Translational Technologies (Dept. 6905) Novo Nordisk Park 1 DK-2760 Måløv  Denmark


