### Accession
PXD015871

### Title
Potential interactors of alpha-tubulin acetyltransferase 1 (αTAT1/MEC17)

### Description
Cell adhesion to the extracellular matrix occurs through integrin-mediated focal adhesions, which sense the mechanical properties of the substrate and impact cellular functions such as cell migration. Mechanotransduction at focal adhesions affects the actomyosin network and contributes to cell migration. Despite being key players in cell adhesion and migration, the role of microtubules in mechanotransduction has been overlooked. Here, we show that substrate rigidity increases microtubule acetylation through β1 integrin signalling in primary rat astrocytes. Moreover, αTAT1, the enzyme responsible for microtubule acetylation, interacts with a major mechanosensing focal adhesion protein, Talin, and is able to tune the distribution of focal adhesions depending on the matrix rigidity. αTAT1 also reorganises the actomyosin network, increases traction force generation and cell migration speed on stiff substrates. Mechanistically, acetylation of microtubules promotes the release of microtubule-associated RhoGEF, GEF-H1 into the cytoplasm, which then leads to RhoA activation and high actomyosin contractility. Thus, we propose a novel feedback loop involving a crosstalk between microtubules and actin in mechanotransduction at focal adhesions whereby, cells sense the rigidity of the substrate through integrin-mediated adhesions, modulate their levels of microtubule acetylation, which then controls the actomyosin cytoskeleton and force transmission on the substrate to promote mechanosensitive cell migration.

### Sample Protocol
Cells: HEK cells expressing GFP-Ctl or GFP-αTAT1 (human) Beads: Chromotek GFP-beads; 50 μl per sample Lysis buffer: 500 mM tris pH 7.5; Triton 20%/NP40 10%; 2M NaCl; cOmplete Protease cocktail inhibitor Wash buffer: 50 mM Tris pH 7.5; 150 mM NaCl; 1 mM EDTA; 2.5 mM MgCl2  Proteins on beads were washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and we performed on-beads digestion with 0.2 μg of trypsine/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Sample were then loaded onto a homemade C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 55°C with a linear gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analyzed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification the data were searched against the Homo sapiens (UP000005640) SwissProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage site were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.  The resulting files were further processed using myProMS (Poullet et al, 2007) v3.6 (work in progress). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2 (Valot et al, 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with no missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hek cells, Αtat1, Homo sapiens, Mec17

### Affiliations
Curie Institute
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Valentin SABATET

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


