### Accession
PXD031716

### Title
Mitochondrial Hepatopathy Proteomics

### Description
Identification of altered proteins following mitochondrial hepatopathy

### Sample Protocol
Protein homogenates were prepared from either whole liver tissues or enriched mitochondria. For whole liver tissue, approximately 100 mg of tissue were isolated from snap frozen mouse livers that had been stored at -80˚C. Tissue was homogenized in 500 ul PBS supplemented with protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher, 78425) and protein concentrations were quantitated (DC Protein assay, Biorad). 50 g of each sample was solubilized in 1% SDS, 50mM Tris pH 8.0 at a concentration of 5 mg/ml, run on a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast protein gel (BioRad) into the top of the resolving portion of the gel, stained with Coomassie Blue, and destained. For enriched mitochondria, approximately 100mg of liver tissue was homogenized with 40 strokes of a dounce homogenizer in mitochondrial isolation buffer [HEPES (5mM), sucrose (70mM), mannitol (220mM), MgCl2 (5mM), KH2PO4 (10mM), and EGTA (1mM), pH 7.2] supplemented with protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher, 78425). Mitochondria were isolated via differential centrifugation: First nuclei and cell debris were removed by isolating supernatant after five spins at 600g; and enriched mitochondria were then pelleted with a 10000g spin. Protein concentrations were quantitated (DC protein assay, BioRad), and 50 g of each sample was solubilized in 1% SDS, 50mM Tris pH 8.0 at a concentration of 5 mg/ml. Samples were run on a 4-20% Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast protein gel (BioRad) into the top of the resolving portion of the gel, stained with Coomassie Blue, and destained.  Samples were analyzed at the UT Southwestern Proteomics Core. Gel slices were cut into 1 mm3 cubes, and digested overnight with trypsin (Pierce 90058) following reduction and alkylation with DTT and iodoacetamide (Sigma–Aldrich I6125). The samples then underwent solid-phase extraction cleanup with an Oasis HLB plate (Waters) and the resulting samples were injected onto an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. Samples were injected onto a 75 m i.d., 75-cm long EasySpray column (Thermo) and eluted with a gradient from 0-28% buffer B over 90 min. Buffer A contained 2% (v/v) ACN and 0.1% formic acid in water, and buffer B contained 80% (v/v) ACN, 10% (v/v) trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water. The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 1.8 kV, ion transfer tube temperature of 275 °C, MS1 AGC target of 400000, MS1 maximum injection time of 50 ms, intensity threshold of 5000, MS2 AGC target of 10000, MS2 maximum injection time of 35 ms, MS2 isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS1 scans were acquired at 120,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and up to 10 MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) for ions with charges 2-7. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v2.4 SP1 (Thermo), with peptide identification performed using Sequest HT searching against the mouse protein database from UniProt (downloaded January 2022; 17,062 sequences) assuming a trypsin digestion (cleavage after Lys and Arg except when immediately followed by Pro). Fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified, and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of Met set as a variable modification. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff was 1% for all peptides and all PSMs were validated with the Percoloator node within Proteome Discoverer. PSMs found in only a subset of samples were re-searched to identify peptides based on retention time and mass. Protein abundance was quantitated based on the total ion count for all identified peptides in each sample and only proteins notated with FDR <1% were considered. Protein abundances were normalized after log2 transform according to previously published protocols using Microsoft Excel 2019 (60): First, abundance values were log2 transformed, then each sample was normalized by the average abundance and data distribution width. Missing values were imputed as random values centered around 2.5 standard deviations below the mean abundance value. For samples with > 4 replicates, Shapiro-Wilk tests were performed to test for normal distributions. If samples were not normally distributed, Mann-Whitney tests were used to calculate p-values. For normally distributed data, F-tests were used to assess equal variance, followed by two-tailed homoscedastic (or heteroscedastic) tests to calculate p-values. Unsupervised hierartchical clustering was performed on z-score transformed values in MATLAB (Mathworks, Inc.). Mitochondrial-localized proteins were classified based on their presence in MitoCarta3.0 (61).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Liver

### Affiliations
Children's Research Institute  University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
University of Pennsylvania

### Submitter
Nicholas Lesner

### Lab Head
Dr Prashant Mishra
Children's Research Institute  University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center


