### Accession
PXD006321

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of amastigotes from Leishmania (L.) amazonensis LV79 and PH8 strains reveals molecular traits associated with the virulence phenotype

### Description
Leishmaniasis is an antropozoonosis caused by Leishmania parasites that affects around 12 million people in 98 different countries. The disease has different clinical forms, which depend mainly on the parasite genetics and on the immunologic status of the host. The promastigote form of the parasite is transmitted by an infected female phlebotomine sand fly, is internalized by phagocytic cells, mainly macrophages, and converts into amastigotes which replicate inside these cells. Macrophages are important cells of the immune system, capable of efficiently killing intracellular pathogens. However, Leishmania, can evade these mechanisms due to expression of virulence factors. Different strains of the same Leishmania species may have different infectivity and metastatic phenotypes in vivo. In the present work, we show that parasites from LV79 and PH8 strains have different lesion development in BALB/c and C57BL/6 mouse strains. The comparison of the proteomes of lesion-derived amastigotes from the two strains identified proteins such as CPx, SOD, HSP70 and GP63 as differentially expressed. The expression profile of all proteins and of the differentially expressed ones precisely classified PH8 and LV79 samples, indicating that the two strains are highly divergent and that protein expression correlate with their phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
Promastigotes of Leishmania (L.) amazonensis LV79 (MPRO/BR/72/M 1841) and PH8 (IFLA/BR/67/PH8) strains were cultured at 24 °C in M199 medium supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FCS). Parasites were sub-cultured every 7 days to inoculums of 2 × 106/mL. For differentiation of amastigotes into promastigotes, lesion-derived parasites were counted using Neubauer chamber and transferred to M199 medium with 10% FCS at densities of 103, 104 and 105 parasites/mL. Cultures were incubated at 24 °C for 4 days and promastigote densities were determined. Amastigotes were purified as previously described 32. Briefly, lesions were minced and homogenized in 5mL PBS using a tissue grinder (Thomas Scientific). After centrifugation at 50 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, the supernatant was recovered and centrifuged at 1450 x g for 17 min at 4 °C. Supernatant was then removed and the pellet was washed three times with PBS followed by centrifugations at 1450 x g for 17 min at 4 °C. After 3h incubation under rotation at room temperature to liberate endocytic membranes, amastigotes were further centrifuged, resuspended in 2mL of erythrocyte lysis buffer (155mMNH4Cl, 10mM KHCO3, 1mM EDTA, pH7,4) and incubated for 2min in ice. For lysis parasites were washed twice in PBS, resupended at 109 cells/300μL in PBS+Proteoblock1x (Fermentas) and lysed by 8 cycles of freeze thaw in liquid nitrogen -42 °C. Soluble proteins were obtained after centrifugation at 12.000 x g for 3 min and quantified by Bradford (Biorad).100 µg of soluble amastigote proteins from each sample were digested with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was analyzed on a LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with LC-MS/MS by an EASY-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Sample concentration and desalting were performed online using a pre-column (2 cm; 100 µm ID; 5 µm C18-A1; Thermo). Separation was accomplished on Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (10cm; 75um ID; 3um C18-A2; Thermo) using a linear gradient of A and B buffers (buffer A: A = 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B = 99% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) from 1% to 50% buffer B over 60 for a total of 77 min at a flow rate of 0.3 μL/min to elute peptides into the mass spectrometer. Columns were washed and re-equilibrated between LC–MS/MS experiments. Mass spectra were acquired in the positive-ion mode over the range m/z 400–1500 at a resolution of 30,000 (full width at half-maximum atm/z400) and AGC target >1 × e6. The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states ≥ 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and isolation width of 2 and fragmented in the linear ion trap using low-energy CID (normalized collision energy of 35%) with activation time of 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion size list of 500, exclusion duration of 30 s, and a repeat count of 1. Three biological replicates (amastigotes from three independent mice infections) were performed with two technical runs for LV79 and PH8.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, raw files were imported into MaxQuant version 1.5.2.8 35 and the database search engine Andromeda 35, 36 was used to search MS/MS spectra against a database composed of Uniprot Mus musculus (release May, 5th 2016; 50,189 entries) and Leishmania sp (release May, 5th 2016, 50, 820 entries) databases. Database search was done using the following parameters: (i) mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm and 0.5 Da for MS and MS/MS, respectively; (ii) trypsin cleavage at both ends and two missed cleavage allowed; (iii) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (57.021 Da) was set as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine (15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (42.010 Da) were selected as variable modifications. All identifications were filtered to achieve a protein and peptide FDR of 1%. Label-free protein quantification was based on the MaxQuant label-free algorithm, using both unique and razor peptides for protein quantification; at least 2 ratio counts were required for a protein quantification to be considered valid. Protein abundance was calculated based on the normalized spectral protein intensity (LFQ intensity). Statistical analyses of the proteome data were performed using Perseus v.1.5.4.1 which is available in the MaxQuant environment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome comparison, Virulence, Lesion-derived amastigotes, Clustering, Leishmania amazonensis

### Affiliations
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil
Department of Molecular Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, NSW, Australia

### Submitter
Rebeca Kawahara

### Lab Head
Dr Beatriz S. Stolf
Department of Parasitology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil


