### Accession
PXD013243

### Title
Morphological plasticity in a sulfur-oxidizing bacterium from the SUP05 clade enhances dark carbon fixation

### Description
Sulfur-oxidizing bacteria from the SUP05 clade are abundant in anoxic and oxygenated marine waters that appear to lack reduced sources of sulfur for cell growth. This raises questions about how these chemosynthetic bacteria survive across oxygen and sulfur gradients and how their mode of survival impacts the environment. Here we use growth experiments, proteomics and cryo-electron tomography to show that a SUP05 isolate, Ca. Thioglobus autotrophicus, is several times larger, amorphous in shape and stores considerably more intracellular sulfur when it respires oxygen. We also show that these cells can use diverse sources of reduced organic and inorganic sulfur at submicromolar concentrations. Enhanced cell size, carbon content and metabolic activity of the aerobic phenotype are likely facilitated by a stabilizing surface-layer (S-layer) and an uncharacterized form of FtsZ-less cell division that supports morphological plasticity. The additional sulfur storage provides an energy source that allows cells to continue metabolic activity when exogenous sulfur sources are not available. This metabolic flexibility leads to the production of more organic carbon in the ocean than estimates that are based solely on their anaerobic phenotype.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, Thioglobus autotrophicus strain EF1 cells were grown at in situ temperatures (13 °C) in acid-washed and autoclaved 125 ml serum vials containing seawater media from Puget Sound. Media was made using seawater was collected from Puget Sound on April 20th, 2016 and analyzed for nutrients (28 M of NO3- , 4.8 M of NH4+ and 98 M C per liter of dissolved organic carbon). Two sets of EF1 cultures were grown under either aerobic or anaerobic conditions. Aerobic cultures were maintained in 10 serum bottles containing 100 ml of seawater media each and amended with 1 mM sodium thiosulfate. Anaerobic cultures were maintained in 10 serum bottles contained 100 ml of seawater amended with 1 mM sodium thiosulfate, sealed with 20 mm butyl rubber stoppers (Wheaton), then bubbled with an N2:CO2 gas mix (1000 ppm CO2, Praxair Specialty Gas Mix) for 10 minutes, and headspace sparged for an additional 5 minutes. Cell biomass from the cultures were filtered when they reached early stationary growth phase (~5  106 cells per mL). Cell biomass from each condition was collected onto filters (separately) and anaerobic filtering was done inside an anaerobic glove bag containing N2 gas to avoid exposure of cells to oxygen.  Filters were extracted using bead-beating and freeze-thaw cycles at -20°C to lyse cells. A media blank was also collected onto a single filter and processed identically.   Lysed cells were subjected to in-solution proteolytic digestion. RapiGest SF (Waters), an acid labile surfactant, was added to help facilitate protein solubilization (0.06% w/v). Next, disulfide bonds were reduced with tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; to a final concentration of 10 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Reduced samples were then alkylated with iodoacetamide (IAM; to a final concentration of 30 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. Excess IAM was quenched by the addition of dithiolthreitol (DTT; to final concentration of 5 mM) for 1 hour at room temperature in the dark. All protein extracts were proteolytically digested with mass spectrometry-grade trypsin/Lys-C mix (Promega) at an estimated substrate-to-enzyme ratio of 25 for 19 hours at 37 °C containing a final concentration of 0.05% w/v RapiGest, 50 mM AMBIC and 5 mM EDTA (pH 8).  Following trypsin/Lys-C digestion, RapiGest was hydrolyzed by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (0.5% final v/v, pH < 2; concurrently terminating trypsin/Lys-C activity), heated for 45 minutes at 37 °C and centrifuged at 15,000 rpm (21,130 rcf) at 4 °C for 15 minutes to precipitate the water immiscible decomposition product, dodeca-2-one. The supernatant was removed, transferred to a new protein LoBind eppendorf tube and samples were dried to near-dryness using a centrivap concentrator (Thermo Savant SPD2010 SpeedVac). Digested samples were desalted using a MacroSpin C18 column (NestGroup) following an established manufacturer protocol. Samples were eluted from the MacroSpin columns using two times 200 µL of 80% LCMS-grade acetonitrile with 20% LCMS-grade water containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. Desalted samples were concentrated using the centrivap to near dryness and were immediately resuspended in 95% LCMS-grade water with 5% LCMS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The resuspension solution also contained an internal standard of synthetic peptides (Hi3 Escherichia coli Standard, Waters) at 50 fmol/µL.  All samples including controls were resuspended in 25 µL, corresponding to an estimated 7.29 × 107 cells/µL for EF1 (aerobic) and 7.84 × 107 cells/µL for EF1 (anaerobic). Samples were immediately analyzed by LCMS.

### Data Protocol
Samples were injected in triplicates onto the column of a Waters ACQUITY M-class UPLC; an injection volume of 2 µL corresponded to an on-column estimated 1.46 × 108 cells for EF1 (aerobic) and 1.57 × 108 cells for EF1 (anaerobic). Peptide separation was performed by reversed-phase chromatography using a nanoACQUITY HSS T3 C18 column (1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm; 45 °C) with an ACQUITY UPLC M-class Symmetry C18 trapping column (180 µm x 20 mm). The peptides were trapped at a flow rate of 5 µL/min at 99% A for 3 minutes. A flow rate of 0.3 µL/min was used over a gradient between LCMS-grade water (A) and LCMS-grade acetonitrile (B), both modified with 0.1% LCMS-grade formic acid. The total 145 minute gradient method for the separation of the peptides started at 95% A and ramped to 60% A over the course of 120 minutes. The gradient then switched to 15% A at 122 -127 minutes followed by a ramp back to starting conditions 95% A at 128-145 minutes.  The ACQUITY M-class was coupled to a Thermo QExactive HF Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer (HRMS) equipped with a nano-electrospray (NSI) source made in-house following the University of Washington Proteomic Resource (UWPR) design. Using a MicroTee (PEEK, 0.025” OD), the commercial analytical column was connected to a commercial emitter (PicoTip, Waters) and the liquid path was applied a high voltage through a platinum wire (adapted from UWPR design). All analyses were carried out in positive mode and a NSI spray voltage of 2.0 kV. Data was collected using data dependent acquisition (DDA) using Xcalibur 4.0 data acquisition software (Thermo Fisher). The MS1 scan range was 400-2000 m/z at 60,000 resolution with a maximum injection time of 30 ms and automated gain control of 1e6.  Following each MS1 scan, data-dependent MS2 (dd-MS2) was set to perform on the top 10 ions in a data-dependent manner at 15,000 resolution with a normalized collision energy of 27 eV. Additional selection criteria for dd-MS2 were as follows: maximum injection time of 50 ms with an automated gain control of 5e4, the isolation window was 1.5 Da and dynamic exclusion was set at 20 sec.  Data processing was conducted using the software from the trans-proteomic pipeline (TPP v.5.1.0). Briefly, raw data was converted to mzML and searched using COMET against a FASTA protein database consisting of EF1 (Uniprot 9GAMM 1,488 proteins accessed February 2017; KEGG estimated protein genes 1,506), the E.coli chaperone protein (Hi3 standard; P63284), and was concatenated with a set of randomized sequences. Additional COMET parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, one allowed non-tryptic termini, up to two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as a fixed modification (+57.02146 Da), and oxidation of methionine residues (+15.9949 Da) and clipping of N-terminal methionines as variable modifications. The COMET pep.xml files from each technical triplicate mzML file were then grouped and searched in PeptideProphet followed by iProphet and ProteinProphet within the TPP. The set of randomized sequences were decoy peptides used for the purpose of calculating peptide spectrum matching (PSM) and protein false discovery rates (FDR). From each of the combined datasets, PeptideProphet probabilities greater than 90% resulted in the following EF1 (aerobic) or EF1 (anerobic). EF1 (aerobic) resulted in 5,276 peptides and 66,326 PSM with a corresponding FDR of <0.05% (PSM level 28/66,326). EF1 (anaerobic) resulted in 5,019 peptides and 52,070 PSM with a corresponding FDR of <0.1% (PSM level 38/52,070).  The list of protein identifications was filtered using a 95% or greater protein probability as calculated from iProphet corresponding to a FDR < 0.5%. Abacus was used to join and organize PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet data across replicates and treatment conditions. All filtered Abacus datasets were further constrained by iProphet protein lists, which have validated protein probabilities greater than 95%, for each treatment. For each treatment, all total spectral counts as well as adjusted spectral counts were averaged across triplicate injections and standard deviations of these averages were calculated for error. Averaged spectral counts of proteins were further normalized to the Hi3 internal standard to account for differences in NSI ionization of peptides due to sample matrix effects. To compare normalized spectral counts across EF1 treatment conditions and account for differences in biomass injected on-column, the relative amount of protein ‘per cell’ was calculated by dividing by the number of cells injected on-column (see above estimates), resulting in a semi-quantitative estimate of ‘normalized spectral counts per cell’ (with propagated error). The subcellular localization of each protein is based on predictions from PSORTb (v3.0). COG functional categories and protein descriptions were generated using eggNOG-mapper and filtered using e-value scores less than 1e-40.

### Publication Abstract
Sulfur-oxidizing bacteria from the SUP05 clade are abundant in anoxic and oxygenated marine waters that appear to lack reduced sources of sulfur for cell growth. This raises questions about how these chemosynthetic bacteria survive across oxygen and sulfur gradients and how their mode of survival impacts the environment. Here, we use growth experiments, proteomics, and cryo-electron tomography to show that a SUP05 isolate, "<i>Candidatus</i> Thioglobus autotrophicus," is amorphous in shape and several times larger and stores considerably more intracellular sulfur when it respires oxygen. We also show that these cells can use diverse sources of reduced organic and inorganic sulfur at submicromolar concentrations. Enhanced cell size, carbon content, and metabolic activity of the aerobic phenotype are likely facilitated by a stabilizing surface-layer (S-layer) and an uncharacterized form of FtsZ-less cell division that supports morphological plasticity. The additional sulfur storage provides an energy source that allows cells to continue metabolic activity when exogenous sulfur sources are not available. This metabolic flexibility leads to the production of more organic carbon in the ocean than is estimated based solely on their anaerobic phenotype.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Identifying shifts in microbial metabolism across redox gradients will improve efforts to model marine oxygen minimum zone (OMZ) ecosystems. Here, we show that aerobic morphology and metabolism increase cell size, sulfur storage capacity, and carbon fixation rates in "<i>Ca</i> Thioglobus autotrophicus," a chemosynthetic bacterium from the SUP05 clade that crosses oxic-anoxic boundaries.

### Keywords
Gammaproteobacteria, Qexactive hf, Sup05, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
University of Washington
School of Oceanography, University of Washington

### Submitter
Rachel Lundeen

### Lab Head
Dr Anitra Ingalls
School of Oceanography, University of Washington


