### Accession
PXD013026

### Title
Tomato seeds Phosphorylation Label-free Quantitative Proteomic Analysis

### Description
Mitogen-activated protein kinases usually affect biological processes by phosphorylating proteins. To further investigate the consequences of MAPK11 interacting with SnRK1 in controlling tomato seed dormancy, we performed a phosphorylation label-free quantitative proteomic assay in vivo with dry seeds of TS-9and MAPK11-OE lines. Data analysis showed that a total of 8261 phosphosites and 6026 phosphopeptides derived from 2711 phosphoproteins were identified. The phosphopeptides with an average fold-change >2 or <0.5 and a P value <0.05 were selected as being significantly different. Among all identified phosphopeptides, 87 phosphopeptides were significantly up-regulated and 83 phosphopeptides were significantly down-regulated in seeds of MAPK11-OE line. In addition, we also found that 348 phosphopeptides were just abundant in MAPK11-OE-13 line, and 221 phosphopeptides merely in TS-9, respectively. To explore potential biological function of MAPK11, we conducted GO function annotation and enrichment, KEGG passway annotation and enrichment, and protein protein interaction network (PPI) analyses, and detected that MAPK11 might have effect on binding, catalytic activity, transporter activity, molecular function regulator and signal transducer; and involved in cellular process, metabolic process, biological regulation, regulation of biological process and response to stimulus

### Sample Protocol
1. Sample Preparation TCA/Acetone Precipitation and SDT Lysis： The amount samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and ground with a pestle and mortar. 5 times volume of TCA/acetone (1:9) was added to the powder and mixed by vortex. The mixture was placed at -20℃ for 4h, and centrifuged at 6000g for 40 min at 4℃. The supernatant was discarded. The pre-cooling acetone was added and washed for three times. The precipitation was air dried. 30 times volume of SDT buffer was added to 20-30 mg powder, mixed and boiled for 5 min. The lysate was sonicated and then boiled for 15 min. After centrifuged at 14000g for 40 min, the supernatant was filtered with 0.22 µm filters. The filtrate was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The sample was stored at -80 °C. 2. SDS-PAGE Separation 20 µg of proteins for each sample were mixed with 5X loading buffer respectively and boiled for 5 min. The proteins were separated on 12.5% SDS-PAGE gel (constant current 14 mA, 90 min). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie Blue R-250 staining. 3. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion) (Wiśniewski et al., 2009) 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100mM DTT, 150mM Tris-HCl pH8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), concentrated by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. 4. Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides by the TiO2 bead The lyophilized peptides were resuspended in 500 μL 1×DHB buffer. Then, TiO2 beads were added and agitated for 2 hour. The centrifugation was carried out for 1 min at 5000 g, resulting the beads. And washed with 50 uL of washing buffer I three times and then 50 uL of washing buffer II three times to remove the remaining non-adsorbed material. Finally, the phosphopeptides were eluted with 50 uL of elution buffer three times, followed by lyophilization and MS analysis. 5. Mass Spectrometry 5.1 HPLC Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology.  4 hours gradient：0-55% buffer B for 220 min, 55-100% buffer B for 8 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 12 min. 5.2 LC-MS/MS Analysis LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 240 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis The MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version1.5.3.17 (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry in Martinsried, Germany) (Cox and Mann, 2008). The following parameters were set.  Item Value Enzyme Trypsin Max Missed Cleavages 2 Max Missed Cleavages 2 Main search 6 ppm First search 20 ppm MS/MS Tolerance 20 ppm Fixed modifications Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications Oxidation (M) , Acetyl (Protein N-term), Phospho (STY) Database MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification Database pattern Reverse Peptide FDR ≤0.01 Protein FDR ≤0.01 Site FDR ≤0.01 Time window (match between runs) 2min Protein Quantification Razor and unique peptides were used for protein quantification. LFQ (Cox et al., 2014) True LFQ min. ratio count 1  7 Bioinformatic Analysis 7.1 Gene Ontology (GO) Annotation The protein sequences of differentially expressed proteins were in batches retrieved from UniProtKB database in FASTA format. The retrieved sequences were locally searched against SwissProt database (tomato) using the NCBI BLAST+ client software (ncbi-blast-2.2.28+-win32.exe) to find homologue sequences from which the functional annotation can be transferred to the studied sequences. In this work, the top 10 blast hits with E-value less than 1e-3 for each query sequence were retrieved and loaded into Blast2GO (Terol et al., 2008) (Version 3.3.5) for GO mapping and annotation. In this work, an annotation configuration with an E-value filter of 1e-6, default gradual EC weights, a GO weight of 5, and an annotation cutoff of 75 were chosen. Un-annotated sequences were then re-annotated with more permissive parameters. The sequences without BLAST hits and un-annotated sequences were then selected to go through an InterProScan (Quevillon et al., 2005) against EBI databases to retrieve functional annotations of protein motifs and merge the InterProScan GO terms to the annotation set. The GO annotation results were plotted by R scripts.  7.2 KEGG Pathway Annotation The FASTA protein sequences of differentially changed proteins were blasted against the online Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://geneontology.org/) to retrieve their KOs and were subsequently mapped to pathways in KEGG (Yoshizawa et al., 2007). The corresponding KEGG pathways were extracted. 7.3 Functional Enrichment analysis To further explore the impact of differentially expressed protein in cell physiological process and discover internal relations between differentially expressed proteins, enrichment analysis was performed. GO enrichment on three ontologies (biological process, molecular function, and cellular component) and KEGG pathway enrichment analyses were applied based on the Fisher’ exact test, considering the whole quantified protein annotations as background dataset. Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple testing was further applied to adjust derived p-values. And only functional categories and pathways with p-values under a threshold of 0.05 were considered as significant. 7.4 Hierarchical Clustering The studied protein relative expression data was used to performing hierarchical clusteringanalysis.Forthispurpose,Cluster3.0(http://bonsai.hgc.jp/~mdehoon/software/cluster/software.htm) and the Java Treeview software (http://jtreeview.sourceforge.net) were used. Euclidean distance algorithm for similarity measure and average linkage clustering algorithm (clustering uses the centroids of the observations) for clustering were selected when performing hierarchical clustering. Heatmap is often presented as a visual aid in addition to the dendrogram. 7.5 Protein-Protein Interact Network (PPI)    The protein–protein interaction information of the studied proteins was retrieved from IntAct  molecular interaction database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/intact/) by their gene symbols or STRING software (http://string-db.org/). The results were downloaded in the XGMML format and imported into Cytoscape5 software (http://www.cytoscape.org/, version 3.2.1) to visualize and further analyze functional protein-protein interaction networks. Furthermore, the degree of each protein was calculated to evaluate the importance of the protein in the PPI network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Lc-msms, Proteomic, Tomato

### Affiliations
Huazhong Agricultural University
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, MOE

### Submitter
Jianwen Song

### Lab Head
Dr Zhibiao Ye
Key Laboratory of Horticultural Plant Biology, MOE


