### Accession
PXD029381

### Title
Multi-omics reveals mechanisms of potato resistance to powdery scab

### Description
The potato powdery scab agent Spongospora subterranea causes damage on the skin of tubers and induces root gall formation, precipitating considerable yield and quality losses. Currently, there are no effective chemical treatments for the control of powdery scabs. Understanding the inducible defence responses in roots of potato plants in the resistant and susceptible host environment, particularly during colonisation of the root by S. subterranea is required for the breeding of novel resistant cultivars. Here, we integrated transcriptomics, proteomics and metabolomics datasets to uncover the mechanisms underlying of the potato resistance to powdery scab. This multi-omics approach identified upregulation of glutathione metabolism at the levels of RNA, protein and metabolite in the resistant cultivar but not in the susceptible cultivar. Upregulation of the lignin metabolic process was also specific to in the resistant cultivar at the transcriptome level. In addition, Tthe inositol phosphate pathway was differentially expressed between two cultivars in response to S. subterranea infection, where it was upregulated in the susceptible cultivar but downregulated in the resistant cultivar. We provide, for the first time, large-scale multi-omics data of Spongospora-potato interaction, thereby suggesting the signaling role of glutathione metabolism in the potato resistance against powdery scab

### Sample Protocol
The frozen roots (50 mg per sample) were homogenised in 150 µL of extraction buffer (7 M urea and 2 M thiourea, protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete Mini EDTA-free; Roche Diagnostics, NSW, Australia), 1% dithiothreitol (DTT), 100 mM NaCl and 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0) using a Fast Prep-24 bead beater (Mp Biomedicals, Seven Hills, NSW, Australia) for 60 s. Extracts were then centrifuged at 16,000 g in the cold room (4 °C) for 10 min. The collected supernatant was added to six volumes of − absolute acetone chilled to −20 °C and kept at −20 °C overnight. To concentrate precipitated protein, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 8 min. The protein pellet was washed using cold acetone and the remaining pellet was left to air dry to remove any acetone residue. The pellet was then resuspended in denaturing buffer (7 M urea and 2 M thiourea, protease inhibitor and 40 mM Tris, pH 8.0). Protein concentrations were calculated using a Qubit fluorometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Proteins were reduced overnight at 4 °C by adding DTT in a final concentration of 10 mM. For the alkylation, 50 mM iodoacetamide was added to the samples and incubated for 2 h at room temperature in dark. Proteins (30 µg per sample) were then digested according to the standard SP3 method (Hughes et al., 2019) using trypsin/LysC (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were dried down in the SpeedVac concentrator after desalted using ZipTips (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany).

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed using Spectronaut software (v 14.7) whereby the DIA-MS spectra were used to generate a spectral library using the Pulsar search engine and a FASTA file of 51,106 entries comprising the UniProt proteome for Solanum tuberosum

### Publication Abstract
The pathogen Spongospora subterranea infects potato roots and developing tubers resulting in tuber yield and quality losses. Currently, there are no fully effective treatments for disease control. Host resistance is an important tool in disease management and understanding the molecular mechanisms of defence responses in roots of potato plants is required for the breeding of novel resistant cultivars. Here, we integrated transcriptomic and proteomic datasets to uncover these mechanisms underlying S. subterranea resistance in potato roots. This multi-omics approach identified upregulation of glutathione metabolism at the levels of RNA and protein in the resistant cultivar but not in the susceptible cultivar. Upregulation of the lignin metabolic process, which is an important component of plant defence, was also specific to the resistant cultivar at the transcriptome level. In addition, the inositol phosphate pathway was upregulated in the susceptible cultivar but downregulated in the resistant cultivar in response to S. subterranea infection. We provide large-scale multi-omics data of Spongospora-potato interaction and suggest an important role of glutathione metabolism in disease resistance.

### Keywords
Metabolomics; potato; proteomics; spongospora subterranea; transcriptomics

### Affiliations
University of Tasmania
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania

### Submitter
Richard Wilson

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Richard Wilson
Proteomics facility, Central Science Laboratory, University of Tasmania


