### Accession
PXD008056

### Title
Endogenous androgen receptor proteomic profiling reveals genomic subcomplex involved in prostate tumorigenesis

### Description
Androgen receptor (AR) is a key player in prostate cancer development and progression. Here we applied immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous AR in LNCaP cells to identify components of the AR transcriptional complex. In total, 66 known and novel AR interactors were identified in the presence of synthetic androgen, most of which were critical for AR-driven prostate cancer cell proliferation. A subset of AR interactors required for LNCaP proliferation were profiled using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays followed by sequencing, identifying distinct genomic subcomplexes of AR interaction partners. Interestingly, three major subgroups of genomic subcomplexes were identified, where selective gain of function for AR genomic action in tumorigenesis was found, dictated by FOXA1 and HOXB13. In summary, by combining proteomic and genomic approaches we reveal subclasses of AR transcriptional complexes, differentiating normal AR behavior from the oncogenic state. In this process, the expression of AR interactors has key roles by reprogramming the AR cistrome and interactome in a genomic location-specific manner.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were hormone deprived for 3 days followed by the addition of 10−8 M R1881 for 4 h. Cells were fixed, lysed and sonicated as previously described.26 The nuclear lysate was incubated with 100 μl magnetic beads prebound with 10 μg AR antibody (sc-816, Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) or rabbit IgG control (sc-2027, Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Peptide mixtures were prepared as previously described26 and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1000 system.57 Samples were directly loaded onto the analytical column; solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides (25% of total digest) were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 65-min gradient, containing a 46-min linear increase from 8% to 38% solvent B, followed by a 19-min wash at 100% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data from three biological replicates were analyzed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.0.30) using standard settings.1 MS/MS data were searched against the human Swissprot database (20,192 entries, release 2015_02) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. The MaxQuant protein-groups.txt output file was processed using the R free scripting language (version 3.3.2). LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed and the proteins were filtered for at least two out of three valid values. The mean Log2 LFQ intensity of the three replicates and standard deviations for each detected protein is listed in Table S1. Proteins with three valid values in only one of the sample groups (AR or IgG immunoprecipitation) were considered as a separate ‘on/off’ group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differential protein abundance was determined using a t-test (threshold: p ≤ 0.05 and [x/y] > 1 | [x/y] < -1).

### Publication Abstract
Androgen receptor (AR) is a key player in prostate cancer development and progression. Here we applied immunoprecipitation mass spectrometry of endogenous AR in LNCaP cells to identify components of the AR transcriptional complex. In total, 66 known and novel AR interactors were identified in the presence of synthetic androgen, most of which were critical for AR-driven prostate cancer cell proliferation. A subset of AR interactors required for LNCaP proliferation were profiled using chromatin immunoprecipitation assays followed by sequencing, identifying distinct genomic subcomplexes of AR interaction partners. Interestingly, three major subgroups of genomic subcomplexes were identified, where selective gain of function for AR genomic action in tumorigenesis was found, dictated by FOXA1 and HOXB13. In summary, by combining proteomic and genomic approaches we reveal subclasses of AR transcriptional complexes, differentiating normal AR behavior from the oncogenic state. In this process, the expression of AR interactors has key roles by reprogramming the AR cistrome and interactome in a genomic location-specific manner.

### Keywords
Interactome, Proteomics, Androgen receptor, Rime, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr A. F. Maarten Altelaar
Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Facility, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands


