### Accession
PXD031295

### Title
Repurposing Live Attenuated Trivalent MMR Vaccine as Cost-effective Cancer ImmunotherapyRepurposing Live Attenuated Trivalent MMR Vaccine as Cost-effective Cancer Immunotherapy

### Description
In this study, we show that intratumoral injections of the trivalent measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR) live  attenuated viral vaccine (LAVs) modulate a potent cytotoxic T cells immune response, resulting in tumor  growth inhibition and improved survival in syngeneic mouse models of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and  colorectal cancer (CRC).

### Sample Protocol
Fixed Hepa 1-6 tumors were dehydrated using an increasing ethanol concentration and embedded into paraffin to become formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) blocks as previously described.124 Following deparaffinization of FFPE samples with xylene and tissue lysis in SDS, total protein was reduced, alkylated, and digested using filter-aided sample preparation 125 with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 65:35 buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile): B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) ratio. Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.4 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo). MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following HCD activation, MS/MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in centroid mode at a resolution of 15,000 and normal mass range with normalized collision energy of 30%.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database search using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute) label-free quantification with a parent ion tolerance of 2.5 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
It has long been known that oncolytic viruses wield their therapeutic capability by priming an inflammatory state within the tumor and activating the tumor immune microenvironment, resulting in a multifaceted antitumor immune response. Vaccine-derived viruses, such as measles and mumps, have demonstrated promising potential for treating human cancer in animal models and clinical trials. However, the extensive cost of manufacturing current oncolytic viral products makes them far out of reach for most patients. Here by analyzing the impact of intratumoral (IT) administrations of the trivalent live attenuated measles, mumps, and rubella viruses (MMR) vaccine, we unveil the cellular and molecular basis of MMR-induced anti-cancer activity. Strikingly, we found that IT delivery of low doses of MMR correlates with tumor control and improved survival in murine hepatocellular cancer and colorectal cancer models <i>via</i> increased tumor infiltration of CD8+ granzyme B+ T-cells and decreased macrophages. Moreover, our data indicate that MMR activates key cellular effectors of the host's innate and adaptive antitumor immunity, culminating in an immunologically coordinated cancer cell death. These findings warrant further work on the potential for MMR to be repurposed as safe and cost-effective cancer immunotherapy to impact cancer patients globally.

### Keywords
Rubella hepatocellular carcinoma, Measles, Colerectal cancer, Mouse liver, Mumps

### Affiliations
UAMS Department of Pathology UAMS Winthrop P. Rockefeller
Mayo Clinic

### Submitter
Musa Gabere

### Lab Head
Dr Bolni Marius Nagalo
UAMS Department of Pathology UAMS Winthrop P. Rockefeller


