### Accession
PXD010603

### Title
Proteomic Atlas of the Human Brain in Alzheimer’s Disease

### Description
Here we provide a proteomic resource comprising nine functionally distinct sections from three individuals clinically diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, across a spectrum of disease progression. Using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry, we identify a core brain proteome that exhibits only small variance in expression, accompanied by a group of proteins that are highly differentially expressed in individual sections and broader regions. AD affected tissue exhibited slightly elevated levels of tau protein with similar relative expression to factors associated with the AD pathology. Substantial differences were identified between previous proteomic studies of mature adult brains and our aged cohort. Our findings suggest considerable value in examining specifically the brain proteome of aged human populations, with the goal of understanding ways in which neurological changes occur past full maturity. This resource can serve as a guide, as well as a point of reference for how specific regions of the brain are affected by aging.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue Extraction.  Individual brains were extracted and rapidly flash frozen with a maximum post-mortem interval of five hours. Brain tissue was cold dissected to produce sample sections of approximately one cm3  Extraction and Digestion.  Each tissue sample was suspended in 1.2 ml lysis buffer (6M Guanadine HCl, 100mM Tris pH 8) before being probe sonicated (Misonix XL-2000) to lyse the cells. After sonication a protein BCA assay (Thermo Scientific) was performed to determine protein concentrations of the lysate. Sample lysates ranged in concentration from approximately 6-13 mg/ml. 500ug of protein was aliquoted from each sample lysate. Each aliquot was brought up to 90% methanol before being centrifuged at 14,000 g for 5 min. Supernate was disposed and the precipitate was resuspended in 240ul of reducing and alkylating buffer (8M urea, 10mM TCEP, 40mM CAA, 100mM Tris pH 8). The sample solution was then diluted to 25% concentration with 100mM Tris, pH 8. Trypsin was added to the protein lysate sample at a ratio of 50:1 w/v and digested overnight. Digested samples were desalted using Strata-X Polymeric Reverse Phase column (Phenomenex). Samples were then dried in SpeedVac Concentrator.    Fractionation Dried samples were resuspended in 0.2% formic acid before fractionation using an HPLC (Agilent, Infinity 2000) with a C18 reverse-phase column (Waters, XBridge Peptide BEH, particle size 3.5um). Mobile phase buffer A was a fresh-made mixture of 10mM ammonium acetate, pH 10, while mobile phase buffer B was composed of 10mM ammonium acetate, 80% methanol, pH 10.  Each sample was separated into 32 fractions. Fractions were collected directly in a round-bottom 96-well plates, allowing three samples to be contained in each plate. Fractions were concatenated by combing fractions 1-8 with 18-25 and combining fractions 9 -17 with 26-32, to yield 16 fractions.  In the interest of time fraction number was again reduced to 12 by pooling 15 & 16, 13 & 14, 1 & 2, and 3 & 4. Plates were dried down in the SpeedVac Concentrator. Samples were resuspended in 0.2% formic acid for instrument injection

### Data Protocol
All raw files were searched together in the software MaxQuant(version 1.5.2.8) with each sample input as an experiment made up of 12 fractions. Spectra were searched using fast LFQ against a full human proteome with isoforms downloaded from Uniprot (June 14, 2017). Carbamidomethyl was set as a fixed modification. Matching between runs was used with a retention time window of 0.7 mins. Searches were performed using a protein FDR of 1%, a minimum peptide length of 7, and 0.5 Da MS2 match tolerance. Protein data was then extracted from the “ProteinGroups.txt” file of the Maxquant output after decoy, contaminants, and reverse sequences were removed.

### Publication Abstract
The brain represents one of the most divergent and critical organs in the human body. Yet, it can be afflicted by a variety of neurodegenerative diseases specifically linked to aging, about which we lack a full biomolecular understanding of onset and progression, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here we provide a proteomic resource comprising nine anatomically distinct sections from three aged individuals, across a spectrum of disease progression, categorized by quantity of neurofibrillary tangles. Using state-of-the-art mass spectrometry, we identify a core brain proteome that exhibits only small variance in expression, accompanied by a group of proteins that are highly differentially expressed in individual sections and broader regions. AD affected tissue exhibited slightly elevated levels of tau protein with similar relative expression to factors associated with the AD pathology. Substantial differences were identified between previous proteomic studies of mature adult brains and our aged cohort. Our findings suggest considerable value in examining specifically the brain proteome of aged human populations from a multiregional perspective. This resource can serve as a guide, as well as a point of reference for how specific regions of the brain are affected by aging and neurodegeneration.

### Keywords
['Human', 'Brain', 'Neurodegeneration', "Alzheimer's"]

### Affiliations
['University of Wisconsin - Madison', 'Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Wisconsin, USA']

### Submitter
['Justin McKetney']

### Lab Head
[{'title': 'Dr', 'affiliation': 'Department of Chemistry and Biomolecular Chemistry, University of Wisconsin, Wisconsin, USA', 'email': 'jcoon@chem.wisc.edu', 'country': '', 'orcid': '', 'name': 'Joshua J Cppm', 'id': '111980100'}]

### SDRF
Characteristics[organism]: ['Homo sapiens']
Characteristics[organism part]: ['amygdala' 'cerebellum' 'caudate nucleus' 'entorhinal cortex'
 'parietal lobe' 'middle frontal gyrus' 'superior temporal gyrus'
 'Thalamus' 'visual cortex']
Characteristics[disease]: ["Alzheimer's disease" 'normal']
Characteristics[cell type]: ['not applicable']
comment[label]: ['NT=label free sample;AC=MS:1002038']
comment[fractionation method]: ['NT=High-pH reversed-phase chromatography (hpHRP);AC=PRIDE:0000564']
comment[instrument]: ['NT=Orbitrap Fusion Lumos;AC=MS:1002732']
comment[modification parameters]: ['NT=Carbamidomethyl; MT=fixed; PP=Anywhere; AC=Unimod:4; TA=E']
comment[modification parameters].1: ['NT=Oxidation; MT=Variable; TA=M;AC=UNIMOD:35']
factor value[disease]: ["Alzheimer's disease" 'normal']
factor value[organism part]: ['amygdala' 'cerebellum' 'caudate nucleus' 'entorhinal cortex'
 'parietal lobe' 'middle frontal gyrus' 'superior temporal gyrus'
 'Thalamus' 'visual cortex']

