### Accession
PXD028863

### Title
Mass spectrometry (MS) datasets of PURPL RNA pulldown samples in A375 cells

### Description
We performed PURPL RNA pulldown followed by MS analysis to identify purpl-interacting proteins in A375 cells.With high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS), the binding protein of PURPL from RNA pull down was detected by removing non-specific protein which were binding with EGFP.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry process: Baidu 1). Cut the target strip with a glue cutting pen and place it in the centrifuge tube. 2) Wash twice with 50 µ l double distilled water for 10 min each time. 3) Add 50 µ l decolorizing solution (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate / acetonitrile (1:1)), decolorize at 37 ° C for 20 # min. 4) . repeat step 3 until the blue color fades. 5) Add 50 µ l acetonitrile to dehydrate the adhesive strip to white, and vacuum dry for 10 # min. 6) . add 10 mm DTT (prepared with 25mm ammonium bicarbonate) 50 µ L, 56 ° C water bath for 1 # H. 7) . cool the sample to room temperature, remove the solution, quickly add 30-40 ＾ mm ＾ IAA (prepared with 25 ＾ mM ammonium bicarbonate) 50 µ L, and place it in a dark room for 45 ＾ min. 8) Clean the adhesive strip twice with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate + 50% acetonitrile for 10 min each time, dehydrate with acetonitrile until the adhesive strip turns white, and vacuum dry for 10 min. 9) Dilute 0.1 µ g / µ l trypsin enzyme solution 10-20 times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, add 2-3 µ l to each tube, centrifuge briefly, let the enzyme solution fully contact with the adhesive strip, and place it at 4 ° C for 30 minutes. After the enzymatic hydrolysate is completely absorbed, add 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate to the total volume of 10-15 µ l at 37 ° C overnight. 10) Add 2 µ l 0.1% TFA to terminate the reaction, shake and mix well, centrifuge, collect the enzymatic hydrolysate and point the target.

### Data Protocol
. Obtain the original data: according to the results measured by different machines, the original data format is different, more common. WIFF and RAW. Open it with the relevant software and you can see each sample, and the chromatograms and mass spectrograms of each sample; 2. Pretreatment: The WIFF format data is taken as an example, including extraction of primary and secondary mass spectrometry information, peak alignment, removal of isotope peak, peak area normalization, and RSD screening; 3. Multivariate statistical analysis: Principal component analysis (PCA), partial least squares discriminant analysis (PLS-DA), orthogonal partial least squares discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA) 4. Differential screening: firstly, according to VIP>1, and then according to p-value<0.05, the differential metabolites were screened out. If the selected differential metabolites were still more, the screening could be carried out according to Fold Change. 5. Material qualitative: it can be divided into second-level qualitative and first-level qualitative, which can be through self-built database and public database such as Metlin. First-level qualitative has HMDB database, etc. 6. Bioinformatics analysis: KeGG pathway analysis, cluster heat map, volcano map, bubble map, etc. Author: Lu Ming Biology Link: https://www.zhihu.com/question/265260584/answer/291418176 Source: Zhihu Copyright belongs to the author. Commercial reprint please contact the author for authorization, non-commercial reprint please indicate the source.

### Publication Abstract
Uncontrolled overactivation of autophagy may lead to autophagic cell death, suppression of which is a pro-survival strategy for tumors. However, mechanisms involving key regulators in modulating autophagic cell death remain poorly defined. Here, we report a novel long noncoding RNA, p53 upregulated regulator of p53 levels (PURPL), functions as an oncogene to promote cell proliferation, colony formation, migration, invasiveness, and inhibits cell death in melanoma cells. Mechanistic studies showed that PURPL promoted mTOR-mediated ULK1 phosphorylation at Ser757 by physical interacting with mTOR and ULK1 to constrain autophagic response to avoid cell death. Loss of PURPL led to AMPK-mediated phosphorylation of ULK1 at Ser555 and Ser317 to over-activate autophagy and induce autophagic cell death. Our results identify PURPL as a key regulator to modulate the activity of autophagy initiation factor ULK1 to repress autophagic cell death in melanoma and may represent a potential intervention target for melanoma therapy.

### Keywords
Human  a375 cells lc-ms

### Affiliations
china
Department of Toxicology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China tel:17534997727

### Submitter
xiaoting Liang

### Lab Head
Dr Liang Xiaoting
Department of Toxicology, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Tropical Disease Research, School of Public Health, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China tel:17534997727


