### Accession
PXD035771

### Title
Synechocystis spatial proteome LC-MS/MS

### Description
We treated a unicellular photosynthetic model cyanobacterium, Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803, with five different types of abiotic stresses including nitrogen starvation, iron deficiency, cold, heat, and darkness, and systematically identified proteins showing stress-induced differential expression and/or redistribution between the membrane and the soluble compartments using a quantitative proteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
The wild-type strain of Synechocystis was grown in liquid completed BG11 medium at 30 °C with a medium-light of 50 μmol m−2 s−1. At the exponential phase (O.D. 730 nm ~0.8), cells were treated with various stresses except nitrogen starvation and iron deficiency. The time durations for low temperature (22 °C), high temperature (38 °C), and darkness treatments were 24h.For nitrogen starvation, cells were harvested by centrifugation at 5000 x g for 10 min at 30 °C and washed three times with nitrogen-free BG11, and then cultured in nitrogen-free BG11 for 24h. For iron depletion, the cells were harvested and washed three times with iron-free BG11, and then cultured in iron-free BG11 containing the iron chelator deferoxamine (DFB) for 12h. All cells were then harvested by centrifugation to store at -80 °C until use. Cells were lysed in SMN lysis buffer containing 0.4 M sucrose, 50 mM 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid, pH 7.0, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, and 0.5 mM PMSF with a bead beater. Membrane and soluble fractions from total cell extracts were prepared as described. Briefly, the TCL were centrifuged at 100,000 x g at 4 °C for 1h to precipitate the membranes, and the supernatants were collected as the soluble fraction. The membranes were washed three times with SMN buffer and then dissolved in 4% sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) buffer. The TCL, the membrane, and the soluble fractions were then precipitated with TCA/acetone (Damerval et al., 1986), and re-dissolved with 4% SDS. The protein concentrations were determined using a BCA protein assay kit (Thermo 550 Scientific, Rockford, IL)

### Data Protocol
All raw data files were searched against the Synechocystis proteome database by using the software MaxQuant (version 1.6.3.4). The Synechocystis proteome database was downloaded from CyanoBase (http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase/). The parameters used for the database search were set up as follows: The type of search is reporter ion MS3, TMTpro (16-plex), or TMT 10-plex were chosen as the isobaric labels. Trypsin/P was chosen as the protease for protein digestion, the maximum missed cleavages is 2. The variable modifications were N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation, the fixed modification was cysteine carbamidomethylation. The false discovery rates for both peptide-spectrum matches and protein identifications were set to 0.01. The minimum score for unmodified peptides was set as 15, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set as 40. The match between runs was ticked. All other parameters were set to default values of MaxQuant.

### Publication Abstract
Spatial proteome reorganization in response to a changing environment represents a different layer of adaptation mechanism in addition to differential expression of a subset of stress responsive genes in photosynthetic organisms. Profiling such reorganization events is critically important to extend our understanding how photosynthetic organisms adapt to adverse environments. Thus, we treated a unicellular photosynthetic model cyanobacterium, <i>Synechocystis</i> sp. PCC 6803 (hereafter referred to as <i>Synechocystis</i>), with five different types of abiotic stresses including nitrogen starvation, iron deficiency, cold, heat, and darkness, and systematically identified proteins showing stress-induced differential expression and/or redistribution between the membrane and the soluble fractions using a quantitative proteomics approach. A number of proteins showing such a redistribution in response to a single or multiple types of abiotic stresses were identified. These include 12 ribosomal proteins displaying unanimous cold-induced redistribution to the membrane and the protein FurA, a master regulator of iron acquisition, displaying iron deficiency- and nitrogen starvation-induced redistribution to the membrane. Such findings shed light on a novel regulatory mechanism underlying the corresponding stress responses, and establish the results in the present study as an important resource for future studies intended to understand how photosynthetic organisms cope with adverse environments.

### Keywords
Synechocystis total membrane soluble lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Chinese Academy of Sciences
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China.

### Submitter
Haitao Ge

### Lab Head
Dr Yingchun Wang
State Key Laboratory of Molecular Developmental Biology, Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, No.1 West Beichen Rd., Beijing 100101, China.


