### Accession
PXD023482

### Title
Tracking Gluten throughout Brewing Using N-Terminal Labeling Mass Spectrometry

### Description
Gluten-containing grains cause adverse health effects in individuals with celiac disease. Fermentation of these grains results in gluten-derived polypeptides with largely uncharacterized sizes and sequences, which may still trigger an immune response. This research used N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry to characterize protein hydrolysates during each stage of bench-scale brewing, including malting, mashing, boiling, fermentation, and aging. Gluten hydrolysates from each brewing step were tracked and the immunotoxic potential was evaluated in silico. The results indicate that proteolysis and precipitation of gliadins occurring during brewing differ by protein region and brewing stage. The termini of gliadins were hydrolyzed throughout the entire brewing process, but the central regions remained relatively stable. Most hydrolysis occurred during malting, and most precipitation occurred during boiling. The addition of yeast yielded new cleavage sites but did not result in complete hydrolysis. Consistent detection of peptides within the clinically important regions of gliadin corroborated the hydrolytic resistance of this region. N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry served as a novel approach to track the fate of gliadin/gluten throughout bench-scale brewing. Consistently identified fragments could serve as improved targets for detection of hydrolyzed gluten in fermented products.

### Sample Protocol
Bench-scale brewing and sampling: A bench-scale brewing process was conducted according to an American Wheat Beer recipe from Beer Craftr (https://www.beercraftr.com/1-gallon-american-wheat-recipe/). Five major brewing steps were investigated: malting, mashing, boiling, fermentation, and aging. Triplicate samples (25 g or 25 mL) were taken before and after each brewing step.  Sample preparation and discovery MS of raw grains and yeast: Raw grains (wheat and barley) and yeast were prepared for discovery MS before brewing. Grain samples were extracted into sodium chloride (500 mM NaCl) and ethanol (70%) extractable fractions. The extracts were buffer exchanged or dried and reconstituted into 50 mM HEPES, respectively. All processed raw materials were denatured (6 M guanidine hydrochloride, 65 °C, 15 min), reduced (10 mM DTT, 60 °C, 30 min), alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, room temperature in the dark, 30 min), and digested with chymotrypsin (Promega, WI, USA) (1:100 w/w, 25°C overnight). Separate NaCl extracts and yeast samples were also prepared and digested with trypsin (Promega, WI, USA) (1:100 w/w, 37°C overnight). Samples were desalted, dried, and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H2O with 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS analysis. Samples were injected in duplicate.  Sample preparation for N-terminal labeling MS analysis: For each brewing step, samples from before and after the step were analyzed by a gluten-TAILS analysis. Briefly, 1500 ug total protein in the triplicate samples obtained before (control) and after (test) the brewing step of interest were reconstituted with 375 uL of 50 mM HEPES, denatured with 4 M guanidine hydrochloride, reduced with 10 mM DTT, and alkylated with 15 mM iodoacetamide.   Each sample replicate was then evenly split into three 1.5 mL tubes as sample preparation replicates. The control replicates were labeled with light formaldehyde (CH2O, 37% w/w in H2O) and the test replicates labeled with heavy formaldehyde (13CD2O, 20 % w/w in D2O) (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories, MA, USA) in the presence of 20 mM of sodium cyanoborohydride (pH 6-7, 37 °C overnight). Samples labeled with light and heavy formaldehyde were combined in equal volumes and fractionated with 30 kDa centrifugal filters. For the fraction below 30 kDa (flow-through), the labeling reagent was removed by a buffer exchange with 50 mM HEPES using 3 kDa centrifugal filters followed by desalting with C18 centrifugal columns. For the fraction above 30 kDa (retentate), samples were subsequently digested with chymotrypsin (1:100 w/w, 25°C overnight) to generate peptides of a size more suitable for LC-MS/MS. A free amine-binding HPG-ALD polymer (The University of British Columbia - UBC, Canada) was added (1:5 w/w) for the negative selection of dimethyl-labeled peptides, following manufacturer’s instructions. The polymer was removed using 10 kDa centrifugal filters and samples were desalted with C18 centrifugal columns. Desalted peptides from both fractions were dried and reconstituted with 0.1% FA in H2O with 3% ACN for LC-MS/MS. The entire process was performed separately for each brewing step with triplicate sample, sample preparation, and injection replicates (n=27).  LC-MS/MS analysis: The same data-dependent acquisition method was used for both discovery and gluten-TAILS, with the fractions above and below 30 kDa analyzed separately. For each sample, 4 uL of reconstituted peptide mixture was separated on a Thermo Scientific™ Ultimate 3000 RSLC UHPLC system using a Thermo Scientific™ Hypersil GOLD™ C18 Selectivity LC column (100 mm × 1 mm, 1.9 um particle size) at a flow rate of 0.06 mL/min. A linear gradient (2-40% solvent B over 70 min, 40% solvent B for 6 min) was used (mobile phase A: 0.1% FA in H2O; mobile phase B: 0.1% FA in ACN). Top-ten data-dependent MS/MS analysis was conducted on a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Plus Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer with the following parameters: full scan: 70,000 resolution, 400–1400 m/z scan range, 3e6 automatic gain control (AGC) target, 100 ms maximum injection times (IT), and 1+ to 8+ charge states; MS2: 70,000 resolution, 200–2000 m/z scan range, 1e5 AGC target, and 60 ms maximum IT, isolation window of 2.0 m/z, normalized collision energy of 27, minimum AGC target at 1.50e3 for an intensity threshold of 2.5e4.

### Data Protocol
For the discovery analysis of raw materials, Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) was employed to perform a SEQUEST HT search against a database containing all protein sequences of Triticum aestivum (142,646 sequences), Humulus lupulus (478 sequences), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (71,533 sequences), and Hordeum vulgare (213,089 sequences) downloaded from UniProt (Dec 15th, 2018), combined with the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (115 sequences, version 2012.01.01, The Global Proteome Machine). Fixed modifications included carbamidomethylation, and up to three dynamic modifications (methionine oxidation and asparagine/glutamine deamidation) were allowed. The precursor mass range was 350-5000 Da, with a ±10 ppm mass tolerance, and the mass tolerance for product ions was ±0.02 Da. Full chymotrypsin cleavage (FWY/not P) or full trypsin cleavage (KR/not P) was set as enzyme cleavage, according to the enzyme used, with a maximum of two missed cleavages. All protein sequences identified were used to conduct a BLAST search against the original database, and proteins with >50% identity were curated into a bespoke database for gluten-TAILS (Figure S-3). For gluten-TAILS, a SEQUEST HT search against the manually curated restricted database was performed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1, with settings the same as discovery analysis except for modification and enzyme settings. Additional fixed modifications, including light (+28.031 Da) and heavy (+34.063 Da) dimethylation (peptide/protein N-termini and lysine residues), were searched separately and reported in the same output file. For analysis of the retentate (> 30 kDa), the search was performed twice, with two separate enzyme cleavage settings: chymotrypsin semi-C (only C-termini resulting from chymotrypsin cleavage), and no-enzyme (nonspecific) to account for all possible cleavages at different degrees of hydrolysis. Some peptides were found redundantly by both settings, and only one result was kept by priority: semi cleavage > nonspecific. For the flow-through (< 30 kDa), only the no-enzyme (nonspecific) setting was employed to identify peptides, referred to here as endogenous peptides, which were present in beer due to the hydrolysis during grain storage or the brewing process, rather than secondary chymotrypsin cleavage. Peptides identified with a target-decoy-based false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.01 across all replicates were used as high confidence peptides and imported to the Skyline 4.2.0 for calculating the Log2 heavy:light ratio (Log2HL) of the MS1 peak area of each peptide. Peak areas of the same peptide from different charge states and variable modifications were summed.

### Publication Abstract
Gluten-containing grains cause adverse health effects in individuals with celiac disease. Fermentation of these grains results in gluten-derived polypeptides with largely uncharacterized sizes and sequences, which may still trigger an immune response. This research used N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry to characterize protein hydrolysates during each stage of bench-scale brewing, including malting, mashing, boiling, fermentation, and aging. Gluten hydrolysates from each brewing step were tracked, and the immunotoxic potential was evaluated by sequence comparison with peptides known to stimulate celiac immune responses. The results indicate that proteolysis and precipitation of gliadins occurring during brewing differ by protein region and brewing stage. The termini of gliadins were hydrolyzed throughout the entire brewing process, but the central regions remained relatively stable. Most hydrolysis occurred during malting, and most precipitation occurred during boiling. The addition of yeast yielded new cleavage sites but did not result in complete hydrolysis. Consistent detection of peptides within the clinically important regions of gliadin corroborated the hydrolytic resistance of this region. N-terminal labeling mass spectrometry served as a novel approach to track the fate of gliadin/gluten throughout bench-scale brewing. Consistently identified fragments could serve as improved targets for the detection of hydrolyzed gluten in fermented products.

### Keywords
Barley, Celiac disease, Gliadin, Brewing, Gluten, Wheat, Beer

### Affiliations
Food Allergy Research & Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln

### Submitter
Melanie Downs

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Downs
Food Allergy Research and Resource Program, Department of Food Science and Technology, University of Nebraska-Lincoln


