### Accession
PXD032163

### Title
Proteomic analysis  response of rice (Oryza sativa) leaves to ultravoilet (UV-B) stress

### Description
Rice (Oryza staiva) is staple food for the human consumption and model plants for genetic and molecular studies. Only few studies have been conducted on ultraviolet-B (UV-B) stress on rice. UV-B stress effects different morphological and physiological changes in plants. However, underlying mechanisms governing these integrated responses are unknown. In this study, we conducted proteomic response of rice leaves to UV-B stress using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and identified the selected proteins by mass spectrometry analysis. To identify changes in protein accumulation in response to UV-B stress, two cultivars, i.e., IR6 and REX were irradiated by artificial UV-B radiation. Four 4 levels of daily biologically effective UV-B radiation intensities, 0 (control), 5, 10, and 15 kJ m-2 d-1 were imposed. We conducted this experiment in Sunlit Soil-Plant-Atmosphere-Research (SPAR) chambers to mimic the natural environment.

### Sample Protocol
Protein spots on stained 2-DE gels were cut into approximately 1mm3 pieces. Gel pieces were then subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure (Shevchenko et al., 1996). The samples were reduced by using DTT (1 mM concentration in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 30 minutes at 60°C. The samples were then cooled to room temperature, and iodoacetamide (5mM) was added for 15 minutes in the dark at room temperature. DTT (5mM) was then added to quench the reaction. Then sequence grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) 5 ng/µl was added. After 45 minutes, the excess trypsin solution was removed and replaced with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution to cover the gel pieces. The digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. Peptides were later extracted by removing the ammonium bicarbonate solution, followed by one wash with a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid. The extracts were then dried in a speed-vac (~1 hr). The samples were then stored at 4ºC until analysis. On the day of analysis, the samples were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  A nano-scale reverse-phase HPLC capillary column was created by packing 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads into a fused silica capillary (100 µm inner diameter x ~30 cm length) with a flame-drawn tip (Peng and Gygi, 2001).  After equilibrating the column, each sample was loaded via a Famous autosampler (LC Packings, San Francisco CA) onto the column.    A gradient was formed, and peptides were eluted with increasing concentrations of solvent B (97.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid).  As peptides were eluted, they were subjected to electrospray ionization and then entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Peptides were detected, isolated, and fragmented to produce a tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide.  Peptide sequences (and hence protein identity) were determined by matching protein databases (http://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/?query=taxonomy:39947) with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) (Eng et al., 1994). All databases include a reversed version of all the sequences, and the data were filtered to between a one and two percent peptide false discovery rate.

### Publication Abstract
Rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i>) is a human staple food and serves as a model organism for genetic and molecular studies. Few studies have been conducted to determine the effects of ultraviolet-B (UV-B) stress on rice. UV-B stress triggers morphological and physiological changes in plants. However, the underlying mechanisms governing these integrated responses are unknown. In this study, we conducted a proteomic response of rice leaves to UV-B stress using two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and identified the selected proteins by mass spectrometry analysis. Four levels of daily biologically effective UV-B radiation intensities were imposed to determine changes in protein accumulation in response to UV-B stress: 0 (control), 5, 10, and 15 kJ m<sup>-2</sup> d<sup>-1</sup>in two cultivars, i.e., IR6 and REX. To mimic the natural environment, we conducted this experiment in Sunlit Soil-Plant-Atmosphere-Research (SPAR) chambers. Among the identified proteins, 11% of differentially expressed proteins were found in both cultivars. In the Rex cultivar, only 45% of proteins are differentially expressed, while only 27.5% were expressed in IR6. The results indicate that REX is more affected by UV-B stress than IR6 cultivars. The identified protein TSJT1 (spot 16) in both cultivars plays a crucial role in plant growth and development during stress treatment. Additionally, we found that UV-B stress altered many antioxidant enzymes associated with redox homeostasis and cell defense response. Another enzyme, the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), has been identified as spot 15, which plays an essential role in glycolysis and cellular energy production. Another vital protein identified is glycosyl hydrolase (GH) as spot 9, which catalyzes the hydrolysis of glycosidic bonds in cell wall polymers and significantly affects cell wall architecture. Some identified proteins are related to photosynthesis, protein biosynthesis, signal transduction, and stress response. The findings of our study provide new insights into understanding how rice plants are tailored to UV-B stress <i>via</i> modulating the expression of UV-B responsive proteins, which will help develop superior rice breeds in the future to combat UV-B stress. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD032163.

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Leaves, Ultraviolet-b stress, Mass spectrometry, Two dimensional gel electrophoresis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology, and Plant Pathology, Mississippi State University, Box 9655, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.
Brookhaven National Laboratory

### Submitter
Saroj Sah

### Lab Head
Dr Jiaxu Li
Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology, Entomology, and Plant Pathology, Mississippi State University, Box 9655, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.


