### Accession
PXD016813

### Title
Arginine and lysine methylproteomes of Giardia duodenalis

### Description
Methylation is a common post-translational modification of lysine and arginine in eukaryotic proteins. To date, these methylomes are best characterised in model organisms and higher eukaryotes. Herein, we integrated bioinformatics, proteomics and high-content drug-screening to comprehensively explore protein methylation in the human gastrointestinal parasite and deep-branching eukaryote, Giardia duodenalis. We demonstrate Giardia and other Diplomonadida species lack arginine-methyltransferases and have remodelled RGG/RG motifs preferred by these enzymes. Further, Giardia had no detectable methylarginine in vitro, demonstrating the first eukaryote with no arginine methylome. In contrast, we performed detailed curation of 11 putative lysine-methyltransferases, including highly-diverged SET-domain proteins, and novel annotations demonstrating conserved eEF1a methyllysine. We identified >200 high-confidence methyllysine sites, highlighting methyllysine within coiled-coil features, and for Giardia cytoskeletal regulation. Lastly, using known methylation-inhibitors, we demonstrate inhibition of methylation plays a key role in replication and cyst formation in this parasite.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoaffinity purifications (IAPs) were performed using the PTMScan pan-methyl lysine (Cell Signalling Technologies), and PTMScan mono-methyl arginine (Cell Signalling Technologies) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, trophozites were solubilised in 9M Urea in 20mM HEPES (pH 8) containing 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5mM sodium pyrophosphate and 1mM B-glycerolphosphate and 5mM DTT with gentle sonication. This was reduced with DTT for 30 minutes at 37C, followed alkylation with iodoacetamide for 15 minutes. Protein concentration was verified by bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay (Pierce), and 10mg of protein underwent pre-digestion with Lys-C (Wako) for 3 hours at 37C at a ratio of 1:100 enzyme to protein, followed by Trypsin (Promega) digestion overnight at 1:100. Digestion was terminated via acidification with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to 1%. Peptide purification was performed using a Sep-PAK ® Classic C18 column (Waters), and peptides dried via lyophilization.   K-Me and R-MMe peptides were enriched via IAP using PTMScan® Pan-Methyl IAP beads, or PTMScan® Mono-Methyarginine IAP beads (Cell Signalling Technologies), according to manufacturer’s instructions. Mouse liver peptides (Cell Signalling Technologies) were used as a positive control for IAPs, and performed parallel to Giardia pulldowns. After enrichment, samples were desalted using in-house C18 stage-tips, dried down in a vacuum centrifuge, and secondary trypsin digestion was performed as recommended by the manufacturer. The sample was acidified, desalted on a C18 tip and vacuum centrifuged to dryness (as above), and peptides dissolved in 0.1% TFA and 2% ACN for LC-MS/MS.  All LC-MS/MS analysis of IAP-enriched fractions were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo) interfaced with a nano-LC system (Ultimate 3000 RSLC, Dionex) equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex – C18, 100 Å, 75 μm × 50 cm). From Giardia, a total of 10 K-Me IAP fractions from independent biological replicates were analysed with duplicate technical injections (n=9 trophozoite, n=1 cyst), along with 4 R-MMe IAP fractions from independent biological replicates (n=4 trophozoite). A total of 2 K-Me and 2 R-MMe IAP fractions from control mouse liver peptides (Cell Signalling Technologies) were also analysed. K-Me IAP fractions were analysed on a 210min gradient ranging 3%-90% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA), while R-Me IAP fractions were analysed on a 60min gradient ranging 3%-90% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (FA). Eluting peptides were ionized using positive ion mode nano-ESI with 120,000 resolution scanning from 350-1550 m/z in full scan with lockmass of 445.12003 (K-Me samples) and 401.92272 (R-Me samples). Data dependent MS2 was carried out using the 3 second maximum cycle method. MS2 was carried out in HCD mode with resolution of 15,000, AGC target of 40,000 (R-Me samples) and 50,000 (K-Me samples) and Activation Q of 0.25 for ions above 50,000. Dynamic exclusion was enabled (exclusion duration = 45 sec).

### Data Protocol
All raw data analysis of K-Me and R-MMe IAP fractions were performed with Maxquant software (v1.6.3.4 with digestion with trypsin allowing maximum of 3 missed cleavages, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, as well as carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification and protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation as variable modifications. For K-Me IAP samples, searches included Methyl(K), DiMethyl(K), TriMethyl(K) and Methyl(D/E) as variable modifications, and R-MMe IAP samples Methyl(K/R) and Methyl(D/E). Peptide and protein FDR of 0.01 were set, based on number of reverse hits. For Giardia methyl searches, sequences from the Giardia duodenalis WB isolate genome (GiardiaDB.org, ATCC 50803 ver 43) were used with sequences containing common contaminants, and additional sequences from the UniProt Human fasta database (downloaded May 2019) for further exclusion of media- and serum-based K-Me contaminants. Raw data from control mouse IAP fractions were searched as above against the UniProt Mouse fasta database (downloaded May 2019), without additional human databases.  MaxQuant output tables (“msms.txt”, “peptides.txt”, and site tables – e.g. “Methyl (K)Sites.txt”, “Dimethyl (K)Sites.txt” and “Trimethyl (K)Sites.txt”) were processed and filtered by means of a custom R script (available at https://github.com/JoshuaHamey/MethylSite-Filtering), with full details of confidence filtering strategies found in the Supplementary Information of the full manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
Methylation is a common posttranslational modification of arginine and lysine in eukaryotic proteins. Methylproteomes are best characterized for higher eukaryotes, where they are functionally expanded and evolved complex regulation. However, this is not the case for protist species evolved from the earliest eukaryotic lineages. Here, we integrated bioinformatic, proteomic, and drug-screening data sets to comprehensively explore the methylproteome of Giardia duodenalis-a deeply branching parasitic protist. We demonstrate that Giardia and related diplomonads lack arginine-methyltransferases and have remodeled conserved RGG/RG motifs targeted by these enzymes. We also provide experimental evidence for methylarginine absence in proteomes of Giardia but readily detect methyllysine. We bioinformatically infer 11 lysine-methyltransferases in Giardia, including highly diverged Su(var)3-9, Enhancer-of-zeste and Trithorax proteins with reduced domain architectures, and novel annotations demonstrating conserved methyllysine regulation of eukaryotic elongation factor 1 alpha. Using mass spectrometry, we identify more than 200 methyllysine sites in Giardia, including in species-specific gene families involved in cytoskeletal regulation, enriched in coiled-coil features. Finally, we use known methylation inhibitors to show that methylation plays key roles in replication and cyst formation in this parasite. This study highlights reduced methylation enzymes, sites, and functions early in eukaryote evolution, including absent methylarginine networks in the Diplomonadida. These results challenge the view that arginine methylation is eukaryote conserved and demonstrate that functional compensation of methylarginine was possible preceding expansion and diversification of these key networks in higher eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Lysine methylation, Ptm, Giardia, Methylation, Arginine methylation

### Affiliations
Population Health and Immunity, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia  Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia

### Submitter
Samantha Emery

### Lab Head
Dr Aaron R Jex
Population Health and Immunity Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, Melbourne, VIC, Australia  Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC, Australia


