### Accession
PXD014694

### Title
Proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles derived from platelet concentrates treated with Mirasol® identifies biomarkers of platelet storage lesion

### Description
In blood banks, platelets are stored until 7 days after a pathogen reduction technology (PRT) treatment, Mirasol® (vitamin B2 plus UVB light) in the present case. The storage time under these conditions may have an impact on platelets and their releasate leading to potential adverse reactions following transfusion to patients. The aim of this study was to analyze the proteome of extracellular vesicles generated by platelets at different storage days (2 and 7) to gain deeper information on the platelet concentrates state at those moments. EVs were isolated by a centrifugation-based approach and characterized by dynamic light scattering and transmission electron microscopy. Proteomic analysis was by LC-MS/MS and quantification by SWATH. In this way, 151 proteins were found up-regulated at day 7 of storage. This group includes CCL5 and Platelet factor 4, chemokines with power to attract neutrophils and monocytes, which could generate transfusion adverse reactions. In addition, other glycoproteins and platelet activation markers were also found elevated at day 7. Proteins related to glycolysis and lactate production were found altered with high fold changes, showing a deregulation of platelet metabolism at day 7. The obtained results provide novel information about possible effects of platelet-derived EVs on transfusion adverse reactions.

### Sample Protocol
EVs were isolated by an ultracentrifugation-based protocol from Platelet concentrates, and resuspended in sample buffer (65 mM CHAPS, 5 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.15 M NDSB-256, 30 mM Tris, 1 mM  sodium vanadate, 0.1 mM sodium fluoride, and 1 mM benzamidine) for proteomic analysis. Protein concentration was measured using a standard colorimetric assay (Pierce Coomassie  Plus (Thermo Scientific)).  Isolated EVs were resuspended in 50 μl of sample buffer for proteomic analysis. Thus, 3 pools of 3 PCs per condition (each PC sampled at d2 and d7) were put together and 100 μg  of protein per pool were loaded on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel. Protein in-gel digestion was done with trypsin. Peptides were extracted carrying out three incubations of 20 minutes with 60% acetonitrile and 0.5% HCOOH. The resulting peptide extracts were pooled, concentrated and stored at −20 °C. Protein identification by liquid chromatography tandem-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) 4 g of digested peptides were separated using Reverse Phase Chromatography. Gradient was created using a micro liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC 400, SCIEX) coupled to high speed Triple TOF 6600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX) with a micro flow source using a Data dependent workflow. The chosen analytical column was a silica-based reversed phase column YCM-TriartC18 column (150μm × 0.3mm, 12 nmm, 3nm) (YMC CO.Japan).The trap column was a YMC-TRIART C18 (YMC Technologies, Teknokroma with a 3 mm particle size and 120 Å pore size, switched on-line with the analytical column. The loading pump delivered a solution of 0.1% formic acid in water at 10 µl/min. The micro-pump generated a flow-rate of 5 µl/min and was operated under gradient elution conditions, using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A, and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile as mobile phase B. Peptides were separated using a 90 minutes gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B.  Data acquisition was performed in a TripleTOF 6600 System (SCIEX, Foster City, CA) using a Data dependent workflow (DDA). Source and interface conditions were the following: ionspray voltage floating (ISVF) 5500 V, curtain gas (CUR) 25, collision energy (CE) 10 and ion source gas   1   (GS1)   25. Instrument was operated with Analyst TF 1.7.1 software (SCIEX, USA). Switching criteria was set to ions greater than mass to charge ratio (m/z) 350 and smaller than m/z 1400 with charge state of 2–5, mass tolerance 250ppm and an abundance threshold of more than 200 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 15 s. Peptide and protein identifications were performed with Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) using a Human specific Uniprot database 2017_01, specifying iodoacetamide as cysteine alkylation. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both peptides and proteins.  Relative quantification by SWATH acquisition  Prior to protein quantification by SWATH, an MS/MS spectral library was constructed analyzing peptides by a shotgun data-dependent acquisition (DDA) approach by micro-LC-MS/MS in the same conditions as before but using only a 40 min gradient Samples were analyzed using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method making 3 technical replicates per sample. Samples were analyzed by SWATH-MS acquisition method performed on a TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system (AB SCIEX). The method consisted of repeating a cycle that consisted of the acquisition of 65 TOF MS/MS scans (400 to 1500 m/z, high sensitivity mode, 50 ms acquisition time) of overlapping sequential precursor isolation windows of variable width (1 m/z overlap) covering the 400 to 1250 m/z mass range with a previous TOF MS scan (400 to 1500 m/z, 50 ms acquisition time) for each cycle. Total cycle time was 6.3 s. For each sample set, the width of the 65 variable windows was optimized according to the ion density found in the DDA runs using a SWATH variable window calculator worksheet from Sciex. The targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.2) using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). The integrated peak areas were directly exported to the MarkerView software (AB SCIEX) for relative quantitative following Student’s t-test. P-value less than 0.05 were considered significant.

### Data Protocol
TripleToF 6600 was operated with Analyst TF 1.7.1 software (SCIEX, USA). Peptide and protein identifications were performed with Protein Pilot software (version 5.0.1, Sciex) using a Human specific Uniprot database 2017_01, specifying iodoacetamide as cysteine alkylation. In SWATH analysis, the targeted data extraction of the fragment ion chromatogram traces from the SWATH runs was performed by PeakView (version 2.2) using the SWATH Acquisition MicroApp (version 2.0). The integrated peak areas were directly exported to the MarkerView software (AB SCIEX) for relative quantitative following Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
In blood banks, platelets are stored until 7&#x202f;days after a pathogen reduction technology (PRT) treatment, Mirasol&#xae; (vitamin B<sub>2</sub> plus UVB light) in the present case. The storage time under these conditions may have an impact on platelets and their releasate leading to potential adverse reactions following transfusion to patients. The aim of this study was to analyze the proteome of extracellular vesicles generated by platelets at different storage days (2 and 7) to gain deeper information on the platelet concentrates state at those moments. EVs were isolated by a centrifugation-based approach and characterized by dynamic light scattering and transmission electron microscopy. Proteomic analysis was by LC-MS/MS and quantification by SWATH. In this way, 151 proteins were found up-regulated at day 7 of storage. This group includes CCL5 and Platelet Factor 4, chemokines with power to attract neutrophils and monocytes, which could generate transfusion adverse reactions. In addition, other glycoproteins and platelet activation markers were also found elevated at day 7. Proteins related to glycolysis and lactate production were found altered with high fold changes, showing a deregulation of platelet metabolism at day 7. The obtained results provide novel information about possible effects of platelet-derived EVs on transfusion adverse reactions. SIGNIFICANCE: We performed the first proteomic analysis of extracellular vesicles derived from platelets upon storage at different time points on blood bank conditions after Mirasol&#xae; treatment. We identified a high number of proteins related to platelet activation and platelet storage lesion that could have a role in possible transfusion adverse reactions.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; platelet concentrates; transfusion medicine; swath

### Affiliations
FIDIS

### Submitter
Susana Bravo

### Lab Head
Dr Susana B. Bravo
FIDIS


