### Accession
PXD004863

### Title
Expanding the cerebrospinal fluid endopeptidome

### Description
Biomarkers of neurodegenerative disorders are needed to assist in diagnosis, to monitor disease progression and therapeutic interventions, and to provide insight into disease mechanisms. One route to identify such biomarkers is by proteomic and peptidomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).  In the current study, we performed an in-depth analysis of the human CSF endopeptidome to establish an inventory that may serve as a basis for future targeted biomarker studies. High-pH reversed-phase HPLC was employed for peptide fractionation followed by low-pH nano-LC-MS analysis. Different software programs and scoring algorithms for peptide identification were employed and compared. A total of 18,031 endogenous peptides were identified (FDR = 1%), increasing the number of known CSF peptides 10-fold compared to previous studies. The peptides were derived from 2,053 proteins of which more than 60 have been linked to neurodegeneration. Notably, among the findings were six peptides derived from microtubule-associated protein tau, three of which span the diagnostically interesting threonine-181. Also, 213 peptides from amyloid precursor protein (APP), 58 of which were partially or completely within the sequence of amyloid β 1-40/42, as well as 109 peptides from apolipoprotein E, spanning sequences that discriminate between the E2/E3/E4 isoforms of the protein.

### Sample Protocol
CSF sample preparation – endogenous peptides CSF peptide extracts were prepared according to a previously described protocol (19), modified to accommodate a larger sample volume. Briefly, 1.5 ml aliquots of CSF were thawed at room temperature (RT), vortexed gently, and transferred to 15 ml Falcon tubes. Aliquots of 1 M TEAB (250 µl) and 8 M GuaHCl (750 µl) were added and the samples were vortexed gently. Reduction of protein/peptide disulphides was attained by addition of a solution of 200 mM TCEP (60 µl), 300 mM TEAB (60 µl) followed by 1 h incubation at +55 °C under gentle agitation. The samples were subsequently alkylated by addition of 60 µl 400 mM IAA (aq) followed by 30 min incubation at RT in darkness. The samples were diluted by addition of 2.38 ml water (MilliQ) to a total volume of 5 ml and vortexed. Isolation of endogenous peptides was performed by ultrafiltration using 30 kDa MWCO filter devices. The filters were conditioned by adding a solution of 100 mM TEAB, 3 M Gua-HCl (5 ml) and centrifuging at 2,500 x g for 20 min at RT, discarding the flow-through. The samples were then loaded and centrifuged (2,500 x g for 45 min, RT). To improve recovery, 50 mM AmBic (3 ml) were loaded, spun through (RT, 2,500 x g for 20 min) and pooled with the filtrate.  The sample was acidified (final pH ≈ 3) by titration with 0.1% TFA and subsequently desalted by SPE (SEP-Pak C18), operated using a vacuum chamber. The cartridge was conditioned with 2 x 1 ml 84% AcN, 0.1% TFA, and equilibrated by 2 x 1 ml 0.1% TFA, after which the sample was loaded, washed with 2 x 1 ml 0.1% TFA and subsequently eluted with 1 ml 84% AcN, 0.1% TFA. Finally the eluate solvents were evaporated in a vacuum concentrator and at –80 °C.  Alkaline Reverse-Phase HPLC Separation and Fraction Concatenation HpH-RPLC fractionation was performed according to the method of Bath et al (20) with minor method alterations, using a Ultimate 3000 HPLC system (Thermo) equipped with an integrated fraction collector adapted for 96-well deep well plates. Endogenous peptide extracts (from 1.5 ml CSF) were dissolved in 2.5 mM NH3(aq) and 2% AcN (15 µl), and separated over an XBridge Peptide BEH C18 Column, 130 Å . The mobile phases consisted of (A) pure water; (B) 84% AcN; and (C) 25 mM NH3(aq). Buffer C was made fresh at the start of each trial and kept on ice to minimize NH3(aq) decomposition/evaporation. The LC was operated at a constant flow of 100 µl/min with a constant concentration of 10% Buffer C, and using the following gradient: t (min)=0, %B=2%; t=4, B=2%; t=50, B=90%; t=66, B=90%; t=67, B=2%; t=76, B=2%. Fraction collection was started at t=4 min, collecting 72 one-minute fractions in a cycling pattern over 24 wells in a 96-well deep-well plate, resulting in 3 concatenated fractions per well. The fractions were further concatenated by combining the contents of well 1 and 13, 2 and 14, 3 and 15 etc., resulting in 12 samples, each containing six of the original fractions. The fractions were subsequently split in two aliquots, vacuum concentrated and stored at –80 °C until LC-MS analysis. LC-MS Chromatography was performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Thermo) in trap column configuration (trap column: Acclaim® PepMap 100 (Thermo), 75 µm x 2 cm, C18, 100 Å pore size, 3 µm particle size; separation column: Acclaim® PepMap C18, 75 µm x 500 mm, 100Å pore size, 2 µm particle size). The mobile phases were (A) 0.1% FA and (B) 84% AcN, 0.1% FA. The LC was connected to an Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo) via a FlexiSpray nano-ESI interface (Thermo). Full scan spectra were recorded in MS mode at a resolution setting of 120,000 (2.0e5 AGC target) over the m/z range 350-1400. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode, recording MS/MS spectra from the top ten most intense peaks with m/z > 150 and within the intensity range 1.0e4-1.0e5 were selected for fragment ion analysis. Precursor ions were isolated using a quadrupole isolation window of 3 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was used, with an exclusion time of 15 s and an m/z tolerance of ±10 ppm. Fragmentation was performed in the higher-collision energy dissociation (HCD) cell (29% collision energy) and MS/MS acquisitions were recorded in the orbitrap at a resolution setting of 30,000 (5.0e4 AGC target value). A replicate analysis was performed of each fraction.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification Peptide identification was performed using Mascot v2.4 (Matrix Science), SequestHT (Thermo), and PEAKS Studio v7.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions Inc.). The following settings were used for all three programs unless otherwise specified: database: UniProt_SwissProt [version2015_11]; taxonomy: homo sapiens; enzyme: none (trypsin for digested samples); max. missed cleavages: 0 (endogenous peptides), 2 (tryptic peptides); instrument (Mascot only): ESI-Trap; min. peptide length (SequestHT only): 6; precursor mass tolerance: 15 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.05 Da; static modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C); dynamic modifications: Oxidation (M); peptide-spectrum match (PSM) validator: Target Decoy or Percolator (Mascot and Sequest HT only) or Decoy Fusion (PEAKS only); target FDR: 0.01. Evaluation of the respective capacity of Mascot and Sequest HT to identify peptides from mass spectra was performed by comparing the results from two different scoring functions for PSM-validation; the Percolator algorithm (21, 22) and a regular target decoy (TD) validator (23), both implemented in the software Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo).

### Publication Abstract
Biomarkers of neurodegenerative disorders are needed to assist in diagnosis, to monitor disease progression and therapeutic interventions, and to provide insight into disease mechanisms. One route to identify such biomarkers is by proteomic and peptidomic analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). In the current study, we performed an in-depth analysis of the human CSF endopeptidome to establish an inventory that may serve as a basis for future targeted biomarker studies. High-pH RP HPLC was employed for off-line sample prefractionation followed by low-pH nano-LC-MS analysis. Different software programs and scoring algorithms for peptide identification were employed and compared. A total of 18 031 endogenous peptides were identified at a FDR of 1%, increasing the number of known endogenous CSF peptides 10-fold compared to previous studies. The peptides were derived from 2 053 proteins of which more than 60 have been linked to neurodegeneration. Notably, among the findings were six peptides derived from microtubule-associated protein tau, three of which span the diagnostically interesting threonine-181 (Tau-F isoform). Also, 213 peptides from amyloid precursor protein were identified, 58 of which were partially or completely within the sequence of amyloid &#x3b2; 1-40/42, as well as 109 peptides from apolipoprotein E, spanning sequences that discriminate between the E2/E3/E4 isoforms of the protein.

### Keywords
Alzheimer’s disease, Peptides, Neurodegeneration, Biomarkers, Peptidomics, Cerebrospinal fluid, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Gothenburg University, Dept of Neuroscience and Physiology
- Inst. of Neuroscience and Physiology, Dept. of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden - Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden - Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK

### Submitter
Karl Hansson

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Zetterberg
- Inst. of Neuroscience and Physiology, Dept. of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden - Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden - Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK


