### Accession
PXD003433

### Title
NELF-A phosphorylation site identification

### Description
NELF-A phosphorylation by P-TEFb is a key event in the pausing release. We conduct IMAC-LC-MS-MS to identified NELF-A phosphorylation site by activation P-TEFb kinase.

### Sample Protocol
to identify the phospho-residues of NELF-A protein, HeLa cells expressing Flag-tagged NELF-A (NELF-A-f) were treated with solvent or 10 mM HMBA for 2 hr and subjected to high-salt buffer (0.5 M NaCl) extraction. The anti-Flag affinity purification of NELF-A-f from high-salt extracts and the trypsinization of purified proteins were performed as described above. The enrichment of phosphopeptides was carried out by using IMAC according to an optimized IMAC-IMAC protocol with minor modifications (Wu et al., 2012; Zhong et al., 2014). In brief, the trypsinized peptides were re-dissolved in 1% acetic acid/60% acetonitrile solvent and incubated with 10 L IMAC beads by vigorous shake at room temperature for 1 hr, and then loaded onto a Gel loading tip (Corning). The beads were washed twice with solvent, followed by elution three times with 6% NH3H2O (10 L each). The peptides washed out from tip were reloaded to the IMAC tip for second round binding, washing and eluting. The eluted phosphopeptides were then subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis as described above. The nanoLC MS/MS identified 121 phosphosites on NELF-A. PSMs (Peptide Spectrum Match) for each unique NELF-A peptide were calculated. Three phospho-residues, S374, T288 and T168 were most abundant in spectrum count of 73, 15 and 12 after HMBA treatment.

### Data Protocol
The tandem mass spectra were interpreted using ProteinPilot V4.5 beta against the human Uniprot proteome database (downloaded in June. 22nd, 2011) appended with common contaminants and reversed-sequence decoys  PSMs (Peptide Spectrum Match) for each unique peptide were obtained from the Peptide summary file exported from ProteinPilot software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Imac, Nelf-a, Hela cell

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.
Xiamen University

### Submitter
you li

### Lab Head
Dr Ruichuan Chen
State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, Fujian, China.


