### Accession
PXD020171

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of duck embryo fibroblasts infected with novel duck reovirus

### Description
The novel duck reovirus (NDRV) can cause hemorrhage and necrosis on the spleen of Pekin ducks, this disease has resulted in great economic losses to the duck industry. However, the molecular pathogenesis of NDRV remains poorly understood. In the current study, the quantitative proteomic analysis of NDRV-infected duck embryo fibroblasts was performed to explore the cellular protein changes in response to viral infection through iTRAQ coupled with the LC–MS/MS method. A total of 6,137 proteins were obtained in cell samples at 24 hours post infection. Of these, 179 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified (cutoff set to 1.5-fold change), including 89 upregulated and 90 downregulated proteins. Bioinformatic analysis showed that DEPs can be divided into the cellular component, molecular function, and biological process, they were mainly involved in the signal transduction, infectious diseases, cell growth and death, and the immune system. The subcellular localization of most proteins was cytoplasm. Importantly, the expression of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and various interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) were upregulated after NDRV infection. The mRNA transcripts of some ISGs were consistent with proteomic data, showing an increased trend. Results of our study suggested that NDRV infection can elicit the strong expression changes of cellular proteins, and activate the  expression of ISGs from the point of quantitative proteomic analysis. The study provides a new insight into the understanding of NDRV pathogenesis.

### Sample Protocol
Cells and virus Duck embryo fibroblasts (DEF) were produced using 10-day-old duck embryos in the experiment and were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM) (GIBCO, Grand Island, NY, USA) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (GIBCO) at 37℃, and 5% CO2. The NDRV strain used in this study was isolated from clinically infected duck and stored in our laboratory . The virus was propagated in BHK-21 cells, and the titer was determined to be 2  104.6 tissue culture infectious dose (TCID50)/mL in DEF cells. Virus infection DEF cells were passaged before infection and were seeded in 6-well plates (Corning, Shanghai, China) with 2.5  106 cells per well. The monolayer cells were inoculated with NDRV (2  102.6 TCID50 / well). After incubation for 1 h, the virus solution was removed and the cells were washed with sterile phosphate buffered saline. The DMEM containing 1% serum was added, the cells were maintained at 37°C and 5 % CO2. Negative control cultures were set up identically but incubated with serum-free DMEM. The cells were collected for protein isolation, digestion, and labeling at 24 hours post infection (hpi). Each group included three independent biological replicates. Protein extraction, digestion, and iTRAQ labeling The cells of the infected group and the control group were collected and resuspended in 500 L of lysis buffer (1 mM PMSF, 2 mM EDTA, and 10 mM DTT) and incubated on ice for 5 min. Cell samples were ultrasonicated on ice for 2 min (50 Hz) with cellular debris removed by centrifugation (25, 000  g, 15 min, 4°C). The supernatant containing 10 mM DTT with final concentration of 4% was treated in water baths at 56°C for 1 h. Then the IAM with final concentration of 55 mM was added, and placed in a dark room for 45 min. The protein samples were harvested by centrifugation at 25, 000  g for 20 min at 4°C. The protein concentration of the supernatant was determined with the Bradford method . Solutions containing 100 μg protein were digested for 12 h at 37°C with sequencing-grade trypsin and then labeled with different iTRAQ tags as follows: the three negative samples were each labeled with iTRAQ 118 (IT118), IT119, or IT121; and the three NDRV-infected samples were each labeled with IT115, IT116, or IT117. The labeled samples were incubated at room temperature for 2 h, and then mixed, dried with a rotary vacuum concentrator.  LC–MS/MS analysis The LC-20AB liquid phase system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was used, and the separation column was a 5 μm 4.6  250 mm Gemini C18 column for liquid phase separation of samples. The pumped peptide sample with mobile phase A (5% ACN pH 9.8) were reconstituted and injected, and eluted at a flow rate gradient of 1 mL/min: 5% mobile phase B (95% ACN, pH 9.8) for 10 min, 5% to 35% mobile phase B for 40 min, 35% to 95% mobile phase B for 1 min. The mobile phase B lasted 3 min, and 5% mobile phase B equilibrated for 10 min. The elution peak was monitored at a wavelength of 214 nm and one component was collected every minute. The sample was combined with the chromatographic elution peak to obtain 20 components, and then freeze-dried.The dried peptide sample was reconstituted with mobile phase A (2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and centrifuged at 20,000  g for 10 min, and the supernatant was injected. Separation was performed by UltiMate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The sample first entered a trap column for enrichment and desalting, and was then connected in series with a self-packed C18 column (75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm column > particle size, 25 μm column length) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nl/min through the following effective gradient: 0 – 5 min and 5% mobile phase B (98% ACN, 0.1% FA) 5 – 45 min. The mobile phase B linearly increased from 5% to 25%, 45 – 50 min, the mobile phase B increased from 25% to 35%, 50 – 52 min, the mobile phase B increased from 35% to 80%, 52 – 54 min, the 80% mobile phase B; 54 – 60 min, 5% mobile phase B. The nanoliter liquid separation end was directly connected to the mass spectrometer. The peptides separated by the liquid phase were ionized by the nanoESI source and entered the tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive HF X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) for data-dependent acquisition mode detection. Main parameter settings: the ion source voltage was set to 1.9 kV, the scanning range of the primary spectrum was 350 – 1500 m/z, the resolution was set to 60,000, the starting m/z of the secondary spectrum was fixed to 100, the resolution was 15,000. The screening conditions for the second-stage fragmented precursor ions were charge 2 + to 6 +, and peak intensities exceeding 10,000 were ranked in the top 20 precursor ions. The ion fragmentation mode was HCD, and the fragment ions were detected in Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. The AGC was set to: level 1 3E6, level 2 1E5.

### Data Protocol
In the Gene Ontology (GO) analysis (http://www.geneontology.org/), by comparing the identified proteins with the NR database (RefSeq non-redundant proteins), the corresponding GO functional classification was obtained. Pathway classification is to directly compare the identified protein sequences with the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database through Blast software (http://www.genome.jp/kegg) to obtain corresponding annotation information and complete pathway classification results. WoLF PSORT (https://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html) is used to predict protein subcellular localization of eukaryotes.

### Publication Abstract
The novel duck reovirus (NDRV) can cause hemorrhage and necrosis on the spleen of Pekin ducks; this disease has resulted in great economic losses to the duck industry. However, the molecular pathogenesis of NDRV remains poorly understood. In the current study, the quantitative proteomic analysis of NDRV-infected duck embryo fibroblasts was performed to explore the cellular protein changes in response to viral infection through iTRAQ coupled with the liquid chromatography (LC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) method. A total of 6,137 proteins were obtained in cell samples at 24 h post-infection. Of these, 179 differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified (cutoff set to 1.5-fold change), including 89 upregulated and 90 downregulated proteins. Bioinformatics analysis showed that DEPs can be divided into the cellular component, molecular function, and biological process; they were mainly involved in signal transduction, infectious diseases, cell growth and death, and the immune system. The subcellular localization of most proteins was in the cytoplasm. Importantly, the expressions of signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) and various interferon-stimulated genes (ISGs) were upregulated after NDRV infection. The mRNA transcripts of some ISGs were consistent with proteomic data, showing an increased trend. Results of our study suggested that NDRV infection can elicit strong expression changes of cellular proteins and activate the expression of ISGs from the point of quantitative proteomic analysis. The study provides a new insight into the understanding of NDRV pathogenesis.

### Keywords
Interferon-stimulated genes, Novel duck reovirus, Proteomic analysis, Itraq, Cellular response

### Affiliations
Animal Clinical Pathology, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University,Shandong Province, China
the first author 

### Submitter
yudong yang

### Lab Head
Dr Ning Li
Animal Clinical Pathology, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shandong Agricultural University,Shandong Province, China


