### Accession
PXD036038

### Title
Interactome of the long non-protein coding RNA (lncRNA) D4Z4 binding element-transcript (DBE-T)

### Description
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (FSHD) is an inherited progressive neuromuscular disorder that afflicts both children and adults regardless of gender. FSHD is caused by aberrant gain of expression of the transcription factor DUX4, which triggers a pro-apoptotic transcriptional program leading to muscle wasting. As today, no cure or therapeutic option is available to FSHD patients. Given its centrality in FSHD, blocking DUX4 expression with small molecule drugs is an attractive option. We previously showed that the long non-coding RNA DBE-T is required for aberrant DUX4 expression in FSHD. Using affinity purification followed by proteomics, we identified the chromatin remodeling protein WDR5 as a novel DBE-T interactor and a key player required for the biological activity of the lncRNA. We found that WDR5 is required for the expression of DUX4 and its targets in primary FSHD muscle cells. Moreover, targeting WDR5 rescues both cell viability and myogenic differentiation of FSHD patient cells. Notably, comparable results were obtained by pharmacological inhibition of WDR5. Importantly, WDR5 targeting was safe to healthy donor muscle cells. Our results support a pivotal role of WDR5 in the activation of DUX4 expression identifying a druggable target for an innovative therapeutic approach for FSHD.

### Sample Protocol
To test whether DBE-T recruitment to a target gene is sufficient for its activation, we took advantage of the Gal4-λN-BoxB targeting system. This system allows an RNA of interest to be recruited upstream of the luciferase gene by GAL4-λN. HeLa cells were co-transfected with the luciferase and the GAL4-λN plasmids in combination with the BoxB-DBE-T, BoxB-LacZ or empty vector plasmids. In this setting, BoxB-DBE-T strongly promoted the expression of the luciferase reporter, while no activation was observed in the presence of BoxB-LacZ or the empty vector.  To determine if there is a DBE-T region mainly responsible for gene activation, we divided it in seven fragments of similar size that were all fused to BoxB. Interestingly, only BoxB-Frag.3 was able to significantly activate the reporter gene expression. We hence hypothesized that one or more protein factors associate to DBE-T Frag.3 to mediate gene activation. To isolate them, we established a new RNA-targeting system coupled with proximity-dependent biotinylation to identify RNA–protein interactions in intact cells. The system relies on the activity of the two previously described bacterial enzymes, Csy4* and BirA*. Csy4* is a mutant of the CsyA endonuclease part of the CRISPR (clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats) system and stably binds to transcripts carrying a 16-nt Csy4 hairpin RNA-tag with very high affinity and specificity. BirA* is a mutant of the BirA protein biotin ligase that biotinylates proteins in a proximity-dependent manner. A fusion protein BirA*-Csy4* would be able to biotinylate proteins associated to a transcript of interest fused to the Csy4 RNA-tag. To this aim, we generated HEK293-Flp-In cells that expressed, upon doxycycline administration, the BirA*-Csy4* fusion protein. The cells correctly expressed the enzymes only in the presence of doxycycline and biotinylated proteins once biotin was provided into the medium. Nevertheless, BirA*-Csy4* localized both to the cytoplasmic and nuclear compartments. Since DBE-T is nuclear restricted, we produced HEK293-Flp-In cells expressing a BirA*-Csy4* version carrying the SV40 nuclear localization sequence (NLS) at its N-terminus. In this case, NLS-BirA*-Csy4* was correctly biotinylating proteins and exclusively localized in the nucleus. We then expressed in these cells Csy4 hairpin tagged DBE-T Frag.3 (Csy4-Frag.3), the antisense of Frag.3 (Csy4-Frag.3 As) or just the Csy4 tag.  For each construct, 1x 10cm dish of Flp-In T-REx HEK293 BirA/FLAG/NLS/Csy4 cells treated with doxycycline 1μg/mL for 24h and biotin 50μM for 24h was used. The cell pellet was resuspended in 500μL IP-buffer (50mM Tris-HCl pH 7,5; 1% NP-40; 5mM EDTA; 5mM EGTA; protease inhibitors) with 750mM NaCl and incubated 15min on ice. Afterwards, the NaCl concentration was reduced to 150mM using IP-buffer without NaCl. The extracts were passed through a 5mL syringe 21G needle 6x times and digested with 100U of benzonase, while rocking on a wheel for 20min at 37°C, to disrupt DNA. The samples were then centrifuged at 16,000g for 20min at 4°C and the protein content was measured using a Bradford assay. Next, 5mg of proteins were incubated with 40μL STREP-T-actin beads (Sigma, #GE28-9355-99) in IP-buffer while rocking for 2h at 4°C. Then the beads were washed 3x in IP-buffer and 2x in IP-buffer without NP-40 and protease inhibitors. Proteins were eluted with 50μL 2.5mM biotin in IP-buffer without inhibitors and NP-40 for 1h at 4°C shaking at 1100rpm. The biotin elution was complemented with 50μL of 2% SDS in 50 mM Tris HCl pH 7.4, boiled at 95°C for 5min. Proteins were reduced with Dithiothreitol, alkylated with Iodocetamide and digested with sequencing grade Trypsin (MERCK). Tryptic peptides were desalted using StageTip C18 (Thermo Scientific) and analyzed by nLC-MS/MS using a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems) and a nanoUPLC Easy nLC 1000 (Proxeon Biosystems). Peptide separations occurred on a homemade (75 µm i.d., 12 cm long) reverse phase silica capillary column, packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). A gradient of eluents A (water with 0.1% v/v formic acid) and B (acetonitrile with 0.1% v/v formic acid) was used to achieve separation (300 nL/min flow rate), from 0% B to 45% B in 45 minutes for the first biological replicates; from 5% B to 50% B in 88 minutes for the second biological replicates. Full scan spectra were acquired with the lock-mass option, resolution set to 70,000 and mass range m/z from 380 to 1800 for the first biological replicates; from 300 to 2000 for the second biological replicates. The ten most intense doubly and triply charged ions were selected and fragmented.

### Data Protocol
To quantify proteins, the raw data were loaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.6.1.0 to search the human_proteome 20220525 (101,676 sequences; 41,413,969 residues). Searches were performed with the following settings: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme; 5 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation on cysteine as fixed modification; protein N-terminus-acetylation, methionine oxidation as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were accepted with a FDR lower than 1%. Label-free protein quantification was based on the spectral counts considering only proteins identified with a minimum two peptides of which one must be unique.  Specific interactors have been defined as those proteins reproducibly identified in all the biological replicates in association with the DBE-T RNA fragments and never or with at least a 2 fold-enrichment compared to the control RNA. The Csy4-Frag.3 interactome was then filtered using the proteins present in the Csy4-empty vector or Csy4-Frag.3 As purifications. We retained only proteins that were at least 2-fold enriched in the Csy4-Frag.3 compared to both negative controls interactomes, thus resulting in 13 Csy4-Frag.3 specifically associated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy (fshd), Long non-protein coding rna, Affinity proteomics

### Affiliations
Ospedale San Raffaele
Gene Expression and Muscular Dystrophy Unit, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Annapaola Andolfo

### Lab Head
Dr Davide Gabellini
Gene Expression and Muscular Dystrophy Unit, Division of Genetics and Cell Biology, IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy


