### Accession
PXD043387

### Title
HEATR5B associates with dynein-dynactin and selectively promotes motility of AP1- bound endosomal membranes_BioMass@LMB

### Description
The dynein motor complex mediates polarised trafficking of a wide variety of organelles,  intracellular vesicles and macromolecules. These functions are dependent on the dynactin  5 complex, which helps recruit cargoes to dynein’s tail region and activates motor movement.  How dynein and dynactin orchestrate trafficking of diverse cargoes is unclear. Here, we  identify HEATR5B, an interactor of the AP1 clathrin adaptor complex, as a novel player in  dynein-dynactin function. HEATR5B is one of several proteins recovered in a biochemical  screen for proteins whose association with the human dynein tail complex is augmented by  10 dynactin. We show that HEATR5B binds directly to the dynein tail and dynactin and stimulates  motility of AP1-associated endosomal membranes in human cells. We also demonstrate that  the HEATR5B homologue in Drosophila is an essential gene that promotes dynein-based  transport of AP1-bound membranes to the Golgi apparatus. As HEATR5B lacks the coiledcoil architecture typical of dynein adaptors, our data point to a non-canonical process  15 orchestrating motor function on a specific cargo. We additionally show that HEATR5B  promotes association of AP1 with endosomal membranes in a dynein-independent manner.  Thus, HEATR5B co-ordinates multiple events in AP1-based trafficking.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were digested on beads with 1 μg trypsin (Promega) for 18 h at 37°C, followed by acidification of peptides with 2% (v/v) formic acid. The bead/peptide mix was then centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 5 min and the supernatant collected. The peptide fractions (7 μL each) were analysed by nano-scale capillary LC-MS/MS with an Ultimate U3000 HPLC (ThermoScientific 670 Dionex) with a 300 nL/min flow rate. Peptides were trapped in a C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 µ precolumn cartridge (5 µm, 300 µm x 5mm (ThermoScientific Dionex)) prior to separation on a C18 Acclaim PepMap 100 (3 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm (ThermoScientific Dionex)) and elution with a 90-min gradient of acetonitrile (from 5% to 40%). Using a modified nano-flow electrospray ionisation source, the analytical column outlet was directly interfaced with a hybrid linear quadrupole ion trap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap QExactive (ThermoScientific)). Data-dependent analysis was carried out with a resolution of 60,000 for the full MS spectrum (collected over a 200–1800 m/z range), followed by ten MS/MS spectra in the linear ion trap (collected using 35-threshold energy for collision-induced dissociation).

### Data Protocol
Raw mass-spectrometry data from pull-down samples were processed with MaxQuant software (versions 1.5.6.2; (Tyanova et al., 2016a)) using the built-in Andromeda engine to search against the UniprotKB mouse proteome (Mus musculus; release 2012_02) containing forward and reverse sequences. The iBAQ algorithm and “Match Between Runs” option were additionally used. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-acetylation were set as variable modifications (using an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor ion and 0.5 Da for the fragment ions). For peptide and protein identifications, search results were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01. Datasets were further processed with Perseus software (version 1.6.13.0; (Tyanova et al., 2016b)). Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database, as well as common contaminants. Only proteins identified on the basis of at least two peptides and a minimum of three quantification events in at least one experimental group were taken forward. iBAQ intensity values were normalised against the median intensity of each sample (using only those peptides that had intensity values recorded across all samples and biological 695 replicates), followed by log2-transformation and filling of missing values by imputation with random numbers drawn from a normal distribution calculated for each sample, as previously described (Neufeldt et al., 2019; Plaszczyca et al., 2019). Proteins that were significantly enriched between pairs of datasets were identified with Welch’s t-tests with permutation-based false discovery rate statistics. We performed 250 permutations and the 700 FDR threshold was set at 0.05. The parameter S0 was set at 0.1 to separate background from specifically enriched interactors. Volcano plots of results were generated in Perseus. UniprotKB accession codes of all protein groups and proteins identified by mass spectrometry are provided in Supplementary datasets 1 – 4

### Publication Abstract
The microtubule motor dynein mediates polarised trafficking of a wide variety of organelles, vesicles and macromolecules. These functions are dependent on the dynactin complex, which helps recruit cargoes to dynein's tail and activates motor movement. How the dynein-dynactin complex orchestrates trafficking of diverse cargoes is unclear. Here, we identify HEATR5B, an interactor of the adaptor protein-1 (AP1) clathrin adaptor complex, as a novel player in dynein-dynactin function. HEATR5B was recovered in a biochemical screen for proteins whose association with the dynein tail is augmented by dynactin. We show that HEATR5B binds directly to the dynein tail and dynactin and stimulates motility of AP1-associated endosomal membranes in human cells. We also demonstrate that the Drosophila HEATR5B homologue is an essential gene that selectively promotes dynein-based transport of AP1-bound membranes to the Golgi apparatus. As HEATR5B lacks the coiled-coil architecture typical of dynein adaptors, our data point to a non-canonical process orchestrating motor function on a specific cargo. We additionally show that HEATR5B promotes association of AP1 with endosomal membranes independently of dynein. Thus, HEATR5B co-ordinates multiple events in AP1-based trafficking.

### Keywords
Dynactin, Dynein motor complex

### Affiliations
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology
Division of Cell Biology, Medical Research Council (MRC) Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK

### Submitter
Catarina Franco

### Lab Head
Dr Simon L.
Division of Cell Biology, Medical Research Council (MRC) Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK


