### Accession
PXD034931

### Title
The small proteome of the nitrogen-fixing plant symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti

### Description
The Alphaproteobacterium Sinorhizobium meliloti lives in soil and is capable of fixing molecular nitrogen in symbiosis with legume plants. In this work, the small proteome of S. meliloti strain 2011 was studied to uncover translation of both annotated and novel small open reading frame (sORF)-encoded proteins (SEPs).

### Sample Protocol
For mass spectrometry analysis, cells of 1.5 l of a S. meliloti culture (OD600nm 0.5) were harvested by centrifugation at 6,000 rpm and 4°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in 30 ml buffer containing 20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, and 1 mM DTT. After lysis by sonication and centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 30 min at 4°C, the cleared lysates were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. To generate a more comprehensive small protein dataset, three complementary approaches were used for sample preparation: 1) tryptic in-solution digest of all proteins in the sample, 2) solid phase enrichment (SPE) of small proteins without any subsequent digestion, 3) SPE of small proteins with subsequent digestion using Lys-C. Sample preparation was performed as described previously (3) with some modifications. Briefly, samples for tryptic in-solution digests were reduced and alkylated before trypsin was added in an enzyme to protein ratio of 1:100 and samples were incubated at 37 °C for 14 h. The digest was stopped by acidifying the mixture with HCl. For SPE, samples were loaded on an equilibrated column packed with an 8.5 nm pore size, modified styrene-divinylbenzene resin (8B-S100-AAK, Phenomenex), which was then washed to remove larger proteins. The enriched small protein fraction was eluted with 70% (v/v) acetonitrile and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge. The SPE samples were either directly used for mass spectrometry or were subsequently in-solution digested as described above but with Lys-C instead of trypsin. Samples were loaded on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo-Fisher Scientific) equipped with an in-house built 20 cm reversed-phase column packed with 3 µm Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ (Dr. Maisch) and an integrated emitter tip. Peptides were eluted by a 156 min non-linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% v/v acetic acid in acetonitrile) and injected online in an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). The survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap (300 – 1700 Th; 60,000 resolution at m/z 400; 1 x 1e6 predictive automatic gain control target; activated lock mass correction). After collision-induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 35, fragment spectra were recorded in the LTQ (mass range dependent on precursor m/z; 3 x 1e4 predictive automatic gain control) for the 20 most abundant ions. Fragmented ions were dynamically excluded from fragmentation for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Database searches were performed with Sorcerer-SEQUEST 4 (Sage-N Research, Milpitas, USA) allowing two missed cleavages for samples derived from tryptic in solution digest or LysC digested SPE samples, and on non-specified enzymes for SPE samples without proteolytic digest. No fixed modifications were considered and oxidation of methionine was considered as variable modification. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and the mass tolerance for fragment ions to 1.0 Da. Validation of MS/MS-based peptide and protein identification was performed with Scaffold V4.8.7 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA), and peptide identifications were accepted if they exhibited at least deltaCn scores of greater than 0.1 and XCorr scores of greater than 2.2, 3.3 and 3.75 for doubly, triply and all higher charged peptides, respectively. Identifications for proteins >15 kDa were only accepted if at least 2 unique peptides were identified. Proteins that contained ambiguous, non unique peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony (Sorcerer-SEQUEST). Identifications for annotated proteins <15 kDa were accepted if at least one unique peptide was identified with at least two PSMs. To identify novel proteins, more peptide spectrum match (PSM) evidence was required from less credible prediction sources as described before (Varadarajan, Goetze, et al. 2020; Varadarajan, Allan, et al. 2020), i.e., 3 PSMs for ab initio predictions and 4 PSMs from in silico predictions (here, we also allowed in silico candidates with 3 PSMs if 1 PSM was observed in each of the three replicates). Application of these filter criteria kept the protein FDR below 0.65%. To facilitate comparison with Ribo-Seq and Western Blot data, all SEPs were kept in the final results table even if they did not meet the PSM filter.  The Western blot analysis of tagged known and novel SEPs showed that proteomics-identified SEPs can be confirmed despite being identified with only a single PSM. Similar to RefSeq annotated proteins, novel SEPs longer than 150 aa required two unique peptides (but were not the focus of this study).

### Publication Abstract
The soil-dwelling plant symbiont <i>Sinorhizobium meliloti</i> is a major model organism of Alphaproteobacteria. Despite numerous detailed OMICS studies, information about small open reading frame (sORF)-encoded proteins (SEPs) is largely missing, because sORFs are poorly annotated and SEPs are hard to detect experimentally. However, given that SEPs can fulfill important functions, identification of translated sORFs is critical for analyzing their roles in bacterial physiology. Ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) can detect translated sORFs with high sensitivity, but is not yet routinely applied to bacteria because it must be adapted for each species. Here, we established a Ribo-seq procedure for <i>S. meliloti</i> 2011 based on RNase I digestion and detected translation for 60% of the annotated coding sequences during growth in minimal medium. Using ORF prediction tools based on Ribo-seq data, subsequent filtering, and manual curation, the translation of 37 non-annotated sORFs with &#x2264; 70 amino acids was predicted with confidence. The Ribo-seq data were supplemented by mass spectrometry (MS) analyses from three sample preparation approaches and two integrated proteogenomic search database (iPtgxDB) types. Searches against standard and 20-fold smaller Ribo-seq data-informed custom iPtgxDBs confirmed 47 annotated SEPs and identified 11 additional novel SEPs. Epitope tagging and Western blot analysis confirmed the translation of 15 out of 20 SEPs selected from the translatome map. Overall, by combining MS and Ribo-seq approaches, the small proteome of <i>S. meliloti</i> was substantially expanded by 48 novel SEPs. Several of them are part of predicted operons and/or are conserved from <i>Rhizobiaceae</i> to Bacteria, suggesting important physiological functions.

### Keywords
Rhizobia, Proteogenomics, Small proteins, Proteomics, Sorf, Ribosome profiling

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
Institute of Microbiology, University of Greifswald, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


