### Accession
PXD036178

### Title
Proteomics analysis of stool samples from preterm neonates with mass spectrometry for predicting necrotizing enterocolitis

### Description
This study aimed to investigate the potential of fecal proteomics signatures for NEC prediction. Stools were collected from NEC infants up to 10 days before their diagnosis and matched with those from non-NEC controls for three tested periods. Stool samples were analyzed with liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using SWATH acquisition and a cross-compatible proteomic software platform to perform label-free quantification. ROC curves and principal component analysis were used to explore discriminating information provided by potential markers and sets of markers were evaluated with classical clustering and classification methods to evaluate their capacity to sort the samples giving to their actual outcomes. We identified a specific series of markers that predicted all NEC from non-NEC infants at least a week in advance. Our study shows that multiplexed proteomic signature detection constitutes a favorable approach for the early detection of NEC.

### Sample Protocol
The stools of 7 very low birth weight preterm infants were collected up to 10 days before NEC diagnosis and matched with 7 pairs of non-NEC controls and grouped according to three tested periods (group A: -10 to -7, group B: -6 to -3, and group C: -2 to 0 days before diagnosis) for a total of 42 individual samples. For the 42 individual sample preparation, 40 ug of protein in 100ul of 50 mM Tris buffer pH 8.0 was reduced (DDT), alkylated (iodoacetamide), and quenched (DDT), before being recovered by precipitation with centrifugation in cold acetone, then washed with cold methanol and digested o/n with 100 μl of 50 mM Tris buffer pH 8 using 1.4 μg total per sample of a proteolytic mix Trypsin/Lys-C, MS Grade. Cleaning and recovery of the peptides were done with a reversed-phase Strata-X polymeric SPE sorbents column (Phenomenex) according to the manufacturer's instructions. The 42 individual samples were analyzed in SWATH/DIA mode using a reversed-phase Kinetex XB column and an ABSciex TripleTOF 6600 LC-MS/MS system.  To generate an ion library, extracted proteins from a representative pool of samples (3 NEC and 2 non-NEC, covering the 3 tested periods) were separated on a 4%-20% polyacrylamide gel. Proteins were separated in fractions and then reduced, alkylated, and digested in the gel. The acquisition of the 12 gel fractions of the pool of samples was performed in Data-Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode on the same LC-MS/MS system.

### Data Protocol
We used a cross-compatible hybrid strategy combining the FragPipe Graphical User Interface (GUI; v17.1; https://fragpipe.nesvilab.org/) proteomics platform (integrate MSFragger v3.4, Philosopher v4.1.1, and EasyPQP v0.1.27) for the pre-analysis of the data and to create a list of protein targets from preliminary libraries, and DIA-NN (GUI; v1.8) to generate the reference spectral library from this list and for the quantification of the proteins. To produce MS data format compatible with FragPipe and DIA-NN, Sciex DDA and SWATH .wiff files were converted to .mzML format with MSConvert (GUI) from ProteoWizard (v3.0.22074) using “Peak Picking” filter with “Vendor” algorithm. The .mzML from SWATH data were further converted to pseudo-MS/MS spectra .mzML files using DIA-Umpire in MSConvert. Three preliminary spectral libraries were built from FragPipe using 5% FDR to filter the results: (1) from the DDA data, (2) one of the SWATH pseudo-MS/MS data, and (3) one from the DDA and the SWATH pseudo-MS/MS data concurrently. These libraries filtered to remove the duplicates counted a total of 1087 protein UniProtKB IDs entries and 1044 unique proteins (isoforms IDs of the same protein count as one protein). Two proteins of interest were added to this list and the “retrieve/ID mapping tool” from Uniprot.org (https://www.uniprot.org/id-mapping) has been used to create a FASTA file containing the 1089 protein targets and their amino acid sequence. DIA signal extraction for label-free quantification was conducted with DIANN. (4) The reference spectral library was built with DIA-NN using the 1089 protein target database .fasta file as reference. First, an in-silico-predicted spectral library was created from the sequence database with the FASTA digest library-free search/generation and deep learning based-prediction mode enabled. This library was used to analyze the 42 individual .mzML files of the SWATH runs. Match between runs (MBR) to create a new library from the SWATH data and reanalyze the data from this library was enabled (precursor set to 1%). Other settings were 6 – 42 for precursor length, 1 missed cleavage, 1 – 4 charge, and methionine oxidation set as variable modification and carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, as well as the “remove likely interference” and “reannotate” option, and the human proteome reviewed database used as the reference .fasta file with protein inference set to genes.  From the output pg_matrix file, only protein groups with less than 10% missing values were kept for statistical analysis with GraphPad Prism (Prism v9.3.1; GraphPad Software, Inc) or IBM SPSS Statistics (SPSS v28.0.1.1; IBM).

### Publication Abstract
Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) is a life-threatening condition for premature infants in neonatal intensive care units. Finding indicators that can predict NEC development before symptoms appear would provide more time to apply targeted interventions. In this study, stools from 132 very-low-birth-weight (VLBW) infants were collected daily in the context of a multi-center prospective study aimed at investigating the potential of fecal biomarkers for NEC prediction using proteomics technology. Eight of the VLBW infants received a stage-3 NEC diagnosis. Stools collected from the NEC infants up to 10 days before their diagnosis were available for seven of them. Their samples were matched with those from seven pairs of non-NEC controls. The samples were processed for liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analysis using SWATH/DIA acquisition and cross-compatible proteomic software to perform label-free quantification. ROC curve and principal component analyses were used to explore discriminating information and to evaluate candidate protein markers. A series of 36 proteins showed the most efficient capacity with a signature that predicted all seven NEC infants at least a week in advance. Overall, our study demonstrates that multiplexed proteomic signature detection constitutes a promising approach for the early detection of NEC development in premature infants.

### Keywords
Dda, Neonates, Intestines, Stool, Necrotizing enterocolitis, Preterm infants, Proteomics, Swath, Biomarkers, Diagnosis, Detection, Mass spectrometry, Dia, Proteomic signature

### Affiliations
Département d'immunologie et de biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke
Departement d'immunologie et de biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke

### Submitter
David Gagne

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-François Beaulieu
Département d'immunologie et de biologie cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de la santé, Université de Sherbrooke


