### Accession
PXD004076

### Title
Spatiotemporal proteomic profiling of human cerebral development

### Description
We utilize a rapid shotgun LFQ MS method to profile four regions of developing human cerebrum. Regions encompass neural precursor rich ventricular zone, intermediate, subplate and cortex regions across human development from gestational week 16-36 and postnatal week 41 and adult brain tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed using rapigest, an MS-compatible lysis reagent. Following sonication and incubation of samples at 95 degrees and 80 degrees for 1.5 hours samples were digested with trypsin and injected using microplate autosampler onto a C18 trap column using the EASY-nLC1000 system.

### Data Protocol
RAW Xcalibur MS spectra files were searched in MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) against the Human SpissProt database (January 2015 release).

### Publication Abstract
Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis of human post-mortem central nervous system (CNS) tissue and induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC)-based directed differentiations offer complementary avenues to define protein signatures of neurodevelopment. Methodological improvements of formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) protein isolation now enable widespread proteomic analysis of well-annotated archival tissue samples in the context of development and disease. Here, we utilize a shotgun label-free quantification (LFQ) MS method to profile magnetically enriched human cortical neurons and neural progenitor cells (NPCs) derived from iPSCs. We use these signatures to help define spatiotemporal protein dynamics of developing human FFPE cerebral regions. We show that the use of high resolution Q Exactive mass spectrometers now allow simultaneous quantification of &gt;2700 proteins in a single LFQ experiment and provide sufficient coverage to define novel biomarkers and signatures of NPC maintenance and differentiation. Importantly, we show that this abbreviated strategy allows efficient recovery of novel cytoplasmic, membrane-specific and synaptic proteins that are shared between both <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> neuronal differentiation. This study highlights the discovery potential of non-comprehensive high-throughput proteomic profiling of unfractionated clinically well-annotated FFPE human tissue from a diverse array of development and diseased states.

### Keywords
Shotgun lc-msms, Human ffpe tissue, Neurodevelopment

### Affiliations
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
Mt. Sinai Hospital

### Submitter
Ugljesa Djuric

### Lab Head
Dr Eleftherios Diamandis
Mount Sinai Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


