### Accession
PXD024088

### Title
Neddylation modification on cGAS of human and mouse

### Description
The cytosolic DNA sensor cyclic GMP-AMP (cGAMP) synthetase (cGAS) has emerged as a fundamental component fueling the anti-pathogen immunity. Because of its pivotal role in initiating innate immune response, the activity of cGAS must be tightly fine-tuned to maintain immune homeostasis in antiviral response. Here, we reported that neddylation modification was indispensable for appropriate cGAS-STING signaling activation. Blocking neddylation pathway using neddylation inhibitor MLN4924 substantially impaired the induction of type I interferon and proinflammatory cytokines, which was selectively dependent on Nedd8 E2 enzyme Ube2m. We further found that deficiency of the Nedd8 E3 ligase Rnf111 greatly attenuated DNA-triggered cGAS activation while not affecting cGAMP induced activation of STING, demonstrating that Rnf111 was the Nedd8 E3 ligase of cGAS. We further identified Lys231 and Lys421 as the key neddylation sites in human cGAS. Mechanistically, Rnf111 interacted with and polyneddylated cGAS, which in turn promoted its dimerization and enhanced the DNA-binding ability, leading to proper cGAS-STING pathway activation. In the same line, the Ube2m or Rnf111 deficiency mice exhibited severe defects in innate immune response and were susceptible to HSV-1 infection. Collectively, our study uncovered a vital role of the Ube2m-Rnf111 neddylation axis in promoting the activity of the cGAS-STING pathway and highlighted the importance of neddylation modification in antiviral defense.

### Sample Protocol
The stained protein band was cut, volume of the cut gel is 0.5-1 mm3. The cut gel was destained by 50% acetonitrile (ACN) in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and dehydrated upon washing with 100% ACN till the gel turned white. Proteins in gel were treated with 1000 μL 10 mM DTT for 40 min at 56°C and subsequently alkylated with 1000 μL 50mM IAM for 30 min in the dark. The gel was then washed by destained buffer and treated with ACN as above. 10-20 μL 10 ng/μL trypsin was added into gel and incubation for 30 min on ice, then made up to 100 μL with 100 mM TEAB, proteins were digested overnight at 37°C. After centrifugation in low speed, the supernatant was collected and remaining peptides were extracted in 100 μL of 0.1% formic acid (FA). Combined the two supernatant and centrifuged at 12000 g for 5 min at room temperature. The supernatant was slowly loaded to the C18 desalting column, washed with 1 mL of washing solution (0.1% formic acid, 4% acetonitrile) 3 times, then eluted twice by 0.4 mL of elution buffer (0.1% formic acid, 75% acetonitrile). The eluents were combined and lyophilized. Mobile phase A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) and B solution (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) were prepared. The lyophilized powder was dissolved in 10 μL of solution A, centrifuged at 15,000 rpm for 20 min at 4°C, and 1 μg of sample was injected into a home-made C18 Nano-Trap column (2 cm×75 μm, 3 μm). Peptides were separated in a home-made analytical column (15 cm×150 μm, 1.9 μm), using a linear gradient elution as listed in Table 1. The separated peptides were analyzed by Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher), with ion source of Nanospray FlexTM(ESI), spray voltage of 2.3 kV and ion transport capillary temperature of 320°C. Full scan range from m/z 350 to 1500 with resolution of 60000 (at m/z 200), an automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 3×106 and a maximum ion injection time was 20 ms. The top 20 precursors of the highest abundant in the full scan were selected and fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and analyzed in MS/MS, where resolution was 15000 (at m/z 200), the automatic gain control (AGC) target value was 1×105, the maximum ion injection time was 45 ms, a normalized collision energy was set as 27%, an intensity threshold was 2.2×104, and the dynamic exclusion parameter was 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against human and mouse refseq database by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 2.2 (PD 2.2, Thermo). The search parameters are set as follows: mass tolerance for precursor ion was 10 ppm and mass tolerance for product ion was 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl was specified in PD 2.2 as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine (M) and acetylation of the N-terminus were specified in PD 2.2 as variable modifications. A maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites were allowed. The identified protein contains at least 1 unique peptide with FDR no more than 1.0%. Proteins containing similar peptides that could not be distinguished by MS/MS analysis were identified as a same protein group.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Mouse, Cgas, Neddylation

### Affiliations
China  Pharmaceutical  University

### Submitter
Haiyang Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Haiyang Hu
China  Pharmaceutical  University


