### Accession
PXD034900

### Title
Impact of immunoproteasome impairment on microglia cell function

### Description
The ubiquitin-proteasome system maintains the functional proteome of the cells by the clearance of damaged, misfolded, old and/or unneeded proteins. This is particularly important in the brain where protein accumulation has a hallmark of many neurodegenerative diseases that drives neuroinflammation. Microglia are the resident immune cells of the central nervous system and play a major role in the regulation of brain homeostasis via constitutive expression of standard proteasomes and immunoproteasomes (IP). Nevertheless, the impact of IP function on the innate immunity of CNS is not well described. Here, we analyzed ubiquitylated proteins in IP deficient microglia upon enrichment and under different conditions to identify the proteins preferentially degraded by the IP and to investigate the impact of the accumulation of these proteins on microglia function.

### Sample Protocol
Primary microglia were isolated from wild-type and β5i/LMP7 knockout C57BL/6 mice and, were cultured in 3.5cm dishes pre-coated with 50μg/mL poly-L-lysine solution (Millipore) and with Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (PAN Biotech) supplemented with 10% FBS (PAN Biotech), 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 μg/mL streptomycin (PAN Biotech), and glucose 40% (B. Braun Mini-Plasco R connect) at the final concentration of 4,500 mg/L. Cells were cultured at 37oC, 95% humidity, and 5% CO2. Primary microglia were either treated with 50nM water-soluble pan-proteasome inhibitor bortezomib (BTZ) (Velcade, Takeda Oncology) for 8h or stimulated with water-soluble 1µg/mL toll-like receptor 4 ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (InvivoGen) for 8h. Cells were harvested, snap-frozen and kept at -80oC for further analysis. Wild-type and β5i/LMP7 knockout primary microglia cell pellets were resuspended in TSDG buffer (10mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 25mM KCl, 10mM NaCl, 1mM MgCl2, 0,1mM EDTA, 10% (v/v) glycerol, 1mM DTT, 10mM NEM, 10μM MG132) and lysed by four cycles of freezing and thawing using liquid nitrogen and ambient water. Endogenous ubiquitylated proteins were isolated using the Ubi-Qapture-Q kit (Enzo Life Sciences) as described by the manufacturer. For MS analysis, lysates were processed following the SP3 protocol (single pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation) using hydrophobic and hydrophilic Sera-Mag SpeedBeadsTM (Cytiva). Four µg protein of each sample was reduced (DTT) and alkylated (iodoacetamide) before digestion with trypsin at a protein to enzyme ratio 25:1 (37oC, 16 h). Peptides mixtures were separated on a LTQ Orbitrab Velos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to nano-Acquity UPLC (Waters Corp) and controlled by Xcalibur software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in a 93 min nonlinear gradient ranging from 2 to 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min. The detection was carried out in DDA mode selecting TOP 20 precursor ions for CID fragmentation per cycle at an exclusion time of 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by searching a UniProt/SwissProt database (v. 2020_04) with a restriction to mouse entries using the Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software. A protein FDR of 0.01 was used. Proteins were only considered identified, if two or more unique+razor peptides were found per protein. Quantitative analysis was performed on three replicates of untreated, BTZ treated or LPS stimulated wild-type and β5i/LMP7 knockout primary microglia enriched protein samples.

### Publication Abstract
Microglia are the resident immune cells of the central nervous system (CNS) and play a major role in the regulation of brain homeostasis. To maintain their cellular protein homeostasis, microglia express standard proteasomes and immunoproteasomes (IP), a proteasome isoform that preserves protein homeostasis also in non-immune cells under challenging conditions. The impact of IP on microglia function in innate immunity of the CNS is however not well described. Here, we establish that IP impairment leads to proteotoxic stress and triggers the unfolded and integrated stress responses in mouse and human microglia models. Using proteomic analysis, we demonstrate that IP deficiency in microglia results in profound alterations of the ubiquitin-modified proteome among which proteins involved in the regulation of stress and immune responses. In line with this, molecular analysis revealed chronic activation of NF-&#x3ba;B signaling in IP-deficient microglia without further stimulus. In addition, we show that IP impairment alters microglial function based on markers for phagocytosis and motility. At the molecular level IP impairment activates interferon signaling promoted by the activation of the cytosolic stress response protein kinase R. The presented data highlight the importance of IP function for the proteostatic potential as well as for precision proteolysis to control stress and immune signaling in microglia function.

### Keywords
Proteostasis, Proteomics, Neuroinflammation, Cns, Ups, Immunoproteasome, Microglia

### Affiliations
Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology - University Medicine Greifswald
Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Medicine Greifswald, 17475, Greifswald, Germany

### Submitter
Simone Venz

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Venz
Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University Medicine Greifswald, 17475, Greifswald, Germany


