### Accession
PXD040570

### Title
BRD4 degradation via stabilization of a native interaction with DCAF16

### Description
Targeted protein degradation is a modality based on small molecules that induce proximity between a protein of interest (POI) and an E3 ubiquitin ligase, thus prompting POI ubiquitination and degradation. To expand the reach of TPD, current research is geared to unlock novel E3s. To that end, the transcriptional co-activator protein BRD4 has emerged as a frequently used POI. Derivatization of known BRD4 ligands with structurally diverse substituents has yielded a suite of potent BRD4 degraders, thus generating the notion that BRD4 is particularly amenable to TPD. Here, we mechanistically characterize two BRD4 degraders via orthogonal CRISPR screens. Despite their structural dissimilarity, both degraders functionally converge on a unifying mechanism of action that involves the CRL4DCAF16 ligase complex. Using recombinant reconstitution, as well as biophysical and structural elucidation, we demonstrate that BRD4 has an intrinsic activity for DCAF16, which is further enhanced by both compounds. We uncover a novel mode of molecular recognition based on multivalent "gluing" of BRD4 onto DCAF16 that requires both bromodomains of BRD4. Our data thus imply a substantial conceptual overlap between PROTACs and molecular glue degraders, and highlight multivalency as a novel concept in the design of proximity-inducing drugs.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative proteomics was performed for an unbiased, proteome-wide identification of degrader target proteins.Per condition 50 milllion KBM7 iCas9 cells were treated with DMSO (1:1000), compound 1 (1 nM), GNE-0011 (1 µM) or dBET6 (10 nM) for 6 hours in biological triplicates. Cells were harvested via centrifugation, washed three times in ice-cold PBS and snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen.Each washed cell pellet was lysed separately in 500 µl of freshly prepared lysis buffer containing 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 2% SDS, 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich). Samples rested at RT for 20 minutes before heating to 99 °C for 5 min. After cooling down to RT, DNA was sheared by sonication using a Covaris S2 high performance ultrasonicator. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min at 20 °C. Supernatant was transferred to fresh Eppendorf tubes and protein concentration determined using the BCA protein assay kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL). Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) was performed using a 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff centrifugal filters (Microcon 30, Ultracel YM-30, Merck Millipore, Tullagreen, Carrigtwohill Co. Cork IRL) essentially according to the procedure described by Wisniewski et al.1 In brief, 200 µg of total protein per sample was reduced by the addition of DTT to a final concentration of 83.3 mM, followed by incubation at 99°C for 5 minutes. After cooling to room temperature, samples were mixed with 200 μL of freshly prepared 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) (UA-solution) in the filter unit and centrifuged at 14.000 × g for 15 min at 20 °C to remove SDS. Residual SDS was washed out by a second wash step with 200 μL UA. Proteins were alkylated with 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in the dark for 30 min at RT. Thereafter, three washes were performed with 100 μl of UA solution, followed by three washes with 100 μl of 50 mM TEAB buffer (Sigma-Aldrich). Proteolytic digestion is performed using the protease trypsin in a 1:50 ratio overnight at 37°C. Peptides were recovered using 40 μL of 50 mM TEAB buffer followed by 50 μL of 0.5 M NaCl (Sigma-Aldrich). Peptides were desalted using the Thermo Scientific™ Pierce™ Peptide Desalting Spin Columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL). TMTpro 16plex Label Reagent Set was used for labeling according to the manufacturer (Pierce, Rockford, IL). After the labeling reaction was quenched, the samples were pooled, the organic solvent removed in the vacuum concentrator, and the labeled peptides purified by C18 solid phase extraction (SPE). Tryptic peptides were re-buffered in 10 mM ammonium formate buffer pH 10, shortly before separation by reversed phase (RP) liquid chromatography at pH 10 as described by Gilar et al.2. Peptides were separated into 96 time-based fractions on a Phenomenex C18 RP column (150 × 2.0 mm Gemini-NX, 3 µm C18 110Å, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) using an Agilent 1200 series HPLC system fitted with a binary pump delivering solvent at 50 µL/min. Acidified fractions were consolidated into 36 fractions via a concatenated strategy described by Wang et al.3. After removal of solvent in a vacuum concentrator, samples were reconstituted in 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Following data acquisition, the acquired raw data files were processed using the Proteome Discoverer v.2.4.1.15 platform, with a TMT16plex quantification method selected. In the processing step, we used the Sequest HT database search engine and the Percolator validation software node to remove false positives with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% at the peptide and protein level under stringent conditions. All MS/MS spectra were searched against the human proteome (Canonical, reviewed, 20 304 sequences) and appended known contaminants and streptavidin, with a maximum of two allowable miscleavage sites. The search was performed with full tryptic digestion with or without deamidation (+0.9840 Da) on amino acids asparagine, glutamine, and arginine. Methionine oxidation (+15.994 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation (+42.011 Da), as well as methionine loss (-131.040 Da) and protein N-terminal acetylation with methionine loss (-89.030 Da) were set as variable modifications, while carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da) of cysteine residues and tandem mass tag (TMT) 16-plex labeling of peptide N termini and lysine residues (+304.207 Da) were set as fixed modifications. Data were searched with mass tolerances of ±10 ppm and ±0.025 Da for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively. Results were filtered to include peptide spectrum matches with Sequest HT cross-correlation factor (Xcorr) scores of ≥1 and high peptide confidence assigned by Percolator. MS2 signal-to-noise (S/N) values of TMTpro reporter ions were used to calculate peptide/protein abundance values. Peptide spectrum matches with precursor isolation interference values of ≥70, and average TMTpro reporter ion S/N ≤10 were excluded from quantification. Both unique and razor peptides were used for TMT quantification. Correction of isotopic impurities was applied. Data were normalized to total peptide abundance to correct for experimental bias and scaled “to all average”. Protein ratios are directly calculated from the grouped protein abundances using an ANOVA hypothesis test. Adjusted p-values are calculated using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kbm7, Gne-0011, Small molecule induced proximity, Brd4 degradation, Protac, Lc-ms/ms, Orbitrap fusion lumos, Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
The CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences
Dr Georg E. Winter, Winter Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Andrea Rukavina

### Lab Head
Dr Georg Winter
Dr Georg E. Winter, Winter Lab, CeMM Research Center for Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria


