### Accession
PXD041748

### Title
Proteome wide solubility profiling of Nucleozin treated A549 cells infected with Influenza-A 

### Description
A549 WT and Rab11 deleted cell lines were infected with influenza-A and treated with nucleozin. We have evaluated the effect of an antiviral drug, nucleozin, on protein solubility at 13 hpi with influenza-A virus.

### Sample Protocol
After extraction of soluble and total protein fraction, samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding how to harden liquid condensates produced by influenza A virus could accelerate the development of novel antiviral drugs.

### Keywords
Infection. lc-ms-ms, Antiviral, Phase transition

### Affiliations
EMBL, Heidelberg
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
Sindhuja Sridharan

### Lab Head
Dr Mikhail Savitski
EMBL, Heidelberg


