### Accession
PXD008343

### Title
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout and endogenous complex analysis of Cluap1/ IFT38

### Description
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene-editing allows manipulation of a gene of interest in its own chromosomal context. When applied to the analysis of protein interaction, and in contrast to an exogenous expression of a protein, these can be studied maintaining physiological stochiometries, topology and context. We have used CRISPR/Cas9-mediated recombination to Cluap1/ IFT38, a component of the intraflagellar transport complex B (IFT-B). Cluap1 has been implicated in human development as well as in cancer progression. Cluap1 loss of function results in early developmental defects with neural tube closure, sonic hedgehog signaling and left-right defects. Herein, we generated an endogenously tagged Cluap1 for protein complex analysis which was then correlated to the corresponding interactome determined by ectopic expression.

### Sample Protocol
For protein complex analysis of different Cluap1 isoforms HEK293T cells were grown in SILAC DMEM (PAA) supplemented with 3 mM l-glutamine (PAA), 10% dialyzed fetal bovine serum (PAA), 0.55 mM lysine, and 0.4 mM arginine. Light SILAC medium was supplemented with 12C6, 14N2 lysine and 12C6, 14N4 arginine, medium SILAC with 2H4 lysine and 13C6 arginine and heavy SILAC medium with 13C6, 15N2 lysine and 13C6, 15N4 arginine. 0.5 mM proline was added to all SILAC media to prevent arginine-to-proline conversion. HEK293T were grown in 14 cm plates and transfected with either SF-empty vector as control or SF-tagged Cluap1 isoforms. 48hrs post transfection, cells were starved overnight, harvested in 1 ml lysis buffer per plate (0.5% Nonidet-P40, 2% protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), and 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II (Sigma-Aldrich) in TBS (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, and 150 mM NaCl)). Lysates were rotated 20 min at 35 rpm and 4°C and centrifuged 10 min at 10,000 g and 4 °C. Protein concentration was measured using Bradford reagent and equal amounts of protein were used per experiment. Lysates were incubated with either Strep-Tactin Superflow (IBA) or anti-FLAGM2 agarose beads for 1 hour at 4 °C. The resin was washed 3 times with washing buffer (0.1% Nonidet-P40, 1% phosphatase inhibitor cocktails I and II (Sigma-Aldrich) in TBS) and eluted with Strep elution buffer (IBA) or FLAG peptide in TBS, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Number of replicates (and related controls) were: 5 biological for endogenously Flag-tagged Cluap1, 6 biological replicates for Cluap1 isoform 1, 11 biological replicates for Cluap1 isoform Cra_A, 6 biological repliactes for Cluap1 isoform 4 and 4 biological replicates for IFT20 experiments. All data were filtered for potential contaminants, peptides only identified by side or reverse sequence. In the groups, minimum half of the samples should have valid values. The mean values of the groups were calculated. A statistically significant enrichment of proteins was calculated based on the significance A (Benjamin-Hochberg FDR) < 0.05 and a student’s t-test p < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
CRISPR/Cas9-mediated gene editing allows manipulation of a gene of interest in its own chromosomal context. When applied to the analysis of protein interactions and in contrast to exogenous expression of a protein, this can be studied maintaining physiological stoichiometry, topology, and context. We have used CRISPR/Cas9-mediated genomic editing to investigate Cluap1/IFT38, a component of the intraflagellar transport complex B (IFT-B). Cluap1 has been implicated in human development as well as in cancer progression. Cluap1 loss of function results in early developmental defects with neural tube closure, sonic hedgehog signaling and left-right defects. Herein, we generated an endogenously tagged Cluap1 for protein complex analysis, which was then correlated to the corresponding interactome determined by ectopic expression. Besides IFT-B complex components, new interacting proteins like Ephrin-B1 and TRIP6, which are known to be involved in cytoskeletal arrangement and protein transport, were identified. With the identification of platelet-derived growth factor A (PDGFA) and coiled-coil domain-containing protein 6 (CCDC6) two new interactions were discovered, which link Cluap1 to ciliogenesis and cancer development. The CRISPR/Cas9-mediated knockout of Cluap1 revealed a new phenotype affecting the actin cytoskeleton. Together, these data provide first evidence for a role of Cluap1 not only for cilia assembly and maintenance but also for cytoskeletal rearrangement and intracellular transport processes.

### Keywords
Ift, Proteomics, Crispr/cas9, Cilia

### Affiliations
University Clinics Tuebingen
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Germany

### Submitter
Tina Beyer

### Lab Head
Dr Marius Ueffing
Institute for Ophthalmic Research, Centre for Ophthalmology, University of Tübingen, Germany


