### Accession
PXD035340

### Title
Spatially variant immune infiltration scoring in human cancer tissues

### Description
The Immunoscore is a method to quantify the immune cell infiltration within cancers to predict the disease prognosis. Previous immune profiling approaches relied on limited immune markers to establish patients’ tumor immunity. However, immune cells exhibit a higher-level complexity that is typically not obtained by the conventional immunohistochemistry methods. Herein, we present a spatially variant immune infiltration score, termed as SpatialVizScore, to quantify immune cells infiltration within lung tumor samples using multiplex protein imaging data. Imaging mass cytometry (IMC) was used to target 26 markers in tumors to identify stromal, immune, and cancer cell states within 26 human tissues from lung cancer patients. Unsupervised clustering methods dissected the spatial infiltration of cells in tissue using the high-dimensional analysis of 16 immune markers and other cancer and stroma enriched labels to profile alterations in the tumors’ immune infiltration patterns. Spatially resolved maps of distinct tumors determined the spatial proximity and neighborhoods of immune-cancer cell pairs. These SpatialVizScore maps provided a ranking of patients’ tumors consisting of immune inflamed, immune suppressed, and immune cold states, demonstrating the tumor’s immune continuum assigned to three distinct infiltration score ranges. Several inflammatory and suppressive immune markers were used to establish the cell-based scoring schemes at the single-cell and pixel-level, depicting the cellular spectra in diverse lung tissues. Thus, SpatialVizScore is an emerging quantitative method to deeply study tumor immunology in cancer tissues.

### Sample Protocol
First, the samples were baked in a 60oC oven for 2 hours. Then, the samples were deparaffinized by immersing them in xylene and rehydrated by dipping them into descending concentrations of ethanol (100%, 95%, 80%, 70%, and 50% ethanol in water). Finally, the samples were washed with deionized water before proceeding with the antigen retrieval step. The heat-induced epitope retrieval (HIER) approach under basic conditions was used to achieve antigen retrieval using Dako’s target retrieval solution with pH = 9 (Catalog number: S2367, Agilent Dako). The slides were immersed in the target retrieval solution and were incubated in the pressure cooker in a high-pressure setting for 20 minutes. The slides were then left in the target retrieval solution for an additional 20 minutes at room temperature. The slides were washed with Maxpar Water (Catalog number 201069, Fluidigm) for 10 minutes followed by Maxpar PBS (Catalog number 201058, Fluidigm) for an additional 10 minutes with gentle agitation. To minimize the volumes of solutions used on the tissue samples, a PAP pen was then used to draw a hydrophobic barrier around the tumor microarray samples on the slides. Dako’s ready-to-use protein blocking buffer solution (Catalog number: X090930-2, Agilent Dako) was applied to the tissues and incubated for 45 minutes at room temperature. The slides were then washed 3 times with Maxpar PBS. The antibody cocktail mix was prepared in Dako’s protein-blocking buffer solution and incubated with the tissues overnight at 4 °C, following Fluidigm’s labeling protocol. The tissue slides were then washed with 0.2% Triton X-100 in Maxpar PBS for 8 minutes with gentle agitation followed by Maxpar PBS for additional 8 minutes. The nuclear staining was then performed using an Iridium-conjugated intercalator (Catalog number 201192A, Fluidigm) prepared in Maxpar PBS for 30 min at room temperature in a hydration chamber. Finally, the slides were washed with Maxpar water and left to dry at room temperature for 20 minutes. After the staining process is complete, the stained tissues were stored at 4oC until imaging time.

### Data Protocol
To set up the Hyperion imaging system, regions of interest (ROIs) of 1500-μm x1500-μm were chosen within each tissue core to cover most of the tissue. To choose the most optimum laser ablation power, several testing points were chosen from the tissue cores that represent the tissue heterogeneity. The acquired data is automatically saved in .mcd format that can be viewed using Fluidigm’s MCD Viewer software (v 1.0.560.2).

### Publication Abstract
The Immunoscore is a method to quantify the immune cell infiltration within cancers to predict the disease prognosis. Previous immune profiling approaches relied on limited immune markers to establish patients' tumor immunity. However, immune cells exhibit a higher-level complexity that is typically not obtained by the conventional immunohistochemistry methods. Herein, we present a spatially variant immune infiltration score, termed as SpatialVizScore, to quantify immune cells infiltration within lung tumor samples using multiplex protein imaging data. Imaging mass cytometry (IMC) was used to target 26 markers in tumors to identify stromal, immune, and cancer cell states within 26 human tissues from lung cancer patients. Unsupervised clustering methods dissected the spatial infiltration of cells in tissue using the high-dimensional analysis of 16 immune markers and other cancer and stroma enriched labels to profile alterations in the tumors' immune infiltration patterns. Spatially resolved maps of distinct tumors determined the spatial proximity and neighborhoods of immune-cancer cell pairs. These SpatialVizScore maps provided a ranking of patients' tumors consisting of immune inflamed, immune suppressed, and immune cold states, demonstrating the tumor's immune continuum assigned to three distinct infiltration score ranges. Several inflammatory and suppressive immune markers were used to establish the cell-based scoring schemes at the single-cell and pixel-level, depicting the cellular spectra in diverse lung tissues. Thus, SpatialVizScore is an emerging quantitative method to deeply study tumor immunology in cancer tissues.

### Keywords
Lung cancer imc

### Affiliations
Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 6 Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
THOMAS HU

### Lab Head
Dr Ahmet F. Coskun
Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 6 Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA


