### Accession
PXD005322

### Title
Proteomic comparison of tissue engineered tendon constructs derived young and old cells

### Description
Tendon injuries can occur due to sports related incidents, as a result of trauma to overuse or during disease or ageing. Tissue engineering can offer great potential in the treatment of a tendon injury. The preferred cell source is autologous in order to reduce immune response in the treated individual. However, in elderly patients age-related changes in metabolism of the implanted cells may affect results of such therapy. In this study the effect of donor age on synthetic activity of cells used for creation of tendon tissue-engineered constructs was investigated by using label-free proteomic comparison.

### Sample Protocol
Tendon samples were collected from young (age) and old (age) equine superficial digital flexor tendons (SDFT).  Cells from SDFT (n=7 for young and n=6 for old) were harvested and used to create 3D tendon tissue engineered constructs. Proteins were extracted from the constructs using 0.1% RapigestTM. In solution trypsin digestion of was performed on 100µg of extracted protein. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Ultimate Nanosystem(Dionex/Thermo Fisher Scientific) couple online to Q-exactive. Aliquots of (equivalent to 50 ng protein per samples) were loaded onto 170µm x 20mm C18 trap column at 5 µl/min with aqueous solution containing 0.1% (v/V) TFA. After 3 minutes, the trap columns was set in-line with analytical column (C18, 75µm x 15 cm x 2um) using a linear gradient of solvent B (80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) of 3.8% to 50% at 300 nL/min. Data dependents acquisition consistent of 70,000 resolution (m/Z 200 after accumulation of ion to 1x 106 target value based on AGC values from previous full scan. The dynamic exclusion was set to 20s. The 10 most intense multiple charged ions (>2) were fragments by HCD with fixed injection time of 100ms and 35,000 resolution. Typical mass spectromic condition was as followed: spray voltage 1.9kV, no sheat or auxillarry gas flow, heat temperature, 250 °C normalised to HCD collision energy of 30%. The MS/MS ion selection threshold was set to 1 x 104 counts and a 2 m/z isolation width was set.

### Data Protocol
For label-free quantification the Thermo raw files of the acquired spectra from in-solution tryptic digests were analysed by the ProgenesisQI™ software (Waters, Manchester, UK)   the top five spectra for each feature were exported from ProgenesisQI™ and utilised for peptide identification in PEAKS® 7 PTM (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc., Ontario, Canada) using Uniprot horse database. Search parameters used were: 10 ppm peptide mass tolerance and 0.6 Da fragment mass tolerance; one missed cleavage allowed; fixed modification, carbamidomethylation; and variable modifications, methionine, proline, lysine oxidation. Proteins were identified with a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1 % and a minimum of two peptides per protein. The resulting peptide-spectrum matches were imported into ProgenesisQI™ for label-free relative quantification. Differentially expressed (DE) proteins were defined with FDR p < 0.05 and ±2-fold regulation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Tissue engineered constructs, Tendon, Young and old

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Musculoskeletal Biology, University of Liverpool

### Submitter
Yalda  Ashraf Kharaz

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Mandy Peffers
Institute of Ageing and Chronic Disease, Musculoskeletal Biology, University of Liverpool


