### Accession
PXD020993

### Title
The FASTK family proteins are master regulators in mitochondrial RNA processing

### Description
The FASTK family proteins are emerging key post-transcriptional regulators in mitochondrial gene expression. In attempts to uncover their molecular functions, we carried out BioID experiments to identify proteins interacting with FASTKD4 and FASTKD5. Our data suggest that both proteins have similar protein interactome profiles, highlighting their roles in mitochondrial RNA processing.

### Sample Protocol
Peptides were desalted on C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al., 2007) and dried by vacuum centrifugation prior to LC-MS/MS injections. Samples were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system on-line connected with a Lumos Fusion Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18, 3 μm-100Å, 2 cm x 75μm ID) was used for sample trapping and cleaning. A 50cm long capillary column (75 μm ID; in-house packed using ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch) was then used for analytical separations at 250 nl/min over 150 min. biphasic gradients. Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using a cycle time of 1 second. First MS scans were acquired with a resolution of 240’000 (at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 30% using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ions were acquired using the Ion Trap using a maximum injection time of 20 sec. Selected ions were then excluded for the following 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, MS Amanda and Mascot in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against a concatenated database consisting of the Uniprot Human protein database (73112 entries) and a FASTKD sequence. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. A 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification level. For the database search, carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term), PyroGlu (N-term Q), and Phosphorylation (S,T,Y) were considered as variable modifications. Data was further processed and inspected in Scaffold 4.10 (Proteome Software, Portland, USA) and spectra of interest were manually validated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Fastkd5, Fastkd4

### Affiliations
Department of Cell Biology, University of Geneva, 30 quai Ernest-Ansermet, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.
Department of Cell Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland

### Submitter
Akira Ohkubo

### Lab Head
Dr Jean-Claude Martinou
Department of Cell Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland


