### Accession
PXD040283

### Title
Liquid C1 fermentation differential proteomic analysis of Eubacterium limosum

### Description
Some acetogenic bacteria, such as Eubacterium limosum, have the native ability to consume liquid C1 feedstocks, such as formate and methanol, as the sole substrate for growth. Due to high energy efficiency, and compatibility with existing infrastructure, this has sparked interest in the biotechnology industry. Previously, we reported limitations of this metabolism in batch fermentation. Here we undertook chemostat differential analysis to highlight key features and bottlenecks of metabolism. Our work serves as a reference dataset to advance understanding of liquid C1 metabolism in acetogens.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling, storage and sample preparation were performed based on a method previously developed for autotrophic growth of C. autoethangenum. Briefly, ca. 1.5 mgDCW of cells were pelleted by immediate centrifugation (16,000 g for 3 minutes at 4 °C) followed by washing with 1 mL PBS (Sigma P4417). A further round of centrifugation was used, with the supernatant then discarded and the remaining sample stored at -20 °C. Approximately 100 µg of protein was resuspended in 25 µL Milli-Q water and combined with 25 µL SDS lysis buffer (10% SDS, 100 mM Tris). Cells grown on formate required bead beating with a small amount of 0.1 mm diameter glass beads to lyse. To reduce protein disulphide bonds, dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 20 mM before incubating at 70 °C for 1 hour. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was added to a final concentration of 40 mM and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes to alkylate cysteine. The reaction was sonicated and 2.5 µL 12% phosphoric acid was added, before combining with 165 µL S-Trap binding buffer (90% methanol, 100 mM Tris (aq)). The sample was centrifuged for 8 minutes at 13,000 g, before adding to the S-Trap spin column, spun for 1 minute at 4,000 g and washed thrice with 150 µL S-Trap binding buffer. 1 µg of trypsin in 50 µL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8 was added to cover the top of the protein trap, incubating in a sealed bag overnight at 37 °C. Peptides were eluted into a collection tube with 40 µL increasing concentration of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Samples were spun dry and resuspended in 20 µL buffer A (0.1% formic acid (aq)) for injection to the mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry for proteomics analysis was performed using LC-MS/MS with a Thermo Fisher Scientific UHPLC system coupled to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer. The electrospray voltage was 2.2 kV in positive-ion mode, and the ion transfer tube temperature was 250 °C. Full MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyser over the range of m/z 340-1110 with a mass resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200). The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set at ’Standard’, and the maximum accumulation time was ‘Auto’ for the MS/MS. The MS/MS ions were measured in 12 windows from mass 350-470, in 36 windows from mass 465-645 and 10 windows from mass 640-1100. During computer search, methionine was optionally oxidised. Analysis of data were performed using Spectronaut against a reference proteome (UniProt ID UP000246246), with a Q-value cutoff of 0.05 applied to differential protein expressions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetogen; dia; data-independent acquisition, Methanol; formate

### Affiliations
The University of Queensland
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia

### Submitter
Jamin Wood

### Lab Head
Dr A/Prof Esteban Marcellin
Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, Australia


