### Accession
PXD030503

### Title
Dissection of acetylomic profiles in T cell lymphoma following histone deacetylases inhibition

### Description
The aim was to dissect molecular changes in histone and non-histone protein acetylation dynamics following the genetic or pharmacological inhibition of HDAC activity in a model of Anaplastic Large Cell Lymphoma (ALCL), a T cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma, predominantly found in children and adolescents.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were harvested and pelleted for protein isolation. Each sample type (i.e., cells treated with Vorinostat and Entinostat, knockout of Hdac1 in NPM-ALK+ murine ALCL cell lines, and respective controls) was represented by four biological replicates. Cells were fractionated into chromatin and non-chromatin fractions. Histones were extracted from chromatin into sulfuric acid and precipitated with trichloracetic acid and acetone. To prepare histones for LC-MS/MS,  derivatization was performed with trimethylacetic anhydride and trypsin was used for protein digestion. Acetylated non-histone peptides were obtained from non-chromatin fraction using PTMScan® Acetyl-Lysine Motif [Ac-K] Kit (Cell Signaling Technology, MA, USA). Tryptic digests comprising peptides of both fractions were measured using liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid, Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The RAW mass spectrometric data files were searched against the cRAP universal contamination database (based on http://www.thegpm.org/crap/, 112 sequences), an in-house Mus Musculus histone database (v210309, 106 protein sequences, generated from UniProt) and UniProt KB Mouse database (v201007, taxon ID:10090, 21989 sequences) using an in house Mascot search engine (v2.6.2, Matrix Science, United Kingdom) through Proteome Discoverer software (v2.2.0.388, Thermo Fisher Scientific).  Derivatized histone peptides' search settings were as follows: the mass error tolerance for precursors was 7 ppm (10 ppm for cRAP database), and 0.03 Da (0.5 Da for cRAP database) for fragments. Variable modifications selected for cRAP database search were Acetylation (K), Deamidation (N, Q), Oxidation (M), and Trimethylacetylation (N-term, K, S, T, Y). Histone database variable modifications were the same as for UniProt KB Mouse database – Acetylation (K, Protein N-term) and Trimethylacetylation (N-term, K, S, T, Y). Additional variable modifications for histone database were Methylation (K, R), Dimethylation (K), Trimethylation (K) and Phosphorylation (S, T). For all databases semiArg-C enzyme specificity with 2 allowed missed cleavages was set. Results were refined by fixed value PSM validator (delta Cn <0.05). Identifications of selected histone peptides were manually inspected, their quantity was determined with Skyline software (v19.1. or higher) based on peak areas in EICs. Search parameters for data of non-chromatin cell fraction were as follows. Trypsin enzyme specificity with 3, 5, and 8 allowed missed cleavages was set for cRAP, UniProt KB, and Histone database, respectively. For all databases, Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a static modification. The mass error tolerances were 7 ppm and 0.3 Da (0.02 Da for Histone database) for precursors and fragments, respectively. Variable modifications in cRAP database were Acetylation (K, Protein N-term) and Oxidation (M). The same variable modifications were selected for Histone and UniProt KB database – Acetylation (K, Protein N-term), Methylation (K, R), Dimethylation (K), and Trimethylation (K).  The search results of non-chromatin peptides were refined by applying 1 % FDR q-value based validation in Percolator node. Label-free quantification was carried out in Proteome discoverer software with combination of Minora Feature Detector, Feature Mapper and Precursor Ion Quantifier nodes with default settings. Only peptides with high confidence, minimal 6 amino acid length, and Mascot Ion Score at least 30 were used for further processing.

### Publication Abstract
Histone deacetylases (HDACs) target acetylated lysine residues in histone and non-histone proteins. HDACs are implicated in the regulation of genomic stability, cell cycle, cell death and differentiation and thus critically involved in tumorigenesis. Further, HDACs regulate T-cell development and HDAC inhibitors (HDACis) have been approved for clinical use in some T-cell malignancies. Still, the exact targets and mechanisms of HDAC inhibition in cancer are understudied. We isolated tumor cell lines from a transgenic mouse model of anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL), a rare T-cell lymphoma, and abrogated HDAC activity by treatment with the HDACis Vorinostat and Entinostat or Cre-mediated deletion of <i>Hdac1</i>. Changes in overall protein expression as well as histone and protein acetylation were measured following <i>Hdac1</i> deletion or pharmacological inhibition using label-free liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We found changes in overall protein abundance and increased acetylation of histones and non-histone proteins, many of which were newly discovered and associated with major metabolic and DNA damage pathways. For non-histone acetylation, we mapped a total of 1204 acetylated peptides corresponding to 603 proteins, including chromatin modifying proteins and transcription factors. Hyperacetylated proteins were involved in processes such as transcription, RNA metabolism and DNA damage repair (DDR). The DDR pathway was majorly affected by hyperacetylation following HDAC inhibition. This included acetylation of H2AX, PARP1 and previously unrecognized acetylation sites in TP53BP1. Our data provide a comprehensive view of the targets of HDAC inhibition in malignant T cells with general applicability and could have translational impact for the treatment of ALCL with HDACis alone or in combination therapies.

### Keywords
Histone deacetylase inhibitors, Anaplastic large cell lymphoma, Proteomics, Acetylomics, Histone deacetylases

### Affiliations
Masaryk University
CEITEC-MU, Masaryk University, Brno

### Submitter
Gabriela Lochmanova

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Zdrahal
Masaryk University


