### Accession
PXD028647

### Title
A shot to missing protein from an aneuploidy cell line

### Description
With fast development of proteomic technology, the scale of missing proteins (MPs) has being continuously shrunk, approximately 1,470 MPs not explored yet. Discovery of MPs, on the other hand, is appearing more difficult. In some aneuploid cells, the abundance changes are proportional to the additional chromosome(s), while several MPs were found within them. Herein, we hypothesize that a stable aneuploid cell line with the increased chromosomes was a useful material that assists MP exploration. Ker-CT cell line with trisomy at chromosome 5 and 20 was selected. With a combination strategy of RNA-Seq and LC-M/MS, a total of 22,178 transcripts and 8,846 proteins were identified in Ker-CT. Although the transcripts corresponding to 31 and 32 MP genes located at chromosome 5 and 20 were detected, none of MPs was found in Ker-CT. Surprisingly, 3 MPs containing at least two unique non-nest peptides of length ≥9 amino acid were identified in Ker-CT, whose genes are located in chromosome 3 and 10. Furthermore, the 3 MPs were verified using the method of parallel reaction monitoring (PRM).

### Sample Protocol
Ker-CT cell line (CRL-4048™) was purchased from ATCC (Manassas, Virginia, USA) and was cultured in KGMTM Gold Keratinocyte Growth Medium (0.1% Hydrocortisone, 0.1% Transferrin (recombinant human), 0.05% Epinephrine, 0.1% GA-1000 (Gentamicin sulfate-Amphotericin), 0.4% Bovine Pituitary Extract, 0.1% Epidermal Growth Factor (recombinant human), and 0.1% Insulin (recombinant human)), at 37 ◦C and 5% CO2. Farage cell line was bought from Cobioer Biosciences (Nanjing, China), and was cultured in RPMI-1640 medium with 10% Fetal Bovine Serum at 37 ◦C and 5% CO2.  The cells on culture dish were washed twice with precool PBS then were mixed with lysis buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.2% SDS, 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0-8.5, and protease inhibitor cocktail. The lysates were collected and centrifuged at 20,000 g. After removing the pellets, the supernatants were regarded the extracted proteins, and were treated with reduction, alkylation followed by digestion with trypsin, as described in the previous reports.  The digested peptides were filtered through 10-kDa FASP filter-tube (Sartorius, UK) and were loaded onto a Gemini high-pH RP column (5 μm C18, 110 Å, 250 mm × 4.6 mm, Phenomenex, CA) in a Shimadzu HPLC system, which was equilibrated with buffer A, 5% acetonitrile with 25% ammonia, pH 9.8. The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 0.7 mL/min using a gradient of 2-8% buffer B, 95% acetonitrile with 25% ammonia, pH 9.8 for 2 min, 8-18% buffer B for 22 min, 18-32% buffer B for 8 min, 32-95% buffer B for 1 min, 95% buffer B for 4 min, 95-5% buffer B for 1 min and finally 5% buffer B for 17 min. According to the concatenated method to merge 54 fractions, 20 fractions were finalized and dried in MaxiVac Beta (Labogene, Denmark).  The dried peptides were redissolved in buffer C, 2% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid, and were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 15 min. Approximately 1-2 μg peptides were directly loaded onto the trap column (Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 HPLC column, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm×5 mm, Thermo Fisher, USA). After going through the trap column, the peptides were delivered to an in-house packed column (180 μm×35 cm C18 column containing 1.8 μm Xtimate® UHPLC particles, 120 Å, from Welch (Shanghai, China)) and were eluted with a 115 min gradient at 0.5 μL/min: 5-25% buffer D (98% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid) for 90 min, 25-35% buffer D for 10 min, 35-80% buffer D for 5 min, 80% buffer D for 5 min, and finally 80-5% buffer D for 5 min. The eluted peptides were injected into the Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) for peptide identification at DDA mode. The main parameters of MS were set as follows, positive and data dependent acquisition mode, 350-1,500 m/z mass range for full MS, NCE 28, 120,000 mass resolution for MS1, 30,000 mass resolution for MS2, the number of precursors selected for tandem MS at Top 20, AGC target intensity for MS at 3e6 and for MS2 at 1e5, intensity threshold for MS2 with 2e4, charge state screening parameters at 2+ to 6+, and dynamic exclusion settings at 30s.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0) was utilized to treat the MS/MS raw data and to search the corresponding proteins against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (released in Sep. 2020 with 20379 protein sequences) with a decoy database as a negative control. The false discovery rate (FDR) was automatically calculated by that software by cutoff setting at FDR 0.01 at both PSM and protein level. During search, modification status of peptides was considered, such as carbamidomethylation (C), variable modification with oxidation (M) and acetyl (protein N-term). The precursor mass tolerance and the daughter ion tolerance were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The maximum of missed cleavages for each peptide by trypsin was set at 2. Intensity-based absolute quantification of proteins (iBAQ) was used to evaluate the protein abundance and the abundance of each protein was normalized against sum of quantitative data in the individual samples. To ensure the qualitative and quantitative information of proteomic analysis, the MS/MS raw data were also searched by Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4.1.15) in parallel. The peptides of MPs identified in this study were examined by the peptide uniqueness checker (https://www.nextprot.org/tools/peptide-uniqueness-checker).The confirm peptides were input to Skyline to estimate the corresponding parameters, such as m/z, charges, polarity, collision energy and retention time (RT). These parameters were taken to establish the PRM method. Meanwhile, two non-nested unique peptides of each MP were chemically synthesized. Both native and corresponding synthesized peptides were determined by the Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer at PRM mode. The PRM data were processed with Skyline software to compare RTs and fragment intensity patterns between native and synthetic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rna-seq, Missing proteins, Lc-ms/ms, Aneuploidy, Karyotype

### Affiliations
15105131523
BGI-Genomics and Department of BGI education, School of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Science, China

### Submitter
Bu fanyu

### Lab Head
Dr Liu Si Qi
BGI-Genomics and Department of BGI education, School of Life Sciences, University of Chinese Academy of Science, China


