### Accession
PXD000171

### Title
The effect of proteasome inhibition on the HLA peptidome

### Description
The Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I peptidome is thought to be generated mostly through proteasomal degradation of cellular proteins, a notion that is based on the alterations in presentation of selected peptides following proteasome inhibition. We evaluated the effects of proteasome inhibitors, epoxomicin and bortezomib, on human cultured cancer cells. Since the inhibitors did not reduce the level of presentation of the cell surface human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, we followed their effects on the rates of synthesis of both HLA peptidome and proteome of the cells, using dynamic stable isotope labeling in tissue culture (dynamic-SILAC). The inhibitors reduced the rates of synthesis of most cellular proteins and HLA peptides, yet the synthesis rates of some of the proteins and HLA peptides was not decreased by the inhibitors and of some even increased. Therefore, we concluded that the inhibitors affected the production of the HLA peptidome in a complex manner, including modulation of the synthesis rates of the source proteins of the HLA peptides in addition to their effect on their degradation. The collected data may suggest that the current reliance on proteasome inhibition may overestimate the centrality of the proteasome in the generation of the MHC peptidome. It is therefore suggested that the relative contribution of the proteasomal and non-proteasomal pathways to the production of the MHC peptidome should be revaluated in accordance with the inhibitors effects on the synthesis rates of the source proteins of the MHC peptides. Bioinformatics & data processing: Peptides were identified and the dynamic-SILAC data were quantified using the MaxQuant and the Proteome Discoverer software tools. Graphical representation of the bioinformatics results was performed with Perseus, version 1.3.0.4. MaxQuant [54] version 1.3.0.5 was used with the Andromeda search engine [55] and the human section of Nov 2011 of UniProt containing 20257 entries and mass tolerance of 6 ppm for the precursor masses and 0.5 Da for the fragments. Methionine oxidation was accepted as variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. Carbamidomethyl cysteine and n-acetylation were accepted as modification for the proteomics analyses. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for tryptic peptides. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for tryptic peptides to 0.01 for protein identifications, and 0.05 for the MHC peptides. The resulting identified protein tables were filtered to eliminate the identifications derived from the reverse database, as well as common contaminants. Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo-Fisher) was used with UniProt of April 2012 for the Sequest search (containing 20220 entries) and July 2012 for the Mascot search (containing 20306 entries). Masses tolerance was set to 6 ppm for the precursors and 0.5 Da for the fragments. Methionine oxidation and n-acetylation were accepted as variable modification for both tryptic and HLA peptides. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was set as fixed modification for the proteomics analyses. Mass range of 350-5000 Da was used for tryptic peptides and mass range of 750-2500 Da was used for the MHC peptides. For both tryptic and MHC peptides the PSMs were filtered with at least 0.05 FDR (medium confidence), peptide maximum rank was set to 1. Minimal number of identified peptides per proteins was set to 2.

### Sample Protocol
Affinity purification of the HLA complexes: The cells were released from the plates with trypsin, washed three times with cold PBS by centrifugation and then incubated for 1 hour at 4°C with mild stirring in lysis buffer, containing 0.25% sodium deoxycholate, 1% octyl-β-glucopyranoside, 33 µg/ml iodoacetamide, 1 mM EDTA, 1:200 Protease inhibitors cocktail (Sigma) and 1:1000 PMSF. The cell lysate was spun at 18,000 g for 30 min and the supernatant was passed through a column containing the w6/32 antibody covalently bound to protein A Sepharose beads, as in [42] or to AminoLink beads (Pierce) as in [44]. The columns were washed twice with ten column volumes of 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM Tris-HCl, once with ten volumes of 400 mM NaCl and with seven volumes of 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8. The peptides were separated from the heavy subunits of the HLA molecules by elution with 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) (Sigma) followed by their concentration and desalting on disposable Silica C-18 column (Harvard Apparatus, MA) in a modification (by Michal Bassani-Sternberg and Arie Admon) of the HLA peptide purification procedure, as follows: The disposable C-18 columns were washed with 0.1% TFA and the HLA peptides were eluted with 0.1% TFA and 30% acetonitrile to separate the HLA peptides from the HLA α-chain and the β-2-microglubulin. The protein subunits were eluted with 0.1% TFA and 80% acetonitrile to evaluate the recovery of the HLA by western blotting. The solvent was evaporated to dryness and the peptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and stored until use at -80°C. LC-MS/MS Analysis: The recovered HLA class I peptides (or tryptic peptides) were analyzed by µLC-MS/MS using an OrbitrapXL mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher) fitted with a capillary HPLC (Eksigent). The peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap column (0.3x5 mm, LC-Packings) connected on-line to a homemade capillary columns (75 micron ID) packed with Reprosil C18-Aqua and resolved using 7-40% acetonitrile gradients the presence of 0.1% formic acid during 2 hours. Top seven, 1-3 charged peptides for MHC peptides or 2 and 3 charged for tryptic peptides, were selected for fragmentation by collision induced disintegration (CID) from each full mass spectrum with exclusion list of up to 500 for 90 seconds, with a mass range of 350–2000 Th and a target value of 107 ions, and a target value of 5x105 ions for MS and 1X104 for MS/MS. Ion selection threshold was set to 3X104 counts and the resolution to 7x104.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified and the dynamic-SILAC data was quantified using multiple software tools: Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo-Fisher) using Sequest (Thermo-Fisher) and Mascot (Matrix-Science) and MaxQuant version 1.3.0.5 and the Andromeda search engine. The identification was done against the human section of the UniProt release database (http://www.uniprot.org, Nov 2011) (total of 40440 entries, including forward and reverse or random sequences). In the main Andromeda search (Maxquant) precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 6 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The search included variable modification of methionine oxidation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two miscleavages for tryptic peptides was allowed. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set for tryptic peptides to 0.01 for protein identifications, and for MHC peptides to 0.05. In those cases when identified groups of tryptic peptides were all shared between two proteins, these were combined and reported as one protein group. Protein table were filtered to eliminate the identifications from the reverse database, and common contaminants. Discoverer analysis: search precursor mass and fragment mass had an initial mass tolerance of 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. The search included variable modification of methionine oxidation, and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl cysteine. For tryptic peptides we used precursor mass of 350-5000 Da and for MHC peptides 750-2500 Da. For protein and tryptic peptides we filtered only PSMs with at least medium confidence, peptide maximum rank=1. Peptide per protein: minimal number of peptides: 2, count only rank 1 peptide and count peptide only in top score protein. Filter for MHC peptides: Sequest minimal Xscore per charge 1:1.5, charge 2:2 and charge 3:2.25. Minimum Mascot ion score: 20 and peptide rank:1. We used SILAC for quantitation with minimum fold change threshold of 2 and maximum allowed of 100.  Bioinformatics analysis and graphical representation of the results was done with Perseus, version 1.3.0.4. The data is the supplementary data of Milner et al. submitted to MCP by Arie Admon. These include files labeled seq28398_E202 to seq28404_E202. Files labeled seq28398_E202_B to seq28404_E0202_B are technical repetition of seq28398_E202 to seq28404_E202. The 2nd set is proteomics analysis of the same cells. The tryptic peptides were analyzed with two-dimensional chromatographies (SCX and RP). The files are labeled seq27808_E202 (0 time, no label), seq27810_E202 (2 hours, control-DMSO), seq2727811_E202 (4 hours, control-DMSO), seq27816_E202 (2 hours, epoxomicin), seq27817_E202 (4 hours, epoxomicin), seq27822_E202 (2 hours, velcade), seq27823_E202 (4 hours, velcade). The 3rd is proteomics analysis of the same cells grown for 0 to 26 hours in the dynamic SILAC experiment. The analysis was performed with long (4 hours) chromatographies of the tryptic peptides. These include files labeled seq27808_E202 to seq27826.

### Publication Abstract
The Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I peptidome is thought to be generated mostly through proteasomal degradation of cellular proteins, a notion that is based on the alterations in presentation of selected peptides following proteasome inhibition. We evaluated the effects of proteasome inhibitors, epoxomicin and bortezomib, on human cultured cancer cells. Because the inhibitors did not reduce the level of presentation of the cell surface human leukocyte antigen (HLA) molecules, we followed their effects on the rates of synthesis of both HLA peptidome and proteome of the cells, using dynamic stable isotope labeling in tissue culture (dynamic-SILAC). The inhibitors reduced the rates of synthesis of most cellular proteins and HLA peptides, yet the synthesis rates of some of the proteins and HLA peptides was not decreased by the inhibitors and of some even increased. Therefore, we concluded that the inhibitors affected the production of the HLA peptidome in a complex manner, including modulation of the synthesis rates of the source proteins of the HLA peptides, in addition to their effect on their degradation. The collected data may suggest that the current reliance on proteasome inhibition may overestimate the centrality of the proteasome in the generation of the MHC peptidome. It is therefore suggested that the relative contribution of the proteasomal and nonproteasomal pathways to the production of the MHC peptidome should be revaluated in accordance with the inhibitors effects on the synthesis rates of the source proteins of the MHC peptides.

### Keywords
Dynamic silac, Hla peptidome, Proteasome inhibitors

### Affiliations
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
Biology

### Submitter
Arie Admon

### Lab Head
Dr Arie Admon
Faculty of Biology, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel


