### Accession
PXD018422

### Title
Global discovery of bacterial RNA-binding proteins by RNase-sensitive gradient profiles reports a new FinO domain protein

### Description
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play important roles in bacterial gene expression and physiology but their true number and functional scope remain little understood even in model microbes. To advance global RBP discovery in bacteria, we here establish glycerol gradient sedimentation with RNase treatment and mass spectrometry (GradR). Applied to Salmonella enterica, GradR confirms many known RBPs by their RNase-sensitive sedimentation profiles, and discovers the FopA protein as a new member of the emerging family of FinO/ProQ-like RBPs. FopA, encoded on resistance plasmid pCol1B9, primarily targets a small RNA associated with plasmid replication. The target suite of FopA dramatically differs from the related global RBP ProQ, revealing context-dependent selective RNA recognition by FinO-domain RBPs. Numerous other unexpected RNase-induced changes in gradient profiles suggest that cellular RNA helps to organize macromolecular complexes in bacteria. By enabling poly(A)-independent generic RBP discovery, GradR provides an important element for building a comprehensive catalogue of microbial RBPs.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis, RNase digestion, and gradient fractionation. Salmonella SL1344 cells were grown in Lysogeny broth (LB) media to transition phase at OD600 of 2.0, pelleted at full speed, and frozen at -20 °C. In total 60 OD of cells were lysed in 500 µl lysis buffer (20 mM Tris/HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM PMSF) by glass beads (0.1 mm, BioSpec Products) in the Ratchet at 30 Hz for 10 min at 4 °C. The cell lysate was cleared at full speed for 10 min and the supernatant was transferred. 20 µl RNase A/T1 mix (2 µg µl-1 / 5 U µl-1, Thermo Scientific) was added to 100 µl lysate (OD260 ~ 150) for RNase digestion for 20 min at 20 °C. The reaction was stopped on ice, diluted with 1 volume lysis buffer, and loaded completely onto a 10-40% glycerol (w/v) gradient in lysis buffer. The proteins were sedimented in the SW40Ti rotor (Beckman Coulter) at 100,000 × g for 17 h at 4 °C. The gradient was fractionated in 20 equal samples (~600 µl) from the top and the pellet was resuspended in an additional fraction. RNA was extracted by PCI for RNA (X985.3, Carl Roth) for RNA integrity control gels. Protein samples were prepared for SDS-PAGE analysis and western blotting.  In-solution MS sample preparation. 0.2 µg proteomics dynamic range standard set (UPS2, Sigma-Aldrich) was added as spike in to 50 µl protein samples of each fraction. Samples were diluted with two volumes denaturation buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 12 M urea). 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Bond-Breaker, neutral pH, Thermo Scientific) was added and samples were incubated at room temperature for 20 min. 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and samples were incubated at room temperature for 15 min in the dark. 0.25 µg Lys-C protease (Promega) was added and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C. Samples were diluted with three volumes digestion buffer (100 mM Tris/HCl pH 8.5, 1 mM CaCl2) and 0.25 µg Trypsin (Sequencing Grade, Promega) were added and incubated o/n at 37 °C. 5% formic acid (FA) was added for acidification and samples were cleared by centrifugation at full-speed for 10 min. Acidified sample supernatant was loaded onto methanol activated stage-tips (C18) by centrifugation for 5-10 min at 2,000 × g. Tips were washed three times with washing solution (2% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.3% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)) and eluted in 0.5 ml protein-low bind tubes with two times 20 µl elution solution (60% ACN, 0.3% FA). Samples were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. For liquid chromatography analysis, samples were solubilized in application solution (2% ACN, 0.1% FA), sonicated, and 12 µl transferred to HPLC tubes. NanoLC-MS/MS Analysis and MS analysis. Samples were MS analysed in the lab of Andreas Schlosser by Stephanie Lamer. NanoLC-MS/MS analyses were performed by an Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were loaded on capillary columns (PicoFrit, 30 cm × 150 µm ID, New Objective) self-packed with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm (r119.aq., Dr. Maisch). Samples were analysed by a 120 min linear gradient from 3-40% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 500 nl/min. MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a resolution of 60,000 and 15,000, respectively. Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation was applied with 35% normalized collision energy. We used top speed data-dependent MS/MS method with a fixed cycle time of 3 s. Dynamic exclusion was applied with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 60 seconds (singly charged precursors were excluded from selection). Minimum signal threshold for precursor selection was set to 50,000. Predictive AGC was used with AGC a target value of 2E05 for MS scans and 5E04 for MS/MS scans. EASY-IC was used for internal calibration.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analysed with MaxQuant version 1.6.2.2 (Cox et al. 2008). Database search was performed with Andromeda, which is integrated in the utilized version of MaxQuant. The search was performed against the UniProt Salmonella Typhimurium UP000008962 (strain SL1344) and a database containing the proteins of the UPS2 proteomic standard. Additionally, a database containing common contaminants was used. The search was performed with tryptic cleavage specificity with three allowed missed cleavages. Protein identification was under control of the false-discovery rate (FDR, 1% on protein and peptide level). In addition to MaxQuant default settings, the search was additionally performed for the following variable modifications: Protein N terminal acetylation, glutamine to pyro-glutamic acid formation (N-term. glutamine) and oxidation (methionine). Carbamidomethyl (cysteine) was set as fixed modification. For protein quantitation, the iBAQ intensities were used (Schwanhäusser et al. 2011). Proteins that could not be distinguished by peptides were listed individually.

### Publication Abstract
RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) play important roles in bacterial gene expression and physiology but their true number and functional scope remain little understood even in model microbes. To advance global RBP discovery in bacteria, we here establish glycerol gradient sedimentation with RNase treatment and mass spectrometry (GradR). Applied to <i>Salmonella enterica</i>, GradR confirms many known RBPs such as CsrA, Hfq, and ProQ by their RNase-sensitive sedimentation profiles, and discovers the FopA protein as a new member of the emerging family of FinO/ProQ-like RBPs. FopA, encoded on resistance plasmid pCol1B9, primarily targets a small RNA associated with plasmid replication. The target suite of FopA dramatically differs from the related global RBP ProQ, revealing context-dependent selective RNA recognition by FinO-domain RBPs. Numerous other unexpected RNase-induced changes in gradient profiles suggest that cellular RNA helps to organize macromolecular complexes in bacteria. By enabling poly(A)-independent generic RBP discovery, GradR provides an important element in the quest to build a comprehensive catalog of microbial RBPs.

### Keywords
Salmonella, Rbp, Hfq, Proq, Gradr, Faba, Yafb, Csra

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research, Würzburg
Institute for Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Milan Gerovac

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, Würzburg Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research, Würzburg


