### Accession
PXD037231

### Title
LFQ proteomics analysis of the M. smegmatis ClpC2 interactome.

### Description
To assess the ClpC2 interactome, a IP-MS analysis was performed using ectopically expressed tagged ClpC2 in a ClpC2 deficient cell line. To evaluate potential binding sites on ClpC2, CymA treatment was applied to compete with potential interactors for a shared ClpC2 binding site.

### Sample Protocol
Cultures of M. smegmatis mc2-155 cell lines ΔclpC2:ev and ΔclpC2:ClpC2twinstrep as described in the cultivation section were harvested by centrifugation, the pellet was taken up in 500 µl buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.2, 100 mM KCl) and subsequently lysed for 10 minutes using a Bioruptor (Diagenode, 10 cycles, 30 seconds on - 30 seconds off) after adding a small amounts of glass beads to the suspension. The lysates were clarified by centrifugation, the protein concentration was determined, and the volume was adapted accordingly. For the IP, 20 µl of Twin-strep bead resin was added and the samples were incubated at 4 °C for 20 minutes on a shaker. The supernatant was removed in spin columns and the beads were washed five times with buffer. After elution of proteins from the beads in 100 µl buffer BXT, samples were denatured and reduced with SDC (10 µl, 20%) and 10 mM DTT at 60 °C for 10 minutes and subsequently alkylated with 20 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 minutes. The samples were digested with trypsin (1:50 ratio to protein) at 37 °C overnight. To remove SDC, TFA (10%) was added toa final concentration of 1%. Samples were cleared and the supernatants were desalted using spin columns (Pierce).

### Data Protocol
MS raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (1.6.17.0) and the search was performed against a database of the M. smegmatis 2019 Uniprot Reference Proteome with contaminants added. The database search allowed tryptic peptides (min. 7 amino acids) with two missed cleavages. Alkylation of cysteine was considered as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Match between runs and LFQ was enabled and a 1% false discovery rate cutoff was applied at PSM and protein level. Statistical analysis and data normalization was performed in R using the in-house built LaTeX script Cassiopeia (https://github.com/moritzmadern/Cassiopeia_LFQ). Data was filtered for contaminants, protein groups with less than two razor and unique peptides and for missing valid values in raw intensities with a cutoff of less than three valid values in at least one group. Remaining missing values were imputed from normal distribution. The data was loess normalized on protein raw intensity.

### Publication Abstract
The ClpC1:ClpP1P2 protease is a core component of the proteostasis system in mycobacteria. To improve the efficacy of antitubercular agents targeting the Clp protease, we characterized the mechanism of the antibiotics cyclomarin A and ecumicin. Quantitative proteomics revealed that the antibiotics cause massive proteome imbalances, including upregulation of two unannotated yet conserved stress response factors, ClpC2 and ClpC3. These proteins likely protect the Clp protease from excessive amounts of misfolded proteins or from cyclomarin A, which we show to mimic damaged proteins. To overcome the Clp security system, we developed a BacPROTAC that induces degradation of ClpC1 together with its ClpC2 caretaker. The dual Clp degrader, built from linked cyclomarin A heads, was highly efficient in killing pathogenic Mycobacterium tuberculosis, with&#xa0;&gt;100-fold increased potency over the parent antibiotic. Together, our data reveal Clp scavenger proteins as important proteostasis safeguards and highlight the potential of BacPROTACs as future antibiotics.

### Keywords
Protein degradation, Antibiotics, Tpd

### Affiliations
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria
IMP

### Submitter
David Hoi

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Hartl
Max Perutz Labs, Vienna, Austria


