### Accession
PXD008297

### Title
Proteomics in biomanufacturing control: Protein dynamics of CHO-K1 cells and conditioned media during apoptosis and necrosis

### Description
Cell viability has a critical impact on product quantity and quality during the biomanufacturing of therapeutic proteins. An advanced understanding of changes in the cellular and conditioned media proteomes upon cell stress and death is therefore needed for improved bioprocess control. Here, a high pH / low pH reversed phase data independent 2D-LC-MSE discovery proteomics platform was applied to study the cellular and conditioned media proteomes of CHO-K1 apoptosis and necrosis models where cell death was induced by staurosporine exposure or aeration shear in a benchtop bioreactor, respectively. Enriched gene ontology molecular function, biological processes and cellular component terms revealed both cell-death independent and specific features. In addition, label free quantitation using the Hi3 approach resulted in a comprehensive shortlist of 23 potential cell viability marker proteins with highest abundance and a significant increase in the conditioned media upon induction of cell death, including proteins related to cellular stress response, signal mediation, cytoskeletal organization, cell differentiation, cell interaction as well as metabolic and proteolytic enzymes which are interesting candidates for translating into targeted analysis platforms for monitoring bioprocessing response and increasing process control.

### Sample Protocol
Preparation of cell lysates and proteins from conditioned media  Cell pellets were dissolved in 8 M urea / 0.1 M triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, pH 8.5) to which HALT protease inhibitor was added according to manufacturer’s recommendations and lysed using sonication. Protein concentrations were determined using Bradford assay and aliquots of 150 µg protein were used for further processing by an adapted filter-assisted sample preparation protocol (FASP) (Wisniewski et al. 2009). In short, protein aliquots were placed on 10 kDa spin filters, reduced in 5 mM DTT in 8 M urea / 0.1 M TEAB for 1 h at room temperature, subsequently alkylated in 150 mM IAA in 8 M urea / 0.1 M TEAB for 0.5 h at room temperature in the dark. Proteins were buffer-exchanged into 0.1 M TEAB and digested with sequence grade trypsin overnight at 37 °C using a 1:50 (w/w, enzyme/protein) ratio. Following digestion, the released peptides were centrifuged (14 000 × g, room temperature) into a fresh collection tube and dried using vacuum centrifugation. For proteins in the cell supernatant, volume-aliquots of media were concentrated using spin filtration (10 kDa; 3000 × g, 10 °C) and volume-aliquots were further processed using the same protocol as for the cell pellets.  High pH / low pH 2D-LC-MSE analysis and proteomics data processing A Waters Acquity UPLC BEH 130 C18-column (1.7 µm; 2.1 × 150 mm) attached to a Waters H-Class Bio system was used for first dimension high pH peptide separation. Dried peptides were re-constituted in 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid for injection. A loading method in which an isocratic flow of 97% eluent A (10 mM ammonium formate in water, pH 10) and 3% eluent B (ammonium formate in 90% acetonitrile, pH 10) was held for 4 minutes at 0.2 mL/min was used to remove hydrophilic impurities. Peptides from cell lysates were subsequently separated using the following conditions: 97% A, initial conditions; 97% A – 90% A, 0-2 min; 90% A – 55% A, 2-35 min; 55% A - 0% A, 35 – 37 min; 0% A, 37 - 39 min; 0% A – 97% A, 39-40 min; 97% A, 40 - 50 min, a flow of 0.2 mL/min, column temperature of 60°C and UV detection at 214 nm. Sample fractions were automatically collected in 2 minutes intervals, recombined into 6 pools and dried using vacuum centrifugation. For peptides from conditioned media, first dimension separation was merely used as a purification step and peptides were eluted into one pool using isocratic elution at 100% B for 4 minutes. Second dimension low pH chromatographic separation of peptides was performed according to Farrell et al. (Farrell et al. 2015) using a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system equipped with a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC 2G-V/M Trap 5 μm symmetry C18, 180 μm × 20 mm column and a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC 1.8 μm HSS T3, 75 μm × 200 mm analytical column. Peptide samples were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (~ 1 μg/μL) and spiked with Waters Hi3 peptides (E. coli) to a final concentration of 1 pmol/μL prior to injection. 1 μL of sample/standard mixtures were loaded onto the trapping column at a flow rate of 10 μL/min for 5 minutes using 99% eluent C (0.1 % formic acid in water) and 1% eluent D (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Analytical separation of the trapped peptides was performed at 0.3 μL/min and column temperature of 30 °C using a gradient starting from 97% A (initial conditions) followed by 97% A – 94% A (0-2 minutes), 94% A – 60% A (2-90 minutes), column cleaning at 15% A (2 minutes) and equilibration at 97% A (15 minutes). Gradients used for cellular peptide pools were adapted based on the level of hydrophobicity based on 1D-separation. The analytical column was attached to a PicoTip emitter (10 μm) in the nanoflow sprayer of the nano-lockspray dual electrospray ion source which allowed for QToF-MSE analysis using a Xevo G2 QToF-MS instrument. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode at a spray voltage of 3 kV, with 1 s sequential low and high energy scans in the range of 50−2000 Da and a collision energy ramp from 20 to 45 V for the high energy MSE function. The system was calibrated using a Glu-fibrinopeptide (m/z 785.8426, z = 2) which was also used as lockmass reference and was recorded every 30 s throughout the sample run.   References Farrell A, Mittermayr S, Morrissey B, Mc Loughlin N, Navas Iglesias N, Marison IW, Bones J. 2015. Quantitative Host Cell Protein Analysis Using Two Dimensional Data Independent LC–MSE. Anal Chem 87(18):9186-9193. Wisniewski JR, Zougman A, Nagaraj N, Mann M. 2009. Universal sample preparation method for proteome analysis. Nat Methods 6(5):359-62.  See attached file [Albrecht ete al_experimental.docx]for full description of experiment

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis was performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics V 3.2 using the following parameters: minimum number of fragment ion matches per peptide = 3, minimum number of fragment ion matches per protein = 7, minimum number of unique peptides per protein = 2, maximum number of one missed cleavage for tryptic digestion, fixed modification = carbamidomethyl C, variable modifications = oxidation M and deamidation N and Q, false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 1%. Data was searched against the Cricetulus griseus NCBI FASTA database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/assembly/GCF_000419365.1/, downloaded 12th June 2015) and its underlying Mus musculus mRNA FASTA database (Liu et al. 2015), to which the protein sequence of the Hi3 standard protein (E. coli chaperone protein ClpB) was added. The cellular proteomes were normalized to their total proteome whereas data normalization for the conditioned media proteomes was performed in relation to the internal Hi3 standard peptides due to the volume-based approach used.   References Liu Z, Dai S, Bones J, Ray S, Cha S, Karger BL, Li JJ, Wilson L, Hinckle G, Rossomando A. 2015. A quantitative proteomic analysis of cellular responses to high glucose media in Chinese hamster ovary cells. Biotechnol Prog 31(4):1026-38.

### Publication Abstract
Cell viability has a critical impact on product quantity and quality during the biomanufacturing of therapeutic proteins. An advanced understanding of changes in the cellular and conditioned media proteomes upon cell stress and death is therefore needed for improved bioprocess control. Here, a high pH/low pH reversed phase data independent 2D-LC-MS<sup>E</sup> discovery proteomics platform was applied to study the cellular and conditioned media proteomes of CHO-K1 apoptosis and necrosis models where cell death was induced by staurosporine exposure or aeration shear in a benchtop bioreactor, respectively. Functional classification of gene ontology terms related to molecular functions, biological processes, and cellular components revealed both cell death independent and specific features. In addition, label free quantitation using the Hi3 approach resulted in a comprehensive shortlist of 23 potential cell viability marker proteins with highest abundance and a significant increase in the conditioned media upon induction of cell death, including proteins related to cellular stress response, signal mediation, cytoskeletal organization, cell differentiation, cell interaction as well as metabolic and proteolytic enzymes which are interesting candidates for translating into targeted analysis platforms for monitoring bioprocessing response and increasing process control.

### Keywords
2d-lc-mse, Proteomics, Keywords: biomanufacturing, Cho, Necrosis, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
NIBRT
NIBRT Characterisation and Comparability Laboratory, National Institute for Bioprocessing, Research and Training, Fosters Avenue, Mount Merrion, Blackrock, Co. Dublin, A94 X099, Ireland

### Submitter
Simone Albrecht

### Lab Head
Dr Jonathan Bones
NIBRT Characterisation and Comparability Laboratory, National Institute for Bioprocessing, Research and Training, Fosters Avenue, Mount Merrion, Blackrock, Co. Dublin, A94 X099, Ireland


