### Accession
PXD009792

### Title
Global quantitative proteomics of mouse brain structures reveals significant alterations in expression of proteins involved in neuronal plasticity during aging

### Description
Aging is believed to be the result of alterations of protein expression and accumulation of changes in biomolecules. Although there are numerous reports demonstrating changes in protein expression in brain during aging, only few of them describe global changes in the protein level. Here, we present a deepest quantitative proteomic analysis of three brain regions, hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum, in mice aged 1 and 12 months, using the total protein approach technique. In all the brain regions, both in young and in middle-aged animals, we identified over 6,700 proteins. We found that although the total protein expression in middle-aged brain structures is practically unaffected by aging, there are significant differences between young adult and middle-aged mice in the expression of some receptors and signaling cascade proteins proven to be significant for learning and memory formation.  Our analysis demonstrates that hippocampus is the most unstable structure during natural aging and that the first symptoms of weakening of neuronal plasticity may be observed on protein level in middle-aged animals.

### Sample Protocol
Sample aliquots containing 70 ug total protein were processed using the MED FASP method . Proteins were first cleaved overnight LysC, and in the second step digested with trypsin for 2h. The enzyme to protein ration was 1:50. Digestions were carried out in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 at 37C. Aliquots containing 10 µg total peptide were concentrated to a volume of ~5 µL and were stored frozen at -20 C until mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
The spectra were searched using MaxQuant software. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. The maximum false peptide and protein discovery rate was specified as 0.01. Protein abundances were calculated using the “total protein approach” (TPA) method

### Publication Abstract
Aging is believed to be the result of alterations of protein expression and accumulation of changes in biomolecules. Although there are numerous reports demonstrating changes in protein expression in brain during aging, only few of them describe global changes at the protein level. Here, we present the deepest quantitative proteomic analysis of three brain regions, hippocampus, cortex and cerebellum, in mice aged 1 or 12 months, using the total protein approach technique. In all the brain regions, both in young and middle-aged animals, we quantitatively measured over 5,200 proteins. We found that although the total protein expression in middle-aged brain structures is practically unaffected by aging, there are significant differences between young and middle-aged mice in the expression of some receptors and signaling cascade proteins proven to be significant for learning and memory formation. Our analysis demonstrates that the hippocampus is the most variable structure during natural aging and that the first symptoms of weakening of neuronal plasticity may be observed on protein level in middle-aged animals.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Mouse brain, Total proteins approach (tpa), Cortex, Aging, Fasp, Hippocampus

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jacek Wisniewski

### Lab Head
Dr Jacek R Wisniewski
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Martinsried, Germany


