### Accession
PXD043779

### Title
Evaluation of the secretome of senescent melanoma cells and the impact of silencing Mfn1 on the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) by shotgun proteomics analysis.

### Description
Cellular senescence is a therapy endpoint in melanoma, and the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) can affect tumor growth and microenvironment, influencing treatment outcomes. Metabolic interventions can modulate the SASP, and an enhanced mitochondrial energy metabolism supports resistance to therapy in melanoma. In a previous report we showed that in melanoma, senescence induced by the DNA methylating agent temozolomide, increases fusion proteins mitofusins 1 and 2. Silencing Mfn1 or Mfn2 expression reduced interleukin-6 secretion by senescent cells. Here we expanded these observations evaluating the secretome of senescent melanoma cells using shotgun proteomics, and explored the impact of silencing Mfn1 on the SASP. A significant increase in proteins reported to reduce the immune response towards the tumor was found in the media of senescent cells. The secretion of several of these immunomodulatory proteins was affected by Mfn1 silencing, among them was galectin-9. In agreement, tumors lacking mitofusin 1 responded better to treatment with the methylating agent dacarbazine, tumor size was reduced and a higher immune cell infiltration was detected in the tumor. Our results highlight mitochondrial dynamic proteins as potential pharmacological targets to modulate the SASP in the context of melanoma treatment.

### Sample Protocol
Three biological replicates of proteins obtained from cultured cells (shMfn1 or shScr), treated or not with TMZ, were run on 1 cm long SDS gels (12% acrylamide).  In-gel Cys alkylation was performed by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56 °C followed by incubation with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. In-gel protein digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C by incubation with trypsin (Promega) 1:50 protease:protein (w:w) in ammonium bicarbonate 50mM. Peptide extraction was performed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 60% acetonitrile as previously described (Rossello J et al. 2017, Scientific Reports, DOI:10.1038/s41598-017-09926-3). Samples were vacuum-dried, resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, and desalted using Ziptip C18 (Milipore).  Tryptic peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC (UltiMate 300, Thermo Scientific) coupled to a hybrid mass spectrometer Q-Orbitrap (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Each biological replicate was injected twice into an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 precolumn (75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a PepMap TM RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm x 50 cm, 2 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min at 40°C. Peptide elution was achieved with a 150 min gradient from 1% to 50% of mobile phase B (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). MS analysis was carried out in two steps, first acquisition of MS between 200 y 2000 m/z followed by Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of the 12 highest ions from each segment with normalized collision energy (NCE) 25, 30 and 35, using a dynamic exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data analysis was performed using PatternLab for proteomics 4.0 software (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org) data analysis protocol. The proteome from Mus musculus was used to identify the proteins present in the media. A target-reverse data-base including the most common contaminants was generated using PatternLab’s database generation tool. Thermo raw file were searched against the database with the following parameters: mass tolerance from the measured precursor m/z (ppm): 40; enzyme: trypsin, enzyme specificity: fully-specific, missed cleavages: 2; variable modifications: methionine oxidation; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using PatternLab’s Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module to achieve a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. PatternLab’s Venn Diagram module was used for pinpointing proteins exclusively identified in one biological condition using probability mode (p<0.05). PatternLab’s TFold module was used to identify proteins found in both conditions but having a statistically differential abundance according to their extracted ion chromatograms (XIC).  TFold module relies on the Benjamini-Hochberg theoretical FDR estimator to maximize the number of identifications that satisfy both a fold-change cutoff that varies with the t-test p-value as a power law and a stringency criterion that aims to filter out lowly abundant proteins that could produce false positives. Proteins detected in three replicates in all conditions were considered. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the PatternLab´s Clustergram module, and principal omponent analysis (PCA) was performed with the PatternLab´s Buzios module.

### Publication Abstract
Cellular senescence is a therapy endpoint in melanoma, and the senescence-associated secretory phenotype (SASP) can affect tumor growth and microenvironment, influencing treatment outcomes. Metabolic interventions can modulate the SASP, and mitochondrial energy metabolism supports resistance to therapy in melanoma. In a previous report we showed that senescence, induced by the DNA methylating agent temozolomide, increased the level of fusion proteins mitofusin 1 and 2 in melanoma, and silencing Mfn1 or Mfn2 expression reduced interleukin-6 secretion by senescent cells. Here we expanded these observations evaluating the secretome of senescent melanoma cells using shotgun proteomics, and explored the impact of silencing Mfn1 on the SASP. A significant increase in proteins reported to reduce the immune response towards the tumor was found in the media of senescent cells. The secretion of several of these immunomodulatory proteins was affected by Mfn1 silencing, among them was galectin-9. In agreement, tumors lacking mitofusin 1 responded better to treatment with the methylating agent dacarbazine, tumor size was reduced and a higher immune cell infiltration was detected in the tumor. Our results highlight mitochondrial dynamic proteins as potential pharmacological targets to modulate the SASP in the context of melanoma treatment.

### Keywords
Melanoma, Cellular senescence, Mitofusins, Secretome, Shotgun proteomics

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur de Montevideo
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo and Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable

### Submitter
Alejandro Leyva

### Lab Head
Dr Rosario Durán
Analytical Biochemistry and Proteomics Unit, Institut Pasteur de Montevideo and Instituto de Investigaciones Biológicas Clemente Estable


