### Accession
PXD039074

### Title
Proteome analysis of male accessory gland secretions in the diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae)

### Description
In insects, male accessory gland proteins (ACPs) are important reproductive proteins secreted by male accessory glands (MAGs) of the internal male reproductive system. During mating, ACPs were transferred along with sperms inside female bodies and have a significant impact on the physiology of female reproduction. Under sexual selection pressures, the ACPs exhibit remarkably rapid and divergent evolution and varies from species to species. The diamondback moth, Plutella xylostella (L.) (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae), is a major insect pest of cruciferous vegetables worldwide. The reproductive physiology on post-mating state of this species is still largely unknown, which is important for management of this pest. In this study, the ACPs transferred into females during mating were identified by using a tandem mass tags quantitative proteomic analysis. The MAGs were compared before and after mating immediately. The proteomes of copulatory bursas (CB) in mated females shortly after mating were also analyzed by shotgun LC-MS/MS technique. In total, we identified 123 putative secreted ACPs, including most important physiological: regulators of proteolysis, transporters and protein export machinery, signal transduction and immunity. Comparing P. xylostella with other four insect ACPs, trypsins were the only ACPs detected in all insect species. We also identified some new insect ACPs, including protein with chitin binding Peritrophin-A domain, PMP-22/EMP/MP20/Claudin tight junction domain-containing protein, netrin-1, type II inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase, two spaetzles, allatostatin-CC and cuticular protein. This was the first time to identify and analyze ACPs in P. xylostella. Our results have provided an important list of putative secreted ACPs, and have set the stage for further explore functions of these putative proteins in P. xylostella reproduction.

### Sample Protocol
A two-day-old virgin male and a two-day-old virgin female were placed together into a 50 ml microtubes that the orifice was covered with 80 mesh gauze and a cotton ball soaked with 10% sucrose solution at the bottom. The microtubes were placed at scotophase for copulating. A male and female were considered mated if they were in copula for more than 30 minutes and completed the coupling naturally. Once the male and female naturally finished copulation, they were anesthetized with CO2 and immediately dissected in sterile lepidopteran saline on ice under stereomicroscope (JSZ6, Jiangnan, China). The MAG and CB tissues were collected and stored at −80°C until further analysis. For each sample, approximately 200 tissues were pooled. For each type of sample, three biological replicates were prepared, including mated-MAG and mated-CB.And then three mated-CB samples were mixed as a composite sample for analysis.

### Data Protocol
Considering that not all ACPs were secreted via a classical pathway and had a well-defined signal peptide at N-terminal. Here, we used qualitative proteomic analysis of mated-CB to identify as many ACPs as possible. After the protein extracts of mated-CB were digested by trypsin, the obtained peptide mixture of mated-CB sample was separated into 10 separate fractions in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions using the Pierce high pH reverse-phase fractionation kit (Thermo Scientific, QL225317A). For LC-MS/MS analysis, 5μl of each fraction were injected. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted for 60 minutes using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nLC (Thermo Scientific).The MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) was used to search each sample’s MS raw data and embedded into the software Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) for quantitative analysis and identification. The related parameters were as follows: peptide mass tolerance was 20 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was 0.1 Da. The proteolytic enzyme was trypsin with two maximum missed cleavages. The fix modifications were carbamidomethyl (C), and oxidation (M) as a variable modifications. Based on a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% and 99% confidence, the peptides were extracted. The database used in this study was generated from P. xylostella MAGs transcriptomic (accession number SRP306271 in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) of NCBI) containing 28066 amino acid sequences. The transcriptomic putative coding sequences (CDSs) were predicted using Transdecoder software (https://github.com/TransDecoder/TransDecoder/releases).

### Publication Abstract
In insects, male accessory gland proteins (ACPs) are important reproductive proteins secreted by male accessory glands (MAGs) of the internal male reproductive system. During mating, ACPs are transferred along with sperms inside female bodies and have a significant impact on the post-mating physiology changes of the females. Under sexual selection pressures, the ACPs exhibit remarkably rapid and divergent evolution and vary from species to species. The diamondback moth, <i>Plutella xylostella</i> (L.) (Lepidoptera: Plutellidae), is a major insect pest of cruciferous vegetables worldwide. Mating has a profound impact on the females' behavior and physiology in this species. It is still unclear what the ACPs are in this species. In this study, two different proteomic methods were used to identify ACPs in <i>P. xylostella</i>. The proteins of MAGs were compared immediately before and after mating by using a tandem mass tags (TMT) quantitative proteomic analysis. The proteomes of copulatory bursas (CB) in mated females shortly after mating were also analyzed by the shotgun LC-MS/MS technique. In total, we identified 123 putative secreted ACPs. Comparing <i>P. xylostella</i> with other four insect ACPs, trypsins were the only ACPs detected in all insect species. We also identified some new insect ACPs, including proteins with chitin binding Peritrophin-A domain, PMP-22/ EMP/ MP20/ Claudin tight junction domain-containing protein, netrin-1, type II inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate 5-phosphatase, two spaetzles, allatostatin-CC, and cuticular protein. This is the first time that ACPs have been identified and analyzed in <i>P. xylostella</i>. Our results have provided an important list of putative secreted ACPs, and have set the stage for further exploration of the functions of these putative proteins in <i>P. xylostella</i> reproduction.

### Keywords
Plutella xylostella; seminal fluid proteins; male accessory gland; accessory gland proteins; proteomics

### Affiliations
College of Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Lijuan Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Lijuan Wu
College of Plant Protection, Northwest A&F University


