### Accession
PXD026884

### Title
E. coli BL21 Gold LC-MSMS in varying growth conditions

### Description
Proteomic data from LC-MSMS of E. coli BL21 Gold grown in varying growth conditions, including in LB, M9, and spent mammalian cell media.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were harvested in 4 ml samples after a 4 hour growth in a 50 ml culture. Harvested in biological triplicates, digested in trypsin and purified peptides by ZipTip.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed by MaxQuant, and mapped to the E. coli proteome from Uniprot (UP000002032)

### Publication Abstract
Deriving new value from waste streams through secondary processes is a central aim of the circular bioeconomy. In this study we investigate whether chemically defined spent media (CDSM) waste from cell culture bioprocess can be recycled and used as a feed in secondary microbial fermentation to produce new recombinant protein products. Our results show that CDSM supplemented with 2% glycerol supported a specific growth rate of E. coli cultures equivalent to that achieved using a nutritionally rich microbiological media (LB). The titre of recombinant protein produced following induction in a 4-hour expression screen was approximately equivalent in the CDSM fed cultures to that of baseline, and this was maintained in a 16-hr preparative fermentation. To understand the protein production achieved in CDSM fed culture we performed a quantitative analysis of proteome changes in the E. coli using mass spectrometry. This analysis revealed significant upregulation of protein synthesis machinery enzymes and significant downregulation of carbohydrate metabolism enzymes. We conclude that spent cell culture media, which represents 100s of millions of litres of waste generated by the bioprocessing industry annually, may be valorized as a feed resource for the production of recombinant proteins in secondary microbial fermentations. Data is available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD026884.

### Keywords
Growth conditions, Lc-msms, Bl21, E. coli

### Affiliations
BiOrbic, Center for the Bioeconomy, University College Dublin AND School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, University College Dublin.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Ciara Lynch

### Lab Head
Dr O'Connell, David
BiOrbic, Center for the Bioeconomy, University College Dublin AND School of Biomolecular and Biomedical Sciences, University College Dublin.


