### Accession
PXD013861

### Title
Endodermis-specific Receptor-like Kinase (ERK1) is required for the deposition of lignin in the Casparian strip in the root

### Description
The Casparian strip constitutes a physical diffusion barrier formed by the polar deposition of lignin in the root endodermis. The polar deposition of lignin is thought to be mediated by the scaffolding activity of membrane bound Casparian Strip domain proteins (CASPs) and the dirigent domain-containing protein Enhanced Suberin1 (ESB1). Here, we show that the endodermis-specific receptor-like kinase (ERK1), is part of this machinery, playing an essential role in the localization of CASP proteins and in the deposition of lignin, which ultimately are required for the formation of afunctional Casparian strip. ERK1 is localized to the cytoplasm and nucleus of the endodermis, and is part of a signalling pathway that implicates the circadian clock regulator Time for Coffee (TIC). In addition, we found that loss of ERK1 and TIC disrupts the Casparian strip organisation and alters composition of the root microbiome.

### Sample Protocol
For the purification of total proteins from roots seedlings were grown hydroponically in phytatrays (Sigma) on a nylon filter (250 μm mesh; NITEX) which allows the roots to grow through into the half-strength MS medium supplemented with 1% (w/v) sucrose (pH 5.7 with KOH)(Bargmann and Birnbaum, 2010). After two weeks roots were harvested and flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. The root tissue was homogenised with a mortar and pestle cooled with liquid nitrogen. Protein were extracted by adding twice the volume of extraction buffer (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 20 mM NaF, 1 mM Na2MoO4, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 1 mM PMSF, 2 µM Calyculin A, 1 mM NaVO4, 1 mM DTT, Protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 2% (w/v) PVPP) to 3 g of root tissue. After 30 min the samples were spun for 15 min at 4,000 g (4°C) to remove debris. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged for another 30 min at 16,000 g (4°C). The supernatant was again transferred to a new tube and methanol/chloroform precipitation was carried out by adding 4 volumes of methanol, 1 volume of chloroform, and 3 volumes of water, respectively. Samples were centrifuges for 15 min at 4000 g and the aqueous top phase was removed. The proteins were precipitated by adding another 4 volumes of methanol and centrifugation for 15 min at 4000 g. The pellet was washed twice with methanol and resuspended in 25 mM HEPES (pH 8). Reduction and alkylation of the cysteine residues was carried out by adding a combination of 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and 10 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. The protein was digested with trypsin (Promega Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade) overnight at 37 °C at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:100 (w:w). After the digested the peptides were suspended in 80% acetonitrile (AcN), 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and the insoluble matter was spun down at 4000 g for 10 min. The supernatant was used the enrichment of phosphopeptides. Enrichment of phosphopeptides: The peptide concentration was measured with a Qubit™ fluorometer (Invitrogen) and 1 mg total peptides were used for each sample. The Titansphere TiO2 10 µm beads (GL Sciences Inc.) were equilibrated in a buffer containing 20 mg/mL 2,5-dihydroxybenzoic acid (DHB), 80% ACN and 5% TFA in a ratio of 10 µl DHBeq per 1 mg beads for 10 min with gentle shaking at 600 rpm. TiO2 beads were used in a ratio of 1:2 peptide-bead ration (w:w). The TiO2 solution was added to each sample and incubated for 60 min at room temperature. The samples were spun down at 3000 g for 2 min and resuspended in 100 µL Wash buffer I (10% AcN, 5% TFA). The resuspended beads were added to self-made C8-columns. C8-colums were made of 200 µL pipette tips with 2 mm Empore™Octyl C8 (Supelco) discs. The columns were spun down at 2600 g for 2 min, washed with 100 µL Wash buffer II (40% AcN, 5% TFA) and 100 µL Wash buffer III (40% AcN, 5% TFA). The peptides were eluted from the TiO2 beads with 20 µL 5% ammonium hydroxide and subsequently with 20 µL 20% ammonium hydroxide in 25% AcN. Both eluates were pooled, the volume was reduced to 5 µL in a centrifugal evaporator (20 – 30 min) and acidified with 100 µL of buffer A (2% AcN, 1% TFA). Samples were desalted with a self-made C18 column (Empore™Octadecyl C18). C18 were made in the same way as the C8-columns. Before adding the samples, the C18-columns were activated with 50 µL methanol and washed with 50 µL AcN and 50 µL buffer A* (2% AcN, 0.1% TFA). Samples were loaded on the C18-column and spun at 2000 g for 7 min. The columns were washed with 50 µL ethyl acetate and 50 µL buffer A* and then eluted consecutively with 20 µL 40% AcN and 20 µL 60% AcN. Samples were then vacuum-dried and prior to MS analysis resuspended in 50 µL buffer A.

### Data Protocol
Reversed phase chromatography was used to separate tryptic peptides prior to mass spectrometric analysis. Two columns were utilised, an Acclaim PepMap µ-precolumn cartridge 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm 5 μm 100 Å and an Acclaim PepMap RSLC 75 µm x 25 cm 2 µm 100 Å (Thermo Scientific). The columns were installed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex). Mobile phase buffer A was composed of 0.1% formic acid in water and mobile phase B 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Samples were loaded onto the µ-precolumn equilibrated in 2% aqueous acetonitrile containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for 5 min at 10 µL min-1 after which peptides were eluted onto the analytical column at 250 nL min-1 by increasing the mobile phase B concentration from 4% B to 25% over 37 min, then to 35% B over 10 min, and to 90% B over 3 min, followed by a 10 min re-equilibration at 4% B. Eluting peptides were converted to gas-phase ions by means of electrospray ionization and analysed on a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion (Q-OT-qIT, Thermo Scientific). Survey scans of peptide precursors from 375 to 1575 m/z were performed at 120K resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 4 × 105 ion count target. Tandem MS was performed by isolation at 1.6 Th using the quadrupole, HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy of 35, and rapid scan MS analysis in the ion trap. The MS2 ion count target was set to 1x104 and the max injection time was 200 ms. Precursors with charge state 2–6 were selected and sampled for MS2. The dynamic exclusion duration was set to 45 s with a 10 ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Monoisotopic precursor selection was turned on. The instrument was run in top speed mode with 2 s cycles. The raw data was processed using MSConvert in ProteoWizard Toolkit (version 3.0.5759)1. MS2 spectra were searched with Mascot engine (Matrix Science, version 2.5.0) against the Arabidopsis thaliana TAIR database (https://www.arabidopsis.org/)and the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins Database (http://www.thegpm.org/cRAP/index.html). Peptides were generated from a tryptic digestion with up to two missed cleavages, with carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, and with oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications. Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm and product ions were searched at 0.8 Da tolerances.  Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.9, Proteome Software Inc.) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorith2. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters.

### Publication Abstract
The Casparian strip (CS) constitutes a physical diffusion barrier to water and nutrients in plant roots, which is formed by the polar deposition of lignin polymer in the endodermis tissue. The precise pattern of lignin deposition is determined by the scaffolding activity of membrane-bound Casparian Strip domain proteins (CASPs), but little is known of the mechanism(s) directing this process. Here, we demonstrate that Endodermis-specific Receptor-like Kinase 1 (ERK1) and, to a lesser extent, ROP Binding Kinase1 (RBK1) are also involved in regulating CS formation, with the former playing an essential role in lignin deposition as well as in the localization of CASP1. We show that ERK1 is localized to the cytoplasm and nucleus of the endodermis and that together with the circadian clock regulator, Time for Coffee (TIC), forms part of a novel signaling pathway necessary for correct CS organization and suberization of the endodermis, with their single or combined loss of function resulting in altered root microbiome composition. In addition, we found that other mutants displaying defects in suberin deposition at the CS also display altered root exudates and microbiome composition. Thus, our work reveals a complex network of signaling factors operating within the root endodermis that establish both the CS diffusion barrier and influence the microbial composition of the rhizosphere.

### Keywords
Erk1, Phosphorylation, Time for coffee, Root, Arabidopsis, Endodermis

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom
University of Warwick

### Submitter
Andrew Bottrill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Jose Gutierrez-Marcos
School of Life Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry, United Kingdom


