### Accession
PXD019942

### Title
Parallel global profiling of plant TOR dynamics reveals a conserved role for LARP1 in protein translation

### Description
TARGET OF RAPAMYCIN (TOR) is a deeply conserved protein kinase that coordinates eukaryotic metabolism with nutrient availability.  In mammals, TOR specifically promotes translation of ribosomal protein mRNAs when amino acids are available to support protein synthesis.  The mechanisms controlling translation downstream from TOR remain contested, however, and are largely unexplored in plants.  Here, we took parallel global profiling approaches to define the in planta TOR-regulated proteome, and phosphoproteome.  We found that TOR regulates ribosome biogenesis in plants at multiple levels. To investigate this further, we focused on a putative TOR substrate identified in our phosphoproteome: LARP1, a eukaryotic RNA-binding protein that is proposed to mediate TOR translational control of 5′TOP mRNAs in humans.

### Sample Protocol
At least 600 quiescent seedlings per sample were collected and frozen in liquid nitrogen. The samples were homogenized in a TissueLyser, then lysed in a lysis buffer (100mM HEPES, 100mM NaCl and protease and phosphatase inhibitor from Cell Signal Technology) and sonicated on ice. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assays (Thermo). Protein lysates (1mg) were reduced with 10 mM TCEP and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide prior to trypsin digestion at 37°C overnight. Digests were acidified with formic acid and subjected to Sep-Pak C18 solid phase extraction (Waters) and resuspended in 100 μL 50% ACN / 50% water. A 5 μL aliquot (5%) of the sample was reserved for global analysis and the remaining 95 μL of sample was subjected for phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Scientific). The Sequest HT search engine in the Proteome Discover was set to search human database (Uniprot.org). The digestion enzyme was set as trypsin. The HCD MS/MS spectra were searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.02 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-terminal of protein (phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were added when analyzing phosphoproteome data) were specified as a variable modification, while carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT labeling was designated at lysine residues or peptide N-termini were specified in Proteome Discoverer as static modifications. MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications and quantification results was initially generated in Proteome Discover 2.1 and later uploaded to Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.2 Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) for final TMT quantification and data visualization. Normalized and scaled protein/peptide abundance ratios were calculated against the abundance value of the “reference” (which is the pooled sample).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Lc-msms, Seedlings

### Affiliations
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA Plant Gene Expression Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Albany, CA 94710, USA
Postdoctoral researcher

### Submitter
Maria Regina Scarpin

### Lab Head
Dr Jacob O. Brunkard
Department of Plant and Microbial Biology, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA Plant Gene Expression Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Research Service, Albany, CA 94710, USA


