### Accession
PXD017934

### Title
Proteomics of Campylobacter jejuni grown in deoxycholate and following gene deletion

### Description
Campylobacter jejuni is a major cause of food-borne gastroenteritis. Proteomics by label-based two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identified proteins associated with growth in 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (DOC, a component of gut bile salts), and system-wide validation was performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA-SWATH-MS). Proteins involved in nutrient transport were altered by DOC and aligned with intracellular changes to their respective carbon sources. DOC increased intracellular levels of sulfur-containing amino acids (cysteine and methionine) and the dipeptide cystine (Cys-Cys). A DOC induced transport protein was Cj0025c, which has sequence similarity to bacterial Cys-Cys transporters. Deletion of cj0025c (Δcj0025c) resulted in proteome changes consistent with sulfur starvation.

### Sample Protocol
For discovery-based quantitative proteomics by tandem mass tag (TMT) labelling and LC-MS/MS of C. jejuni growth in 0.1% DOC, biological replicates (control and DOC growth) were processed in tandem. Two additional biological replicates were generated for the DIA-SWATH-MS validation set. Analysis of C. jejuni NCTC11168 wild-type (WT) compared to a Δcj0025c mutant were carried out as above. Samples for the 2 technical approaches were processed independently of each other. Prior to TMT labelling, equal aliquots from each biological replicate were split to form an internal technical replicate.

### Data Protocol
Data files from TMT experiments were processed in Proteome Discoverer (v. 2.2) and searched against the UniProt C. jejuni NCTC11168 genome database (UP000000799; organism ID 192222; release May 24, 2018 last modification; 1623 proteins [48]) with the SequestHT algorithm. Search parameters were maximum 2 missed cleavages and carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification; and with variable modifications, oxidation (M), TMT-6plex (peptide N-term, K), and using precursor and fragment ion tolerances of 20 ppm. Peptide level false discovery rate (FDR) was determined using Percolator (v. 2.08.01). Rank 1 peptide spectral matches (PSMs) corresponding to a 1% FDR were exported, and reporter intensities normalized to total reporter ion signals across all channels. Peptides with ambiguous protein assignments were removed.SWATH library data files were processed in Protein Pilot (v. 5.0) and searched against the UniProt C. jejuni NCTC11168 proteome (as above) using the Paragon algorithm. Search parameters were sample set as identification; maximum 2 missed cleavages; Cys alkylation, IAA; digestion, trypsin; instrument, TripleTOF 6600; search effort as thorough ID, and using a detected protein threshold of 0.05. The group file was then imported into PeakView (v. 2.2.0.11391) using a total protein number corresponding to a global protein FDR of 1%. SWATH files were processed against the resulting library using a peptide confidence threshold of 95%, 1% FDR and an extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) width of 20 ppm. Peptide areas were summed to yield a total protein area for relative quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> is a major cause of food-borne gastroenteritis. Proteomics by label-based two-dimensional liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) identified proteins associated with growth in 0.1% sodium deoxycholate (DOC, a component of gut bile salts), and system-wide validation was performed by data-independent acquisition (DIA-SWATH-MS). LC-MS/MS quantified 1326 proteins (&#x223c;82% of the predicted <i>C. jejuni</i> proteome), of which 1104 were validated in additional biological replicates by DIA-SWATH-MS. DOC resulted in a profound proteome shift with 512 proteins showing significantly altered abundance. Induced proteins were associated with flagellar motility and antibiotic resistance; and these correlated with increased DOC motility and resistance to polymyxin B and ciprofloxacin. DOC also increased human Caco-2 cell adherence and invasion. Abundances of proteins involved in nutrient transport were altered by DOC and aligned with intracellular changes to their respective carbon sources. DOC increased intracellular levels of sulfur-containing amino acids (cysteine and methionine) and the dipeptide cystine (Cys-Cys), which also correlated with reduced resistance to oxidative stress. A DOC induced transport protein was Cj0025c, which has sequence similarity to bacterial Cys-Cys transporters. Deletion of <i>cj0025c</i> (&#x394;<i>cj0025c</i>) resulted in proteome changes consistent with sulfur starvation, as well as attenuated invasion, reduced motility, atypical morphology, increased antimicrobial susceptibility and poor biofilm formation. Targeted metabolomics showed &#x394;<i>cj0025c</i> could use known <i>C. jejuni</i> amino and organic acid substrates commensurate with wild-type. Medium Cys-Cys levels however, were maintained in &#x394;<i>cj0025c</i> relative to wild-type. A toxic Cys-Cys mimic (selenocystine) inhibited wild-type growth, but not &#x394;<i>cj0025c</i> Provision of an alternate sulfur source (2 mm thiosulfate) restored &#x394;<i>cj0025c</i> motility. Our data confirm that Cj0025c is a Cys-Cys transporter that we have named TcyP consistent with the nomenclature of homologous proteins in other species.

### Keywords
Pathogenesis, Proteomics, Sulfur, Nutrient uptake, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
The University of Sydney

### Submitter
Lok Man

### Lab Head
Dr Stuart James Cordwell
The University of Sydney


