### Accession
PXD002593

### Title
Proteome profiling of GC1-spg cells over-expressing DYNLT1

### Description
This study was designed to evaluate the proteome profiles of GC1-spg cells  transfected with pEGFPN1-dynlt1 (experiment) and empty vector (control). The cells were harvested 48 hrs after transfection and the proteins were profiled.

### Sample Protocol
GC1-spg cells were transfected with pEGFPN1-dynlt1 (experiment) and empty vector (control). The cells were harvested 48 hrs after transfection and the protein was extracted using Rapigest following the recommended protocols. The proteome profile was done using label-free proteome profiling protocol.

### Data Protocol
The acquired ion mobility enhanced MSE spectra was analysed using ProteinLynx Global SERVER™ v2.5.3 (PLGS, Waters, Manchester, UK) for protein identification as well as for the label-free relative protein quantification. Data processing included lock mass correction post acquisition. Processing parameters for PLGS were set as follows: noise reduction thresholds for low energy scan ion – 150 counts, high energy scan ion - 50 counts and peptide intensity - 500 counts (as suggested by manufacturer). The protein identifications were obtained by searching against the mouse database downloaded from NCBI. During database search, the protein false positive rate was set to 4 %. The parameters for protein identification was made in such a way that a peptide was required to have at least 1 fragment ion match, a protein was required to have at least 3 fragment ion matches and a protein was required to have at least 1 peptide match for identification. Oxidation of methionine was selected as variable modification and cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification. Trypsin was chosen as the enzyme used with a specificity of 1 missed cleavage. Data sets were normalized using the ‘auto-normalization' function of PLGS and label-free quantitative analyses was performed by comparing the normalized peak area/intensity of identified peptides between the samples. Thus, we obtained parameters such as score, sequence coverage and number of peptides identified for each protein. The protein data set was filtered by considering only those identified proteins which have at least 2 peptides. Furthermore only a fold change higher than 50% difference (ratio of either <0.50 or >1.5) was considered to be indicative of significantly altered levels of expression.

### Publication Abstract
DYNLT1 is a member of a gene family identified within the t-complex of the mouse, which has been linked with male germ cell development and function in the mouse and the fly. Though defects in the expression of this gene are associated with male sterility in both these models, there has been no study examining its association with spermatogenic defects in human males. In this study, we evaluated the levels of DYNLT1 and its expression product in the germ cells of fertile human males and males suffering from spermatogenic defects. We screened fertile (n = 14), asthenozoospermic (n = 15), oligozoospermic (n = 20) and teratozoospermic (n = 23) males using PCR and Western blot analysis. Semiquantitative PCR indicated either undetectable or significantly lower levels of expression of DYNLT1 in the germ cells from several patients from across the three infertility syndrome groups, when compared with that of fertile controls. DYNLT1 was localized on head, mid-piece, and tail segments of spermatozoa from fertile males. Spermatozoa from infertile males presented either a total absence of DYNLT1 or its absence in the tail region. Majority of the infertile individuals showed negligible levels of localization of DYNLT1 on the spermatozoa. Overexpression of DYNLT1 in GC1-spg cell line resulted in the up-regulation of several cytoskeletal proteins and molecular chaperones involved in cell cycle regulation. Defective expression of DYNLT1 was associated with male factor infertility syndromes in our study population. Proteome level changes in GC1-spg cells overexpressing DYNLT1 were suggestive of its possible function in germ cell development. We have discussed the implications of these observations in the light of the known functions of DYNLT1, which included protein trafficking, membrane vesiculation, cell cycle regulation, and stem cell differentiation.

### Keywords
Spermatogenesis, Spermatogonia, Dynlt1, Gc1-spg cells

### Affiliations
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Thycaud PO Poojappura Thiruvananthapuram Kerala 695 014, India
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology, Thycaud PO, Poojappura, Thiruvananthapuram 695014, Kerala, India

### Submitter
Pradeep Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Pradeep G Kumar
Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Thycaud PO Poojappura Thiruvananthapuram Kerala 695 014, India


