### Accession
PXD009571

### Title
Purification of Cross-linked RNA-Protein Complexes by Phenol-Toluol Extraction

### Description
Recent methodological advances allowed the identification of an increasing number of RNAbinding proteins (RBPs) and their RNA-binding sites. RNA interactome capture is, however, limited to proteins interacting with polyadenylated RNAs while RBPs associating with nonadenylate RNA classes cannot be purified. Moreover, the vast majority of species that lack poly-A tails in their mRNAs (including all archea and bacteria) are not amenable to RNA interactome capture studies. To overcome these limitations, we have developed a novel protocol, Phenol Toluol extraction (PTex), that does not rely on a specific RNA sequence or motif for isolation of cross-linked ribonucleoproteins (RNPs), but rather purifies them based entirely on their physicochemical properties. PTex captures RBPs that bind to poly-A RNA, but also proteins associating with non-adenylate RNA species (rRNA, tRNA) as short as 30nt. PTex can be used to simplify complex work ows such as PAR-CLIP and reliably recovers RBPs from tissues and bacteria thus significantly expanding the experimental toolbox to species that could previously not be assessed experimentally.

### Sample Protocol
Input material was lyzed and proteins denatured in 1% SDS and 0.1 M DTT Phosphate Buffer Solution (PBS) by boiling for 10 min at 95°C. After cooling, samples were treated with Benzonase for 30 min at 37°C, spun down to remove cell debris and supernatant containing cellular proteins transferred to fresh tubes. Remaining input material was used for RBPs enrichment with PTex as described above. After PTex, RBPs were precipitated in 90% ethanol solution at -20°C and 30 minutes centrifugation at 20000g at 4°C. Protein pellets were ressuspended in 2M urea in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer and Benzonase was added for 30 min at 37°C to digest RNA. Proteins were precipitated with methanol-chloroform extraction (Wessel and Flugge 1984) and ressuspended in 8 M urea and 0.1 M Tris pH 8 solution. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 30 min and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were first digested by lysyl endopeptidase (LysC) (Wako) at a LysC-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at room temperature for 3 h, diluted to 2M final concentration of urea with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and further digested with trypsin (Promega) at a trypsin-to-protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) under constant agitation at room temperature for 16 h. Peptides were desalted with C18 Stage Tips (Rappsilber et al. 2003) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were separated on a monolithic column (100 µm ID x 2,000 mm, MonoCap C18 High Resolution 2000 [GL Sciences] kindly provided by Dr. Yasushi Ishihama [Kyoto University]) using 6 hour gradient of  5 to 50 % increasing acetonitrile concentration at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Q Exactive Plus instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was operated in the data dependent mode with a full scan in the Orbitrap followed by top 10 MS/MS scans using higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD).

### Data Protocol
All raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant software (v1.5.1.2) (Cox and Mann, 2008) using the label free quantification (LFQ) algorithm (reference PMID 24942700) with default parameters and match between runs option on. Search parameters included two missed cleavage sites, cysteine carbamidomethyl fixed modification and variable modifications including methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation. The peptide mass tolerance was 6 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 20 ppm. Database search was performed against the human reference proteome (UNIPROT,  downloaded in October 2014) or the Salmonella typhimurium reference proteome (UNIPROT, downloaded in August 2017) with common serum and enzyme contaminants sequences included. A minimum peptide count required for protein quantification was set to two. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at peptide spectrum match (PSM) and protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
Recent methodological advances allowed the identification of an increasing number of RNA-binding proteins (RBPs) and their RNA-binding sites. Most of those methods rely, however, on capturing proteins associated to polyadenylated RNAs which neglects RBPs bound to non-adenylate RNA classes (tRNA, rRNA, pre-mRNA) as well as the vast majority of species that lack poly-A tails in their mRNAs (including all archea and bacteria). We have developed the Phenol Toluol extraction (PTex) protocol that does not rely on a specific RNA sequence or motif for isolation of cross-linked ribonucleoproteins (RNPs), but rather purifies them based entirely on their physicochemical properties. PTex captures RBPs that bind to RNA as short as 30 nt, RNPs directly from animal tissue and can be used to simplify complex workflows such as PAR-CLIP. Finally, we provide a global RNA-bound proteome of human HEK293 cells and the bacterium Salmonella Typhimurium.

### Keywords
Human, Salmonella, Rna-binding proteins, Ptex, Lc-msms, Shotgun

### Affiliations
Max-Delbrück-Centrum für Molekulare Medizin in der Helmholtz-Gemeinschaft
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.

### Submitter
Carlos Henrique Vieira e Vieira

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Selbach
Max-Delbrueck-Centre for Molecular Medicine (MDC), Berlin, Germany.


