### Accession
PXD003240

### Title
Characterization of Mortierella elongata/Candidatus Glomeribacter sp. symbiotic system

### Description
Proteins from Mortierella elongata/Candidatus Glomeribacter sp. symbiotic system were extracted, trypsine digested  and identified with LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
using SDS-boiling based cell lysis and then use FASP-base protein cleanup and digestion

### Data Protocol
using Sipros 3.0 for database searching. search results were filtered to achieve 1% at the peptide level and a minimum of 1 unique peptide and 1 non-unique was required for each inferred protein

### Publication Abstract
Many plant-associated fungi host endosymbiotic endobacteria with reduced genomes. While endobacteria play important roles in these tri-partite plant-fungal-endobacterial systems, the active physiology of fungal endobacteria has not been characterized extensively by systems biology approaches. Here, we use integrated proteomics and metabolomics to characterize the relationship between the endobacterium Mycoavidus sp. and the root-associated fungus Mortierella elongata. In nitrogen-poor media, M. elongata had decreased growth but hosted a large and growing endobacterial population. The active endobacterium likely extracted malate from the fungal host as the primary carbon substrate for energy production and biosynthesis of phospho-sugars, nucleobases, peptidoglycan and some amino acids. The endobacterium obtained nitrogen by importing a variety of nitrogen-containing compounds. Further, nitrogen limitation significantly perturbed the carbon and nitrogen flows in the fungal metabolic network. M. elongata regulated many pathways by concordant changes on enzyme abundances, post-translational modifications, reactant concentrations and allosteric effectors. Such multimodal regulations may be a general mechanism for metabolic modulation.

### Keywords
Endosymbiosis, Lc-ms/ms, Mortierella elongata, Candidatus glomeribacter sp.

### Affiliations
Oak Ridge National Lab
Oak Ridge National Laboratory

### Submitter
Zhou Li

### Lab Head
Dr Chongle Pan
Oak Ridge National Laboratory


