### Accession
PXD014846

### Title
Vaginal secretory proteome dynamically changes across the early and mid-trimesters of pregnancy

### Description
This study investigates the dynamic alterations in high vaginal fluid (HVF) proteome and its correlation with physiological changes during progression of term pregnancy. The HVF samples were collected at three time points as defined as  V1 (6-12 weeks), V2 (18-20 weeks) and V3 (26-28 weeks) and SWATH-MS strategy were applied to profile changes in protein expression at early and middle stage of pregnancy. Using in-house generated HVF-specific protein library, 61 proteins (>1.5 fold at V2/V1 or V3/V1, q-value <0.05) changed as a function of gestational age. The stage-specific expression pattern of these proteins was mainly associated with the biology of cervical remolding, fetal development and microbial defense.

### Sample Protocol
The maternal HVF was collected using swab from the enrolled participants. All samples were buffer exchanged with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.0)through a 3 kDa MWCO membrane (Amicon Ultra, Millipore). Trypsin were used for proteins digestion at 20:1 protein to enzyme ratio. The digested samples were desalted using C18 fast-flow tips (Pierce Thermo Fisher scientific) and spiked with iRT (Biognosys, Switzerland). Samples were vacumm dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis using an TripleTOF 5600 (SCIEX)in DDA or DIA (SWATH-MS) mode.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant analysis software (version 1.6.1.0) with default settings were used for identification of peptides and proteins from DDA MS files. Reference spectral library was generated using Spectronaut (Biognosys) with default settings. All DIA datasets (.wiff files) were converted to HTRMS format before analysis and Spectronaut (version 11) software was used for retention time normalisation and targeted data extraction from the DIA MS files. The protein quantitation and peptide quantities were calculated as a mean intensity within the XIC peak area of the respective fragment ions at MS2. The protein CVs were calculated based on the summed intensities of their respective peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Pregnancy is characterized by intense physiological and structural alterations in the vagina, cervix, and overlying fetal membranes. High vaginal fluid (HVF) is a proximal fluid that covers the lower part of the female reproductive system and the severity of vaginal pathology often adversely affects pregnancy outcomes. To identify the correlation of vaginal fluid proteome dynamics and physiological changes during the progression of pregnancy, a longitudinal study was performed on 20 pregnant women who delivered a baby in &gt;37 weeks without any complications. SWATH-MS-based label-free quantitative proteomics was performed to profile the HVF proteome at three time points defined as V1 (7-12 weeks), V2 (18-20 weeks), and V3 (26-28 weeks). Linear mixed-effect models were used to estimate protein abundance as a function of the period of gestational age. In this study, we identified 1015 HVF proteins and 61 of them were significantly altered until late second trimester. Our result demonstrates that the HVF proteins reveal gestational age-specific expression patterns and the function of these proteins is associated with tissue remodeling, organ development, and microbial defense. Our study provides an opportunity to monitor the underlying physiology of pregnancy that may be further probed for the biomarker identification in pregnancy-related adverse outcomes. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD014846 and PXD021811.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Longitudinal study, Swath ms, Human vaginal fluid

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology
NCR Biotech Science Cluster
3rd Milestone, Faridabad-Gurgaon Expressway
P.O. Box No. 3, Faridabad - 121 001
Haryana (NCR Delhi), India
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad 121001, INDIA.

### Submitter
Bhoj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Tushar Kanti Maiti
Regional Centre for Biotechnology, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad 121001, INDIA.


