### Accession
PXD018995

### Title
SIRT3 interactions and mitochondrial proteome during HCMV infection

### Description
SIRT3 has been shown to inhibit HCMV infection, but the mechanism under the antiviral effect is not clear. To identify the mediator of SIRT3 antiviral function, we aim to identify and quantify SIRT3 interactions during HCMV infection. A set of large-scale IPs were performed to determine the specific interactions with SIRT3 during infection, while small-scale IPs were conducted to determine the temporal interactions over the life cycle of infection. The mitochondrial proteome was used to characterize the changes of protein abundances after infection, and it was used for the normalization of acetylation.

### Sample Protocol
Human fibroblasts MRC5 cell lines that overexpress SIRT3-GFP and mito-GFP were infected by human cytomegalovirus strain AD169. Uninfected and infected (72 hours after infection) cells were collected, and mitochondria were enriched using density-gradient fractionation. Enriched mitochondria were cryo-grinded, and anti-GFP IPs were conducted to isolate SIRT3-GFP and mito-GFP. Isolates were subjected to an in-gel digestion procedure and analyzed using Thermo LTQ Velos ETD. For the small-scale IPs,  SIRT3-GFP and mito-GFP cell lines were infected and collected at mock, 6, 24, 48, 72, 96, and 120 hpi. The enriched mitochondria were subjected to in-solution digestion procedure, and the isolated proteins then analzyed by Thermo Q Exactive HF. For the mitochondrial proteome, MRC5 cells were infected and collected at mock, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hpi, and the enriched mitochondria samples were prepared using methanol/chloroform precipitation, and subsequently analyzed by  Thermo Q Exactive HF.

### Data Protocol
The raw files of the large-scale IPs were searched by Proteome Discover ver. 1.3 and SEQUEST using a human and herpesviruses sequences appended with common contaminants, and the peptide spectrum matches were asembled and analyzed by Scaffold (3.6.5). The spectral counts of the proteins were reported. The results of small-scale Ips and mitochondrial proteome were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer ver 2.3 with a processing and consensus workflow. The raw abundances of the small-scale IP results were exported for further analysis, and the abundance ratios of the imtochondrial proteome were used for subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondrial proteome, Ip-ms, Hcmv, Sirt3

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of molecular biology, Princeton University, US

### Submitter
Xinlei Sheng

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of molecular biology, Princeton University, US


