### Accession
PXD040164

### Title
The C-terminal domain of periostin is intrinsically disordered and interacts with 143 proteins in an in vitro epidermal model of atopic dermatitis

### Description
Human periostin is a 78-91 kDa alternatively spliced protein belonging to the group of matricellular proteins. The protein has been implicated in extracellular matrix remodeling, tumor development, and metastasis, inflammatory diseases like atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and asthma. The C-terminal may be alternatively spliced, but the role of the ten variants is not understood. Here we investigate the structure of the C-terminal domain containing the protein sequence encoded by the fourall exons and its interactome. Structural analysis using SAXS, CD spectroscopy, and limited proteolysis suggested that the C-terminal domain was disordered. In addition, the motif responsible for heparin-binding was mapped to an arginine-rich sequence in the conserved very C-terminal part of periostin. Co-immunoprecipitationPull-down confirmed three known interaction partners bound to the C-terminal domain of periostin and identified an additional 140 novel potential interaction partners. Nine of these have been implicated in atopic dermatitis. Based on our findings, we suggest that the C-terminal domain anchor periostin to cell surfaces and facilitates interactions between connective tissue components or other cells. We propose that the C-terminal domain is a central part of the suggested function as a multifunctional modulator of extracellular matrix stability and wound healing.

### Sample Protocol
To identify potential interaction partners of periostin CTD, the recombinant PN FL and PN ΔCTD were used as bait and conditioned medium from differentiated NTERT1 cells treated with IL-4/-13 was used as pull-down matrix. MagStrep ”type 3” XT 5 % bead suspension (IBA Lifesciences) were coupled with 0.85 nmol of PN FL or PN ΔCTD following the manufacturer’s protocol. Coupled beads were incubated with 500 µl pull-down matrix for 60 min at RT rotating and were washed in 3x200 µl buffer A1 before interaction partners were eluted in 2x25 µl Buffer BXT (IBA Lifesciences). The pull-down was performed in triplicates.  Tryptic digests of eluates for LC-MS/MS analysis were performed on spin filters to remove biotin. Eluates were lyophilized and resuspended in denaturation buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (Ambic), pH 8) followed by reduction in 50 mM DTT for 30 min and alkylation in 100 mM idodoacetamide for 30 min. Proteins were captured on Vivacon® 500 ultrafiltration spin filter columns (10,000 MW cut-off) and washed twice with 100 µl of denaturation buffer. Urea was removed with 50 mM Ambic pH 8 before 500 ng MS grade trypsin (Promega) in 100 µl of 50 mM Ambic pH 8 was added. The samples were vortexed, and incubated over night at 37° C. Peptides were collected in a new collection tube by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 30 min before addition of 50 µl of 500 mM NaCl to the filter and additional centrifugation for 10 min. Samples were desalted using Empore™ Octadecyl C18 reverse phase membranes stage tips.

### Data Protocol
Samples from the pull-down were analyzed on an Orbitrap Eclipse™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 5 cm trap column and a 15 cm analytical column packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 3µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). The flow rate was 250 nl/min, and peptides were eluted with a 20 min gradient from 6 % to 44 % solvent B (80 acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid). Each replicate was analyzed twice to obtain technical duplicates.  The spectra obtained from LC-MS/MS analysis were analyzed with Proteome DiscovererTM (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Spectra were searched using the SequestHT search engine against the SwissProt Homo sapiens protein sequence database (SwissProt TaxID=9606) (v2017-10-25) with search parameters; trypsin as protease; up to two missed cleavages; carbamidomethylation of cysteine set as a static modification; methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and methionine loss set as dynamic modifications; precursor mass tolerance at 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance at 0.2 Da; FDR of 1 %. To identify interaction partners, search results were used to perform label-free quantification with parameters; unique peptides only; precursor abundance based on intensity; no scaling; no normalization; protein ratio calculation based on protein abundance; low abundance resampling imputation of missing values; ANOVA statistical analysis. Only proteins with ≥ 2 unique peptides, 4 ≥ peptide spectrum matches, and identification/feature detection in ≥ 60 % of the replicates were considered in the analysis. Criteria for CTD interaction partners were > 5-fold relative abundance in PN FL vs. PN ΔCTD samples with adjusted p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Human periostin is a 78-91 kDa matricellular protein implicated in extracellular matrix remodeling, tumor development, metastasis, and inflammatory diseases like atopic dermatitis, psoriasis, and asthma. The protein consists of six domains, including an N-terminal Cys-rich CROPT domain, four fasciclin-1 domains, and a C-terminal domain. The exons encoding the C-terminal domain may be alternatively spliced by shuffling four exons, generating ten variants of unknown function. Here, we investigate the structure and interactome of the full-length variant of the C-terminal domain with no exons spliced out. The structural analysis showed that the C-terminal domain lacked a tertiary structure and was intrinsically disordered. In addition, we show that the motif responsible for heparin-binding is in the conserved very C-terminal part of periostin. Pull-down confirmed three known interaction partners and identified an additional 140 proteins, among which nine previously have been implicated in atopic dermatitis. Based on our findings, we suggest that the C-terminal domain of periostin facilitates interactions between connective tissue components in concert with the four fasciclin domains.

### Keywords
Extracellular matrix protein, Connective tissue, Alternative splicing, Wound healing, Heparin-binding protein, Atopic dermatitis, Periostin, Protein‐protein interactions, Intrinsically disordered protein

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark
Aarhus University

### Submitter
Christian  Rusbjerg-Weberskov

### Lab Head
Dr Jan J. Enghild
Institute of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


