### Accession
PXD029832

### Title
Tailored pyridoxal probes unravel novel cofactor-dependent targets and antibiotic hits in critical bacterial pathogens

### Description
Unprecedented bacterial targets are urgently needed for the development of novel antibiotics to overcome the current resistance crisis. Challenges include the limited uptake of compounds as well as prioritizing proteins for their druggability and functional relevance. Especially, the wealth of uncharacterized proteins represents an untapped source for novel targets. However, tools to decipher their function are largely lacking. We here utilize the systematic mining of pyridoxal phosphate dependent enzymes (PLP DEs) in bacteria to focus on a target class, which is known to bind ligands, accesses PLP via active transport from the media and is involved in crucial metabolic processes. For this, we systematically exploited the chemical space of the pyridoxal (PL) scaffold and obtained eight PL probes bearing modifications at various ring positions. These probes were subsequently tested for phosphorylation by cognate kinases and labelling of PLP DEs in clinically relevant Gram-positive (Staphylococcus aureus) as well as Gram-negative (Escherichia coli and Pseudomonas aeruginosa) strains. Overall, the coverage of this diverse set of probes along with refined labelling conditions not only exceeded the performance of a previous probe generation, it also provided a detailed map of binding preferences of certain structural motifs. Although originally conducted in mutant cells devoid of PLP de novo biosynthesis, we here demonstrate efficient PLP DE labelling also in a wild type strain. Overall, the profiling revealed several putative PLP DEs with unknown function, of which we exemplarily characterized five via in-depth enzymatic assays. Finally, we screened a panel of putative PLP binders for antibiotic activity and unravelled the targets of hit molecules via competitive profiling with our probes. Here, an uncharacterized enzyme, essential for bacterial growth, was assigned as PLP dependent cysteine desulfurase and confirmed to be inhibited by the marketed drug phenelzine. Our approach provides a basis for deciphering novel PLP DEs as essential antibiotic targets along with corresponding ways to decipher small molecule inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment: Live cells of E. coli, P. aeruginosa or S. aureus were treated with the PL-probes and lysed after 2 h. Lysate was reduced with sodium borohydride and labeled proteins were clicked to biotin tags. Proteins were further enriched on avidin beads, digested (lysC and trypsin), and peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Fusion. All proteomics experiments were simultaneously conducted in three biological replicates (E.coli PL3 enrichment 4 replicates). Competitive approach: Live cells of S. aureus were treated with the corresponding inhibitors, then with a PL-probe and lysed after 2 h. Lysate was reduced with sodium borohydride and labeled proteins were clicked to biotin tags. Proteins were further enriched on avidin beads, digested (lysC and trypsin), and peptides were analyzed on a Thermo Scientific Fusion. All proteomics experiments were simultaneously conducted in three biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were analysed using MaxQuant (ver. 1.6.2.10) which uses the Andromeda search engine. Settings were default except for LFQ quantification and match between runs, which were activated during search. The following UniProtKB databases were used for the searches: E. coli K12 (taxon identifier: 83333, downloaded 09.04.2019), P. aeruginosa PAO1 (taxon identifier: 208964, downloaded 14.04.2020) and S. aureus USA300 (taxon identifier: 367830, downloaded 04.11.2020). Statistical analysis was conducted in Perseus (ver. 1.6.5.0). Protein-groups textfiles from the MaxQuant analysis were loaded into Perseus and first, LFQ intensities were transformed (log2). Further, protein contaminants, ones only identified by site modification and reverse hits were removed from the matrix. Sample replicates were then equally annotated and the matrix was filtered for 2 out of 3 valid values in at least one group. Missing values were imputated for the whole matrix using the following settings: width 0.3, down shift 1.8. Finally, p values were calculated by a two-sided two sample t test using a BENJAMINI HOCHBERG false discovery rate correction (FDR, 0.05). Visualisation of data was realised using a scatter plot [x axis: student’s t test difference (probe/control or competitor plus probe/probe); y axis:  log student’s t test p value (probe/control or competitor plus probe/probe)]. Heatmaps were created in OriginPro® (ver. 9.7.0.185) by plotting LFQ intensities against PLP dependent enzymes.

### Publication Abstract
Unprecedented bacterial targets are urgently needed to overcome the resistance crisis. Herein we systematically mine pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes (PLP-DEs) in bacteria to focus on a target class which is involved in crucial metabolic processes. For this, we tailored eight pyridoxal (PL) probes bearing modifications at various positions. Overall, the probes exceeded the performance of a previous generation and provided a detailed map of PLP-DEs in clinically relevant pathogens including challenging Gram-negative strains. Putative PLP-DEs with unknown function were exemplarily characterized via in-depth enzymatic assays. Finally, we screened a panel of PLP binders for antibiotic activity and unravelled the targets of hit molecules. Here, an uncharacterized enzyme, essential for bacterial growth, was assigned as PLP-dependent cysteine desulfurase and confirmed to be inhibited by the marketed drug phenelzine. Our approach provides a basis for deciphering novel PLP-DEs as essential antibiotic targets along with corresponding ways to decipher small molecule inhibitors.

### Keywords
Antibiotic compound screening, Pyridoxal phosphate dependent enzymes, Chemical proteomics, Enzyme characterization

### Affiliations
Technical University of Munich
Chair of Organic Chemistry II TU München Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8 D-85748 Garching Germany

### Submitter
Martin Pfanzelt

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan Axel Sieber
Chair of Organic Chemistry II TU München Ernst-Otto-Fischer-Straße 8 D-85748 Garching Germany


