### Accession
PXD016320

### Title
Yeast proteomic analysis upon temperature shift

### Description
DIA/SWATH analysis of yeast upon temperature shift.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast was grown in triplicates at different temperature (20, 25, 30 ,37°C) prior to protein extraction and bottom-up LC-MS analysis. The samples were injected in DDA mode for library generation and in DIA/SWATH modefor peptide/protein quantification

### Data Protocol
DDA files were searched with Mascot+Comet; search results were combined with peptideProphet, iProphet; the spectral library were generated with spectraST and exported to an assay list in tsv and TraML format. The DIA/SWATH files were extracted with openSWATH, and the results aligned using TRIC.

### Publication Abstract
Productive ribosomal RNA (rRNA) compaction during ribosome assembly necessitates establishing correct tertiary contacts between distant secondary structure elements. Here, we quantify the response of the yeast proteome to low temperature (LT), a condition where aberrant mis-paired RNA folding intermediates accumulate. We show that, at LT, yeast cells globally boost production of their ribosome assembly machinery. We find that the LT-induced assembly factor, Puf6, binds to the nascent catalytic RNA-rich subunit interface within the 60S pre-ribosome, at a site that eventually loads the nuclear export apparatus. Ensemble F&#xf6;rster resonance energy transfer studies show that Puf6 mimics the role of Mg<sup>2+</sup> to usher a unique long-range tertiary contact to compact rRNA. At LT, puf6 mutants accumulate 60S pre-ribosomes in the nucleus, thus unveiling Puf6-mediated rRNA compaction as a critical temperature-regulated rescue mechanism that counters rRNA misfolding to prime export competence.

### Keywords
Puf6, Yeast, S cerevisiae, Proteomics, Swath, Dia

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich Faculty of Science, University of Zurich
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Ludovic Gillet

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi A Aebersold
Department of Biology, Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich Faculty of Science, University of Zurich


