### Accession
PXD040437

### Title
 Pediatric COVID-19 Human plasma LC-MS

### Description
Analysis of plasma from adult and pediatric COVID-19 patients via untargeted and targeted proteomics reveals activation in complement and coagulation pathways as common elements in both populations

### Sample Protocol
Neat plasma diluted 1:10 reduced, alkyated 150µg of total protein was transferred to a low bind centrifuge tube and diluted with sodium deoxycholate to a final concentration of 1% (w/v) and 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Thermofisher). The sample was then incubated at 60˚C for 30 minutes. After cooling for 5 min at room temperature alkylation of cysteines was initiated by the addition of iodoacetamide (SigmaAldrich) to a final concentration of 10 mM with 30 minutes of incubation at 37˚C in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched by the addition of DL-dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma Aldrich) at a final concentration of 10 mM followed by 30 minutes of incubation at 37˚C. From this reaction 50 µg of total protein (~1/3 of the total) was removed and digested with TPCK treated trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) and Lys-C protease (Pierce) at a protein to enzyme ratio of 1:10 trypsin and 1:20 LysC. The digestion was left to proceed overnight at 37˚C. Samples were acidified and deoxycholate was removed via centrifugation and then desalted using solid phase extraction HLB matrix (Oasis HLB 96-well plate, 30µm). 400 ng of pepted was injected on Aurora C18 column (15 cm x 75 µm ID, 1.6 µm C18, Ionopticks, Australiausing an Easy-nLC 1200 HPLC system (Thermo Fischer)  the column temperature was maintained at 60˚C with an integrated column oven equipped with a spray adaptor and larger chamber to accommodate the fittings of the column (Sonation, Biberach, Germany, PROSO-V1). The samples were analyzed on an Eclipse Tribrid Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher) equipped with a FAIMS Pro source (Thermo Fisher). Data dependent LC-MS/MS was conducted FAIMS CV voltages of -50 and -70, RF funnel 40V, heated capillary 305˚C. The instrument was operated in data dependent mode with full profile MS spectra collected at 120k resolution (at 200m/z), 375-1500 m/z, AGC target of 250% with maximum injection time set to Auto.

### Data Protocol
Labele free quantiation using Proteom discoverer v 2.5. Minora feature detection for LFQ. Search settings set to Trypsin, 10 ppm tolerance on precursor, and 0.5 Da on fragment. Data were collected orbitrap 120k, and MS2 in the iontrap. MSPepsearch with TaxID=9606 v2021-06-03 SP_cononical database. NIST_Human_Orbitrap_HCD_20160923 spectral library. Sepctra that were not match with ihg confidence in MSpepsearch were then search with SequestHT using the same FASTA data base, Trypsin with 3 miss cleavages,variable modificaitons oxidation(M), N-term pyro-Glu, N-term actyle and Met-loss+Acetyl

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Plasma, Covid, Childern

### Affiliations
Emory School of Medicine
Dept. Biochemistry, Emory School of Medicine

### Submitter
Blaine Roberts

### Lab Head
Dr Blaine R. Roberts
Dept. Biochemistry, Emory School of Medicine


