### Accession
PXD004756

### Title
TDP-43 loss of function inhibits endosomal trafficking and alters trophic signaling in neurons

### Description
Whole proteome quantification identified upregulation of the ESCRT component VPS4B upon TDP-43 knockdown in neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in 4% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0, reduced with 10 mM DTT subjected to 45 min of alkylation with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Acetone (−20 °C) was added to 100 μg of proteins to a final concentration of 80% v/v, and proteins were precipitated over night at −20 °C. The protein pellet was dissolved in 50 μl of 6 M urea/2 M thiourea, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0. After the addition of 2 μg of LysC, digestion was carried out for 4 h (21C). We diluted with 5 volumes of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and  digested the mixture with 2 μg of trypsin (21C) over night.

### Data Protocol
We processed the raw data with MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) and used the integrated search engine Andromeda (Cox et al., 2011) to search MS/MS spectra against the rat UniprotKB Fasta database (34,562 forward entries; version from July 2015). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin while allowing up to two miss cleavages and cleavage N-terminal to proline. We set the minimum length of peptides to be considered for identification to seven amino acids assuming carbamidomethylation of cysteins as fixed and methionine Oxidation (M) as well as acetylation of N-termini as variable modifications. A false discover rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied on both the peptide and protein level.

### Publication Abstract
Nuclear clearance of TDP-43 into cytoplasmic aggregates is a key driver of neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), but the mechanisms are unclear. Here, we show that TDP-43 knockdown specifically reduces the number and motility of RAB11-positive recycling endosomes in dendrites, while TDP-43 overexpression has the opposite effect. This is associated with delayed transferrin recycling in TDP-43-knockdown neurons and decreased &#x3b2;2-transferrin levels in patient CSF Whole proteome quantification identified the upregulation of the ESCRT component VPS4B upon TDP-43 knockdown in neurons. Luciferase reporter assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation suggest that TDP-43 represses VPS4B transcription. Preventing VPS4B upregulation or expression of its functional antagonist ALIX restores trafficking of recycling endosomes. Proteomic analysis revealed the broad reduction in surface expression of key receptors upon TDP-43 knockdown, including ErbB4, the neuregulin 1 receptor. TDP-43 knockdown delays the surface delivery of ErbB4. ErbB4 overexpression, but not neuregulin 1 stimulation, prevents dendrite loss upon TDP-43 knockdown. Thus, impaired recycling of ErbB4 and other receptors to the cell surface may contribute to TDP-43-induced neurodegeneration by blocking trophic signaling.

### Keywords
Erbb4, Ftld, Tdp-43, Als, Recycling endosomes

### Affiliations
Proteomics
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Experimental Systems Immunology  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried/Munich Germany

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry Experimental Systems Immunology  Am Klopferspitz 18 82152 Martinsried/Munich Germany


