### Accession
PXD010872

### Title
Giant panda (Ailuropoda melanoleuca) gut microbiomes degrade bamboo in distinct patterns: heterofermentation of green leaves to ethanol, lactate and acetate, and homofermentation of yellow pith to lactate

### Description
The iconic giant panda is an endangered species known worldwide for its peculiar dietary habits. While retaining the digestive system of a carnivore, the giant panda successfully moved into a diet almost exclusively based on bamboo. Digestion of lignocellulose is believed to be conducted solely by its gut microbiome, provided that no lignocellulose-degrading enzyme was found in the giant panda’s genome. Many reports focused on which lignocellulose component feeds the giant panda, while little effort was made to link the products of bamboo fermentation to the panda’s dietary choices. In the present study, fermentation of either green leaves or yellow pith was conducted in the laboratory using gut microbiomes derived from either green or yellow stools, respectively. Green leaves were fermented to ethanol, lactate and acetate, while yellow pith to lactate resembling, respectively, hetero/homo-fermentation patterns. Several microbial pathways (assessed by metaproteomics) related to hemicellulose rather than cellulose degradation. However, alpha-amylases (E.C. 3.2.1.1) from the giant panda itself were the most predominant enzyme (up to 60% of all metaproteins), indicating that they have a primary role in bamboo digestion. The distinct fermentation profiles resulting from digestion of selected portions of bamboo may be part of the feeding strategy of giant pandas.

### Sample Protocol
3.1 Protein extraction (suspension) For each 5 mL suspension, 4.8 gsucrose (to a final concentration of 2 M), 7mLphenol (10 g phenol in 1 mL water) and 5 g silica beads (0.5 mm zirconia/ silica beads) were added and the cells were lysed in a FastPrep®-24 ball mill (MP Biomedicals GmbH, Eschwege) (5 min, 18'000 rpm).  Protein extraction (pellet) Pellets were resuspended in 2 mL 50 mM Tris HCL pH 6.8.Additionally, 5 g silica beads (0.5 mm zirconia/ silica beads), 4 mL 2 M sucrose solution and 700 mL liquid phenol (10 g phenol in 1 mL water) were added and the cells were lysed in a FastPrep®-24 ball mill (MP Biomedicals GmbH, Eschwege) (5 min, 18'000 rpm).In order to purify the proteins the reaction tube was centrifuged (10 min, 8'500 g, 4 °C), the upper phenol phase was transferred into a new 50 mL reaction tube and washed with the same volume of 1 M sucrose solutionon a thermo mixer (10 min, 60 rpm, RT). After a further centrifugation step (10min, 10'000 g, RT) the phenol phase was transferred again into a new 50 mL reaction tube. Then proteins were precipitated twice, once with the fourfold and once with the threefold volume ofice-cold 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol. After each precipitation step the reaction tube was incubated at -20 °C for 1 h and the supernatant was discarded after centrifugation (10 min, 8'500 g, 4 °C). For removal of remaining impurities the pellet was washed four times. Therefore two times the threefold volume of ice-cold 80% acetone (v/v) resp. ice-cold70% ethanol (v/v) were used alternating. Between each precipitation step the reaction tube was incubated for 15 min at -20 °C and the supernatant was removed after centrifugation (10 min, 8'500 g, 4 °C). Finally, the pellet was dissolved in 500-700 µL urea buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 0.01 g mL-1 1,4-dithiothreitol).  Protein quantification For protein quantification 300 µL amido black dye solution (0.26 mg mL-1) was mixed with 50 µL protein extract. Afterwards excess dye was removed by centrifugation (16'400 g, 5 min, RT) and discarding of the supernatant, followed by two washing steps with 500 µL 10% methanol (v/v). Between each washing step the samples were centrifuged (16'400g, 5 min, RT). Finally, the pellet was dissolved in 1mL0.1M sodium hydroxide solution, the absorption was measure at 615nm and compared against a standard curve with bovine serum albumin. 3.2 SDS-PAGE To pre-purify samples for MS/MS, proteins were loaded additionally onto a SDS-PAGE [(Laemmli 1970)].Therefore 25 µg protein extract were diluted in the same volume of destilled water and precipitated with the fivefold volume of ice-cold 100% acetone. After 1h incubation at -20 °C and centrifugation (for 30 min at 16'400 g and 4 °C) the supernatant was discarded and the pellet was dried under a hood. Subsequently, the pellet was dissolved in 21 µL SDS sample buffer during shaking on a thermo mixer (5 min, 1'400 rpm, 60 °C). Finally, insoluble material was removed by centrifugation (10 min, 16'400 g, RT) and the supernatant was loaded on a 1 mm 12 % SDS-PAGE (Mini-Protean® Tetra System, BIO-RAD, Hercules, USA). However, SDS-PAGE was stopped after the proteins entered approximately 5 mm into the separation gel. For visualization of the proteins the gel was stained with colloidal coomassie [(Neuhoffet al. 1985)] and scanned (ViewPix 900 Scanner,Biostep,Burkhardtsdorf, Germany) with 300 dpi.  Tryptic digestion Tryptic digestion of the complete protein fraction from the SDS-PAGE was carried out as previously described by Shevchenko et al. 1996. Therefore the stained protein fraction was cut-off from the SDS-PAGE, chopped into pieces of 1 mm size and transferred into a 2mL reaction tube. Coomassie dye and other impurities were removed by two washing steps with 900 µL washing solution (50 % methanol (v/v), 5 % acetic acid (v/v)) (1 h, 150 rpm, RT) and one with acetonitrile (5 min, 150 rpm, RT) on a thermomixer. After the gel pieces were entirely dried, proteins were denaturatedwith 900 µL 45 mM1,4-dithiotreitol (30 min, 150rpm, RT) and alkylated with 900 µL of a 100mMiodacetamide (30 min, 150 rpm, RT). After each step the gel pieces were washed with 900 µL acetonitrile (5 min, 150 rpm, RT). Subsequently, two further washing steps one with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate (10 min, 150 rpm, RT) and one with acetonitrile (5 min, 150 rpm, RT) were carried out. Proteins were digested then by the addition of 200 µL trypsin buffer (overnight, 150 rpm 37 °C), containing 0.07 µg trypsin dissolved in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate). The next day the peptides in the supernatant were collected into a new 2 mL reaction tube. Remaining peptides from the gel pieces were extracted by the incubation with 10%  formic acid (v/v) as well as with a mixture of 49  acetonitrile and 1% triflouric acid and were also collected into the new 2 mL reaction tube. Finally, the peptides were dried in a speedvac (Digital Series SpeedVac SPD121P, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, USA)

### Data Protocol
Bioinformatic data evaluation MS results were processed by the Proteome Discoverer Software 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and exported as mascot generic format (.mgf). For protein identification multiple database searches were conducted using Mascot (version 2.5), X!tandem (version15.12.2015)and OMSSA (versionomssa-2.1.9). Whereas for X!Tandem and OMSSA search the .mgf-files were directly imported into and extended version of the MPA Software [17] (https://code.google.com/p/meta-proteome-analyzer/, version 1.3.4) for MASCOT 2.5 the mgf.-files were imported first into the ProteinScape software (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Deutschland, version 3.1.3.461) and afterwards the results were uploaded as Mascot result files (.dat-files) into the MPA software. For all database search algorithms, following search parameters were applied: trypsin, one missed cleavage, monoisotopic mass, carbamidomethylation (cysteine) and oxidation (methionine) as variable modifications, ±10 ppm precursor and ±0.5 Da MS/MS fragment tolerance, 113C and +2/+3 charged peptide ions, 1% false discovery rate. The protein database contained all UniProt/Swiss-Prot entries (version: 14.06.2016), the UniProt Tremble entries for the giant panda (version: 14.06.2016), as well as entries of three metagenomes of panda microbiomes.Entries from metagenome were annotated by a BLAST search (version: ncbi-blast-2.3.0+) against UniProt/Swiss-Prot entries (version: 14.06.2016) with an e-value threshold of 10-4. For the final taxonomic and functional data evaluation redundant protein identifications were grouped to so calledmetaproteins based at least one shared peptide.

### Publication Abstract
The giant panda is known worldwide for having successfully moved to a diet almost exclusively based on bamboo. Provided that no lignocellulose-degrading enzyme was detected in panda's genome, bamboo digestion is believed to depend on its gut microbiome. However, pandas retain the digestive system of a carnivore, with retention times of maximum 12 h. Cultivation of their unique gut microbiome under controlled laboratory conditions may be a valid tool to understand giant pandas' dietary habits, and provide valuable insights about what component of lignocellulose may be metabolized. Here, we collected gut microbiomes from fresh fecal samples of a giant panda (either entirely green or yellow stools) and supplied them with green leaves or yellow pith (i.e., the peeled stem). Microbial community composition was substrate dependent, and resulted in markedly different fermentation profiles, with yellow pith fermented to lactate and green leaves to lactate, acetate and ethanol, the latter to strikingly high concentrations (&#x223c;3%, v:v, within 3.5 h). Microbial metaproteins pointed to hemicellulose rather than cellulose degradation. The alpha-amylase from the giant panda (E.C. 3.2.1.1) was the predominant identified metaprotein, particularly in reactors inoculated with pellets derived from fecal samples (up to 60%). Gut microbiomes assemblage was most prominently impacted by the change in substrate (either leaf or pith). Removal of soluble organics from inocula to force lignocellulose degradation significantly enriched <i>Bacteroides</i> (in green leaf) and <i>Escherichia</i>/<i>Shigella</i> (in yellow pith). Overall, different substrates (either leaf or pith) markedly shaped gut microbiome assemblies and fermentation profiles. The biochemical profile of fermentation products may be an underestimated factor contributing to explain the peculiar dietary behavior of giant pandas, and should be implemented in large scale studies together with short-term lab-scale cultivation of gut microbiomes.

### Keywords
Metaproteomics microbial communities fermentation

### Affiliations
OvGU
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg

### Submitter
Robert Heyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dirk Benndorf
Otto von Guericke University Magdeburg


