### Accession
PXD039445

### Title
AP-MS of Strep-HA YAP1 mutants (S61A, S109A, S127A, S138A, S143A, S367A, 5SA)

### Description
In this project we investigated the effect of YAP1 mutations on the interactome. We investigate the effect of S61A, S109A, S127A, S138A, S143A, S367A, 5SA.

### Sample Protocol
The expression of SH-tagged bait proteins stably integrated in T-RExTM Flp-In cells was induced with 1 µg/ml tetracycline for 24 h. For affinity purification three or four (based on bait expression), 150 mm tissue culture plates at 80% cell confluency were harvested and the cell pellet was snap frozen. The frozen pellet was lysed with the following buffer (HNN lysis buffer): 0.5% NP40, 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 400 nM Na3VO4 supplemented with 1mM PMSF, 1.2 µM Avidin (IBA) and protease inhibitor cocktail (P8849, Sigma), using 800 µl of lysis buffer for each lysed cell plate. The lysate was incubated on ice for 20 min and subjected to mild sonication (3 times 10 seconds, 35% amplitude and 80% cycle time, Hielscher-Ultrasound Technology) and digestion of nucleic acids via Benzonase (Sigma) (50 U/ml). The cleared cell lysate was incubated with 50µl crosslinked Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA) for 1 h on a rotation shaker. Before the incubation with lysate, beads were crosslinked with 5 mM of di-succinimidylsuberate DSS (Thermo) in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 150 mM NaCl for 30 minutes at 37 °C with strong agitation and quenched with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 30 minutes at 37 °C. Upon washing two times with lysis buffer and three times with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF), beads and bound proteins were transferred in 10 kDa molecular weight cut-off spin column (Vivaspin 500, Sartorious ), following the FASP protocol56. Briefly, beads in solution were centrifuged at 8000g until dryness. Samples were denatured, reduced (8 M Urea and 5 mM TCEP in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 30 min) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 min). Each sample was subsequently washed three times by flushing the filter with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate and digested with 0.5 μg of Trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade) for 16 h at 37 °C. Proteolysis was quenched by 0.1% TFA and peptides were purified with a C18 microspin column (Nest Group). Eluted peptides were dried using a speed vacuum before being resuspended in 20 μl 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile. For quality control, iRT peptides (Biognosys) were spiked to each sample (1:50) before LC-MS/MS analysis. In fractionated samples, peptides were subjected to high pH fractionation in reversed phase (microspin column, Nest Group) following the procedure based on the high pH reversed-phase peptide fraction kit (Pierce). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated on a Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, Thermo) with a 90 min gradient from 9% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. (buffer A: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid 5% [v/v] acetonitrile; buffer B: 0.1% [v/v] formic acid, 95% [v/v] acetonitrile) The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1600 m/z) at 120’000 resolution followed by MS/MS scans in the Ion Trap. Only ions with charge higher than three were subjected to isolation (2.0 m/z isolation window) and fragmented (CID, Normalized Collision Energy 35%). Selected ions were dynamical excluded for 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The experiment was performed with three independent biological replicates and acquired spectra were searched using the MaxQuant software package version 1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine61 against human proteome reference dataset (http:/www.uniprot.org/, downloaded on 06.04.2021) extended with reverse decoy sequences. The search parameters were set to include only full tryptic peptides, maximum two missed cleavage, carbamidomethyl as static peptide modification, oxidation (M) and deamidation (N-ter) as variable modification and “match between runs” option. The MS and MS/MS mass tolerance was set to 20ppm. False discovery rate of <1% was used protein identification. Protein abundance was determined from the intensity of top two unique peptides. Intensity values were median normalized and imputed using random sampling from a normal distribution generated 1% less intense values. ANOVA statistical tests were performed to compare interactor profiles in all conditions. p-values were corrected using the Benjamini-Hochberg method.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Yap1; ap-ms

### Affiliations
IMSB, ETHZ
ETH

### Submitter
Federico Uliana

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Matthias Gstaiger
IMSB, ETHZ


