### Accession
PXD024174

### Title
Mock microbial community with spike-ins of 13C-labeled Escherichia coli cells for benchmarking of protein-based stable isotope probing proteomics (Protein-SIP)

### Description
This dataset is part of a study aimed at developing algorithms for the quantification of stable isotope content in microorganisms in microbial communities after labeling them with stable isotope-labeled substrates. For this dataset Escherichia coli cultures were labeled with different percentages (1, 5 and 10%) of fully labeled 13C glucose (13C1-6) and spiked-in into a mock microbial community consisting of 32 species of bacteria, archaea, eukaryote and bacteriophages (UNEVEN Community described in Kleiner et al. 2017 Nat Communications 8(1):1558). The community also contained unlabeled E. coli cells and labeled/unlabeled E. coli cells in the spike-in sample were at a 1:1 ratio. Cultures of E. coli were grown in M9 minimal medium in which a percentage of the glucose was replaced with 13C1-6 glucose for >10 generations to achieve close to complete labeling of cells. The following percentages of 13C1-6 glucose were added 1, 5 and 10%. Triplicate cultures were grown for each percentage. Please note that the unlabeled glucose that was used of course had a natural content of 13C of around 1.1%, thus the 0% added label samples have an actual 13C content of 1.1% and all added label is on top of this value. We included a tab delimited table with this submission providing details on all raw files.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT). SDT lysis buffer was added in a 1:10 sample/buffer ratio to the sample pellets and subsequently incubated at 95° C for 10 minutes followed by pelleting of debris for 5 min at 21,000 x g. We prepared tryptic digests following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al. (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 30 µl of the cleared lysate were mixed with 200- µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 1.25 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated overnight in a wet chamber at 37° C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using Qubit® Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. Two wash runs and one blank run were done between sample replicates to reduce carry over. Sample MockU2 EcoliR1 1% was re-run at the end of the sequence as a label carry-over control. For the 1D-LC-MS/MS runs, 2000 ng of peptide were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After loading, the pre-column was switched in line with a 75 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 60° C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 260 minute gradient and mass spectra acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences from the reference genomes of the organisms used in the mock communities (Kleiner et al. 2017 Nat Communications 8(1):1558)). The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. We created a clustered version of this database to remove highly similar sequences of closely related strains by clustering the whole database using CD-HIT (http://weizhongli-lab.org/cd-hit/) at a similarity cutoff of 95%. The databases were submitted with this PRIDE project. MS/MS spectra were searched against the databases using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and peptide spectral matches were filtered using the Percolator node as described by Petersen et al. (Nature Microbiology 2016, 2:16195). Protein-SIP analyses were carried out with Calis-p 2.0 (https://sourceforge.net/projects/calis-p/).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
13c, 1d-lc, Stable isotope, Stable isotope probing, Protein-sip, Carbon 13

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel Kleiner
North Carolina State University


