### Accession
PXD010062

### Title
The proteome of pig spermatozoa is remodelled during ejaculation

### Description
Proteins are essential for sperm function, including fertilizing capacity. Pig spermatozoa, emitted in well-defined ejaculate fractions, clearly vary in their functionality, which would be related to differences in protein composition. This study aimed firstly to update the porcine sperm proteome and secondly to identify proteins differentially expressed among mature spermatozoa from cauda epididymis and those fortuitously delivered in different ejaculate portions. Nine ejaculates from nine mature and fertile boars were manually collected in three separate ejaculate portions: the first 10 mL of sperm-rich ejaculate fraction (SRF), the rest of SRF and the post-SRF. The contents of cauda epididymides of the same boars was collected post-mortem by perfusion. All samples were centrifuged, pooling the resulting sperm pellets within the respective source-sample, which were later split to generate two technical replicates per source. The final eight sperm samples were subjected to iTRAQ-based 2D-LC-MS/MS for protein identification and quantification. A total of 1,723 proteins were identified (974 of Sus Scrofa taxonomy) and 1,602 of them were also quantified (960 of Sus Scrofa taxonomy). After an ANOVA test, 32 Sus Scrofa proteins showed quantitative differences (P < 0.01) among the sperm samples, which were particularly relevant for the functionality of spermatozoa fortuitously ejaculated in the post-SRF. The present study is the first showing quantitative differences in the protein profile of mature spermatozoa, involving proteins clearly implicated in sperm function, that prove the protein profile of boar spermatozoa is remodelled during ejaculation . These findings provide a valuable groundwork for further studies focused on identifying protein biomarkers of sperm fertility.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction  Sperm pellets were thawed at rt and centrifuged at 14,000 xg at 10ºC for 10 min to obtain the protein-enriched fractions. Then, the sperm pellets were subjected to protein extraction in 200 µL of U/T/C lysis buffer. Then, the samples were treated with 10% (final concentration) of TCA and stored overnight at 5ºC to achieve complete protein precipitation. The dried pellets were solubilazed  in 200 µL of 8 M urea in 0.5 M TEAB. The protein concentration was measured by Lowry modified RCDC Protein Assay Kit. A total of 100 µg of final protein extract per sample was used for iTRAQ analysis.  iTRAQ labelling  The iTRAQ labelling was performed following the protocol provided in the SCIEX kit. Thereafter, the iTRAQ-labelled peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide fractionation by isoelectric focusing  The dried iTRAQ labelled peptides were subjected to fractionation by IEF separation following the protocol of Krijgsveld et al. (14) with minor modifications.The isoelectrofocused peptides were extracted from the strips with 120 µL of the following sequential five extracted solutions: (1) 5% aqueous ACN 0.1% TFA, (2) 20% ACN 0.1% TFA, (3) 50% ACN 0.1% TFA, (4) 70% ACN 0.1% TFA and (5) 99.9% ACN 0.1% TFA. All the peptide fractions were combined, dried by vacuum centrifugation and re-dissolved with 40 µL of 2% ACN 0.1% TFA. The samples were cleaned and concentrated by C18 silica homemade “in tip” columns, dried by speed vacuum and re-suspended to a concentration of ca 0.30 µg/µL in 2% ACN 0.1% TFA.  Liquid chromatography and tandem mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS) The labelled peptides were analysed by LC using a NanoLC Ultra 1-D plus Eksigent (Eksigent Technologies, Dublin, CA, USA), which was directly connected to a TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX). Briefly, 5 µL from each sample were loaded onto a trap column (NanoLC column, Chrom XP C18-3µm, 350 µm x 0.5 mm; Eksigent Technologies) and desalted with 0.1% TFA at 3 µL/min during 5 min. Then, the peptides were eluted from the trap column and separated using an analytical LC-column (3 μm particles size C18-CL, 75 µm x 12 cm, Nikkyo Technos Co®, Tokyo, Japan) equilibrated in 5% ACN 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Fisher Scientific). Peptide elution was performed by applying a linear gradient of solvents A (0.1% FA in water) and B (0.1% FA in ACN) from 5% to 35% of solvent B in A at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min over 90 min.  The eluted peptides were thereafter ionized and then analyzed with the TripleTOF 5600 mass spectrometer coupled to the NanoLC system. The samples were ionized applying 2.8 kV to the spray emitter and the TripleTOF was operated in information-dependent acquisition mode, in which a TOF MS scan was made from 350 to 1250 m/z, accumulated for 250 ms TOF followed by 75 product ion scans from 100-1500 m/z, on the 25 most abundant multiply charged (2+, 3+, 4+ or 5+) precursor peptide ions were automatically selected. Ions with 1+ and unassigned charge states were rejected from the MS/MS analysis. Collision energy was automatically set by the instrument rolling collision energies for iTRAQ labelled peptides.

### Data Protocol
The generated SCIEX.wiff data-files were processed using ProteinPilot v5.0 search engine (AB SCIEX) for protein identification and quantification with a peptide confidence threshold of 95% and a false discovery rate (FDR) less than 1% at protein level. The Paragon algorithm (4.0.0.0, 4767) of ProteinPilot was used to search against the Uniprot_mammalias database with the following parameters: iTRAQ quantitation, trypsin specificity, cys-alkylation (MMTS), no taxonomy restricted, and the search effort set to throughout. The identified proteins were grouped by the Pro GroupTM algorithm (ProteinPilotTM Solfware) following the Pro Group Report recommendation (http://www3.appliedbiosystems.com/cms/groups/mcb_marketing/documents/generaldocuments/cms_040586.pdf). Protein groups were exclusively made from observed peptides and the grouping was guided by usage of spectra. Consequently, unobserved regions of protein sequence were not considered for explaining the data.

### Publication Abstract
Proteins are essential for sperm function, including their fertilizing capacity. Pig spermatozoa, emitted in well-defined ejaculate fractions, vary in their functionality, which could be related to different sperm protein composition. This study aimed (i) to update the porcine sperm proteome and (ii) to identify proteins differentially expressed in mature spermatozoa from cauda epididymis and those delivered in separate ejaculate fractions. Ejaculates from nine mature and fertile boars were manually collected in three separate portions: the first 10 ml of the sperm-rich ejaculate fraction (SRF), the rest of the SRF and the post-SRF. The contents of cauda epididymides of the boars were collected post-mortem by retrograde duct perfusion, generating four different semen sources for each boar. Following centrifugation, the resulting pellets of each semen source were initially pooled and later split to generate two technical replicates per source. The resulting eight sperm samples (two per semen source) were subjected to iTRAQ-based 2D-LC-MS/MS for protein identification and quantification. A total of 1,723 proteins were identified (974 of <i>Sus scrofa</i> taxonomy) and 1,602 of them were also quantified (960 of <i>Sus scrofa</i> taxonomy). After an ANOVA test, 32 <i>Sus scrofa</i> proteins showed quantitative differences (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01) among semen sources, which was particularly relevant for sperm functionality in the post-SRF. The present study showed that the proteome of boar spermatozoa is remodeled during ejaculation involving proteins clearly implicated in sperm function. The findings provide valuable groundwork for further studies focused on identifying protein biomarkers of sperm fertility.

### Keywords
Itraq; artificial insemination ; seminal plasma; sperm-rich ejaculate fraction;

### Affiliations
Universitat de Valencia
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain

### Submitter
Luz Valero

### Lab Head
Dr Jordi Roca
Department of Medicine and Animal Surgery, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Murcia, Spain


