### Accession
PXD025757

### Title
A Chemoproteomic Approach toward Probing the Interactomes of Perfluoroalkyl Substances

### Description
Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are widely used in industrial products and consumer goods. Due to their extreme-ly recalcitrant nature and potential bioaccumulation and toxicity, exposure to PFASs may result in adverse health outcomes in humans and wildlife. In this study, we developed a chemoproteomic strategy, based on the use of isotope-coded desthiobiotin-perfluorooctanephosphonic acid (PFOPA) probe and LC-MS/MS analysis, to profile PFAS-binding proteins. Targeted proteins were labeled with the desthiobiotin-PFOPA probe, digested with trypsin, and the ensuing desthiobiotin-conjugated peptides were enriched with streptavidin beads for LC-MS/MS analysis. We were able to identify 469 putative PFOPA-binding proteins. By conducting competitive binding experiments using a low (10 M) and high (100 M) concentrations of stable isotope-labeled PFOPA probes, we further identified 128 non-redundant peptides derived from 75 unique proteins that exhibit selective binding toward PFOPA. Additionally, we demonstrated that one of these proteins, fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5), could interact directly with PFASs. Furthermore, the desthiobiotin-labeled lysine residues are located close to the fatty acid-binding pocket of FABP5, and the binding affinity varies with the structures of PFASs. Taken together, we developed a novel chemo-proteomic method for interrogating the PFAS-interacting proteome. The identification of these proteins sets the stage for un-derstanding the mechanisms through which exposure to PFASs confers adverse human health effects.

### Sample Protocol
The peptide samples were dissolved in a 20-μL solution of 0.1% formic acid and injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). First, the peptide samples were loaded onto a home-packed pre-column (75 μm in internal diameter and 4 cm in length) packed with reversed-phase C18 material (ODS-A C18, 5 μm in particle size, Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC). The analytes were subsequently resolved on an analytical column (75 μm I.D, 25 cm in length) packed with reversed-phase C18 material (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ,  3-μm in particle size,  Dr. Maisch GmbH HPLC). The mobile phases were 0.1% formic acid in water (buffer A) and 0.1% formic acid in CH3CN (buffer B). The gradient includ-ed 0-15 min, 95% A; 15-150 min, 95-63% A; 150-152 min, 63%-1% A; 152-179 min, 1% A; 179-179.01 min, 1%- 95% A; 179.01-200 min, 95% A. The flow rate was 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition mode, where one full-scan (m/z 300–2000) MS is followed by MS/MS scans on the 20 most abundant ions found in full-scan MS. Precursor ions were isolated at a width of 1.0 m/z unit, and dynamic exclusion was enabled with an exclusion time window of 60 s after a precursor ion was first selected for MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed and analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8). A human fasta file (ipi.HUMAN.v.3.68.fasta) was employed as the database for protein identification with the use of default parameters. In particular, mass tolerances for precursor and fragment ions were 6 and 10 ppm, respectively, the minimum peptide length was 6 amino acids, and the maximum number of missed cleavages for trypsin was 2. The proteins quantified were supported by at least two quantification replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are widely used in industrial products and consumer goods. Due to their extremely recalcitrant nature and potential bioaccumulation and toxicity, exposure to PFASs may result in adverse health outcomes in humans and wildlife. In this study, we developed a chemoproteomic strategy, based on the use of isotope-coded desthiobiotin-perfluorooctanephosphonic acid (PFOPA) probe and liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis, to profile PFAS-binding proteins. Targeted proteins were labeled with the desthiobiotin-PFOPA probe, digested with trypsin, and the ensuing desthiobiotin-conjugated peptides were enriched with streptavidin beads for LC-MS/MS analysis. We were able to identify 469 putative PFOPA-binding proteins. By conducting competitive binding experiments using low (10 &#x3bc;M) and high (100 &#x3bc;M) concentrations of stable isotope-labeled PFOPA probes, we further identified 128 nonredundant peptides derived from 75 unique proteins that exhibit selective binding toward PFOPA. Additionally, we demonstrated that one of these proteins, fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5), could interact directly with PFASs, including perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA), perfluorooctanesulfonic acid (PFOS), perfluorohexanesulfonic acid (PFHxS), and perfluorobutanesulfonic acid (PFBS). Furthermore, desthiobiotin-labeled lysine residues are located close to the fatty acid-binding pocket of FABP5, and the binding affinity varies with the structures of PFASs. Taken together, we developed a novel chemoproteomic method for interrogating the PFAS-interacting proteome. The identification of these proteins sets the stage for understanding the mechanisms through which exposure to PFASs confers adverse human health effects.

### Keywords
Pfass, Probe

### Affiliations
University of California Riverside

### Submitter
Quanqing Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Quanqing Zhang
University of California Riverside


