### Accession
PXD022596

### Title
SOX4 AND SMARCA4 COOPERATIVELY REGULATE PI3K SIGNALING THROUGH TRANSCRIPTIONAL ACTIVATION OF TGFBR2 IN TRIPLE NEGATIVE BREAST CANCER

### Description
Dysregulation of PI3K/Akt signaling is a dominant feature in basal-like or triple-negative breast cancers (TNBC). However, the mechanisms regulating this pathway are largely unknown in this subset of aggressive tumors. Here we demonstrate that the transcription factor SOX4 is a key regulator of PI3K signaling in TNBC. Genomic and proteomic analyses coupled with mechanistic studies identified TGFBR2 as a direct transcriptional target of SOX4 and demonstrated that TGFBR2 is required to mediate SOX4-dependent PI3K signaling. We further report that SOX4 and the SWI/SNF ATPase SMARCA4, which are uniformly overexpressed in basal-like tumors, form a previously unreported complex that is required to maintain an open chromatin conformation at the TGFBR2 regulatory regions in order to mediate TGFBR2 expression and PI3K signaling. Collectively, our findings delineate the mechanism by which SOX4 and SMARCA4 cooperatively regulate PI3K/Akt signaling and suggest that this complex may play an essential role in TNBC genesis and/or progression. Kinase enrichment proteomic analysis was performed using HCC1143 breast cancer cells treated with a  control siRNA pool or a pool targeting SOX4 in biological triplicate to evaluate the effects on the functional kinome.

### Sample Protocol
For siRNA knockdown experiments, cells were sub-cultured at 60–70% confluence before transfections. Lipofectamine RNAiMAX (ThermoFisher) was used to transfect cells with 50 nm of SMART pool siRNA targeting either SOX4 (L-011779-00-0005) or non-targeting siRNA control pool (D0012061305) according to manufacturer’s instructions (Dharmacon) for 96 h prior to harvesting cells for subsequent experiments. For MIB affinity chromatography, HCC1143 cells treated with either siRNA targeting SOX4 or non-targeting control siRNA for 96 hours were washed 1X with cold PBS, lysed in 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, at pH 7.5 containing 10 mM NaF, 2.5 mM NaVO4, Complete protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Roche), and 1% Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma). Lysate was sonicated three times (10 seconds) on ice and centrifuged (10min, 13,000 rpm) at 4°C and the supernatant syringe-filtered through a 0.2 mM SFCA membrane. Lysate was equalized at 500µg total protein per experiment to 1M NaCl and flowed over kinase inhibitor bead resin, a 175-μL mixture of five kinase inhibitors (VI-16832, PP58, Purvalanol B, UNC-21474, and BKM-120) custom-synthesized with hydrocarbon linkers (except Purvalanol B) and covalently linked to ECH-Sepharose (or EAH-Sepharose for Purvalanol B) beads as previously described (Duncan et al.., 2012), followed by 30 volumes of washes with high salt (1M NaCl) and low salt (150mM NaCl) buffer (50 mM HEPES, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, at pH 7.5). Bound kinases were eluted by boiling with 0.5% SDS and 1% β-mercaptoethanol in 100mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 2X 15 minutes, treated with DTT (5mM, 25min at 60°C) and Iodoacetamide (20mM, 30min in the dark at RT), and spin-concentrated to 100μL (Amicon Millipore Amicon Ultra-4, 10K cutoff) before Methanol/Chloroform precipitation. Proteins were trypsinized overnight at 37°C, extracted with water-saturated ethyl acetate 4 times, then dried down in a speed-vac. Peptides were desalted with C-18 spin columns (Cat. 89870, Pierce) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Forty percent of the final peptide suspension was injected onto a 5cm PepMap trap column and then a Thermo Easy-Spray 75 μm × 25 cm C-18 column and separated on a 110 min gradient (3-28% ACN), B was increased to 40% over 2 min, up to 90% over 2 min, held at 90% for 2 min, and decreased back to 3% using an Ultimate 3000. The Thermo Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometry (MS) ESI parameters were as follows: 350-1700 m/z, 3e6 AGC MS1, 100 milliseconds MS1 max inject time, 1e5 AGC MS2, 17,500 resolution, 75 msec MS2 max inject time, 15 loop count, 1.8 m/z isolation window, NCE 27%, 30 sec dynamic exclusion, excluding unassigned, 1, 8, and >8 charge states.

### Data Protocol
Thermo MS raw files were processed for label-free quantification by MaxQuant LFQ (MaxQuant version 1.6.10.43) with default parameters, using a Uniprot/Swiss-Prot human database, fixed carbidomethyl (C) and variable oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) modifications. Matching between runs was enabled with a match time window of 3 min. Kinase LFQ intensities with two or more unique+razor peptides were processed using Perseus (version 1.6.10.50)—LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and if three values were present in at least one group (siControl or siSOX4), missing values were imputed by column using default parameters. Unpaired Student’s t-test was performed in Perseus to report log2 fold change and associated P-value.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pi3 kinase, Chromatin, Transcription, Swi/snf, Epigenetics, Breast cancer, Smarca4, Tgfbr2, Sox4

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Radiation Oncology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ

### Submitter
Steven Angus

### Lab Head
Dr Michael L. Gatza, PhD
Department of Radiation Oncology, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, NJ


