### Accession
PXD002881

### Title
Mouse cardiomyocytes LC/MS/MS -  Membrane Proteomics of Impaired Energetics and Cytoskeletal Disorganization in Elderly Diet-Induced Diabetic Mice

### Description
Differential Membrane Proteomics Profiles of isolated cardio myocytes in HFD mice

### Sample Protocol
Real-time Quantitative Reverse-Transcriptase Polymerase Chain Reaction (RT-qPCR), F-actin and G-actin Staining, Purification and Gel-assisted Digestion of Membrane Proteins, iTRAQ labeling, Hp-RP StageTip Fractionation, and LC-MS/MS Analysis

### Data Protocol
To perform protein identification, the raw MS/MS data were converted to *msm format by using the Raw2msm software and then subjected to Mascot software (v2.3, Matrix Sapiens, London, United Kingdom) for database searching against SwissPort mouse protein sequence (2014_06, 16724 sequences) with the following parameters: the tryptic peptides with maximums of two missed cleavage sites; MS tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 20 mmu. Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Methylthio (C), iTRAQ (K) and iTRAQ (N-terminal) were set as variable modifications. The search result was exported to *xml format for further Multi-Q quantitation . For protein quantitation, the raw MS/MS data was converted into *mzxml file. Both *xml and *mzxml files were loaded into Multi-Q software.

### Publication Abstract
Diabetic cardiomyopathy is a well-recognized complication of diabetes, but its pathophysiology is unclear. We aimed to investigate the mechanisms underlying cardiac dysfunction in an elderly type 2 diabetic (T2DM) mouse model, using membrane proteomic analyses. Elderly mice were fed a high fat diet for 12 weeks to induce T2DM, and myocardial structure and function were assessed by echocardiography. Cardiomyocytes were isolated by Langendorff perfusion and subjected to iTRAQ-based quantitative membrane proteomic profiling, immunoblotting, and real-time quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Compared to controls, elderly T2DM mice showed worse systolic function, more myocardial fibrosis and up-regulation of several heart failure markers (all p &lt; 0.05). Cardiomyocyte membrane proteomic profiling revealed that 417 proteins had differential expressions related to perturbations in several biological processes in T2DM mice compared with the control. The most up-regulated proteins were involved in oxidative phosphorylation, whereas many down-regulated proteins were involved in cytoskeletal regulation. Differential protein expression correlated with myocardial systolic velocity by tissue Doppler. In addition, cardiomyocyte immunofluorescence staining showed greater disorganization of thick/parallel F-actin stress fibers and marked reduction in F-to-G-actin ratio in T2DM vs control (p &lt; 0.05), which paralleled worsened myocardial systolic velocity. We concluded that cardiac contractile dysfunction in elderly T2DM mice was associated with impaired energetics and cytoskeletal disorganization.

### Keywords
Hp-rp stagetip fractionation, Itraq labeling, Mouse cardiomyocytes, Lc/ms/ms

### Affiliations
Master program for clinical pharmacogehomics and pharmacoprotemics   Chia-Li Han LAB.Taipei
Taipei Medical University

### Submitter
Feng-wen Jiang 

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Li Han
Master program for clinical pharmacogehomics and pharmacoprotemics   Chia-Li Han LAB.Taipei


