### Accession
PXD001767

### Title
Fission yeast DUB substrates -  A Degenerate Cohort of Yeast Membrane Trafficking DUBs Mediates Cell Polarity and Survival

### Description
His-Biotin-His Ubiquitin was overexpressed in various fission yeast (S. pombe) genetic backgrounds to identify ubiqutinated proteins. Normalizing to bait (ubiquitin) across samples provided insight into relative changes in ubiquitination with loss of deubiquitinases (DUBs), yielding putative DUB substrates.

### Sample Protocol
Ubiquitinated species were isolated using a tandem affinity purification under fully denaturing conditions (see PMID: 16432255). Proteins were digested off streptavidin beads after reduction (TCEP) and alkylation (chloroacetamide). After digestion, peptides were desalted offline using mini C18 spin columns. Then, half of each sample was loaded onto a triphasic MudPIT column (20 cm analytical column) and then eluted with increasing salt concentration (13 total fractions) and analyzed on a Thermo LTQ Velos.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were converted to DTA files and searched in Turbo Sequest v.27 rev12.

### Publication Abstract
Deubiquitinating enzymes (DUBs), cysteine or metallo- proteases that cleave ubiquitin chains or protein conjugates, are present in nearly every cellular compartment, with overlapping protein domain structure, localization, and functions. We discovered a cohort of DUBs that are involved in membrane trafficking (ubp4, ubp5, ubp9, ubp15, and sst2) and found that loss of all five of these DUBs but not loss of any combination of four, significantly impacted cell viability in the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe (1). Here, we delineate the collective and individual functions and activities of these five conserved DUBs using comparative proteomics, biochemistry, and microscopy. We find these five DUBs are degenerate rather than redundant at the levels of cell morphology, substrate selectivity, ubiquitin chain specificity, and cell viability under stress. These studies reveal the complexity of interplay among these enzymes, providing a foundation for understanding DUB biology and providing another example of how cells utilize degeneracy to improve survival.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin deubiquitinases fission yeast ubiquitination

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine
Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Janel Beckley

### Lab Head
Dr Kathleen L. Gould
Cell and Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine


