### Accession
PXD035452

### Title
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis-associated Mutants of SOD1 Modulate miRNA Biogenesis through Aberrant Interactions with Exportin 5

### Description
Mutations in SOD1 (Superoxide Dismutase 1) gene are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease. By employing ascorbate peroxidase (APEX)-based proximity labeling, coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis, we uncovered 37 and 28 proteins exhibiting higher abundance in the proximity proteomes of SOD1G85R and SOD1G93A, respectively, than that of the wild-type SOD1. Immunoprecipitation followed by western blot analysis confirmed the preferential binding of one of these proteins, exportin 5 (XPO5), toward the two mutants of SOD1 over its wild-type counterpart. In line with the established function of XPO5 in pre-miRNA transport, we observed diminished nucleocytoplasmic transport of pre-miRNAs in cells with ectopic expression of the two SOD1 mutants over those expressing the wild-type counterpart. On the other hand, RT-qPCR results revealed significant elevations in mature miRNA in cells expressing the two SOD1 mutants, which are attributed to diminished inhibitory effect of XPO5 on Dicer-mediated cleavage of pre-miRNA to mature miRNA. Together, our chemoproteomic approach led to the revelation of a novel mechanism through which ALS-associated mutants of SOD1 perturb miRNA biogenesis, i.e., through aberrant binding toward XPO5.

### Sample Protocol
APEX labeling was performed at 24 h after transfection of HEK293T cells with the aforementioned SOD1-APEX plasmids. Briefly, approximately 2×107 cells transfected with the plasmids were incubated with 500 µM biotin phenol for 30 min in a 37 °C incubator, followed by incubation with 1.0 mM H2O2 for 1 min to induce biotinylation. To quench the reaction, the cells were washed with a solution containing 5 mM 6-hydroxy-2,5,7,8-tetramethylchroman-2-carboxylic acid (Trolox), 10 mM sodium ascorbate and 10 mM sodium azide in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), followed by washing with PBS twice. The cells were lysed in 500 µL of 7.0 M urea containing 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) in 1.0 M 50 mM? Tris buffer (pH 7.5), and the above-described quenching buffer. The mixtures were briefly vortexed and rotated for 20 min to completely lyse the cells, followed by centrifugation at 13,000 RPM at room temperature for 30 min to remove the cell debris. For streptavidin pull-down, 1 mg of the protein lysate was incubated with streptavidin-conjugated agarose beads (Thermo Fisher) at room temperature for 2 h. The beads were subsequently washed five times with 500 µL of 7.0 M urea. To elute the biotinylated proteins, the beads were incubated with a 3× SDS-PAGE loading buffer containing 2 mM biotin at 95°C for 5 min. The resulting proteins were resolved on a 10% SDS-PAGE gel, followed by the excision of gel bands in the molecular weight range of ≥ 15 kDa into 1 mm3 cubes. The gel cubes were destained and dehydrated, followed by cysteine reduction and alkylation, where the gel pieces were incubated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and 55 mM iodoacetamide at 37°C for 1 h and at room temperature in the dark for 20 min, respectively. The proteins were digested in-gel with trypsin, and the resultant peptide mixture was dried in a Speed-vac and desalted using OMIX C18 pipette tips (Agilent Technologies).

### Data Protocol
The raw LC-MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0). The mass tolerance for both MS and MS/MS was set at 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages was permitted, and the peptides were filtered at 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Match between runs option was selected with a match time window of 0.7 min. Peptide mass spectra were searched against a target-decoy human UniProt database (UP000005640) for protein identification and filtered at 1% protein FDR. Normalized label-free quantification with a minimum ratio count of 2 was used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in the <i>SOD</i>1 (superoxide dismutase 1) gene are associated with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), a fatal neurodegenerative disease. By employing ascorbate peroxidase-based proximity labeling, coupled with LC-MS/MS analysis, we uncovered 43 and 24 proteins exhibiting higher abundance in the proximity proteomes of SOD1<sup>G85R</sup> and SOD1<sup>G93A</sup>, respectively, than that of wild-type SOD1. Immunoprecipitation followed by western blot analysis indicated the preferential binding of one of these proteins, exportin 5 (XPO5), toward the two mutants of SOD1 over the wild-type counterpart. In line with the established function of XPO5 in pre-miRNA transport, we observed diminished nucleocytoplasmic transport of pre-miRNAs in cells with ectopic expression of the two SOD1 mutants over those expressing the wild-type protein. On the other hand, RT-qPCR results revealed significant elevations in mature miRNA in cells expressing the two SOD1 mutants, which are attributed to the diminished inhibitory effect of XPO5 on Dicer-mediated cleavage of pre-miRNA to mature miRNA. Together, our chemoproteomic approach led to the revelation of a novel mechanism through which ALS-associated mutants of SOD1 perturb miRNA biogenesis, that is, through aberrant binding toward XPO5.

### Keywords
Lc-ms affinity purification sod1 apex

### Affiliations
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA-RIVERSIDE
University of California, Riverside

### Submitter
Xingyuan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr YINSHENG WANG
UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA-RIVERSIDE


