### Accession
PXD017467

### Title
Colon cancer luminal contents metaproteomics

### Description
Metaproteomics of surgically collected luminal contents from colon cancer patients

### Sample Protocol
SDS-based protein extraction FASP 135 min gradient LC coupled with Q-Exactive HCD MS/MS

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4; Thermo Scientific), with Sequest-HT as search engine and Percolator for peptide validation (FDR < 1%). Search parameters were as follows: precursor mass range 350-3,500 Da; minimum peak count 5; S/N Threshold: 1.5, enzyme trypsin; maximum missed cleavage sites 2; peptide length range 6-50 amino acids; precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance: 0.02 Da; static modification cysteine carbamidomethylation; dynamic modification methionine oxidation. Searches were conducted in parallel against 3 sequence databases: i) a collection of metagenomic sequences obtained in house from a pool of the study samples (generated as described above; 147,265 sequences in total); ii) a public human gut metagenome dataset (available at ftp://ftp.cngb.org/pub/SciRAID/Microbiome/humanGut_9.9M/GeneCatalog/IGC.pep.gz; 9,878,647 sequences in total); iii) a human proteome database (retrieved from UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, release 2019_06; 42,420 sequences in total). The Spectrum Files RC node was used to perform offline mass recalibration, while the Minora Feature Detector node was used for label-free MS1 quantitation. After mass recalibration and feature alignment, the optimal settings for the determination of retention time and mass tolerance windows were calculated by the Minora algorithm, based on the distribution of mass accuracy and retention time variance.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have provided evidence of interactions among the gut microbiota (GM), local host immune cells, and intestinal tissues in colon carcinogenesis. However, little is known regarding the functions exerted by the GM in colon cancer (CC), particularly with respect to tumor clinical classification and lymphocyte infiltration. In addition, stool, usually employed as a proxy of the GM, cannot fully represent the original complexity of CC microenvironment. Here, we present a pilot study aimed at characterizing the metaproteome of CC-associated colonic luminal contents and identifying its possible associations with CC clinicopathological features. Colonic luminal contents were collected from 24 CC tissue specimens immediately after surgery. Samples were analyzed by shotgun metaproteomics. Almost 30,000 microbial peptides were quantified in the samples, enabling the achievement of the taxonomic and functional profile of the tumor-associated colonic luminal metaproteome. Upon sample aggregation based on tumor stage, grade, or tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs), peptide sets enabling discrimination of sample groups were identified through discriminant analysis (DA). As a result, <i>Bifidobacterium</i> and <i>Bacteroides fragilis</i> were significantly enriched in high-stage and high-grade CC, respectively. Among metabolic functions, formate-tetrahydrofolate ligase was significantly associated with high-stage CC. Finally, based on the results of this pilot study, we assessed the optimal sample size for differential metaproteomic studies analyzing colonic luminal contents. In conclusion, we provide a detailed picture of the microbial and host components of the colonic luminal proteome and propose promising associations between GM taxonomic/functional features and CC clinicopathological features. Future studies will be needed to verify the prognostic value of these data and to fully exploit the potential of metaproteomics in enhancing our knowledge concerning CC progression.

### Keywords
Human, Microbiota, Colon cancer, Metaproteomics, Gut

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Sardinia, Italy
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Sardinia

### Submitter
Alessandro Tanca

### Lab Head
Dr Sergio Uzzau
Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Sassari, Sassari, Sardinia, Italy


