### Accession
PXD020354

### Title
In-depth plasma proteome profiling of COVID-19 patients

### Description
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an unprecedented global threat caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2). The COVID-19 pandemic is a global health crisis. Recent reports have exposed an astonishing case fatality rate of 61.5% for critical cases, increasing sharply with age and for patients with underlying comorbidities. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics has the potential to become an ideal technology to be applied in this urgent situations, because it can quickly deliver substantial amounts of clinical and biological information from blood plasma or serum in an untargeted fashion. Furthermore, these MS-based proteomic workflows for biomarker discovery and profiling are well established. However, only two studies have presently applied proteomics to serum of COVID-19 patients with moderate proteome depth. Therefore, it is necessary to gain a more detailed understanding with in-depth proteome of plasma or serum to develop prognostic or predictive protein markers.    In this study, we performed in-depth proteome profiling of undepleted plasma samples using BoxCar acquisition method from an exploratory cohort comprising ten COVID-19 patients to identify candidate biomarkers for disease severity evaluation.

### Sample Protocol
The protein digestion process was optimised to 2 μL of each plasma or serum sample as previously described with some modifications. All LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using Quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometers, Q-exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC systems (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) via a nano electrospray source, as described with some modifications.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed in MaxQuant version 1.6.1.0. MS/MS spectra were searched against the Human Uniprot protein sequence database (December 2014, 88,657 entries) using the Andromeda search engine. In global parameter, boxcar was set as experimental type. Primary searches were performed using a 6-ppm precursor ion tolerance for total protein level analysis. The MS/MS ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Cysteine carbamido-methylation was set as a fixed modification. N-acetylation of protein and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to full tryptic digestion. Peptides with a minimum length of six amino-acids and up to two missed-cleavages were considered. The required false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% at the peptide, protein, and modification level. To maximize the number of quantification events across samples, we enabled the ‘Match between Runs’ option on the MaxQuant platform.

### Publication Abstract
The severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has infected over forty million patients worldwide. Although most coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) patients have a good prognosis, some develop severe illness. Markers that define disease severity or predict clinical outcome need to be urgently developed as the mortality rate in critical cases is approximately 61.5%. In the present study, we performed in-depth proteome profiling of undepleted plasma from eight COVID-19 patients. Quantitative proteomic analysis using the BoxCar method revealed that 91 out of 1222 quantified proteins were differentially expressed depending on the severity of COVID-19. Importantly, we found 76 proteins, previously not reported, which could be novel prognostic biomarker candidates. Our plasma proteome signatures captured the host response to SARS-CoV-2 infection, thereby highlighting the role of neutrophil activation, complement activation, platelet function, and T cell suppression as well as proinflammatory factors upstream and downstream of interleukin-6, interleukin-1B, and tumor necrosis factor. Consequently, this study supports the development of blood biomarkers and potential therapeutic targets to aid clinical decision-making and subsequently improve prognosis of COVID-19.

### Keywords
Plasma, Covid-19, Boxcar, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital

### Submitter
Dohyun Han

### Lab Head
Dr Dohyun Han
Proteomics core facility, Biomedical Research Institute, Seoul National University Hospital


