### Accession
PXD004887

### Title
Large-scale Perspective on Protein Dynamics in Tomato Fruit Tissues Development through Label-free Deep Shotgun Proteomics

### Description
Current innovations in mass-spectrometry-based technologies allow deep coverage of protein expression. Despite its immense value and in contrast to transcriptomics, only a handful of studies in Arabidopsis and especially other plant species engaged with global proteome assays. Here, we present large-scale protein profiling of tomato fruit across two key tissues and five developmental stages. This was accomplished by means of a shotgun proteomic assay comprising prior multi-step peptide fractionation followed by nano flow liquid chromatography coupled with high-resolution mass-spectrometry. A total of 7738 individual proteins were identified and reliably measured at least in one of the analysed tissues or stages. The detection of 115 putative transcription factors (TFs) further demonstrated the depth of our assay since a small number of TF proteins are typically detected in plant proteomics assays. Among this TFs set, 61 were differentially expressed in fruit development including renowned ripening regulators and elements of ethylene signalling. Curiously, we measured more than 80% of the predicted enzymatic reactions in the tomato metabolic network. Hence, proteins representing almost the complete set of reactions in major metabolic pathways were detected including the cytosolic and plastidic isoprenoid and the phenylpropanoid pathways. Furthermore, the data allowed us to discern between protein isoforms according to expression patterns which is most significant in light of the weak transcript-protein expression correspondence. Finally, visualization of changes in protein abundance associated with a particular process provided us with a unique, protein level view of skin and flesh tissues in developing fruit. This study adds a different perspective to the existing genomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic resources. It is therefore likely to promote translational and post-translational research in tomato and additional species which is presently focused on transcription.

### Sample Protocol
Plant growth and sampling Tomato seeds (Solanum lycopersicum ‘Microtom’) were grown in greenhouse controlled conditions. Flowers were marked at the anthesis and fruits were collected according to their size and color as follows: IG stage approximately 25 days post anthesis (DPA), MG stage approximately 42 DPA, Br stage approximately 44 DPA, Or stage approximately 46 DPA, and R stage approximately 48 DPA. The exact DPA for specific samples differed according to the pace of development of individual fruits. The skin and flesh were separated immediately upon harvesting.   Sample preparation Samples were subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion using a modified Filter Aided Sample Preparation protocol (FASP). All chemicals are from Sigma Aldrich, unless stated otherwise. Sodium dodecyl sulfate buffer (SDT) included: 4% (w/v) SDS, 100mM Tris/HCl pH 7.6, 0.1M DTT. Urea buffer (UB): 8 M urea (Sigma, U5128) in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.0 and UC buffer: 2M Urea, pH 7.6-8.0 (dilute UB X 4 with 0.1M Tris-HCl pH 7.6). Cells were dissolved in 100 L SDT buffer and lysed for 3 min at 95∘C. Then spun down at 16,000 RCF for 10min. 30L were mixed with 200 L UB and loaded onto 30 kDa molecular weight cutoff filters and spun down. 200 l of UA were added to the filter unit and centrifuge at 14,000 x g for 40 min. Trypsin was then added and samples incubated at 37∘C overnight. Digested proteins were then spun down, acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and stored in -80∘C until analysis.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was imported into the Expressionist®; software (Genedata). The software was used for retention time alignment and peak detection of precursor peptides. A master peak list was generated from all MS/MS events and sent for database searching using Mascot v2.5 (Matrix Sciences). Data was searched against the tomato sequences in the ITAG database, version 2.3. appended with 125 common laboratory contaminant proteins. Fixed modification was set to carbamidomethylation of cysteines and variable modification was set to oxidation of methionines. Search results were then imported back to Expressions to annotate identified peaks. Proteins were then grouped based on shared peptides and identifications were filtered such that the global false discovery rate was maximum of 1.6%. The data are available as Supplemental Table S3.

### Publication Abstract
Current innovations in mass-spectrometry-based technologies allow deep coverage of protein expression. Despite its immense value and in contrast to transcriptomics, only a handful of studies in crop plants engaged with global proteome assays. Here, we present large-scale shotgun proteomics profiling of tomato fruit across two key tissues and five developmental stages. A total of 7738 individual protein groups were identified and reliably measured at least in one of the analyzed tissues or stages. The depth of our assay enabled identification of 61 differentially expressed transcription factors, including renowned ripening-related regulators and elements of ethylene signaling. Significantly, we measured proteins involved in 83% of all predicted enzymatic reactions in the tomato metabolic network. Hence, proteins representing almost the complete set of reactions in major metabolic pathways were identified, including the cytosolic and plastidic isoprenoid and the phenylpropanoid pathways. Furthermore, the data allowed us to discern between protein isoforms according to expression patterns, which is most significant in light of the weak transcript-protein expression correspondence. Finally, visualization of changes in protein abundance associated with a particular process provided us with a unique view of skin and flesh tissues in developing fruit. This study adds a new dimension to the existing genomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic resources. It is therefore likely to promote translational and post-translational research in tomato and additional species, which is presently focused on transcription.

### Keywords
Ripening, Fruit, Solanum lycopersicum, Proteomics, Development

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Asaph Aharoni
Weizmann Institute of Science


