### Accession
PXD006874

### Title
A peptidomic approach to characterize peptides involved in cerebellar cortex development leads to the identification of the neurotrophic effects of nociceptin

### Description
The cerebellum is a brain structure involved in motor and cognitive functions. The development of the cerebellar cortex (the external part of the cerebellum) is under the control of numerous factors. Among these factors, neuropeptides including PACAP or somatostatin modulate the survival, migration and/or differentiation of cerebellar granule cells. Interestingly, such peptides contributing to cerebellar ontogenesis usually exhibit a specific transient expression profile with a low abundance at birth, a high expression level during the developmental processes, which take place within the first two postnatal weeks in rodents, and a gradual decline toward adulthood. Thus, to identify new peptides transiently expressed in the cerebellum during development, rat cerebella were sampled from birth to adulthood, and analyzed by a semi-quantitative peptidomic approach. A total of 33 peptides were found to be expressed in the cerebellum. Among these 33 peptides, 8 had a clear differential expression pattern during development, 4 of them i.e. cerebellin 2, nociceptin, somatostatin and VGF [353-372], exhibiting a high expression level during the first two postnatal weeks followed by a significative decrease at adulthood. A focus by a genomic approach on nociceptin, confirmed that the precursor mRNA is transiently expressed during the first week of life in granule neurons within the internal granule cell layer of the cerebellum, and showed that the nociceptin receptor is also actively expressed between P8 and P16 by the same neurons. Finally, functional studies revealed a new role for nociceptin, acting as a neurotrophic peptide able to promote the survival and differentiation of developing cerebellar granule neurons.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sampling for peptidomic analysis ─ Cerebella were quickly removed, placed in saline buffer and cleared of meninges and choroid plexus. Tissues were then rapidly heat-denatured with a Stabilizor™ (Denator) to avoid protein and peptide degradation prior to storage at -80°C. For each stage of development, tissue weight was adjusted by pooling several cerebella to reach the weight of one P90 cerebellum (i.e. 300 mg). For each stage, 10 biological replicates were sampled. Peptide extraction ─ Tissues were sonicated in extraction buffer (Stabilizor Peptide Extraction Kit, Denator) and centrifuged at 14,000 × g, for 30 min at 4°C. Peptide content in the supernatant was then quantified with the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad) and 300 fmol of human serum albumin (HSA; HSA peptide standard mix, Agilent Technologies) was added as an internal standard in extraction buffer. HSA level was compared between the 4 groups by measuring the area under the curve with Mass Hunter (Agilent Technologies, version B06.00) to assess the quality and reproducibility of the peptide extraction protocol. Samples were filtered with 10 kDa cut-off centrifugal filter units (YM-10 Microcon) at 14,000 × g for 60 min at 4°C. The flow through was applied to a solid phase extraction cartridge (Oasis HLB 10 mg) and eluted with 60% acetonitrile (ACN)/40% H2O (v/v) and freeze-dried over-night. The peptide extracts were then re-suspended in 300 µL of LC-MS (liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry) solvent (3% ACN/97% H2O(v/v) + 0.1% formic acid (FA)) and concentrated by evaporation to 30 µL. Mass spectrometry ─ Nanoflow liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) experiments were performed on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled with a nanoflow liquid chromatography instrument (Easy-nLC II, Thermo Fisher Scientific). A 2 µL volume of each sample was injected onto an enrichment column (C18 PepMap100, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The separation was performed with an analytical column needle (NTCC-360/100-5-153, NikkyoTechnos) in the presence of a mobile phase composed of H2O/0.1% FA (buffer A) and ACN/0.1 % FA (buffer B). Elution of peptides was conducted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, using a two-step linear gradient: from 10 to 40% buffer B over 30 min followed by 10 min at 100% buffer B. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode with capillary voltage and source temperature set at 1.5 kV and 275°C, respectively. The samples were analyzed using collision-induced dissociation method. The first scan (MS spectra) was recorded in the Orbitrap analyzer (R = 60,000) with the mass range m/z 400–1800. Then, the 20 most intense ions were selected for MS2 experiments. Singly charged species were excluded for MS2 experiments. Dynamic exclusion of already fragmented precursor ions was applied for 30 s, with a repeat count of 1, a repeat duration of 30 s and an exclusion mass width of ±10 ppm. Fragmentation occurred in the linear ion trap analyzer with normalized collision energy of 35. All measurements in the Orbitrap analyzer were performed with on-the-fly internal recalibration (lock mass) at m/z 445.12002 (polydimethylcyclosiloxane).

### Data Protocol
Identification of peptides expressed in the cerebellum ─ Peptides were identified using SpectrumMill (Agilent Technologies, version B04.00.127) implemented with a specific database containing 184 rat neuropeptides collected from the literature (Rat Neuropeptide Database version released on January 2017; Table S1). Data were also processed using the SwissProt Rat database. For analysis, the following parameters were used: no enzymatic digestion; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; product mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; variable modifications: cysteine sulfoxide, acetylated lysine, oxidized methionine, deaminated, pyroglutamic acid, phosphorylated S, T and Y. Only peptides with an identification score above 10 (choose from Agilent Technologies recommendations and from the literature (17, 18)) and found in at least 7 samples out of 10 in one or several developmental stages were retained.  Quantification of regulated peptides during development ─ To measure peptide changes between the four groups (P8, P16, P21 and P90), Progenesis LC-MS software (Nonlinear dynamics, version 4.0.4441.29989) was used. The P8 group was set as the reference to perform two by two comparisons and one P8 sample was chosen to align the LC-MS runs to account for retention time shifts. A minimum of 90% of alignment was required for further analysis. After alignment, statistical analysis was performed with one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA). To highlight peptides differentially expressed between P8 and other groups, a P-value < 0.05, a q-value < 0.05 and a power > 0.8 were required. Peptides with a rank > 10 and a score < 20 were excluded. In addition, only peptides with a fold change > 2 in at least one of the 2-by-2 comparison tests were considered differentially expressed. For the identification, Mascot (Matrix Science, version 2.2.04) was used with the following parameters: no enzymatic digestion; precursor mass tolerance: 10 ppm; product mass tolerance: 0.5 Da; variable modifications: oxidized methionine and carbamidomethylation. Mascot search results were imported into Progenesis.

### Publication Abstract
The cerebellum is a brain structure involved in motor and cognitive functions. The development of the cerebellar cortex (the external part of the cerebellum) is under the control of numerous factors. Among these factors, neuropeptides including PACAP or somatostatin modulate the survival, migration and/or differentiation of cerebellar granule cells. Interestingly, such peptides contributing to cerebellar ontogenesis usually exhibit a specific transient expression profile with a low abundance at birth, a high expression level during the developmental processes, which take place within the first two postnatal weeks in rodents, and a gradual decline toward adulthood. Thus, to identify new peptides transiently expressed in the cerebellum during development, rat cerebella were sampled from birth to adulthood, and analyzed by a semi-quantitative peptidomic approach. A total of 33 peptides were found to be expressed in the cerebellum. Among these 33 peptides, 8 had a clear differential expression pattern during development, 4 of them <i>i.e.</i> cerebellin 2, nociceptin, somatostatin and VGF [353-372], exhibiting a high expression level during the first two postnatal weeks followed by a significative decrease at adulthood. A focus by a genomic approach on nociceptin, confirmed that its precursor mRNA is transiently expressed during the first week of life in granule neurons within the internal granule cell layer of the cerebellum, and showed that the nociceptin receptor is also actively expressed between P8 and P16 by the same neurons. Finally, functional studies revealed a new role for nociceptin, acting as a neurotrophic peptide able to promote the survival and differentiation of developing cerebellar granule neurons.

### Keywords
Cerebellum; rat; development; peptidome; nociceptin

### Affiliations
Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Communication and Differentiation, Neuropeptides, Neuronal death and Cell plasticity team, 76000 Rouen, France
INSERM 1239

### Submitter
Auriane Corbière

### Lab Head
Dr Anouar Youssef
Normandie Univ, UNIROUEN, Inserm, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Communication and Differentiation, Neuropeptides, Neuronal death and Cell plasticity team, 76000 Rouen, France


