### Accession
PXD028069

### Title
Differential nuclear import sets the timing of protein access to the embryonic genome

### Description
During early embryonic cell divisions, the total nuclear volume doubles with each cycle. At a critical volume ratio between the nucleus and cytoplasm, embryos start transcribing their genome in a reproducible and sequential manner. However, the underlying molecular mechanism for these well-timed events remains unclear. Previous studies proposed that titration of a regulatory factor by the exponentially increasing DNA content of the system triggers the onset of the first transcripts. Nevertheless, a systematic investigation of nuclear proteome changes during development is still missing. In this study, we perform this investigation and find that differential nuclear import timing can largely explain the sequential onset of transcription. First, we investigated nuclear proteome changes in early development. We found that nuclear proteins sequentially titrate into the embryonic nuclei. Interestingly, transcription factors and RNA polymerases enter the nucleus at different times, which correspond to the activation of their nuclear functions. Notably, we observed a high correlation between when transcription factors enter the nucleus and the order in which they activate downstream transcription.  Time-lapse imaging of protein import into nuclei encapsulated in droplets of cytoplasmic extract validated our discovery of the sequential nuclear import by mass spectrometry. Lastly, we investigated the underlying molecular mechanism responsible for the differential timing of protein entry into embryonic nuclei. To this end, we quantified the relative affinity of substrates to importin and observe that high-affinity substrates tend to enter the nucleus earlier than low-affinity substrates. Notably, we can explain > 36% of the observed time-variation of when proteins enter the nucleus in the embryo with this simple affinity assay. Together, our results suggest that embryos control protein entry into the nucleus by modulating importin affinities, which then determines the timing of essential nuclear processes in early development.

### Sample Protocol
We investigated embryos of the African clawed frog Xenopus Laevis. We developed a nuclear enrichment assay to measure how the nuclear proteome changes as a function of embryonic progression in frog embryos. We separated embryonic nuclei from the cytoplasm at various stages of development via rapid filtration and quantified nucleocytoplasmic partitioning with multiplexed proteomics (TMTProC). We validated our proteomics results by imaging nuclear import in cell droplets artificially generated by a microfluidic device. To investigate the molecular mechanism that regulates nuclear import in developing embryos, we performed affinity purification-mass spectrometry on importin by varying RanGTP concentration, which alters the concentration of active importin. From here, we measure the relative abundance of each importin-bound protein. LC/MS data collection Approximately 1-3ug of the sample was analyzed by LC-MS. LC-MS experiments were performed with an nLC-1200 HPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each run, peptides were separated on an Aurora Series emitter column (25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18) (ionopticks, Australia), held at 60 °C during separation by an in-house built column oven. Separation was achieved by applying a 12% to 35% acetonitrile gradient in 0.125% formic acid and 2% DMSO over 90min for fractionated samples and 180 min for unfractionated samples at 350 nL/min at 60 °C. Electrospray ionization was enabled by applying a voltage of 2.6 kV through a MicroTee at the inlet of the microcapillary column. As indicated in each proteomics experiment, we used the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos with a TMT-MS3 (Ting et al., 2011), TMTc+ (Sonnett et al., 2018b), TMTpro-MS3 (Li et al., 2020), or TMTproC (Johnson et al., 2021) as previously described.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis Mass spectrometry data analysis was performed essentially as previously described (Sonnett et al., 2018a). The mass spectrometry data in the Thermo RAW format was analyzed using the Gygi Lab software platform (GFY Core Version 3.8) licensed through Harvard University. Peptides that matched multiple proteins were assigned to the proteins with the greatest number of unique peptides. TMT-MS3 (Ting et al., 2011), TMTc+ (Sonnett et al., 2018b), TMTpro-MS3 (Li et al., 2020), or TMTproC (Johnson et al., 2021) data were analyzed as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Multiplexed quantitative proteomics, Lc-ms, Early embryogenesis, Xenopus embryo, Nuclear import, Zygotic gene activation, Nucleocytoplasmic partitioning

### Affiliations
Wuhr Lab, Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, USA
Wuhr Lab - Princeton University

### Submitter
Thao Nguyen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Helmut Wuhr
Wuhr Lab, Molecular Biology and the Lewis-Sigler Institute for Integrative Genomics, Princeton University, USA


