### Accession
PXD041375

### Title
Effect of LPS and the glucocorticoid dexamethasone on the mouse Bone Marrow Derived Macrophage Proteome

### Description
The concentrations and copy number of proteins in the mouse Bone Marrow Derived proteome was determined for control, 10 ng/mL LPS stimulation, and LPS stimulation plus the addition of 100 nM dexamethasone, after an incubation for 24 hours and with four biological replicates for each condition. Over 6000 proteins were detected, 410 of which were upregulated by LPS (> 1.5-fold increase, adjusted p value < 0.05). 125 of these LPS-induced proteins were significantly regulated by Dexamethason > 1.5 fold 899 increase or decrease, adjusted p value <0.05).

### Sample Protocol
Bone marrow was isolated from the femurs of wild type C57/BL6J mice, humanely culled at 6-12 week. Bone marrow derived macrophages (BMDMs) were differentiated in vitro by incubation for 7 days with 5% CO2 at 37 °C, in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with L-glutamine (Gibco Thermo Fisher Scientific 21875034) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (Sigma F0392) and 50 ng/ml recombinant murine M-CSF (Peprotech 300-25). BMDMs were then replated at a density of 1 x 106 cells/ml in six well plates, and incubated for at least 1 day. Stimulations involved adding 10 ng/mL LPS (Enzo ALX-581-010-L002) to 4 biological replicates, and LPS plus 100 nM dexamethasone (Sigma D8893) t another 4, with an additional 4 left unstimulated. After 24 hours incubation, cells were washed with PBS and lysed in proteomic lysis buffer (5% SDS, 10mM TCEP, 50mM TEAB). Lysates were digested with trypsin prior to Data Independent Acquisition using label-free proteomic analysis, as described in full in the protocol cited below. In brief, lysates were sonicated at maximum amplitude for 15 cycles of 30 seconds on, 30 seconds off, nucleic acids were degraded by adding benzonase and incubating for 1 hour at room temperature. 92.5 mg/mL Iodoacetamide was added and then incubated at room temperature in the dark as protein was quantified using the EZQ Protein Quantification Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 200 μg of protein from each sample was added to 1.2% phosphoric acid, diluted in S-trap binding buffer, loaded onto an S-Trap column (ProtiFi) then washed with addition binding buffer. Retained proteins were then digested by incubating for 2 hours at 47°C with 10 μg Mass spectrometry grade Trypsin Gold (Promega) diluted in digest buffer. Peptides were then eluted using digest buffer, 0.2% aqueus formic acid, and 50% aqueous formic acid. Peptides were vacuum dried, resuspended in 50 μL 1% formic acid, then centrifuged for 30 minutes at maximum speed to elute precipitate. Peptides were quantified using the CBQCA Protein Quantitation Kit (Invitrogen) so that 1.5 μg peptide from each sample could be injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system and electrosprayed onto the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS. Full details: Christa P. Baker, Iain R. Phair, Alejandro J. Brenes, Abdelmadjid Atrih, Dylan G. Ryan, Roland Bruderer, Albena T. Dinkova-Kostova, Douglas J. Lamont, J. Simon C. Arthur, Andrew J.M. Howden, 2022, DIA label-free proteomic analysis of murine bone-marrow-derived macrophages, STAR Protocols, Volume 3, Issue 4, ISSN 2666-1667, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.xpro.2022.101725

### Data Protocol
The 12 RAW data files were entered into Spectronaut version 15 with the direct DIA option against the Mouse C57BL6J Uniprot database (UP000000589, 20210316) using the following search parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin. Peptide minimum length: 7 amino acids. Missed cleavages: 2. Protein Qvalue Cut-off (Run): 0.01. Major Group Top N: unselected, incompatible with the “proteomic ruler” method used to calculate concentration and copy number. Minor Group Top N: unselected, incompatible with the “proteomic ruler” method used to calculate concentration and copy number. Minor Group Quantity: Sum precursor quantity Protein LFQ Method: QUANT 2.0 (SN Standard) Cross Run Normalization: unselected. Calibration mode: Automatic. Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Variable modifications: Oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation (protein N-terminus). False discovery rate (FDR) of precursor and protein: 1% Q-value. Data filtering: Q-value  The output from Spectronat was then annotated and analysed with Perseus (Version 16), using the Proteomic Ruler plugin to calculate concentration and copy number per cell based on histone abundance.  The mean concentration for each sample and log10 of each concentration value was calculated in Microsoft Excel. Mean values were used to calculate the log2(fold change) for LPS vs control, LPS + Dexamethasone vs control and LPS + Dexamethasone vs control. log10 of concentration values were used to calculate the unpaired two-tailed p value for LPS vs control, LPS + Dexamethasone vs control and LPS + Dexamethasone vs control.

### Publication Abstract
Glucocorticoids potently inhibit expression of many inflammatory mediators, and have been widely used to treat both acute and chronic inflammatory diseases for more than seventy years. However, they can have several unwanted effects, amongst which immunosuppression is one of the most common. Here we used microarrays and proteomic approaches to characterise the effect of dexamethasone (a synthetic glucocorticoid) on the responses of primary mouse macrophages to a potent pro-inflammatory agonist, lipopolysaccharide (LPS). Gene ontology analysis revealed that dexamethasone strongly impaired the lipopolysaccharide-induced antimicrobial response, which is thought to be driven by an autocrine feedback loop involving the type I interferon IFN&#x3b2;. Indeed, dexamethasone strongly and dose-dependently inhibited the expression of IFN&#x3b2; by LPS-activated macrophages. Unbiased proteomic data also revealed an inhibitory effect of dexamethasone on the IFN&#x3b2;-dependent program of gene expression, with strong down-regulation of several interferon-induced antimicrobial factors. Surprisingly, dexamethasone also inhibited the expression of several antimicrobial genes in response to direct stimulation of macrophages with IFN&#x3b2;. We tested a number of hypotheses based on previous publications, but found that no single mechanism could account for more than a small fraction of the broad suppressive impact of dexamethasone on macrophage type I interferon signaling, underlining the complexity of this pathway. Preliminary experiments indicated that dexamethasone exerted similar inhibitory effects on primary human monocyte-derived or alveolar macrophages.

### Keywords
Dexamethasone, Mouse, Innate immunity, Glucocorticoid, Macrophage, Type i interferon

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee United Kingdom

### Submitter
Jordan Warner

### Lab Head
Dr Simon Arthur
Cell Signalling and Immunology School of Life Sciences University of Dundee United Kingdom


