### Accession
PXD002797

### Title
Dynamics of protein expression reveals primary targets and secondary messengers of estrogen receptor signaling in MCF-7 breast cancer cells

### Description
Estrogen receptor-mediated proliferation of breast cancer cells is facilitated through expression of multiple primary target genes, products of which induce the secondary response to stimulation. To differentiate between the primary and secondary target genes of estrogen receptor signaling, we measured dynamics of protein expression induced by estradiol in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Measurement of the global proteomic effects of estradiol by SILAC resulted in identification of 104 estradiol-regulated proteins, with only 41 corresponding genes having estrogen response elements (EREs). Selected reaction monitoring assays were used to validate 32 proteins and measure the dynamics of their expression within 72 hours upon estradiol stimulation and in the presence of 4-hydroxytamoxifen, thus confirming estrogen receptor-mediated signaling. Dynamics of protein expression revealed immediate early response proteins including TFF1 and CDK1 and delayed response proteins including CDK2 and NAB2. Presence or absence of EREs in the corresponding genes indicated early or delayed expression of proteins identified by SILAC. Finally, we measured accurate dynamics of estradiol-induced protein expression in the sub-network of primary and secondary targets of estrogen receptor. Interestingly, since NAB2 protein is also a repressor of EGR3-induced transcription, siRNA-mediated silencing of NAB2 resulted in the over-expression of some EGR3-induced proteins, such as ITGA2. To conclude, quantitative proteomics revealed secondary targets of estrogen receptor signaling potentially overlooked by genome-wide profiling of EREs and provided dynamics of protein expression in the network of transcription factors with a negative feedback loop.

### Sample Protocol
SILAC media were prepared using customized RPMI-1640 media devoid of L-arginine and L-lysine (AthenaES). Heavy media was prepared by addition of L-13C6-arginine (87 mg/L) and L-13C6-,15N2-lysine (54 mg/L) supplied by Cambridge Isotope Laboratories. Both heavy and light media were supplemented with L-proline (150 mg/L, Sigma) and dialyzed FBS (10% final, Gibco). Cells were grown for ~ 9 days (six doublings) to ensure near-complete labelling. Labeled cells were detached with a non-enzymatic cell dissociation buffer (Sigma) and seeded in 6-well plates (106 cells/well), in triplicates. Cells were left for 24 hours in the FBS-free RPMI-1640 to induce cell cycle synchronization, washed twice with PBS and then media was changed for RPMI-1640 supplemented with 10% dextran-coated charcoal treated FBS. Heavy isotope-labeled cells were treated with 10 nM estradiol (Sigma), while control cells were treated with 0.1% ethanol. Cells were grown for 6 or 36 hours, washed with PBS, centrifuged at 288 g for 10 minutes and supernatants were discarded. Cell pellets were kept at −80°C. Three biological replicates of approximately 3×106 cells (500 μg of total protein) were reconstituted in 200 μL of 0.1% RapiGest SF (sodium-3-[(2-methyl-2-undecyl-1,3-dioxolan-4-yl)-methoxyl]-1-propanesulfonate, Waters, Milford, MA) and lysed as previously described (14). All lysates were centrifuged for 20 min at 15,000 rpm at 4°C, even though no debris was typically observed after lysis. Coomassie total protein assay (Pierce, USA) was performed to measure total protein. For SILAC experiment, equimolar amounts of “heavy”- and “light”-labelled cell lysate based on total protein proteins were mixed. Trypsin digestion of proteins was performed as previously described (14). Briefly, proteins were denatured at 65°C, reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide and digested overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (trypsin:total protein ratio 1:30; Promega, Madison WI, USA). RapiGest SF was cleaved with 1 % trifluoroacetic acid and removed by centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
Following protein digestion, a mixture of light and heavy cell lysates were fractionated by strong cation exchange chromatography, eighteen fractions were collected and analyzed by reverse phase liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry (LTQ-Orbitrap XL) as previously described (14). For protein identification and data analysis, XCalibur software (v. 2.0.5; Thermo Fisher) was utilized to generate RAW files. Mass spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.1.1.25), which generated a peak list as well as SILAC- and extracted ion current-based quantitation for SILAC pairs. MaxQuant executed spectral search against a concatenated International Protein Index (IPI) human protein database (version 3.71) and a decoy database. Parameters included: trypsin enzyme specificity, SILAC double measurements of Lys6 and Arg8, 1 missed cleavage, minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, minimum of 1 unique peptide, top 6 MS/MS peaks per 100 Da, peptide mass tolerance of 20 ppm for precursor ion and MS/MS tolerance of 0.5 Da and fixed modification of cysteines by carbamidomethylation. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine and acetylation of the protein at n-terminus. All entries were filtered using a false positive rate of 1% both at the peptide and protein levels, and false positives were removed. MaxQuant search file proteinGroups.txt was uploaded to Perseus software (version 1.4.1.3). Protein identifications annotated in the columns “Only identified by site”, “Reverse” and “Contaminant” as well as proteins identified only in a single replicate were filtered out. Heavy-to-light ratios (“Ratio H/L Normalized”) for two or three replicates were log2-transformed and used to calculate average ratio and statistical significance (t-test with Benjamini-Hochberg false-discovery rate-adjusted P-values) and generate volcano plots.

### Publication Abstract
Estrogen receptor alpha (ER&#x3b1;)-mediated proliferation of breast cancer cells is facilitated through expression of multiple primary target genes, products of which induce a secondary response to stimulation. To differentiate between the primary and secondary target proteins of ER&#x3b1; signaling, we measured dynamics of protein expression induced by 17&#x3b2;-estradiol in MCF-7 breast cancer cells. Measurement of the global proteomic effects of estradiol by stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) resulted in identification of 103 estrogen-regulated proteins, with only 40 of the corresponding genes having estrogen response elements. Selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assays were used to validate the differential expression of 19 proteins and measure the dynamics of their expression within 72 h after estradiol stimulation, and in the absence or presence of 4-hydroxytamoxifen, to confirm ER&#x3b1;-mediated signaling. Dynamics of protein expression unambiguously revealed early and delayed response proteins and well correlated with presence or absence of estrogen response elements in the corresponding genes. Finally, we quantified dynamics of protein expression in a rarely studied network of transcription factors with a negative feedback loop (ER&#x3b1;-EGR3-NAB2). Because NAB2 protein is a repressor of EGR3-induced transcription, siRNA-mediated silencing of NAB2 resulted in the enhanced expression of the EGR3-induced protein ITGA2. To conclude, we provided a high-quality proteomic resource to supplement genomic and transcriptomic studies of ER&#x3b1; signaling.

### Keywords
Estrogen receptor, Mcf-7, Estrogen-regulated proteins, Ere, Silac, Estradiol, Srm

### Affiliations
University of Alberta
Staff Scientist, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada Assistant Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

### Submitter
Andrei Drabovich

### Lab Head
Dr Andrei Drabovich
Staff Scientist, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, University Health Network, Toronto, Canada Assistant Professor, Department of Laboratory Medicine & Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada


