### Accession
PXD010376

### Title
Global involvement of lysine crotonylation in protein modification and transcription regulation in rice

### Description
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered post-translational modification (PTM) existing in mammals. A global crotonylome analysis was undertaken in rice (Oryza sativa L. japonica) using high accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with crotonylated peptide enrichment. A total of 1,265 lysine crotonylation sites were identified on 690 proteins in rice seedlings. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that 51% of the crotonylated proteins identified were localized in chloroplasts. The photosynthesis-associated proteins were also mostly enriched in total crotonylated proteins. In addition, a genomic localization analysis of histone Kcr by ChIP-seq was performed to assess the relevance between histone Kcr and the genome. Of the 10,923 identified peak regions, the majority (86.7%) of the enriched peaks were located in gene body, especially exons. Furthermore, the degree of histone Kcr modification was positively correlated with gene expression in genic regions. Compared with other published histone modification data, the Kcr was co-located with the active histone modifications. Interestingly, histone Kcr facilitated expression of genes with existing active histone modifications. In addition, 77% of histone Kcr modifications overlapped with DNase hypersensitive sites (DHSs) in intergenic regions of the rice genome, and might mark other cis-regulatory DNA elements which are different from IPA1, a transcription activator in rice seedlings. Overall, our results provide a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the crotonylome and new active histone modification in transcriptional regulation in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, trypsin digestion and HPLC fractionation were conducted using a procedure described by Xue et al. (34). Leaf samples were ground under liquid nitrogen and sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% Triton-100, 65 mM DTT (dithiothreitol) and 0.1% Protease Inhibitor Cocktail). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation (20,000 g, 4 °C, 10 min). Finally, the protein was precipitated with cold 15% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) for 2 h at -20°C. After centrifugation (12,000 g, 4°C, 10 min), the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed three times with cold acetone. The protein was redissolved in buffer (8 M urea, 100 mM NH4CO3, pH 8.0). For digestion, the protein solution was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 37°C and alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. For trypsin digestion, the protein samples were diluted by adding 100 mM NH4CO3 to reduce the urea concentration to below 2 M. The protein concentration was determined with BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, P0011-1, Shanghai China) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for an overnight digestion, followed by an addition of 1:100 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for another 4 h digestion. The samples were then separated into 80 fractions by high pH reverse-phase HPLC using Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). Briefly, peptides were first separated with a gradient of 2% to 60% acetonitrile in 10 mM ammonium 8 bicarbonate with a pH of 10 over 80 min. The peptides were then combined into eight fractions and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Affinity enrichment of Kcr peptides and enrichment of lysine peptides and LC-MS/MS analysis To enrich Kcr peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM BioLabs, PTM-501) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. The beads were washed four times with NETN buffer and twice with ddH2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. The resulting peptides were cleaned with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions prior to LC-MS/MS analysis. Enrichment of lysine peptides were analyzed using LC-MS/MS as described by Xue et al. (34). Briefly peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (FA) and directly loaded onto a reversed-phase pre-column (Acclaim PepMap 100, Thermo Scientific). Peptide separation was performed using a reversed-phase analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, Thermo Scientific). The gradient was as follows: 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% FA in 98% acetonitrile (ACN)) for 24 min, 22% to 35% for 8 min then increased to 80% over 5 min and held at 80% for 3 min. The gradient was generated at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The resulting peptides were analyzed by Q ExactiveTM hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptides were 9 subjected to a nano electrospray ionization (NSI) source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) using Q ExactiveTM (Thermo) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using a Normalized collision energy (NCE) setting of 28; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 2e4 in the MS survey scan with 10.0 s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 5e4 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. The MS scans were performed over the range of 350 to 1,800 m/z. Database search

### Data Protocol
The resulting tandem mass spectrometry data were processed using the MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.1.2) described by Zhou (35) according to a method described by He (36). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the UniProt_Oryza sativa database (UniProt Oryza sativa subsp. Japonica) concatenated with the reverse decoy database. The search database consisted of the UniProt Oryza sativa subsp. Japonica proteome set (including 63,195 protein sequences) downloaded from UniProtKB (http://www.uniprot.org) in July 2014. Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme with allowances set for up to four missing cleavages, five modifications per peptide and five charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm 10 for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was specified as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met, crotonylation of lysine and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for proteins, peptides and modification sites were set at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other MaxQuant parameters were set to default values and the site localization probability was set at >0.75. The phylogenetic tree was constructed using the neighbor-joining method with MEGA Version 6.0 (37) (gaps/missing data treatment: pairwise deletion, bootstrap: 1,000). Human and mouse p300 genes were used as an outgroup. All p300 protein sequences were aligned using T-coffee (38) with default options. Bioinformatics analysis Analysis of sequences around crotonylated site The analysis of sequences around the Kcr site was performed based on Shen et al (39). For all proteins, Motif-X was used to analyze the model of sequences constituted by amino acids in specific positions of modifier 21-mers (10 amino acids upstream and downstream of the site). And all the database protein sequences were used as background database parameters, while other parameters were set to the default. All the crotonylation substrate categories obtained after enrichment were collated along with their P-values, and then filtered for those categories which were enriched in at least one of the clusters with P-value <0.05. This filtered P-value matrix was 11 transformed by the x = −log10 (P-value). The results were visualized in a heatmap generated using “heatmap.2”. Functional annotation of proteins Gene ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was achieved with reference to the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) using a procedure described by Xue et al (34). Proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Functional enrichment analysis The Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways using the Functional Annotation Tool of DAVID against the background of Nipponbare, following a detailed procedure described by Xue et al (34). GO annotation and enriched pathways with a corrected P-value <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Lysine crotonylation (Kcr) is a newly discovered posttranslational modification (PTM) existing in mammals. A global crotonylome analysis was undertaken in rice (<i>Oryza sativa</i> L. <i>japonica</i>) using high accuracy nano-LC-MS/MS in combination with crotonylated peptide enrichment. A total of 1,265 lysine crotonylation sites were identified on 690 proteins in rice seedlings. Subcellular localization analysis revealed that 51% of the crotonylated proteins identified were localized in chloroplasts. The photosynthesis-associated proteins were also mostly enriched in total crotonylated proteins. In addition, a genomic localization analysis of histone Kcr by ChIP-seq was performed to assess the relevance between histone Kcr and the genome. Of the 10,923 identified peak regions, the majority (86.7%) of the enriched peaks were located in gene body, especially exons. Furthermore, the degree of histone Kcr modification was positively correlated with gene expression in genic regions. Compared with other published histone modification data, the Kcr was co-located with the active histone modifications. Interestingly, histone Kcr-facilitated expression of genes with existing active histone modifications. In addition, 77% of histone Kcr modifications overlapped with DNase hypersensitive sites (DHSs) in intergenic regions of the rice genome and might mark other cis-regulatory DNA elements that are different from IPA1, a transcription activator in rice seedlings. Overall, our results provide a comprehensive understanding of the biological functions of the crotonylome and new active histone modification in transcriptional regulation in plants.

### Keywords
Histone lysine crotonylation, Oryza sativa, Crotonyl lysine, Post-translational

### Affiliations
PTM
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China

### Submitter
suzhen huang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhiyun Gong
Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Crop Genetics and Physiology/Co-Innovation Center for Modern Production Technology of Grain Crops, Key Laboratory of Plant Functional Genomics of the Ministry of Education, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou 225009, China


