### Accession
PXD037464

### Title
Dynamic partitioning of branched-chain amino acids- derived nitrogen supports renal cancer progression

### Description
Metabolic reprogramming is critical for tumor initiation and progression. However, the exact impact of specific metabolic changes on cancer progression is poorly understood. Here, we integrate multimodal analyses of primary and metastatic clonally-related clear cell renal cancer cells (ccRCC) grown in physiological media to identify key stage-specific metabolic vulnerabilities. We show that a VHL loss-dependent reprogramming of branched-chain amino acid catabolism sustains the de novo biosynthesis of aspartate and arginine enabling tumor cells with the flexibility of partitioning the nitrogen of the amino acids depending on their needs. Importantly, we identify the epigenetic reactivation of argininosuccinate synthase (ASS1), a urea cycle enzyme suppressed in primary ccRCC, as a crucial event for metastatic renal cancer cells to acquire the capability to generate arginine, invade in vitro and metastasize in vivo. Overall, our study uncovers a mechanism of metabolic flexibility occurring during ccRCC progression, paving the way for the development of novel stage-specific therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation Cell pellets were lysed, reduced and alkylated in 100 µl of 6M Gu-HCl, 200 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 1 mM TCEP, 1.5 mM Chloractamide by probe sonication and heating to 95ºC for 5 min. Protein concentration was measured by a Bradford assay and initially digested with LysC (Wako) with an enzyme to substrate ratio of 1/200 for 4 h at 37 ºC. Subsequently, the samples were diluted 10fold with water and digested with porcine trypsin (Promega) at 37 ºC overnight. Samples were acidified to 1% TFA, cleared by centrifugation (16,000 g at RT) and approximately 20 µg of the sample was desalted using a Stage-tip. Eluted peptides were lyophilized, resuspended in 0.1% TFA/water and the peptide concentration was measured by A280 on a nanodrop instrument (Thermo). The sample was diluted to 1 µg/ 5 µl for subsequent analysis.  Mass spectrometry analysis The tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer connected to an Ultimate Ultra3000 chromatography system (both Thermo Scientific, Germany) incorporating an autosampler. 5 μL of the tryptic peptides, for each sample, was loaded on a homemade column (250 mm length, 75 μm inside diameter [i.d.]) packed with 1.8 μm uChrom (nanoLCMS Solutions) and separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient, using a 150-min reverse-phase gradient (from 3%–40% Acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 220 °C, with a potential of 2000 V applied to the column. Data were acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data-dependent switching mode, with MS resolution of 240k, with a cycle time of 1 s and MS/MS HCD fragmentation/analysis performed in the ion trap. Mass spectra were analyzed using the MaxQuant Software package in biological triplicate. Label-free quantification was performed using MaxQuant. All the samples were analyzed as biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using the MaxQuant software package. Raw data files were searched against a human database (Uniprot Homo sapiens), using a mass accuracy of 4.5 ppm and 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels. Every single file was considered separately in the experimental design; the replicates of each condition were grouped for the subsequent statistical analysis. Carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modification while methionine oxidation and acetylation of protein N-termini were specified as variable. Subsequently, missing values were replaced by a normal distribution (1.8 π shifted with a distribution of 0.3 π) in order to allow the following statistical analysis. Results were cleaned for reverse and contaminants and a list of significant changes was determined based on average ratio and t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Renal cancer, Metabolism

### Affiliations
University of Edinburgh

### Submitter
Alex von kriegsheim

### Lab Head
Dr Alex von Kriegsheim
University of Edinburgh


