### Accession
PXD026802

### Title
Deep proteome profiling of human cerebrospinal fluid from patients diagnosed with Multiple System Atrophy, Parkinson’s Disease, Dementia with Lewy Bodies, Progressive Supranuclear Palsy, and from Controls

### Description
Human cerebrospinal fluid was collected from patients diagnosed with neurodegenerative diseases including multiple system atrophy (n=28), Parkinson’s disease (n=40), dementia with Lewy bodies (n=20), progressive supranuclear palsy (n=39) and from controls (n=17) in order to perform a comparative quantitative proteome profiling of cerebrospinal fluids from the five groups.

### Sample Protocol
CSF samples were collected into polypropylene tubes using a standard protocol. After collection, the CSF was centrifuged 10 min at 2k x g and 4 °C before aliquoting the supernatant into 400 uL aliquots and storage at -80 °C until further analysis.  At the day of analysis, samples were thawed, centrifuged 3 min at 600 xg to remove any remaining debris or precipitates formed during freezing. The supernatant was then transferred to a new tube followed by centrifugation at 20k x g for 30 min to pellet microvesicles. The supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 120k x g for 90 minutes to pellet exosomes before transfer of the genuine soluble proteins to a fourth tube.  The pelleted fractions were washed once with PBS and then resuspended in 30 µl GuHCl (6 M GuHCl, 100 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5 supplemented with 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA). From the last supernatant 10 µL of the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and mixed with 30 uL GuHCl solution. All samples were then supplied with 0.5 µg endo-Lys C and allowed to digest 2h at 37 °C. Then, each tube was supplemented with 150 µl 25 mM TrisHCl pH 8.5 to reach 1 M GuHCl final concentration before addition of 1 µg sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and continued digestion overnight. Eventually, the digestion was terminated by addition of 10% TFA (1% TFA final concentration) and generated peptides were desalted using homemade StageTips before estimating the amount of eluted peptides by A280 measurements using a NanoDrop spectrophotometer.  Prior to mass spectrometry analysis, 250 ng desalted peptides were loaded via EvoTips onto homemade columns (15 cm long, 150 µm inner diameter) packed with 1.9 um C18 beads (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using an Evosep One LC system (Evosep Biosystems). Loaded peptides were separated and eluted into a Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) by applying a 45 min (30 SPD) EvoSep gradient. Samples were analyzed in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode: Full scan MS1 spectra were recorded in the m/z range 350-1400 Da with the resolution set to 120,000 at m/z 200; AGC target was 3e6 and IT 45 ms. The MS2 scans were recorded in 48 successive 15 Da windows (with 1 Da overlap) starting from 368.5 Da (center of isolation window) recorded at 15,000 resolution; AGC target was 3e6 and IT 22 ms. The normalized collision energy was set to 25% and both MS1 and MS2 spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw files from the DIA based MS analysis of the CSF samples were searched using Spectronaut v. 14.7 against a modified SwissProt database (downloaded October 2018, with predicted signal peptides removed) applying the sum of peptides quantified at the MS1 level to report protein quantities. Settings were as follows: Enzyme: Trypsin. Missed cleavages: max 2 missed cleavage sites. Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), and acetyl (protein N-terminal). Fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C). All other settings were left at the default settings.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Evosep, Progressive supranuclear palsy, Dementia with lewy bodies, Multiple system atrophy, Proteome, Cerebrospinal fluid, Q-exactive hf-x, Mass spectrometry, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark

Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research,  Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences  University of Copenhagen,  Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N,  Denmark

### Submitter
Ole Østergaard

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research,  Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences  University of Copenhagen,  Blegdamsvej 3B,  DK-2200 Copenhagen N,  Denmark


