### Accession
PXD025836

### Title
Phospho-proteomic characterization of human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) tumor biopsies

### Description
We analyzed the phospho-proteome of tumor and matched non-tumor biopsies from 51 treatment-naive Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) patients by label-free DDA. Thereby we aim to find subgroups of patients characterized by specific pathway activation. Furthermore, we aim to find novel factors involved in HCC development and novel biomarkers.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh liver biopsies from 51 HCC and 11 normal livers were immediately snap-frozen in LN2 and processed as described (Dazert et al., 2016). Each frozen biopsy was crushed on dry ice into a fine powder and transferred into a cooled 1.5 ml tube containing 150 - 400 μl lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 8M urea, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, Complete Mini Protease Inhibitors (Roche), PhosSTOP (Roche)). Lysates were vortexed for 5 min, rotated for 1h at 4°C and sonicated in a VWR Ultrasonic bath (USC300T) for 2 min. Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 15°C at 14.000 rpm and supernatant was removed and stored. Next, 50 μl of fresh lysis buffer were added and the sample was homogenized with a Teflon pestle in a hand homogenizer (Pellet Pestle Motor, Kontes/Kimble, USA) at max speed on ice twice for 1 min. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 15°C at 14.000 rpm and supernatant was pooled with previous one. Protein conc. was measured by Bradford assay. Next, proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1h at 37 °C and alkylated with 50 mM IAM for 30 min at RT in the dark, both with gentle shaking. Urea conc. was lowered to 4 M with 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0. Lysates were digested twice with endoproteinase LysC (Wako) at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio at 37°C for two hours. Next, urea conc. was lowered to 1 M. Lysates were digested twice with trypsin (Sigma): 1:50 ratio overnight and 1:100 ratio for 2 h at 37°C. Digestion was stopped with TFA to a final conc. of 0.5%. Digests were centrifuged for 2 min at 1,500 g and desalted on a 50mg C18 SepPak cartridge (Waters) or C18 Macrospin/Microspin cartridge (Waters). Peptide conc. was estimated at 280nm, aliquots were taken and peptides were dried in the SpeedVac. Peptide samples were enriched for phosphorylated peptides using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges on an AssayMAP Bravo platform (Post et al., 2017). We used an input peptide amount of approx. 165 μg for the enrichment. For 3 biopsies, input to enrichment was slightly reduced but was accounted for by Progenesis/SafeQuant (see below). These 3 samples did not show an outlier pattern in terms of the quantified phosphorylation sites after data processing and were included in subsequent analyses. The μRPLC-MS system was set up as described (Ahrné et al., 2016). Peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nano-LC 1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with a heated RP-HPLC column (75 μm x 37 cm) packed in-house with 1.9 μm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch). Dried phosphopeptides were resuspended in 20 μl of 0.1% formic acid and 3 μl of sample were injected. Samples were analyzed using a linear gradient ranging from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 2% water, 0.15% formic acid) to 30% solvent B over 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Mass spectrometry analysis was performed on a Q-Exactive HF instrument equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (both Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each MS1 scan was followed by high-collision-dissociation (HCD) of the 10 most abundant precursor ions with dynamic exclusion for 20 s. Total cycle time was approx. 1 s. For MS1, 3e6 ions were accumulated in the Orbitrap cell over a max. time of 100 ms and scanned at a resolution of 120,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). MS2 scans were acquired at a target setting of 1e5 ions, accumulation time of 50 ms and resolution of 30,000 FWHM (at 200 m/z). Singly charged / unassigned charge state ions were excluded from triggering MS2 events. Normalized collision energy was set to 27%, the mass isolation window was set to 1.4 m/z and one microscan was acquired for each spectrum. Samples were measured in triplicates. Raw-files were imported into the Progenesis QI software (v2.0, Nonlinear Dynamics Limited), used to extract peptide precursor ion intensities across all samples applying the default parameters. The mgf-files were searched using MASCOT against a decoy database containing normal and reverse sequences of the predicted SwissProt entries of Homo sapiens (www.ebi.ac.uk) and commonly observed contaminants generated using the SequenceReverser tool from the MaxQuant software (version 1.0.13.13). Search criteria were: full tryptic specificity required; 3 missed cleavages allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed modification; oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) as variable modifications; mass tolerance of 10 ppm (precursor) and 0.02 Da (fragments). Database search results were filtered using the ion score to set the false discovery rate (FDR) to 1% on peptide and protein level, respectively, based on the number of reverse protein sequence hits in the datasets. Relative quantitative data were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house script SafeQuant (Ahrné et al., 2016). Here the gMin algorithm was chosen. Afterwards, data were imported into FileMakerPro Advanced (Version FMP18) for further data processing. Imputed values were excluded and data were median subtracted per biopsy.

### Data Protocol
Our SafeQuant in house script generated phospho-peptide centric quantifications. In order to generate quantitative data for single phosphorylation sites, peptides with more than one phosphorylation site were deconvoluted. As a next step all intensities assigned to a single phosphorylation site were added up to generate one cumulative intensity per phosphorylation site. The raw intensities of the triplicates were averaged and the mean values transformed by the logarithm to the base 2. Next, the values were normalized by median subtraction. The phospho-enrichments were performed and measured in three batches due to the limitation of the number of MS runs that can be performed using the same capillary column. In each batch also an aliquot of the pooled healthy sample was enriched and measured. Normalization to the pooled healthy sample was then performed batch-wise to the pooled healthy sample enriched and measured at the same time with the same batch. Localization probabilities of each phosphorylation site were determined per batch using ScaffoldPTM (Version 3.2.0) (Proteome Software) and the maximum observed localization probability was assigned to each phosphorylation site. Only phosphorylation sites with a minimum localization probability of 50% were taken into account. We obtained data for 12205 phosphorylation sites (in 4230 proteins) that were quantified (always against healthy liver) in at least one HCC (Table S1), 9606 (3816) quantified in at least one HCC with >99% localization probability, 7911 (3160) quantified in at least 26 HCCs, 6403 (2856) quantified in at least 26 HCCs with >99% localization probability, 4112 (2031) quantified in all 51 HCCs and 3439 (1837) quantified in at all 51 HCCs with >99% localization probability. Starting from the 12205 phosphorylation sites, we removed proteins for which data were missing from >50% of samples (50% to enable sufficient data for imputation), resulting in 7893 phosphorylation sites from 3156 proteins for further analysis. Since data were generated over three batches, we corrected for the batch effect using the ‘removeBatchEffect’ function in the edgeR R package (Robinson et al., 2010).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Phospho-proteomics, Hepatocellular carcinoma (hcc), Qexactive hf, Biopsies

### Affiliations
Biozentrum University of Basel
Department of Growth and Development, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland

### Submitter
Eva Dazert

### Lab Head
Dr Michael N. Hall
Department of Growth and Development, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland


