### Accession
PXD001862

### Title
Dysregulation of splicing proteins in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Description
Aberrant activation of splicing regulators contributes to oncogenic transformation of cells by modulating the alternative splicing events of key oncogenes. Phosphorylation of splicing factors affects subcellular localization and activity of these proteins. Studies have shown a close association between altered phosphorylation of molecules involved in splicing machinery and cancer. We carried out proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) cell lines using tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling approach followed by titanium dioxide-based phosphopeptides enrichment method. LC-MS/MS analysis resulted in the identification of 4,920 phosphosites corresponding to 2,288 proteins in six HNSCC cell lines compared to a normal oral cell line; OKF6/TERT1. Among the proteins identified, 23 kinases were found to be hyperphosphorylated in all HNSCC cell lines compared to the normal oral cell line.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured till 70% confluency and serum starved for 12 h. Then the cells were washed with 1X PBS and harvested in 1X ice-cold PBS. Further cells were lysed in lysis buffer. The cell lysates were sonicated and centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 10 minutes. The protein concentration was estimated using Bicinchoninic acid assay (BCA). Equal amount of protein from each cell line was reduced using dithiothreitol at 60°C for 20 minutes. The reduced protein lysate was alkylated using iodoacetamide and incubated for 10 minutes in dark at room temperature. We employed filter aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol to remove SDS. Protein digestion was carried using TPCK treated trypsin (1:20) at 37°C for 12-16 hours. Peptides from each cell line were labeled using Tandem mass tag labeling method as per manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides derived from OKF6/TERT1 were labeled with TMT tag 126, JHU-O28 with TMT tag 127N, JHU-O11 with TMT tag 127C, Fadu with TMT tag 128N, CAL27 with TMT tag 128C, JHU-O22 with TMT tag 129N and JHU-O29 with TMT tag 130C Further the labelled and digested peptides were subjected to bRPLC fractionation. All the fractions were lyophilized and then subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptides enrichment. LC-MS/MS analysis of enriched fractions of phosphopeptides was carried using an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry derived data was searched against Human RefSeq protein database (Version 65, containing 36211 protein entries with common contaminants added) using SEQUEST and MASCOT search algorithms through Proteome Discoverer platform (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, GmbH). For both the algorithms search parameters included maximum of two missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation at cysteine, TMT 6-plex (+229.163) modification at N-terminus of peptide and lysine were set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation at serine, threonine and tyrosine as variable modifications. For MS data, monoisotopic peptide mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm and MS/MS tolerance to 0.1 Da. PhosphoRS (version 3.1) and, phosphosite localisation algorithm were used to calculate the confident localization of phosphosite within the identified peptide.  Phosphorylation sites were considered if PhosphoRS probability score was more than 75.0. Phosphopeptides were then further mapped to the corresponding proteins to locate the phosphorylation site in the protein. False discovery rate of 1% was set at the peptide level.

### Publication Abstract
Signaling plays an important role in regulating all cellular pathways. Altered signaling is one of the hallmarks of cancers. Phosphoproteomics enables interrogation of kinase mediated signaling pathways in biological systems. In cancers, this approach can be utilized to identify aberrantly activated pathways that potentially drive proliferation and tumorigenesis. To identify signaling alterations in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC), we carried out proteomic and phosphoproteomic analysis of HNSCC cell lines using a combination of tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling approach and titanium dioxide-based enrichment. We identified 4,920 phosphosites corresponding to 2,212 proteins in six HNSCC cell lines compared to a normal oral cell line. Our data indicated significant enrichment of proteins associated with splicing. We observed hyperphosphorylation of SRSF protein kinase 2 (SRPK2) and its downstream substrates in HNSCC cell lines. SRPK2 is a splicing kinase, known to phosphorylate serine/arginine (SR) rich domain proteins and regulate splicing process in eukaryotes. Although genome-wide studies have reported the contribution of alternative splicing events of several genes in the progression of cancer, the involvement of splicing kinases in HNSCC is not known. In this study, we studied the role of SRPK2 in HNSCC. Inhibition of SRPK2 resulted in significant decrease in colony forming and invasive ability in a panel of HNSCC cell lines. Our results indicate that phosphorylation of SRPK2 plays a crucial role in the regulation of splicing process in HNSCC and that splicing kinases can be developed as a new class of therapeutic target in HNSCC.

### Keywords
Splicing, Phosphoproteomics, Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


