### Accession
PXD027413

### Title
A direct interplay between the co-chaperones Hop and p23 regulates cycle progression and client folding in the Hsp70/Hsp90 chaperone machineries

### Description
Folding of stringent clients requires transfer from Hsp70 to Hsp90. The co-chaperone Hop physically connects the chaperone machineries. Here we define its role from the remodeling of Hsp70/40-client complexes to the mechanism of client transfer and the conformational switching from stalled to active client-processing states of Hsp90. We show that Hsp70 together with Hsp40 completely unfolds a stringent client, the glucocorticoid receptor ligand binding domain (GR-LBD) in large assemblies. Hop remodels these for efficient transfer onto Hsp90. As p23 enters, Hsp70 leaves the complex via switching between binding sites in Hop. To proceed to client folding, current concepts assume that Hop dissociates and the co-chaperone p23 stabilizes the Hsp90 closed state. In contrast, we show that p23 directly interacts with Hop, relieves the stalling Hsp90-Hop interaction and closes Hsp90. This reaction allows folding of the client and is thus the key regulatory step for the progression of the chaperone cycle. To study the interaction between the different proteins, especially p23 and the DP2 domain of Hop, we performed crosslinking-MS.

### Sample Protocol
10 µM GR-LBD were incubated with 15 µM Hsp70, 3 µM Hsp40 and 5 mM ATP for 1 h at 25°C. Afterwards, 15 µM Hop or TPR2A2B-DP2 and 20 µM each of Hsp90 and p23 were added and further incubated for 1 h at 25°C to allow Hop-Hsp90-GR-LBD-p23 complex formation. This was followed by the addition 4 µl of freshly prepared 30 mM disuccinimidyl glutarate (ThermoFisher Scientific; in DMSO) and the proteins were crosslinked for 1 h at 25 °C. The reaction was stopped by the addition of 6 µl 1 M Tris/HCl (pH 7.4). To denature the crosslinked proteins, 29.5 µl 6 M Urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.4) and 2.7 µl 100 mM DTT were added and the samples were incubated for 30 min at 56 °C. To alkylate the proteins, 6.3 µl 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) were added after the samples were cooled back to RT and they were incubated for 20 min at RT in the dark. The proteins were digested with 1 µl sequencing grade Trypsin (500 ng; Promega) over night at 37 °C. The digest was stopped by the addition of 1 µl formic acid (FA). The samples were desalted with double C18 layer stage tips. After equilibrating the tips with 70 µl methanol they were washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA by applying mild centrifugation steps (960 x g). The peptides were applied onto the stage tips, washed three times with 70 µl 0.5 % FA and eluted with two times 30 µl 80 % ACN, 0.5 % FA (960 x g). Subsequently, the elution buffer was evaporated in a speed vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf). For the MS/MS measurement, the peptides were dissolved in 25 µl 0.5 % (v/v) FA and incubated for 15 min in an ultrasonic bath at RT. The peptide solutions were filtered with centrifugal filters (0.22 µM; Merck; 1 min at 7,000 x g) and transferred into Chromacol vials (ThermoFisher Scientific). Measurement MS/MS measurements were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion instrument coupled to an Ultimate3000 Nano-HPLC via an electrospray easy source (ThermoFisher Scientific). The peptide solutions were loaded on a 2 cm PepMap RSLC C18 trap column (particles 3 µm, 100 Å, inner diameter 75 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific) with 0.1 % TFA and separated on a 50 cm PepMap RSLC C18 column (particles 2 µm, 100 Å, inner diameter 75 µm, ThermoFisher Scientific) constantly held at 40 °C. Elution took place with a gradient from 5 to 35 % ACN, 0.1 % FA during 35 min at a flow rate of 0.4 µl/min (7 min 5 % ACN, 30 min to 28 % ACN, 5 min to 35 % ACN, 0.1 min to 90 % ACN, 10 min wash at 90 % ACN, 10 min equilibration at 5 % ACN). Survey scans (m/z 300 - 1,500) with a resolution of 120,000 were acquired. The automatic gain control (AGC) target value was set to 2.0*e5 with a maximum injection time of 80 ms. The most intense ions of charge states 2-12 were selected for HCD fragmentation and the collision energy was set to 30 %. The maximum injection time was set to 100 ms in the ion trap and the AGC target value was set to 5.0*e4. Inject ions for all available parallelizable time was allowed. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 60 s. Data were acquired using Xcalibur software version 3.0sp2 (ThermoFisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Converted raw files (.mzXML) were processed with Kojak (version 1.6.1) (Hoopmann et al., 2015). The Kojak output was validated using Percolator (version 2.08) (Käll et al., 2007). The non-validated crosslinks were visualized with ProXL (Riffle et al., 2016). In the PSM filter section the score (Kojak) was set to 2.0 and the min. PSM value was set to 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsp90, P23, Hsp70, Hop

### Affiliations
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Str. 8, 85747 Garching, Germany
Dept. Chemie
Lichtenbergstraße 4
85748 Garching


### Submitter
Moritz Mühlhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Johannes Buchner
Center for Protein Assemblies, Department of Chemistry, Technische Universität München, Ernst-Otto-Fischer Str. 8, 85747 Garching, Germany


