### Accession
PXD001398

### Title
Accessibilome of Human Glioblastoma

### Description
Functional targeted therapy has unfortunately failed to improve the outcome of glioblastoma patients. Success stories evidenced by the use of antibody-drug conjugates in other tumor types are encouraging, but targets specific to glioblastoma and accessible through the blood stream remain scarce. In the current work we have identified and characterized novel and accessible proteins using an innovative proteomic approach on 6 human glioblastomas. We have also analysed U87 tumors grown of chicken chorioallantoic membrane (CAM) and normal brains from mice as controls. Both were processed in the same fashion as the human tumors.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh tissue samples (of human, CAM and mouse origin) were first cut in smaller pieces (~0.125 cm3) and immediately soaked into EZ-link Sulfo NHS-SS-biotin (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) solution for 15 minutes, then snap-frozen and pulverized. 100 mg of tissue powder was lysed and subjected to affinity purification of biotinylated proteins using streptavidin. Purified proteins were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) and 5 µg were injected on the Bio-X-SCX column (500 µm i.d. x 15 mm; Dionex, p/n: 161395). Peptides were fractionated using different concentrations of salt and further separated on the C18 analytical column (Acclaim® 75 µm x 150 mm, p/n: 162224; Dionex, California, USA) connected online to Bruker HCTultra ion-trap (Bremen, Germany).

### Data Protocol
The acquired MS spectra were processed for peak list generation using the Data Analysis® software version 3.4 (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) and database search was conducted using the Mascot® search engine version 2.2.2 (Matrix Sciences, Boston, MA, USA). Human non-redundant protein database Swissprot® (Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics, Basel, Switzerland) version 57.7 was used and a total of 20,405 entries were searched. Following search parameters were used: enzyme was set for trypsin, 1 missed cleavage was allowed, mass tolerances of precursor and fragmented ions were set at 0.6 and 0.3, respectively; fixed modifications was carbamidomethyl and variable modification was oxidization of methionine. The instrument choice was set to ESI-TRAP.

### Publication Abstract
Functional targeted therapy has unfortunately failed to improve the outcome of glioblastoma patients. Success stories evidenced by the use of antibody-drug conjugates in other tumor types are encouraging, but targets specific to glioblastoma and accessible through the bloodstream remain scarce. In the current work, we have identified and characterized novel and accessible proteins using an innovative proteomic approach on six human glioblastomas; the corresponding data have been deposited in the PRIDE database identifier PXD001398. Among several clusters of uniquely expressed proteins, we highlight collagen-VI-alpha-1 (COL6A1) as a highly expressed tumor biomarker with low levels in most normal tissues. Immunohistochemical analysis of glioma samples from 61 patients demonstrated that COL6A1 is a significant and consistent feature of high-grade glioma. Deposits of COL6A1 were evidenced in the perivascular regions of the tumor-associated vasculature and in glioma cells found in pseudopalisade structures. Retrospective analysis of public gene-expression data sets from over 300 glioma patients demonstrated a significant correlation of poor patient outcome and high COL6A1 expression. In a proof-of-concept study, we use chicken chorioallantoic membrane in vivo model to show that COL6A1 is a reachable target for IV-injected antibodies. The present data warrant further development of human COL6A1 antibodies for assessing the quantitative biodistribution in the preclinical tumor models.

### Keywords
Biomarkers; perivascular; targeted therapy;

### Affiliations
University of Liege GIGA Cancer Metastasis Research Laboratory Liege, Belgium
University of Liege, Belgium

### Submitter
Andrei Turtoi

### Lab Head
Dr Vincent Castronovo
University of Liege GIGA Cancer Metastasis Research Laboratory Liege, Belgium


