### Accession
PXD018410

### Title
The Tumor Suppressor FLCN Regulates Glycolysis by Specifically Binding and  Inhibiting Lactate Dehydrogenase-A

### Description
The “Warburg effect” describes the use of aerobic glycolysis by cancer cells to fuel their growth. Lactate dehydrogenase-A (LDHA) is key to this process and catalyzes the interconversion of pyruvate and lactate. Here we used a proteomic approach to identify LDHA as a binding partner of the tumor suppressor FLCN. Canonically, LDHA is thought to be a substrate-regulated enzyme, however our data show that FLCN uncompetitively inhibits LDHA activity by restricting movement of its active site loop. This inhibition appears to be critical in normal cells, as we show FLCN binds to and tightly regulates LDHA activity in order to preserve metabolic homeostasis. Pathogenic mutations of FLCN are associated with LDHA hyperactivity and kidney tumor formation, suggesting a mechanism for FLCN tumor suppressive function. We have identified a cell-permeant ten amino acid peptide based on the FLCN sequence that enters these tumors and inhibits LDHA ex vivo. In a broader context, renal cell carcinomas experience the Warburg effect and show FLCN dissociation from LDHA. Cells that experience this metabolic shift depend on the hyperactivity of LDHA, as previous work has shown attenuation or inhibition of LDHA leads to programmed cell death. Treating these cells with the FLCN-derived peptide causes apoptosis, strongly suggesting that the glycolytic shift of cancer cells is the result of FLCN inactivation or disassociation from LDHA. Taken together, FLCN-mediated inhibition of LDHA provides a new paradigm for the regulation of glycolysis.

### Sample Protocol
Visible bands were excised from the gel manually and cut into small pieces approximately 1 mm x 1 mm. These gel pieces were destained using 1:1 30mM potassium ferricyanide: 100mM sodium thiosulfate for 10 minutes. The destained gel pieces were then washed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile alternatively for 5 minutes each wash. This cycle of 5 minute 25mM ammonium bicarbonate wash followed by 5 minute acetonitrile wash was repeated 3 times. To further prepare the gel pieces for digestion, the gel pieces were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile. After removing all acetonitrile, 25ml of porcine trypsin (Promega) dissolved in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate at a concentration of 4mg/ml was added to the gel pieces. The gel pieces were then kept at room temperature overnight (approximately 12-16 hours). Following digestion, the supernatant was transferred to a second tube, and acetonitrile was added to the gel pieces to complete the extraction of digested peptides. This extract was added to the first supernatant and this combined solution, containing the extracted peptides was frozen and lyophilized. The peptides were resuspended in 5ml of 100:99:1 acetonitrile:water:trifluoroacetic acid immediately prior to spotting on the MALDI target. For MALDI analysis, the matrix solution consisted of alpha-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Aldrich Chemical Co. Milwaukee, WI) saturating a solution of 1:1:0.01 acetonitrile: 25mM ammonium citrate: trifuoroacetic acid. Approximately 0.15ml of peptide solution was spotted on the MALDI target immediately followed by 0.15ml of the matrix solution. This combined solution was allowed to dry at room temperature. MALDI MS and MS/MS data was then acquired using the ABSCIEX TOF/TOF_ 5800 Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Resultant peptide mass fingerprint and peptide sequence data was submitted to the UniProt database using the Mascot search engine to which relevance is calculated and scores are displayed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Flcn ldha glycolysis

### Affiliations
Department of Urology,  2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,  3 Upstate Cancer Center,  4 College of Medicine SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY, USA
SUNY Upstate Medical University

### Submitter
Mehdi Mollapour

### Lab Head
Dr Mehdi Mollapour
Department of Urology,  2 Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,  3 Upstate Cancer Center,  4 College of Medicine SUNY Upstate Medical University Syracuse, NY, USA


