### Accession
PXD000354

### Title
Rat cardiac mitochondrial proteome and phosphoproteome

### Description
Female Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly separated into two groups: i) trained (Ex group) and ii) sedentary (Cont group).  Animals from the Ex group were adapted to treadmill exercise for two consecutive weeks, involving a gradual increase in the running time till 60 min/day at 20 m/min, 0% grade, 5 days/week. This exercise program remained constant until the end of the 54 weeks. Mitochondria isolation from 10 animals (5 Ex group and 5 Cont group)  was performed using the conventional methods of differential centrifugation. Mitochondrial protein extracts were reduced with dithiothreitol, alkylated with iodoacetamide and digested with trypsin using the FASP procedure (18). Briefly, each sample was solubilized in 4 % SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 0.1 M HEPES and incubated for 30 min at 60 C. Then, samples were mixed with 0.2 mL of a solution of 8 M Urea, 0.1 M HEPES, pH 8.5 (UH solution), loaded into the filtration devices (3k Microcon, Millipore), centrifuged at 14,000 g for 20 min, and washed twice with UH solution. After centrifugation, the concentrates were alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide in UH solution (dark, 25 C, 20 min), and washed twice with UH solution. The concentrate was diluted with 0.1 mL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and digested overnight (37 C) with the addition of 2 ug of trypsin diluted in 30 uL of 50 mM ABC. The resulting tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation and the filter were washed twice with 50 uL of 50 mM ABC. Eluted peptides were acidified with 10 uL of formic acid and cleaned up on a homemade Empore C18 column (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA) (ref) for subsequent phospho-enrichment and/or analysis by LC-MS/MS. The dried protein digest was dissolved with 10 uL (3 % ACN, 0.1 % TFA), diluted 1:5 with loading buffer (1 M glycolic acid, 5 % TFA, 80 % ACN) and phosphopeptides were enriched on TiO2-beads as previously described (19). Briefly 5 mg of "Titansphere TiO2 5 um" were suspended in 100 uL of 100 % ACN, immobilized in a pipette-column and washed using 5 uL of loading buffer. Each sample was loaded in each pipette-column and then washed with 30 uL of washing buffer (1 % TFA, 80 % ACN). Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads with 25 uL of 25 % ACN (v/v) containing 25 % NH4OH (m/v), acidified with 10 uL of 10 % TFA and vacuum- concentrated to approximately 4 uL. Samples were finally diluted to 10 uL with H2O + 0.1% formic acid prior to injection.  The peptides mixtures were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-MS/MS) on an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon Biosystems, Odense, Denmark) connected to the LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. Six microliters of the peptide mixture were auto-sampled directly onto the analytical HPLC column (120 mm x75 um I.D., 3 um particle size (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a 120-min gradient from 5 % to 50 % ACN in 0.1 % FA. The effluent from the HPLC column was directly electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer.  The LTQ Orbitrap Velos instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and MS/MS acquisition. The MS survey scan was performed in the FT cell recording a window between 350 and 2000 m/z. The resolution was set to 60 000, and the automatic gain control was set to 1,000,000 ions with a maximal acquisition time of 400 ms. The 20 most intense peptide ions with charge states great than or equal to 2 were sequentially isolated to a target value of 5,000 and fragmented in the high-pressure linear ion trap by low-energy CID with normalized collision energy of 35% Q value of 0.25, and an activation time of 10 ms. Raw files were processed using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen). Peak lists were searched using Mascot software version 2.3 (Matrix Science, UK) against a SwissProt database containing entries corresponding to Rattus norvegicus (version of July 2012), a list of common contaminants, and all the corresponding decoy entries. Trypsin was chosen as enzyme and a maximum of two miscleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M) and phosphorylation (STY) were used as variable modifications. Searches were performed using a peptide tolerance of 7 ppm, a product ion tolerance of 0.5 Da. Resulting data files were filtered for FDR less than 1 % at peptide level.

### Sample Protocol
Not available

### Data Protocol
Not available

### Publication Abstract
Moderate physical activity has traditionally been associated with the improvement of cardiac function and, consequently, with the extension of life span. Mitochondria play a key role in the adaptation of heart muscle to exercise-related metabolic demands. In order to disclose the molecular mechanisms underlying the beneficial effect of lifelong physical activity in cardiac function, we performed label-free quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics of Sprague-Dawley rat heart mitochondrial proteome and phosphoproteome. Our data revealed that 54 weeks of moderate treadmill exercise modulates the abundance of proteins involved in the generation of precursor metabolites and cellular respiration, suggesting an increase in carbohydrate oxidation-based metabolism. Moreover, from the 1335 phosphopeptides identified in this study, 6 phosphosites were exclusively assigned to heart mitochondria from sedentary rats and 17 to exercised animals, corresponding to 6 and 16 proteins, respectively. Most proteins exhibiting significant alterations in specific phosphorylation sites were involved in metabolism. Analysis of the acquired data led to the identification of several kinases potentially modulated by exercise training, which were selected for further validation. Indeed, higher protein abundance levels of RAF and p38 in mitochondria were confirmed to be modulated by sustained exercise. Our work describes the plasticity of heart mitochondria in response to long exercise programs manifested by the reprogramming of phosphoproteome and provides evidence for the kinases involved in the regulation of metabolic pathways and mitochondrial maintenance.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rat, Cardiac muscle, Fasp, Phosphoproteome, Mithocondria

### Affiliations
CRG/UPF Proteomics Unit

### Submitter
Francesco Mattia Mancuso

### Lab Head


