### Accession
PXD016740

### Title
Impact of an antifungal insect defensin on the proteome of the phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea

### Description
ETD151, an analogue of the antifungal insect defensin heliomicin, is an antifungal peptide active against yeasts and filamentous fungi. In order to decipher the mechanisms underlying its molecular action on the phytopathogenic fungus Botrytis cinerea, a necrotrophic pathogen responsible for gray mold disease, we investigated the changes in three-day old mycelia upon treatment with different concentrations of ETD151. Optical and fluorescent microscopies were used prior to establishing the peptide/protein profiles through two mass spectrometry approaches: MALDI profiling, to generate molecular mass fingerprints as peptide signatures, and a gel-free bottom-up proteomics approach. Our results show that a concentration of ETD151 above the half-maximal inhibitory concentration can alter the integrity of the mycelial structure of B. cinerea. Furthermore, reproducible modifications of the peptide/protein composition were demonstrated in the presence of ETD151 within a 1.5-16 kDa mass range. After the robustness of LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis on B. cinerea mycelial extracts was confirmed, our analyses highlighted 340 significantly modulated proteins upon treatment with ETD151 within a 4.8- 466 kDa mass range. Finally, data mapping on KEGG pathways revealed the molecular impact of ETD151 on at least six pathways. In particular, for the effect on oxidative phosphorylation, we clearly demonstrated that ETD151 does not interact directly with the mitochondrial respiratory chain.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction For each plate, the fungal material (mycelium) from each of the 60 wells was collected by manual pipetting. For each experimental condition (untreated or treated with different concentrations of ETD151), 10 individual wells of a same row were pooled into a single 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube and maintained on ice until use. The fungal material was pelleted by centrifugation for 4 min at 13,000 rpm and 4°C. The fungal pellet was washed twice by up-and- down pipetting with 1 mL of sterile MilliQ water before adding 1 mL of 70% EtOH. The washed mycelia were stored overnight at -80°C. The fungal material was disrupted using a Mill-Mix 20 system. The mycelia were ground in 2-mL tubes filled with 0.5 mm zirconium oxide beads for 10 min at 30 Hz. After centrifugation for 4 min at 13,000 rpm and 4°C, the pellets were collected and dried under speed-vaccum. Finally, the proteins were extracted by incubating the dried fungal pellet in the presence of 2 M acetic acid, prepared in 50% ACN, for 4 h at 4°C under gentle shaking. After incubation, the extracts were centrifuged for 4 min at 13,000 rpm and 4°C and the protein supernatants were stored at 4°C until use. The protein supernatants were dried under vacuum, and then suspended with gentle shaking in an ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) buffer (50 mM, pH 7.5) supplemented with 0.1% RapiGest surfactant (Waters). The proteins were reduced with 280 mM dithiothreitol in ABC buffer for 30 min at 56°C in the dark prior to alkylation with 480 mM iodoacetamide in ABC buffer for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Digestions were carried out for 1 h at 37°C by adding 0.5 μg of trypsin (0.1 μg/μL in ABC buffer). Following this initial digestion, 0.5 μg of trypsin was added before overnight incubation at 37°C. To stop proteolysis and cleave the RapiGest surfactant, samples were acidified with 8 μL of a 10% TFA and 20% ACN solution and incubated for 30 min at 37°C. Finally, samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 13,000 rpm at room temperature. The digests were transferred into injection vials containing 5 μL of 2% ACN acidified with a solution of 0.1% TFA.  Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS instrumentation, software, chromatographic columns and other items were from Thermo Fisher Scientific. Peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nanoflow HPLC system coupled to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap high-resolution mass spectrometer, controlled by Xcalibur 2.2, Chromeleon Xpress 6.80 and Thermo QExactive Tune 2.5 software. Nano-LC separations were performed according to Pisani and colleagues48. Briefly, the digests were loaded at a flow rate of 10 μL/min for 6 min onto a PepMap 100 C18 precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm, 5 μm) and separated at a flow rate of 300 nL/min onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 nanoviper column (75 μm × 250 mm, 3 μm) maintained at 35°C. Peptides were eluted using a multi-step linear gradient from 2% to 32% and from 32% to 65% ACN in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 94 min and 5 min, respectively. For MS analyses, the mass spectrometer was operating in positive mode and data-dependent acquisition. The instrument acquired a full-range MS scan from 380 to 2000 m/z (70,000 resolution, AGC target 3.106, maximum IT 200 ms) and then fragmented the top ten peptide ions in each cycle (17,500 resolution, AGC target 2.105, maximum IT 100 ms, intensity threshold 4.104, excluding charge-unassigned ions, Normalized Collision Energy 27). Parent ions were then excluded from MS/MS for the next 15 s.

### Data Protocol
All MS and MS/MS spectral data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.2, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Processing and consensus workflows were adapted from manufacturer’s basic settings. The acquired MS/MS spectra were matched using the SEQUEST HT49 search algorithm (University of Washington) against the EnsemblFungi50 Botrytis cinerea B05.10 protein sequence database (http://fungi.ensembl.org/Botrytis_cinerea). The release 42 downloaded on February 16, 2019 contains 13,749 entries. The spectrum identification considered the following parameters: trypsin as proteolytic enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavages, 6 and 144 amino acids as minimum and maximum peptide lengths, and a tolerance of 10 ppm/0.02 Da for precursor and fragment masses, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was defined as a static modification. Methionine/tryptophan oxidation, serine/threonine/tyrosine phosphorylation and C-terminal amidation were defined as dynamic modifications. False discovery rates (FDRs), referred to as q-values, and posterior error probabilities (PEPs) for peptide spectral matches (PSMs) were calculated and filtered in the Percolator node using a decoy database. Peptides and identified proteins were respectively validated based on high-confidence (FDR < 1%) and medium-confidence criteria (FDR < 5%). Protein grouping was applied to regroup protein candidates covered by the same set or subset of identified peptides under a representative ‘master’ protein. Annotations were implemented through Proteome Discoverer using Gene Ontology (biological process, molecular function, cellular compartment), protein families from Pfam and biochemical pathway maps from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Label-free quantification was performed using the Proteome Discoverer software. Chromatographic alignment for LC/MS mapping features, created by the Minora Feature Detector for each individual file, was achieved with a maximum retention time shift of 10 min and a mass tolerance of 10 ppm. Protein abundance was determined on intensity of precursor ions of unique and razor peptides.

### Publication Abstract
ETD151, an analogue of the antifungal insect defensin heliomicin, is an antifungal peptide active against yeasts and filamentous fungi. To decipher the mechanisms underlying its molecular action on the phytopathogenic fungus <i>Botrytis cinerea</i>, a necrotrophic pathogen responsible for gray mold disease, we investigated the changes in 3 day-old mycelia upon treatment with different concentrations of ETD151. Optical and fluorescence microscopies were used prior to establishing the peptide/protein profiles through two mass spectrometry approaches: MALDI profiling, to generate molecular mass fingerprints as peptide signatures, and a gel-free bottom-up proteomics approach. Our results show that a concentration of ETD151 above the half-maximal inhibitory concentration can alter the integrity of the mycelial structure of <i>B. cinerea</i>. Furthermore, reproducible modifications of the peptide/protein composition were demonstrated in the presence of ETD151 within a 1500-16,000 mass (<i>m/z</i>) range. After the robustness of LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis on <i>B. cinerea</i> mycelial extracts was confirmed, our analyses highlighted 340 significantly modulated proteins upon treatment with ETD151 within a 4.8-466 kDa mass range. Finally, data mapping on KEGG pathways revealed the molecular impact of ETD151 on at least six pathways, namely, spliceosome, ribosome, protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum, endocytosis, MAPK signaling pathway, and oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Insect defensin, Botrytis cinerea, Proteomics, Heliomicin, Mechanism of action, Fungal infection, Antifungal defensin

### Affiliations
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France
Biopark Archamps

### Submitter
Sebastien VOISIN

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Bulet
CR Université Grenoble Alpes, Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Inserm U1209, CNRS UMR 5309, Grenoble, France


