### Accession
PXD023572

### Title
Rituximab and obinutuzumab differentially hijack the B-cell receptor and NOTCH1 signaling pathways.

### Description
An LC-MS/MS based phosphoproteomics study that characterizes the signaling processes downstream of the B-cell receptor and how they are differentially regulated  following treatment with anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies in B-cell lymphoma.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer. This concentration was reduced to 2 M with 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis-HLB cartridges and phosphopeptides enriched using TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot. Label-free quantification was performed using Pescal, a in-house developed software that uses extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all the peptides identified in at least one sample across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
The anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies rituximab and obinutuzumab differ in their mechanisms of action, with obinutuzumab evoking greater direct B cell death. To characterize the signaling processes responsible for improved B cell killing by obinutuzumab, we undertook a phosphoproteomics approach and demonstrate that rituximab and obinutuzumab differentially activate pathways downstream of the B cell receptor. Although both antibodies induce strong ERK and MYC activation sufficient to promote cell-cycle arrest and B cell death, obinutuzumab exceeds rituximab in supporting apoptosis induction by means of aberrant SYK phosphorylation. In contrast, rituximab elicits stronger anti-apoptotic signals by activating AKT, by impairing pro-apoptotic BAD, and by releasing membrane-bound NOTCH1 to up-regulate pro-survival target genes. As a consequence, rituximab appears to reinforce BCL2-mediated apoptosis resistance. The unexpected complexity and differences by which rituximab and obinutuzumab interfere with signaling pathways essential for lymphoma pathogenesis and treatment provide important impetus to optimize and personalize the application of different anti-CD20 treatments.

### Keywords
Cd20, Phosphoproteomics

### Affiliations
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Arran Dokal

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Cutillas
Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London


