### Accession
PXD013546

### Title
Mediator complex interaction partners organize the transcriptional network that defines neural stem cells

### Description
Mediator complex regulates transcription by connecting enhancers to promoters. High Mediator binding density defines super enhancers, which regulate cell-identity genes and oncogenes. Protein interactions of Mediator may explain its role in these processes but have not been identified comprehensively. Here we purify Mediator from neural stem cells (NSCs) and identify 75 protein-protein interaction partners. We identify super enhancers in NSCs and show that Mediator-interacting chromatin modifiers colocalise with Mediator at enhancers and super enhancers. Transcription factor families with high affinity for Mediator dominate enhancers and super enhancers and can explain genome-wide Mediator localization. We identify E-box transcription factor Tcf4 as a key regulator of NSCs. Tcf4 interacts with Mediator, colocalises with Mediator at super enhancers and regulates neurogenic transcription factor genes with super enhancers and broad H3K4me3 domains. Our data suggest that high binding-affinity for Mediator is an important organizing feature in the transcriptional network that determines NSC identity.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were dialyzed to 20mM Hepes pH7.6, 0.2mM EDTA, 1.5mM MgCl2, 100mM KCl, 20% glycerol (buffer C-100). 80μl of anti-Flag M2 agarose beads (Sigma) equilibrated in buffer C-100 were added to 1.5ml of nuclear extract and incubated for 3 hours at 4ºC in the presence of Benzonase (Novagen). Beads were washed five times with buffer C-100 containing 0.02% NP-40 (C-100*) and bound proteins were subsequently eluted at 4ºC with buffer C-100* containing 0.2mg/ml Flag-tripeptide (Sigma). Elutions were TCA precipitated, separated on a 10% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gel (Invitrogen) and stained with Colloidal Coomassie (Biorad) according to manufacturer’s instructions. Gel lanes were cut and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin (Promega). Nano-LC-MS/MS was performed on an 11 series capillary LC system (Agilent Technologies) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo).

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectra from purified Mediator samples or control sample were searched against UniProt release 2012-11 for protein identification using MASCOT.

### Publication Abstract
The Mediator complex regulates transcription by connecting enhancers to promoters. High Mediator binding density defines super enhancers, which regulate cell-identity genes and oncogenes. Protein interactions of Mediator may explain its role in these processes but have not been identified comprehensively. Here, we purify Mediator from neural stem cells (NSCs) and identify 75 protein-protein interaction partners. We identify super enhancers in NSCs and show that Mediator-interacting chromatin modifiers colocalize with Mediator at enhancers and super enhancers. Transcription factor families with high affinity for Mediator dominate enhancers and super enhancers and can explain genome-wide Mediator localization. We identify E-box transcription factor Tcf4 as a key regulator of NSCs. Tcf4 interacts with Mediator, colocalizes with Mediator at super enhancers and regulates neurogenic transcription factor genes with super enhancers and broad H3K4me3 domains. Our data suggest that high binding-affinity for Mediator is an important organizing feature in the transcriptional network that determines NSC identity.

### Keywords
Neural stem cells, Mediator, Transcriptional network

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC Rotterdam, the Netherlands


