### Accession
PXD012081

### Title
Wnt-modulated hiPSC-derived insulin-producing cells, adult human islet proteome

### Description
We aimed to assess whether Wnt-modulation could contribute to mature hiPSC-derived insulin-producing cells in vitro. Building our hypothesis on our previous findings of Wnt activation in immature hiPSC-derived insulin-producing cells compared to adult human islets and with recent data reporting a link between Wnt/PCP and in vitro beta-cell maturation. In this study we stimulated hiPSC-derived insulin-producing cells with syntetic proteins including WNT3A, WNT4, WNT5A and WNT5B as well as inhibiting endogeneous Wnt signaling with Tankyrase inhibitor G007-LK.

### Sample Protocol
Differentated cells and adult human islets were lysed and processed using FASP. Peptides were TMT 11-plex labeled, fractionated by off-line basic pH reversed phase fractionation, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion MS.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed usin a Sequest-based in-house software pipeline and spectra were converted to mzXML using a modified version of ReAdW.exe. Database searching included all entries from the human uniprot database (March 11, 2014). This database was concatenated with one composed of all protein sequences in the reversed order. Searches were performed using a 50 ppm precursor ion tolerance for toal protein level analysi. The product ion tolerance was set to 0.9 Da. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Sequest searches and lineare discriminant analysis. TMT tags on lysine residues and peptide N-termini (+229.163 Da) and carbamidomethylation of cycteine residues (+57.021 Da) were set as static modification, while oxidation of methoionine residues (+15.995 Da) were set as variable modification.

### Publication Abstract
Current published protocols for targeted differentiation of human stem cells toward pancreatic &#x3b2;-cells fail to deliver sufficiently mature cells with functional properties comparable to human islet &#x3b2;-cells. We aimed to assess whether Wnt-modulation could promote the final protocol stages of &#x3b2;-cell maturation, building our hypothesis on our previous findings of Wnt activation in immature hiPSC-derived stage 7 (S7) cells compared to adult human islets and with recent data reporting a link between Wnt/PCP and <i>in vitro</i> &#x3b2;-cell maturation. In this study, we stimulated canonical and non-canonical Wnt signaling in hiPSC-derived S7 cells using syntetic proteins including WNT3A, WNT4, WNT5A and WNT5B, and we inhibited endogenous Wnt signaling with the Tankyrase inhibitor G007-LK (TKi). Whereas neither canonical nor non-canonical Wnt stimulation alone was able to mature hiPSC-derived S7 cells, WNT-inhibition with TKi increased the fraction of monohormonal cells and global proteomics of TKi-treated S7 cells showed a proteomic signature more similar to adult human islets, suggesting that inhibition of endogenous Wnt contributes toward final &#x3b2;-cell maturation.

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms3

### Affiliations
Universitetet i Bergen
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway

### Submitter
Heidrun Vethe

### Lab Head
Dr Helge Ræder
Department of Clinical Science, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway


