### Accession
PXD014581

### Title
LFQ Burkholderia Cenocepacia mutant comparsion

### Description
Comparsion of multiple BC k56-2 muants to assess protoeme chnages. seven strain comparsion between WT vs delta pglL vs delta 1086 vs delta 2974 vs delta CepI vs delta CepR vs delta pglL complemented AmrAB::S7-pglL-his. LFQ based quantification

### Sample Protocol
Freshly prepared whole cell pellets were solubilized in SDS lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris Ph8.0, 10mM DTT), quantified and precipitated overnight with ice-cold acetone. 100ug of precipitated protein per sample were resuspend in 6M urea, 2M thiourea, reduced with 10mM DTT for one hour and then alkylated with 20mM CAA for one hour. Lys-C was added at a ratio of 1:200 and samples allowed to digest for 4 hours. Each sample was then diluted with 100mM ABC and digested overnight with 2ug trypsin (1:50 ratio). Digested samples were acidified with formic acid (to 1%) and cleaned up using home made STAGE tips (EMPORE C18 material).

### Data Protocol
Data was searched using Maxquant version 1.5.5.1 using trypsin specifcity, up to 2 misscleavage events and allowing oxidation of Methionine. Matching between runs and LFQ based quantification was enabled

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Glycosylation mutant, Lfq, Quorum sensing, Burkholderia

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia

### Submitter
Nichollas Scott

### Lab Head
Dr Nichollas Scott
Department of Microbiology and Immunology at the Peter Doherty Institute of infection and immunity, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


