### Accession
PXD002135

### Title
ATR inhibition rewires cellular signaling networks in response to pathologic replication stress

### Description
DNA replication stress is the major cause of genomic instability in human cells. The ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related kinase (ATR) plays an essential role in the cellular response to replication stress and inhibition of ATR has emerged as therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancer. However, the ATR-dependent signaling in the cellular response to replication stress has not been systematically investigated. Here, we employ quantitative mass spectrometry-based proteomics to decipher the ATR-dependent phosphorylation events in response to pathological replication stress induced by hydroxyurea. Our data define the substrate spectrum of ATR and identify several novel putative ATR substrates. In addition, we demonstrate that ATR-inhibition fundamentally rewires cellular signaling networks leading to the prominent activation of different pathways including the ATM-driven double strand break repair.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were pre-treated with 1 µM VE-821 (Selleckchem) for 1 hour and subsequently treated with 2 mM hydroxyurea (HU) for indicated times. Cells were washed with ice-cold phosphate-buffered saline and lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, 5 mM sodium flouride. NaCl was added to a final concentration of 500 mM and lysates were briefly sonicated to release the chromatin-bound proteins. Subsequently, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16000×g for 15 min and protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (BioRad). Proteins were precipitated in 4-fold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide (Nielsen et al, 2008). Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and sequencing grade modified trypsin (Sigma). Protease digestion was stopped by addition of trifluoroacetic acid to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile. For the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides, 5 mg of peptides in binding buffer (50% acetonitrile, 6% trifluoroacetic acid in H2O) (PMID: 21715320) were incubated with 10 mg of TiO2 spheres (GL sciences) for 1 hour. The beads were washed twice in binding buffer and subsequently peptides were eluted using elution buffer (10% NH4OH, 25% acetonitrile in H2O). The eluates were concentrated to remove NH4OH and peptides were fractionated in 6 fractions using micro-column-based strong-cation exchange chromatography (SCX) (Weinert et al, 2013) and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips (Rappsilber et al, 2007). Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Michalski et al, 2011; Kelstrup et al, 2012). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed phase columns (15 cm length, 75 µm inner diameter, 1.9 µm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 hours. The mass spectrometer was operated in data dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300 – 1700) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al, 2007). An ion selection threshold of 5,000 was used. Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge states less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were analyzed using MaxQuant (development version 1.5.2.8) (Cox & Mann, 2008). Parent ion and MS2 spectra were searched against a database containing 88,473 human protein sequences human protein sequences obtained from the UniProtKB released in December 2013 using Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011). Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm in MS mode, 20 ppm in HCD MS2 mode, strict trypsin specificity and allowing up to 3 miscleavages. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was searched as a fixed modification, whereas protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were searched as variable modifications. Site localization probabilities were determined by MaxQuant using the PTM scoring algorithm as described previously (Cox & Mann, 2008; Olsen et al, 2006). The dataset was filtered based on posterior error probability (PEP) to arrive at a false discovery rate of below 1% estimated using a target-decoy approach (Elias & Gygi, 2007).

### Publication Abstract
The slowing down or stalling of replication forks is commonly known as replication stress and arises from multiple causes such as DNA lesions, nucleotide depletion, RNA-DNA hybrids, and oncogene activation. The ataxia telangiectasia and Rad3-related kinase (ATR) plays an essential role in the cellular response to replication stress and inhibition of ATR has emerged as therapeutic strategy for the treatment of cancers that exhibit high levels of replication stress. However, the cellular signaling induced by replication stress and the substrate spectrum of ATR has not been systematically investigated. In this study, we employed quantitative MS-based proteomics to define the cellular signaling after nucleotide depletion-induced replication stress and replication fork collapse following ATR inhibition. We demonstrate that replication stress results in increased phosphorylation of a subset of proteins, many of which are involved in RNA splicing and transcription and have previously not been associated with the cellular replication stress response. Furthermore, our data reveal the ATR-dependent phosphorylation following replication stress and discover novel putative ATR target sites on MCM6, TOPBP1, RAD51AP1, and PSMD4. We establish that ATR inhibition rewires cellular signaling networks induced by replication stress and leads to the activation of the ATM-driven double-strand break repair signaling.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Phosphorytion, Atr

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany


