### Accession
PXD044002

### Title
Darapladib, an inhibitor of Lp-PLA2, sensitises cancer cells to ferroptosis by remodelling lipid metabolism

### Description
Arachidonic and adrenic acids in the membrane play key roles in ferroptosis, but how these fatty acids are manipulated in cells is largely unknown. Here, we reveal that lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) controls intracellular phospholipid metabolism and contributes to ferroptosis resistance. A metabolic drug screen revealed that darapladib, an inhibitor of Lp-PLA2, synergistically induced ferroptosis in the presence of GPX4 inhibitors. Notably, darapladib was able to enhance ferroptosis under lipoprotein-deficient or serum-free conditions. Furthermore, Lp-PLA2 was located in the membrane and cytoplasm and suppressed ferroptosis, suggesting the critical role of intracellular Lp-PLA2. Lipidomic analysis showed that darapladib treatment or deletion of PLA2G7, which encodes Lp-PLA2, generally enriched phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) species and reduced lysophosphatidylethanolamine (lysoPE) species. Moreover, combination treatment with darapladib and PACMA31, a GPX4 inhibitor, efficiently inhibited tumour growth in a xenograft model. Our study suggests that inhibition of Lp-PLA2 is a potential therapeutic strategy to enhance ferroptosis in cancer treatment.

### Sample Protocol
3 to 5×105 cells were washed twice with PBS and extracted by scraping into 300 μl of methanol:acetonitrile:water 40:40:20 (v/v) containing 0.5% formic acid. The lipid extracts were cleared by centrifugation at 18,500 × g for 15 min at 4 °C, and the supernatants were transferred to vials for lipidomic analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass accuracy was maintained with an automated calibrant delivery system interfaced to the second inlet of the DuoSpray ion source. All the samples were pooled in equal volumes to generate quality control (QC) samples, which were analysed prior to sample acquisition and after every 7 samples. Spectral data were preprocessed using MarkerViewTM software (AB Sciex) and normalised to the total spectral area. Lipid metabolites were identified by comparing experimental data with online databases (DBs; HMDB, METLIN, and LIPID MAPS) and our in-house library. Identification was confirmed using the MS/MS patterns and retention times of lipid standard compounds.

### Publication Abstract
Arachidonic and adrenic acids in the membrane play key roles in ferroptosis. Here, we reveal that lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 (Lp-PLA2) controls intracellular phospholipid metabolism and contributes to ferroptosis resistance. A metabolic drug screen reveals that darapladib, an inhibitor of Lp-PLA2, synergistically induces ferroptosis in the presence of GPX4 inhibitors. We show that darapladib is able to enhance ferroptosis under lipoprotein-deficient or serum-free conditions. Furthermore, we find that Lp-PLA2 is located in the membrane and cytoplasm and suppresses ferroptosis, suggesting a critical role for intracellular Lp-PLA2. Lipidomic analyses show that darapladib treatment or deletion of PLA2G7, which encodes Lp-PLA2, generally enriches phosphatidylethanolamine species and reduces lysophosphatidylethanolamine species. Moreover, combination treatment of darapladib with the GPX4 inhibitor PACMA31 efficiently inhibits tumour growth in a xenograft model. Our study suggests that inhibition of Lp-PLA2 is a potential therapeutic strategy to enhance ferroptosis in cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Lp-pla2, Cancer cell, Lc-ms/ms, Lipidomics

### Affiliations
Integrated Metabolomics Research Group, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic Science Institute, Republic of Korea
Korea Basic Science Institute

### Submitter
Seoyoung Jang

### Lab Head
Dr Geum-Sook Hwang
Integrated Metabolomics Research Group, Western Seoul Center, Korea Basic Science Institute, Republic of Korea


