### Accession
PXD029750

### Title
Analysis of CD2 interactome in primary murine CD4+ T cells

### Description
CD2 is a receptor expressed on T cells and when engaged, it promotes T cell activation. However the mechanisms and molecular partners of CD2 that mediate T cell activation remain unclear. Here we used AP-MS to determine the interactome of CD2 prior and upon its engagement. For this purpose, we used a knockin mouse expressing an endogenous One Step Tag (OST) version of the CD2 molecule. Affinity purification of the OST tagged protein was performed using Streptactin beads, from T cells left non-stimulated, or stimulated for 1min or 5min with anti-CD2 antibodies. Each AP-MS purification was associated with a corresponding control (purification from WT CD4+ T cells, cultured and stimulated in the same conditions). The number of replicate biological experiments was n=3 for all conditions.

### Sample Protocol
CD4+ T cells were stimulated with anti-CD2 for 1 or 5 mins at 37°C, lysed and equal amount of post-nuclear lysates were incubated with prewashed Strep-Tactin Sepharose beads (IBA GmbH) for 1.5 h at 4°C on a rotary wheel. Beads were then washed 5 times with 1 ml of lysis buffer and proteins were eluted from the beads with 2.5 mM D-biotin. Protein  samples  were dried and reconstituted in Tris 50mM, Sodium deoxycholate 1%, pH 8. Cysteine residues were reduced and alkylated  by addition of 10 mM of Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM of 2-chloroacetamide, during 5min at 95°C. Proteins were then digested with trypsin on Sera-Mag carboxylate-modified magnetic beads as previously described (Hughes et al, Nat Protocols 2019). Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 17 µl of 2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid and analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography using an UltiMate 3000 system (NCS-3500RS Nano/Cap System; Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Five microliters of each sample were loaded by trap-elute injection. After 3min of desalting on a nano-trap cartridge (Acclaim PepMap C18, id. 300 µm, length 5mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific), peptides were sparated on an Acclaim PepMap C18 column (id 75 µm, length 50 cm, particle size 2 µm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 350 nL/min. Equilibration was performed in 90% solvent A (5% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid) and 10% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 0.2% formic acid), then peptides were eluted using a 10%-45% gradient of solvent B over 60 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with the Xcalibur software. MS survey scans (350-1400 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of 60,000 and an AGC target of 3e6. The 12 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation by high energy collision induced dissociation, and the resulting fragments were analyzed at a resolution of 30,000 using an AGC target of 1e5 and a maximum fill time of 54 ms. Dynamic exclusion was used within 30 s to prevent repetitive selection of the same peptide ion.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were processed with MaxQuant software (version 1.5.2.8) for database search with the Andromeda search engine and quantitative analysis. Data were searched against Mus musculus entries of the UniProtKB protein database (Swiss-Prot+TrEMBL including isoforms),  plus  the  One-Strep-tag  peptide  sequence,  and  the  set  of  common  contaminants provided  by  MaxQuant.  Carbamidomethylation  of  cysteines  was  set  as  a  fixed  modification, whereas  oxidation  of  methionine,  protein  N-terminal  acetylation,  and  phosphorylation  of serine,  threonine,  and  tyrosine  were  set  as  variable  modifications.  Specificity of trypsin digestion was set for cleavage after K or R, and two missed trypsin cleavage sites were allowed. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and 4.5 ppm for the main Andromeda database search.  The  mass  tolerance  in  tandem  MS  mode  was  set  to  0.5  Da. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and minimum number of unique or razor peptides  was  set  to  1  for  validation.  The  I=L  option  of  MaxQuant  was  enabled  to  avoid erroneous  assignation  of  undistinguishable  peptides  belonging  to  very  homologous  proteins. Andromeda results were validated by the target decoy approach using a reverse database, with a false discovery rate set at 1% at both PSM (peptide sequence match) and protein level. For label-free relative quantification of the samples, the match between runs option of MaxQuant was  enabled  with  a  match  time  window  of  1  min,  to  allow  cross-assignment  of  MS  features detected in the different runs, after alignment of the runs with a time window of 20min. Protein quantification was based on unique and razor peptides. The minimum ratio count was set to 1 for LFQ calculation, and computation of the iBAQ metric was also enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cd2, Ap-ms, Primary cd4+ t cell, Mouse, Interactome, Ost tag

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Anne Gonzalez de Peredo

### Lab Head
Dr Odile Schiltz
Institute of Pharmacology and Structural Biology, CNRS, Toulouse, France


