### Accession
PXD008050

### Title
UVA and to UV-oxidized lipids proteomic regulation of the human keratinocytes

### Description
Ultraviolet light is the dominant environmental oxidative skin stressor and a major skin aging factor. We studied which oxidized phospholipid (OxPL) mediators Ultraviolet A (UVA) would generate in primary human keratinocytes (KC). Mass spectrometric analysis of the oxidized phospholipidome of KC immediately or 24h post stress revealed dynamic changes in abundance of 174 oxidized phosphocholine species. Exposure to UVA and to in vitro UVA - oxidized phospholipids both activated, on transcriptome and proteome level, NRF2/antioxidant response signaling and lipid metabolizing enzyme expression, whereas UVA additionally initiated the unfolded protein response (UPR). We identified Nupr1 as an upstream transcriptional regulator of UVA/OxPL mediated gene expression that is itself transcriptionally regulated by reactive lipids, which also aggregate and crosslink recombinant Nupr1 protein. Nupr1 governs the basal and stress regulated expression of cell cycle, redox reactive, autophagy- and lipid metabolizing genes in epidermal keratinocytes, making it a potential key factor in skin ROS responses, -aging and -pathology.

### Sample Protocol
After 24h after the of stress treatment,  cells were washed 2 times with PBS and scraped in cold PBS. The cells were washed two times with PBS and were stored at -80°C until further analysis.  Proteolytic digestion of Proteins - Samples were prepared as previously described (Sialana et al. 2016).  Briefly, cell pellets were solubilized with urea buffer (7M urea, 2M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 100 mM DTT, 50 mM TEAB and supplemented with protease inhibitors) and sonicated. Protein amounts were estimated with Pierce 660 protein assay.  Fifty micrograms of samples were digested with trypsin (1:100 w/w) using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) as previously described with minor modifications (Wisniewski et al. 2009; Manza et al. 2005). Tryptic peptides were recovered and peptides of protein digests were normalized bymeasured by tryptophan fluorescence (Wisniewski and Gaugaz 2015).  The peptides were desalted and concentrated with reversed-phase C18 resins.  Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 5% formic acid and 1 µg of peptides were analyzed by LCMS. Liquid Chromatography Tandem Mass Spectrometry- Samples were injected onto a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Software versions used for the data acquisition and operation of the Q-Exactive were Tune 2.8.1.2806 and Xcalibur 4. HPLC solvents were as follows: solvent A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. From a thermostated autosampler, 10 μL that correspond to 1 µg of the peptide mixture was automatically loaded onto a trap column (PM100-C18 3μm, 75 μm × 20 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Austria) with a binary pump at a flow rate of 5 µL/min using 2% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA for loading and washing the pre-column. After washing, the peptides were eluted by forward-flushing onto a 50 cm analytical column with an inner diameter of 75 µm packed with 2 µm-C18 reversed phase material (PepMap-C18 2 μm, 75 μm x 500 mm, ThermoFisher Scientific, Austria). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column with a 120 min solvent gradient (A: 0.1% FA and B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA) ranging from 5 to 40% solvent B, followed by a 10 min gradient from 40 to 90% solvent B and finally, to 90% solvent B for 5 min before re-equilibration to 5 % solvent B at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min.  The LTQ Velos ESI positive ion calibration solution (Pierce, IL, USA) was used to externally calibrate the instrument prior to sample analysis and an internal calibration was performed on the polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120024 from ambient air (Olsen et al. 2005). MS scans were performed from m/z 380-1800 at a resolution of 70,000. Using a data-dependent acquisition mode, the 20 most intense precursor ions (+2 to +6 charge) were isolated (1.6 m/z window) and fragmented to obtain the corresponding MSMS spectra. The fragment ions were generated in a higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell (NCE of 27%) with first mass fixed automatically and detected with an Orbitrap mass analyser (resolution of 17,500).  The dynamic exclusion for the selected ions was 20 s.  Maximal ion accumulation time allowed in MS and MS/MS mode were 30 and 50 ms, respectively. Automatic gain control was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap and was set to 1 x 106 ions and 5 x 104 ions for a full Fourier transform MS and MS/MS scan, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification and Label free Quantitation- The acquired raw MS data files were processed in MaxQuant 1.5.3.30 (Cox et al. 2014) and  searched against the human SwissProt protein database version v 2015.11.11 (42,097 sequences, including isoforms).  The search parameters were as follows: two tryptic missed cleavage sites, mass tolerances of 5 ppm and 20 ppm for the precursor and fragment ions, respectively.  Oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modification, whilst carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues were set as fixed modifications. The data was also matched against a decoy reverse database.  Peptides and protein identifications with 1% FDR are reported.  Protein identifications requiring a minimum of two peptides sequences were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Ultraviolet light is the dominant environmental oxidative skin stressor and a major skin aging factor. We studied which oxidized phospholipid (OxPL) mediators would be generated in primary human keratinocytes (KC) upon exposure to ultraviolet A light (UVA) and investigated the contribution of OxPL to UVA responses. Mass spectrometric analysis immediately or 24&#x202f;h post UV stress revealed significant changes in abundance of 173 and 84 lipid species, respectively. We identified known and novel lipid species including known bioactive and also potentially reactive carbonyl containing species. We found indication for selective metabolism and degradation of selected reactive lipids. Exposure to both UVA and to in vitro UVA - oxidized phospholipids activated, on transcriptome and proteome level, NRF2/antioxidant response signaling, lipid metabolizing enzyme expression and unfolded protein response (UPR) signaling. We identified NUPR1 as an upstream regulator of UVA/OxPL transcriptional stress responses and found this protein to be expressed in the epidermis. Silencing of NUPR1 resulted in augmented expression of antioxidant and lipid detoxification genes and disturbed the cell cycle, making it a potential key factor in skin reactive oxygen species (ROS) responses intimately involved in aging and pathology.

### Keywords
Human, Uv, Oxidized lipids, Keratinocytes

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
Institute of Cancer Research

### Submitter
Fernando J. Sialana

### Lab Head
Dr Gert Lubec
University of Vienna


