### Accession
PXD011953

### Title
Stn1 S74 phosphorylation - Telomeres, the protective ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, are replicated through concerted actions by conventional DNA polymerases and telomerase, though the regulation of this process is not fully understood

### Description
Publication abstract: Telomeres, the protective ends of eukaryotic chromosomes, are replicated through concerted actions by conventional DNA polymerases and telomerase, though the regulation of this process is not fully understood. Telomere replication requires (C)-Stn1-Ten1, a telomere ssDNA-binding complex that is homologous to RPA. Here, we show that the evolutionarily conserved phosphatase Ssu72 is responsible for terminating the cycle of telomere replication in fission yeast. Ssu72 controls the recruitment of Stn1 to telomeres by regulating Stn1 phosphorylation at S74, a residue that lies within the conserved OB fold domain. Consequently, ssu72Δ mutants are defective in telomere replication and exhibit long 3′ overhangs, which are indicative of defective lagging strand DNA synthesis. We also show that hSSU72 regulates telomerase activation in human cells by controlling the recruitment of hSTN1 to telomeres. Thus, in this study, we demonstrate a previously unknown yet conserved role for the phosphatase SSU72, whereby this enzyme controls telomere homeostasis by activating lagging strand DNA synthesis, thus terminating the cycle of telomere replication.  Summary of MS experiment: Stn1 protein was tagged in the C-terminus with 13-myc tag and purified by immunoprecipitation. The purified extracts were separated by SDS-PAGE and proteins between 63 and 75 kDa were excised and in-gel digested. Tryptic peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an AB Sciex TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer upon separation by nanoLC-MS using an Ekspert 425 nanoLC with cHiPLC. Stn1 protein was identified with 48% of coverage and Serine-74 was found to be phosphorylated.

### Sample Protocol
Stn1 protein was purified by tagging C-terminus with 13-myc tag. 5 litters of Logarithmic cycling cells were collected and lysed with  50 mM HEPES [pH 7.5], 150 mM NaCl, 40  mM EDTA, triton 0.2% 0.1% NP40, 0.5 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 2 mM PMSF, 2 mM benzamidine 10 % glycerol, DNAse I  and complete proteinase inhibitor. Cell lysates were incubated overnight with magnetics beads coated with Myc antibody (9E-10, Pierce), immunoprecipitated and washed.  IP beads were incubated and boiled (95ºC, 5 min) in NuPAGE LDS sample buffer 1x (Invitrogen) containing 5 mM of DTT. Samples were allowed to reach room temperature and then cysteine alkylation was performed through the addition of acrylamide:bis-acrylamide (29:1) solution (Bio-Rad) to the final concentration of 7% (v/v). Samples were incubated for 5 minutes at room temperature and then they were loaded on a 4-12% Bis-Tris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). Gel was stained using BlueSafe coomassie stain (NZYTech). A slice of gel ranging between 75 and 63 kDa was excised and tryptic peptides were prepared by in-gel digestion as previously described in [Luis et al 2016], with minor changes: Gel pieces’ dehydration steps were always performed in a vacuum concentrator (Labconco, Kansas City, MO USA); reduction and alkylation steps were performed before gel electrophoresis; and peptides were recovered from the C18 tips with 3 consecutive elutions, using increasing amounts of acetonitrile (50 %, 70%, and 90 % of acetonitrile in 0.1% Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)). Eluted peptides were pooled together, dehydrated in a vacuum concentrator, and resuspended in an aqueous solution of 0.1% formic acid (FA) (Solvent A).  Peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS using an Ekspert 425 nanoLC with cHiPLC (Eksigent, AB Sciex, Framingham, MA USA) coupled to a TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA, USA). First, using 100% of Solvent A, peptides were loaded in a nano cHiPLC trap column ChromXP C18 (200 µm internal diameter (i.d.) x 0.5 mm length, 3 μm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent, AB Sciex, Framingham, MA USA) at 2 µL/min flow rate for 10 min. Then, using an analytical nano cHiPLC column ChromXP C18 (75 µm i.d. x 15 cm length, 3 µm particles, 120 Å pore size, Eksigent, AB Sciex, Framingham, MA USA),  the sample was resolved at 300 nL/min flow rate using a stepwise gradient of solvents A and B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile):  0-1 min, 95% A/5% B; 1-46min,  5-35% B; 46-48 min, 35-80% B; 48-54 min, 20% A/80% B; 54-57 min, 80-5% B; 57-74 min, 95% A/5% B. Peptides were ionized using a NanoSpray III electrospray ionization source (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA USA) where peptides were sprayed through an uncoated fused-silica PicoTip™ emitter (360 µm o.d., 20 µm i.d., 10 ± 1.0 µm tip i.d., New Objective, Oullins, France). The mass spectra were acquired in information-depended acquisition (IDA) mode: full spectra scan was acquired in the m/z interval from 400 to 2000 for 250 ms, and the 40 most intense ions were selected for subsequent MS/MS scans, which were acquired in the m/z interval from 150 to 1800 for 50 ms each. Only parent ions with a charge state between +2 and +5, and counts above the minimum threshold of 50 counts per second were selected for fragmentation by collision-induced dissociation (CID). Ions selected for MS/MS scan were excluded from further MS/MS analysis for 12 s. Fragmentation by CID was operated using rolling collision energy with a collision energy spread of 5.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were searched against Swiss-Prot database (downloaded in 10/2017, 5201 entries) containing all the reviewed protein sequences available for Schizosaccharomyces pombe, three human keratin sequences (P04264, P35908, P13645), and the bovine trypsin sequence (P00761). The Paragon algorithm embedded in ProteinPilot 5.0 software (AB Sciex, Framingham, MA USA) was used to perform the database search using the following parameters: (1) sample type: identification, (2) cys alkylation: acrylamide, (3) digestion: trypsin, (4) instrument: TripleTOF 6600, (5) special factors: phosphorylation emphasis and gel-based ID,  (6) species: none, (7) ID focus: biological modifications, (8) search effort: thorough, (9) detected protein threshold: >0,05. An independent false discovery rate (FDR) analysis was carried out using the target-decoy approach provided with ProteinPilot software and positive identifications were achieved using a global FDR threshold below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Telomere replication, Fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe

### Affiliations
ITQB NOVA, Oeiras, Portugal
ITQB NOVA

### Submitter
Inês M. Luís

### Lab Head
Dr Isabel A. Abreu
ITQB NOVA, Oeiras, Portugal


