### Accession
PXD001872

### Title
Digital mapping of immunopeptidomes

### Description
We present a novel mass spectrometry-based high-throughput workflow and an open-source computational and data resource to reproducibly identify and quantify HLA-associated peptides. Collectively, the resources support the generation of HLA allele-specific peptide assay libraries consisting of consensus fragment ion spectra, and the analysis of quantitative digital maps of HLA peptidomes generated from a range of biological sources by SWATH mass spectrometry (MS). This study represents the first community-based effort to develop a robust platform for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of the entire repertoire of peptides presented by HLA molecules, an essential step towards the design of efficient immunotherapies.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I molecules were isolated using standard immunoaffinity purification as described previously. In brief, snap-frozen cell pellets were lysed in 10 mM CHAPS/PBS (AppliChem, St Louis, MO, USA/Gibco, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 1x protease inhibitor (Complete; Roche, Basel, Switzerland). HLA molecules were single-step purified using the pan-HLA class I-specific mAb W6/32, which was covalently linked to CNBr-activated sepharose (GE Healthcare, Chalfont St Giles, UK). HLA–peptide complexes were eluted by repeated addition of 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid (Merck, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA). Elution fractions E1–E8 were pooled and free HLA peptides were isolated by ultrafiltration using centrifugal filter units (Amicon; Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). HLA peptides were extracted and desalted from the filtrate using ZipTip C18 pipette tips (Millipore). Extracted peptides were eluted in 35 μl of 80% acetonitrile (Merck)/0.2% trifluoroacetic acid, centrifuged to complete dryness and resuspended in 25 μl of 1% acetonitrile/0.05% trifluoroacetic acid. Samples were stored at − 20 °C until analysis by LC-MS/MS. Three different MS were used for the generation of the spectral libraries: an AB SCIEX TripleTOF 5600+, a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap XL and a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap ELITE.

### Data Protocol
The datasets were searched individually using X!tandem, MS-GF+ and Comet against the full non-redundant, canonical human genome as annotated by the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot (2014_02) with 20,270 ORFs and appended iRT peptide and decoy sequence. Oxidation (M) was the only variable modification. Parent mass error was set to ±5p.p.m., fragment mass error was set to ±0.5Da. The search identifications were then combined and statistically scored using PeptideProphet and iProphet within the TPP.

### Publication Abstract
We present a novel mass spectrometry-based high-throughput workflow and an open-source computational and data resource to reproducibly identify and quantify HLA-associated peptides. Collectively, the resources support the generation of HLA allele-specific peptide assay libraries consisting of consensus fragment ion spectra, and the analysis of quantitative digital maps of HLA peptidomes generated from a range of biological sources by SWATH mass spectrometry (MS). This study represents the first community-based effort to develop a robust platform for the reproducible and quantitative measurement of the entire repertoire of peptides presented by HLA molecules, an essential step towards the design of efficient immunotherapies.

### Keywords
Immunopeptidome, Hla, Dia, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Etienne Caron

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
ETH Zurich Institute of Molecular Systems Biology


