### Accession
PXD043202

### Title
Proteomic approach to Anemonia sulcata and its symbiont Symbiodinium sp. as new source of potential biotechnological applications and climate change biomarkers

### Description
The conservation and growth of natural capital accumulated in the seas and oceans is essential for the provision of sustainable ecosystem services and for the achievement of the EU’s Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) set by the UN for 2030. Therefore, Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD) offers a comprehensive and holistic approach for the protection of the European sea, acting as an environmental pillar of the EU’s broader maritime strategy. The blue economy conveys that a healthier sea is a more productive sea. Concretely, blue biotechnology, which uses, among others, shellfish, bacteria and algae for development in health care and energy production, needs a healthy ocean, biodiversity and biomass abundance to provide innovative substances that help in the production in innovative medicines for the maintenance of human health. Moreover, marine biomass has become a potent source of new and innovative biotechnological tools for new therapeutic strategies and compounds that will increases the utility of marine biomass valorization processes and the quest of new solutions to present diseases. Recently, proteomics approaches has highlighted its potential use to discover new activities with potential biotechnological applications from proteome data through “applied proteomics”. Finally, in the context of global climate change, it is also becoming more and more demanding to anticipate alterations and responses of bioindicator species and to create a database to prevent and predict the environmental and climatic changes before the damage being irreversible. In this project, The proteome analysis of the sea anemone, Anemonia sulcata and its symbiont will lead to the identification of gene expression biomarkers (GEBs), as emerging powerful diagnostic tools, for identifying and characterizing climate change drivers (temperature and irradiance) stress and improving monitoring techniques. In addition, By the application of novel algorithms to detect bioactive compounds based on the analysis of proteome marine-derived molecules will enable the identification of proteins with potential applications in  agri-food and biomedicine fields.

### Sample Protocol
For the characterization of the first proteome of Anemonia sulcate, three independent biological replicates were used. Obtained biomass (2gr) was lyophilized and grounded into a fine powder with a mortar and pestle using liquid nitrogen. Protein extraction was performed following Fernandez-Acero et al (2009). In brief, proteins were precipitated with acetone and cleaned with buffered phenol. Obtained extracts were quantified using Qubit 2.0 Fluorimeter system (Invitrogen, USA).Protein identification was performed following Fajardo et al (2019). In brief, the extract of proteins were cleaned up by 1D SDS-PAGE, concentrating total extract in 1 cm of resolving gel at 10, gel slices were diced and destained with 50% of acetonitrile in 100 mM of ammonium bicarbonate.%. Protein digestions were carried out with trypsin in 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate at 37 °C for 3 h. To block cysteine thiol groups, 25 mM of dithiotreitol and 40 mM of iodoacetamide in 25 mM of ammonium bicarbonate were applied to gel slices. Peptide separations in nano-LC were performed in a Dionex Ul-timate 3000 nano UPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 75 μm i.d. x50 cm Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) atb300 nL/min and 40 °C. Eluting positive peptides were analyzed in positive mode on a Orbitrap Fusion™ Tribrid™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described Fajardo et al (2019). Proteomics raw data were filtered. MasterProtein information was extracted with High Protein FDR confidence (<0.01) from raw data table. In addition, contaminants and modified peptides were filtered out. Finally, quantification values were corrected by global sample intensity. Thus, each quantification value was divided by the global sample intensity and multiplied by the mean of the global sample intensities.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics raw data were filtered. MasterProtein information was extracted with High Protein FDR confidence (<0.01) from raw data table. In addition, contaminants and modified peptides were filtered out. Finally, quantification values were corrected by global sample intensity. Thus, each quantification value was divided by the global sample intensity and multiplied by the mean of the global sample intensities.Protein extracts were loaded into a Orbitrap LC/MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Due to the lack of molecular information in the databases of these non-model organism, proteins identification searches were performed against related organisms, the anemone Nematostella sp. (UP000001593, downloaded 20th of May 2021) and the symbiotic dinoflagellate Symbiodinium microadriaticum (Zooxanthella microadriatica)  . (UP000186817, downloaded 20th of May 2021). Positive protein identification was accepted when the obtained values exceeded 54% of Blast Similarity Means and Blast Hits Counts >20.

### Publication Abstract
Marine ecosystems are among the richest in terms of biodiversity, and at present, still remain largely unknown today. In the molecular biology era, several analyses have been conducted to unravel the biological processes in this ecosystem. These systems have provided biotechnological solutions to current problems, including the treatment of diseases, as well as for the development of new biotechnological tools with applications in biomedicine and/or agri-food. In addition, in the context of climate change and global warming, these studies become even more necessary for the development of molecular tools that allow a reliable follow-up of this situation to anticipate alterations and responses of bioindicator species and to create a database to prevent and predict the environmental and climatic changes before the damage is irreversible. Proteomics approaches have revealed their potential use to obtain the set of biological effectors that lead to the real biological station on a specific stage, the proteins. In addition, proteomics-based algorithms have allowed the discovery of proteins with new potential biotechnological applications from proteome data through "applied proteomics". In this project, the first proteome analysis of the sea anemone, <i>Anemonia sulcata</i>, and its symbiont has been developed. These organisms present a wide distribution sea ecosystem. In Spain, it is accepted as a fishing and aquaculture species. Moreover, <i>Anemonia sulcate</i> has a symbiotic relation with autotroph Dinoflagellates, <i>Symbiodinium</i> spp., that allows the study of its relation at the molecular level. For the first characterization of <i>A. sulcata</i> proteome, three independent biological replicates were used, and proteins were extracted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS, allowing the quantification of 325 proteins, 81 from <i>Symbiodinium</i> spp. proteins and 244 from <i>A. sulcata</i> proteins. These proteins were subjected to gene ontology categorization by Cellular Component, Molecular Function and Biological Process. These analyzes have allowed the identification of biomarkers of gene expression as potential powerful emerging diagnostic tools to identify and characterize the molecular drivers of climate change stresses and improve monitoring techniques. In addition, through the application of novel algorithms for the detection of bioactive compounds based on the analysis of molecules of marine origin, the proteome has allowed the identification of proteins with potential applications in the fields of biomedicine and agri-food.

### Keywords
Biomarkers, Anemonia sulcata, Symbiont, Symbiodinium

### Affiliations
University of Cadiz

### Submitter
ALMUDENA ESCOBAR NIÑO

### Lab Head
Dr Francisco Javier Fernández Acero
University of Cadiz


