### Accession
PXD025024

### Title
Human tRNAs with inosine 34 are essential to efficiently translate eukarya-specific low-complexity proteins

### Description
The modification of adenosine to inosine at the wobble position (I34) of tRNA anticodons is an abundant and essential feature of eukaryotic tRNAs. The expansion of inosine-containing tRNAs in eukaryotes followed the transformation of the homodimeric bacterial enzyme TadA, which generates I34 in tRNAArg and tRNALeu, into the heterodimeric eukaryotic enzyme ADAT, which modifies up to eight different tRNAs. The emergence of ADAT and its larger set of substrates, strongly influenced the tRNA composition and codon usage of eukaryotic genomes. However, the selective advantages that drove the expansion of I34-tRNAs remain unknown. Here we investigate the functional relevance of I34-tRNAs in human cells and show that a full complement of these tRNAs is necessary for the translation of low-complexity protein domains enriched in amino acids cognate for I34-tRNAs. The coding sequences for these domains require codons translated by I34-tRNAs, in detriment of synonymous codons that use other tRNAs. I34-tRNA-dependent low-complexity proteins are enriched in functional categories related to cell adhesion, and depletion in I34-tRNAs leads to cellular phenotypes consistent with these roles. We show that the distribution of these low-complexity proteins mirrors the distribution of I34-tRNAs in the phylogenetic tree.

### Sample Protocol
DeNovo sample Processing Protein samples were reduced, alkylated and overnight tryptic digested (Kinter, M., and Sherman, N. E. 2000,John Wiley & Sons, Inc. pp.161-163). Digested peptide mixtures were desalted and clean-up using polyLC C18 and SCX (strong cation exchange) filters.  Samples were subject to nano-LC-MS/MS analysis. The nanochromatographic system used was either a Nanoacquity (Waters) or a Dionex Ultimate (Thermo Scientific). The Advion Triversa NanoMate (Advion Bioscieneces) was used as the nanosource and it was fitted on an LTQ-FT Ultra (Thermo Fisher) or an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). The mass spectrometer was operated in a DDA mode, with survey scans adquired at 120 k and MS2 scans at 30 k in the orbitrap. iTRAQ sample processing. Protein quantification with Protein Assay 660nm (Pierce_Thermo Scientific), we digest 100 ug of protein for each sample, following FASP protocol (J.R.Winiewski et al., Nature Methods 2009, 6, 359-362). Briefly, we added samples already reduced with 100mM DTT, to a 30kDa filter Microcon (Millipore) and centrifuged, exchanging SDS initial buffer with Urea 8M buffer, then we added iodoacetamide 55mM to the filter to alkylated the sample. Before Trypsin digestion,we removed UREA from the samples by centrifugation and exchanged with triethyammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), the we incubate samples at 37ºC overnight. After digestion, we collected eluted solutions in a new Eppendorf tube, acidified with formic acid to a final concentration of 0.1%, and stored at -20ºC. Samples final concentration were around 0.3 mg/mL. An aliquot of 30L was used to check sample quality by nanoLCMSMS in the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid. The rest of the sample was dried in the speedvac and reconstituted in 46L of TEAB 500mM. We took an aliquot of 11L from each sample and mixed together to generate 2 pool’s (P1 and P2), then 30L of each sample including the 2 pools were labeled with iTRAQTM Reagent-8plex (AB Sciex) as shown in “Designe._AG_iTRAQ_design.xlsx”. We clean-up the combined iTRAQTM-labelled sample with two steps, first with C18 tip (reverse phase, P200 toptip C18 PolyC Inc., Symta) and second with a strong cationic exchange tip (P200 toptip, PolySulfoethyl A PolyC Inc.). After cleaning, we fractioned the combined iTRAQTM-labelled sample with reverse-phase chromatography using a high pH reverse phase peptide fractionation kit (PierceTM High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation columns, Thermo Scientific) following manufacturer’s instructions. The fractions were dried down in a speed-vacuum centrifuge and reconstituted in 58.8L 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid for LC-MSMS analysis. The nano-LC-MS/MS set up was as follows. Digested peptides were diluted in 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA. Samples were loaded to 100 µm × 2 cm Acclaim PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, C18 (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 15 µL/min using a Thermo Scientific Dionex Ultimate 3000 chromatographic system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a C18 analytical column (Acclaim PepMap® RSLC (75 µm × 75 cm, nanoViper, C18, 2 µm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 200nl/min with a 300 min run, comprising three consecutive steps with linear gradients from 1% to 35% of B in 120 min, from 35% to 50% in 5 min, and from 50% to 85% in 2 min, followed by isocratic elution at 85 % B in 5 min and stabilization to initial conditions (A= 0.1% FA in water, B= 0.1% FA in CH3CN). The column outlet was directly connected to an Advion TriVersa NanoMate (Advion) fitted on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ Tribrid (Thermo Scientific). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode. In each data collection cycle, one full MS scan (400-1600 m/z) was acquired in the Orbitrap (1.2 x 105 resolution setting and automatic gain control (AGC) of 2 x 105). The following MS2-MS3 analysis was conducted with a top speed approach. The most abundant ions were selected for fragmentation by collision induced dissociation (CID). CID was performed with a collision energy of 35%, 0.25 activation Q, an AGC target of 1 x 104, an isolation window of 0.7 Da, a maximum ion accumulation time of 50 ms and turbo ion scan rate. Previously analysed precursor ions were dynamically excluded for 30 s. For the MS3 analyses for iTRAQ quantification, multiple fragment ions from the previous MS2 scan (SPS ions) were co-selected and fragmented by HCD using a 65 % collision energy and a precursor isolation window of 2 Da. Reporter ions were detected using the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000, an AGC of 1 x 105 and a maximum ion accumulation time of 120 ms. Spray voltage in the NanoMate source was set to 1.60 kV. RF Lens were tuned to 30%. Minimal signal required to trigger MS to MS/MS switch was set to 5,000. The mass spectrometer was working in positive polarity mode and singly charge state precursors were rejected forfragmentation.

### Data Protocol
To identify possible mistranslation in SDC3-RLuc we performed de novo, database and homology searches using PEAKS v8.5 with search parameters as described above. , de novo score (ALC %) threshold was set to 15 and peptide hit threshold (-10logP) was 30.0. De novo hits that did not match any database or homology searches and that have an ALC > 90 % were used in a BLAST (The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool) search against SDC3-RLuc protein in order to find regions of local similarity between sequences and highlight possible mutations. A database search was performed with Proteome Discoverer software v2.1.0.81 software (Thermo Scientific) using Sequest HT search engine and SwissProt database Human release 2016 01 with contaminant database. Searches were run against targeted and decoy databases to determine the false discovery rate (FDR). Search parameters included trypsin enzyme specificity, allowing for two missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethyl in cysteine and iTRAQ 8plex peptide N-terminus as static modification and iTRAQ 8plex in K/Y, methionine oxidation and acetylation in protein N-terminus as dynamic modifications. Peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da. Peptides with a q-value lower than 0.1 and a FDR < 1% were considered as positive identifications with a high confidence level.

### Publication Abstract
The modification of adenosine to inosine at the wobble position (I34) of tRNA anticodons is an abundant and essential feature of eukaryotic tRNAs. The expansion of inosine-containing tRNAs in eukaryotes followed the transformation of the homodimeric bacterial enzyme TadA, which generates I34 in tRNAArg and tRNALeu, into the heterodimeric eukaryotic enzyme ADAT, which modifies up to eight different tRNAs. The emergence of ADAT and its larger set of substrates, strongly influenced the tRNA composition and codon usage of eukaryotic genomes. However, the selective advantages that drove the expansion of I34-tRNAs remain unknown. Here we investigate the functional relevance of I34-tRNAs in human cells and show that a full complement of these tRNAs is necessary for the translation of low-complexity protein domains enriched in amino acids cognate for I34-tRNAs. The coding sequences for these domains require codons translated by I34-tRNAs, in detriment of synonymous codons that use other tRNAs. I34-tRNA-dependent low-complexity proteins are enriched in functional categories related to cell adhesion, and depletion in I34-tRNAs leads to cellular phenotypes consistent with these roles. We show that the distribution of these low-complexity proteins mirrors the distribution of I34-tRNAs in the phylogenetic tree.

### Keywords
Transfer rna; inosine; low-complexity proteins; mucin-like domain; cell adhesion

### Affiliations
Research Officer at Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics Core Facility
Aging $ Metabolism, Gene Translation Laboratory, Institute for Research in Biomedicine, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

### Submitter
Laura Villarreal

### Lab Head
Dr Lluis Ribas de Pouplana
Aging $ Metabolism, Gene Translation Laboratory, Institute for Research in Biomedicine, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.


