### Accession
PXD014645

### Title
ALDH7A1 inhibits the intracellular transport pathways during hypoxia and starvation to promote cellular energy homeostasis

### Description
Aldehyde dehydrogenase 7A1 (ALDH7A1) is a metabolic enzyme that converts aldehydes to carboxylates.  Here, we find that the reductive consequence of this catalytic activity, which generates NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, reduced form) from NAD (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide), underlies how ALDH7A1 coordinates a broad inhibition of the intracellular transport pathways.  Studying vesicle formation by the Coat Protein I (COPI) complex, we elucidate that NADH generated by ALDH7A1 targets Brefeldin-A ADP-Ribosylated Substrate (BARS) to inhibit the fission stage.  Moreover, defining a physiologic role for the broad transport inhibition exerted by ALDH7A1, we find that it acts to reduce energy consumption during hypoxia and starvation to promote cellular energy homeostasis.  These findings uncover a non-canonical function of ALDH7A1, and also an unexpected way that NADH acts in cellular energetics.  Moreover, the findings advance the understanding of intracellular transport by elucidating how multiple pathways can be coordinated, as well as defining physiologic circumstances in which this coordination occurs.

### Sample Protocol
Cytosol was purified from rat livers by homogenization in lysis buffer (1mM Tris pH 7.4, 800mM sucrose, 5mM EDTA and protease inhibitors) at 4oC, followed by centrifugation at 80,000 x g for 90 minutes. The resulting supernatant was dialyzed against dialysis buffer (25mM Tris at pH 8.0, 50mM KCl and 1mM DTT), followed by centrifugation at 150,000 x g for 90 minutes at 4oC. Aliquots were stored at -80oC. Pulldown experiment was performed by incubating GST or GST-BARS on beads (5 ug) with 50μg rat liver cytosol in traffic buffer (25mM HEPES pH 7.2, 50mM KCl and 2.5mM Mg(OAc)2) for 1 hour followed by extensive washing. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE and then stained with Coomassie blue.

### Data Protocol
Specific bands were excised for protein identification by mass spectrometry (Taplin Mass Spectrometry Facility, Harvard Medical School, USA). Interacting proteins were identified for both GST and GST-BARS. Proteins that only interacted with GST-BARS were considered specific.

### Publication Abstract
The aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) family of metabolic enzymes converts aldehydes to carboxylates. Here, we find that the reductive consequence of ALDH7A1 activity, which generates NADH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide, reduced form) from NAD, underlies how ALDH7A1 coordinates a broad inhibition of the intracellular transport pathways. Studying vesicle formation by the Coat Protein I (COPI) complex, we elucidate that NADH generated by ALDH7A1 targets Brefeldin-A ADP-Ribosylated Substrate (BARS) to inhibit COPI vesicle fission. Moreover, defining a physiologic role for the broad transport inhibition exerted by ALDH7A1, we find that it acts to reduce energy consumption during hypoxia and starvation to promote cellular energy homeostasis. These findings advance the understanding of intracellular transport by revealing how the coordination of multiple pathways can be achieved, and also defining circumstances when such coordination is needed, as well as uncovering an unexpected way that NADH acts in cellular energetics.

### Keywords
Bars

### Affiliations
Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, MA 02115, USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Jiashu Yang
Brigham and Women's Hospital Boston, MA 02115, USA


