### Accession
PXD014291

### Title
Human Prostate and Benign Prostate Hyperplasia, LC MSMS

### Description
It is well known that prostate cancer (PCa) is a progressive disease involving multiple gene alterations. The Gleason score (GS) is a morphologic feature of PCa used in the clinic to evaluate the risk of disease progression. However, GS often fail to clearly distinguish between indolent and aggressive disease. The aim of this study was to identify potential biomarkers for PCa risk stratification. An in-depth proteomics analysis (LC ESI-MS/MS) was performed on human PCa and BPH tissues. First, we identified differentially expressed proteins between PCa and BPH samples. We then filtered the proteins based on peptide spectrum matches and selected a panel of candidates. To assess and validate the clinical significance of these peptides we performed an integrative bioinformatics analysis using public database repositories. We identified YWHAZ, an androgen receptor downstream target, as one of the proteins enriched in PCa compared with BPH. We also found a strong association of YWHAZ expression with poor prognosis across different PCa datasets. Briefly, overall and relapse-free survival were significantly shorter in PCa cases expressing high vs. low YWHAZ expression. Further, multivariate analyses displayed high significant correlation with poor prognosis, independent from GS, age, PSA at diagnosis and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion. A multi-cancer screening for YWHAZ unveils amplification as the main alteration for this gene correlating with increased mRNA expression levels across all types of cancer through the cBioPortal platform. YWHAZ rises as a promising prognostic factor in PCa, independent from GS, aiding in disease risk stratification. 

### Sample Protocol
An in-depth proteomics analysis (LC ESI-MS/MS) was performed on human PCa and BPH tissues. Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded (FFPE) section tissues from 20 patients (10 radical prostatectomy specimens of treatment naïve PCa patients and 10 BPH patients) were analyzed without replication. 3 FFPE sections per patient were used for protein extraction. Samples with less than 250 peptides were excluded from the subsequent analysis.  PCa and BPH FFPE tissue sections mounted on microscope slides were processed. PCa and BPH FFPE tissue sections were deparaffinized and rehydrated. After air-drying, the tissue sections were percolated with CelLytic MT Mammalian Tissue Lysis/Extraction Reagent (Sigma) for 90 min, and harvested with a scalpel blade. The collected tissues were incubated on a heating block at 99 °C and then sonicated. The debris was pelleted and the recovered proteins in the supernatant were quantified with a Pierce BCA Protein Assay kit. The digests were analysed by nanoLC-MS/MS in a Thermo Scientific QExactive Mass Spectrometer coupled to a nanoHPLC EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific). For the LC ESI-MS/MS analysis, approximately 1 μg of peptides was loaded onto the column and eluted for 120 min using a reverse phase column (C18, 2 μm, 100A, 50 μm x 150 mm), Easy-Spray Column PepMap RSLC (P/N ES801)) suitable for separating protein complexes with a high degree of resolution. The flow rate used for the nano column was 300 nl min-1 and the solvent gradient range was 7% B (for 5 min) to 35% B in 120 min. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid in water whereas B was 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The injection volume was 2 μl. The MS equipment has a high collision dissociation cell (HCD) for fragmentation and an Orbitrap analyzer (Q-Exactive-Thermo Scientific Germany). A voltage of 3.5 kV was used for Electro Spray Ionization (Thermo Scientific, EASY-SPRAY). XCalibur 3.0.63 (Thermo Scientific) software was used for data acquisition with a configuration that allows peptide identification at the same time of their chromatographic separation. A Data dependant method was used: Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap analyser. The scanned mass range was 400-1800 m/z, at a resolution of 70000 at 400 m/z and the twelve most intense ions in each cycle, were sequentially isolated, fragmented by HCD and measured in the Orbitrap analyser. Peptides with a charge of +1 or with unassigned charge state were excluded from fragmentation for MS2.

### Data Protocol
Raw data generated with Xcalibur software was processed and analyzed with Proteome discoverer 2.1.1.21 with SEQUEST Search engine. Spectrum Selector node with default parameter settings was used to generate peak lists. Minimum and maximum precursor masses were set at 350 and 5000 with a S/N of 1.5. Data was searched against Uniprot Homo sapiens UP000005640 database, October 2017, with trypsin specificity (full cleavage) and a maximum of two missed cleavages per peptide. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine was set as variable modification. Proteome Discoverer searches were performed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product ion tolerance to 0.05 Da. Proteome Discoverer default settings were used: Target FDR= 0.01; Z=1 High confidence XCorr 1.5; Z=2 High confidence XCorr 2; Z=3 High confidence XCorr 2.5; z≥4 High confidence XCorr 3. Protein hits were filtered for high confidence peptide matches with a maximum protein and peptide false discovery rate of 1% calculated by employing a reverse database strategy.

### Publication Abstract
Some prostate cancers (PCas) are histo-pathologically grouped within the same Gleason Grade (GG), but can differ significantly in outcome. Herein, we aimed at identifying molecular biomarkers that could improve risk prediction in PCa. LC ESI-MS/MS was performed on human PCa and benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) tissues and peptide data was integrated with omic analyses. We identified high YWHAZ and NDRG1 expression to be associated with poor PCa prognosis considering all Gleason scores (GS). YWHAZ and NDRG1&#xa0;defined two subpopulations of PCa patients with high and intermediate risk of death. Multivariable analyses confirmed their independence from GS. ROC analysis unveiled that YWHAZ outperformed GS beyond 60 months post-diagnosis. The genomic analysis of PCa patients with YWHAZ amplification, or increased mRNA or protein levels, revealed significant alterations in key DNA repair genes. We hereby state the relevance of YWHAZ in PCa, showcasing its role as an independent strong predictor of aggressiveness.

### Keywords
Human, Lc msms, Prostate

### Affiliations
CONICET
Universidad de Buenos Aires. Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales. Departamento de Química Biológica, Buenos Aires, Argentina; CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires. Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina

### Submitter
Sofia Lage Vickers

### Lab Head
Dr Geraldine Gueron
Universidad de Buenos Aires. Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales. Departamento de Química Biológica, Buenos Aires, Argentina; CONICET-Universidad de Buenos Aires. Instituto de Química Biológica de la Facultad de Ciencias Exactas y Naturales (IQUIBICEN), Buenos Aires, Argentina


