### Accession
PXD026543

### Title
Impact of pregnancy on composition of human high density lipoproteins (apoB-depleted plasma)

### Description
Pregnancy results in significant physiological changes which can impact the health and development of the fetus and mother. Pregnancy-induced changes in plasma lipoproteins are well-documented with modest to no impact observed on the generic measure of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. However, no studies have taken a deeper look at the impact of pregnancy on the concentration and composition of HDL subspecies. In this prospective study, we collected plasma from 24 non-pregnant and 19 pregnant women in their second trimester. Using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) we quantified 11 different lipoprotein size subspecies from plasma including 3 in the HDL class.  We observed a profound increase in the number of larger HDL particles in pregnant women. These findings were confirmed by tracking phospholipid across lipoproteins using high-resolution gel-filtration chromatography. Using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) we identified 87 lipid-associated proteins across size speciated fractions.  We report drastic shifts in multiple protein clusters across different HDL sized fractions in pregnant females compared to their non-pregnant controls.  In summary, we have shown that pregnancy results in major alterations in HDL subspecies concentrations and compositions that would have otherwise been missed using traditional lipid measurements.  These findings significantly elevate our understanding of how changes in lipoprotein metabolism due to pregnancy could impact the health of both the fetus and the mother.

### Sample Protocol
HDL was isolated for compositional characterization two different ways. In the first, apoB-containing lipoproteins (i.e. VLDL and LDL) were precipitated from plasma by heparin and magnesium chloride.  Plasma from non-pregnant and pregnant women was incubated with heparin and magnesium chloride for 30 min on ice, centrifuged at 1500 x g for 30 min, and supernatant was carefully removed for analysis. In the second, equivalent amounts of plasma (354 µl) was separated by size using gel filtration chromatography with three superdex 200 columns in series. Plasma was eluted in standard tris buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 0.02% Azide) at 0.3 ml/min and 1.5 ml fractions were collected for analysis.  Phospholipid elution patterns were generated by measuring lipid concentrations in each lipoprotein fraction (Phospholipids C and Cholesterol E, Wako). HDL sized fractions were collected from a subset of three non-pregnant and three pregnant women.  ApoB-depleted plasma and the HDL subspecies in each fraction acquired from gel filtration chromatography (spanning fractions 20-30) were incubated with calcium silicate hydrate (lipid-removal agent, LRA) to sequester lipid-associated proteins. The bound lipoproteins were washed thoroughly with 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH = 8.0) and proteins were digested directly off the LRA by incubation with sequencing-grade trypsin overnight at 37 ºC with gentle shaking. Digested peptides were collected and reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 min at 42 ºC followed by alkylation with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark.  Peptides were dried under vacuum and stored at -20 ºC until ready for analysis by LC-MS. Peptides were reconstituted in 15 µl solvent A (formic acid/H2O 0.1/99.9, v/v) and 5 µl was loaded onto a reverse phase column (ACQUITY UPLC C18, Waters) maintained at 40 ºC with an Infinity 1290 autosampler and HPLC (Agilent). Peptides were eluted at 0.1 ml/min using a mobile phase gradient from 5% solvent B (formic acid/acetonitrile 0.1/99.9, v/v) to 32% solvent B over 60 min to 50% solvent B over 2 min. The column was cleaned by ramping the mobile phase gradient to 90% solvent B for 10 min followed by re-equilibration of the column at 5% solvent B for 10 minutes. Peptides were introduced to the mass spectrometer using a Jet Stream source (Agilent). Precursors were limited to acquisition of ions with a charge states of 2+ and 3+ and required a minimum of 1500 counts. Each cycle acquired the 20 most intense precursors which were fragmented with a variable collision energy (CE) dependent on the precursor mass-to-charge (m/z) ratio: CE = k* (m/z) +b,  with a slope (k) of 3 and an offset (b) of 2 for 2+ ions and -2 for 3+ ions. MS/MS spectra were acquired until at least 45,000 total counts were collected or a maximum accumulation time of 0.33 s.

### Data Protocol
First, mascot generic files (MGFs) were generated from the raw data files using MassHunter Qualitative Analysis Software (v B.07.00, Agilent). MS/MS peaks were limited to the top 150 peaks by height and precursors were limited to a maximum assigned charge state of 3+. Peptide spectral data was matched against the UniProtKP/Swiss-prot Protein knowledgebase for Homo sapiens (version: release 2017_11, date: 12-20-2017, entries: 20,319) using the Mascot search engine (v 2.2.07). Trypsin was used to generate peptides and data was constrained to allow for a maximum of three missed cleavages, fixed modification of carbamidomethylation, and a variable modification of oxidation with a peptide tolerance of 35 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da. Scaffold (v4.3.4) was employed for MS/MS peptide validation using X! Tandem (2010.12.01.1, subset of 1590 entries). Identified proteins and peptides were constrained to 99.9% and 95.0% probability, respectively, and protein inclusion required identification of at least 2 unique peptides. The list of proteins was further constrained to only including proteins that showed up in the same fraction across all three patients within an experimental cohort. For example, protein A had to meet the minimum identification thresholds in fraction N of either all three non-pregnant or all three pregnant females to be included in the list. A final list of 92 proteins were selected and integrated into a FASTA file. As raw Agilent files are incompatible with MaxQuant, the Agilent data files were first formatted to mzML files with 32-bit binary encoding precision, write index, and TPP compatibility for all MS levels using the Vendor Algorithm. The mzML files were further formatted into mzXML files with forced MaxQuant compatibility using TOPPAS file converter. The final mzXML files and custom fasta file were used to perform label-free quantification (LFQ) using MaxQuant. Samples were further processed by exporting the proteomic label-free quantification data into Perseus for final analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Pregnancy is accompanied by significant physiological changes, which can impact the health and development of the fetus and mother. Pregnancy-induced changes in plasma lipoproteins are well documented, with modest to no impact observed on the generic measure of high density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. However, the impact of pregnancy on the concentration and composition of HDL subspecies has not been examined in depth. In this prospective study, we collected plasma from 24 nonpregnant and 19 pregnant women in their second trimester. Using nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), we quantified 11 different lipoprotein subspecies from plasma by size, including three in the HDL class. We observed an increase in the number of larger HDL particles in pregnant women, which were confirmed by tracking phospholipids across lipoproteins using high-resolution gel-filtration chromatography. Using liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS), we identified 87 lipid-associated proteins across size-speciated fractions. We report drastic shifts in multiple protein clusters across different HDL size fractions in pregnant females compared with nonpregnant controls that have major implications on HDL function. These findings significantly elevate our understanding of how changes in lipoprotein metabolism during pregnancy could impact the health of both the fetus and the mother.

### Keywords
Pregnancy, Plasma, Hdl, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of Cincinnati Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Pacific Northwest National Laboratories
University of Cincinnati

### Submitter
John Melchior

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Woollett
University of Cincinnati Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine


