### Accession
PXD003569

### Title
Stoichiometry and absolute abundance of proteins in the Bacillus cereus spore insoluble fraction determined using a QconCAT approach

### Description
Spores of Bacillus cereus pose a threat to food safety due to their high resistance to the heat or acid treatments commonly used to make food microbially safe. As spores survive these treatments and later resume growth either on foodstuffs or, after ingestion, upon entering the gut they are capable of producing toxins which cause either vomiting or diarrhea respectively. The outer layers of the spore consist primarily of proteins which may serve as potential biomarkers for detection. In order to quantify proteins in the insoluble fraction of the spore coat, a proteomics approach using a QconCAT reference standard was employed which is the first time this is used in a heterogeneous system. This allowed us to determine the abundance of 21 proteins which spanned across three orders of magnitude and together covered 5.66% ±0.51 of the total spore weight. Classification by abundance resulted in functional characterisation of the protein BC_0987, renamed SasS. Furthermore, protein stoichiometry and determination of the abundance of, for instance, germination mediating enzymes provides useful information for model development. And finally, the four most abundant proteins, CotB1, CotB2, CotX and InhA, are presented to be biomarker candidates containing immunogenic epitopes as predicted by the SVMTriP algorithm and being conveniently located in the outermost layers of the spore.

### Sample Protocol
B. cereus growth and sporulation conditions B. cereus ATCC 14579 was grown in Tryptic Soy Broth medium at 30°C overnight. Overnight cultures were harvested and washed once and transferred to 250 ml Chemically Defined Growth and Sporulation medium (CDGS)38 at an optical density of 2 at 600nm. Growth and sporulation was allowed to continue for 4 days until a >95% spore crop was obtained. Spores were harvested by centrifugation, washed with 1.25% Tween-20 once, followed by 4 washes with cold mili-Q water after which spores were freeze-dried and stored at -80°C before protein isolation. Spore coat protein isolation Proteins in the spore coat insoluble fraction were isolated using a modified version of the method developed by Abhyankar et al.8 Lyophilised spores were resuspended in cold 10mM Tris-HCl and subjected to two cycles of bead beating with Zirconia-Silica beads consisting of 3 rounds of 40s beating, 60s rest, resting on ice for 10 minutes between cycles. Beads were washed with 1M NaCl 5 times to remove cytosolic proteins and non-specific proteins. The soluble fraction of the spore proteome was removed by SDS extraction (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH7.8), 0.2% SDS, 100 mM Na-EDTA, 100 mM β-ME) for 10 minutes at 80°C. This also leaves the insoluble fraction of the proteome more accessible to trypsin. After centrifugation the insoluble pellet was washed three times with mili-Q water and freeze dried.  Peptide sample preparation Freeze dried protein material was resuspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate and reduced with 10mM DTT at 55°C for 60 minutes and alkylated with 55mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in the dark. Samples were centrifuged and the pellet was resuspended in 100mM ammonium bicarbonate, 10% acetonitrile, 5µg Trypsin was added per mg of material. At this point QconCAT was added in different quantities as indicated. The digestion was allowed to proceed for 18 hours at 37°C unless otherwise indicated. After digestion, the supernatant was collected and the pellet was washed twice with 100mM ammonium bicarbonate. Up to 1% TFA was added to acidify the buffer, removing ammonium bicarbonate and inactivating trypsin. Samples were freeze dried and resuspended in 50% ACN, 0.1% TFA and stored at -80°C until use. LC-MS/MS data were acquired with an Bruker ApexUltra Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a 7 T magnet and a nano-electrospray Apollo II DualSource™ coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA) High-Performance Liquid Chromatography system. For each digest, a similar amount of material was dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 100% TFA and sonicated for 15 min to disaggregate peptides which improved chromatographic behaviour.39 TFA was removed by blowing the sample dry with Argon gas. Peptides were resuspended and injected as a 40 μl 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid solution and loaded onto a PepMap100 C18 (5 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 μm inner diameter x 5 mm length) precolumn at a flow rate of 50 µL/min. Following injection, the peptides were eluted via an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 (3 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm inner diameter x 500 mm length at 60°C) analytical column (Thermo Scientific, Etten-Leur, The Netherlands) to the nano-electrospray source. LC Gradient profiles of up to 120 minutes were obtained using 0.1% formic acid / 99.9% H2O (A) and 0.1% formic acid / 80% acetonitril / 19.9% H2O (B) (0 min 97%A/3%B, 2 min 94%A/6%B, 110 min 70%A/30%B, 120 min 60%A/40%B, 125 min 100%B) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Data dependent Q-selected peptide ions were fragmented in the hexapole collision cell at an Argon pressure of 6x10-6 mbar (measured at the ion gauge) and the fragment ions were detected in the ICR cell at a resolution of up to 60000. In the MS/MS duty cycle, 3 different precursor peptide ions were selected from each survey MS. The MS/MS duty cycle time for 1 survey MS and 3 MS/MS acquisitions was about 2 s. Instrument mass calibration was better than 5 ppm over an m/z range of 250 to 1500.

### Data Protocol
Raw FT-MS/MS data were processed with the MASCOT DISTILLER program, version 2.4.3.1 (64bits), MDRO 2.4.3.0 (MATRIX science, London, UK), including the Search toolbox and the Quantification toolbox. Peak-picking for both MS and MS/MS spectra were optimized for the mass resolution of up to 60000. Peaks were fitted to a simulated isotope distribution with a correlation threshold of 0.7, with minimum signal to noise ratio of 2.  The processed data were searched with the MASCOT server program 2.3.02 (MATRIX science, London, UK) against a complete B. cereus ATCC14579 predicted proteome database obtained from UniPROT40 complemented with the QconCAT protein amino acid sequence. Trypsin was used as enzyme and 1 missed cleavage was allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine, oxidation of methionine and pyroglutamination of N-terminal glutamic acid were included as variable modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and the peptide fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.03 Dalton. The quantification method was set to the metabolic 15N labelling method to enable MASCOT to identify both the 14N target and 15N QconCAT peptides. Using the quantification toolbox, the quantification of the light target peptides relative to the corresponding heavy QconCAT peptides was determined as the heavy over light isotopic ratio using Simpsons integration of the peptide MS chromatographic profiles for all detected charge states. Correlation threshold for isotopic distribution fit was set to 0.98, with a detected 15N label content of 99.6%. XIC threshold: 0.1, all charge states: on, max XIC width: 200 seconds. Allowed elution time shift for the heavy and light peptides was limited to 20 seconds. All Isotope ratios were manually validated by inspecting the MS spectral data.  For target peptides which over all replica analyses were occasionally not MS/MS identified, the isotope ratio was manually calculated from their extracted heavy and light peptide ion chromatograms as the ratio of the areas under the curves using Bruker DataAnalysis 4.2 program (Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).

### Publication Abstract
Spores of Bacillus cereus pose a threat to food safety due to their high resistance to the heat or acid treatments commonly used to make food microbiologically safe. Spores may survive these treatments and later resume growth either on foodstuffs or, after ingestion, upon entering the gut they are capable of producing toxins, which cause either vomiting or diarrhea. The outer layers of the spore, the spore coat and exosporium, consist primarily of proteins that may serve as potential biomarkers for detection. The major morphogenetic protein CotE is important for correct assembly and attachment of the outermost layer, the exosporium, and by extension retention of many proteins. However, characterization of the proteins affected by deletion of CotE has been limited to electrophoretic patterns. Here we report the effect of CotE deletion on the insoluble fraction of the spore proteome through liquid chromatography-Fourier transform tandem mass spectrometry (LC-FTMS/MS) analysis. A total of 560 proteins have been identified in both mutant and wild-type spore coat isolates. A further 163 proteins were identified exclusively in wild-type spore isolates indicating that they are dependent on CotE for their association with the spore. Several of these are newly confirmed as associated with the exosporium, namely BC_2569 (BclF), BC_3345, BC_2427, BC_2878, BC_0666, BC_2984, BC_3481, and BC_2570. A total of 153 proteins were only identified in &#x394;CotE spore isolates. This was observed for proteins that are known or likely to be interacting with or are encased by CotE. Crucial spore proteins were quantified using a QconCAT reference standard, the first time this was used in a biochemically heterogeneous system. This allowed us to determine the absolute abundance of 21 proteins, which spanned across three orders of magnitude and together covered 5.66% &#xb1; 0.51 of the total spore weight. Applying the QconCAT methodology to the &#x394;CotE mutant allowed us to quantify 4.13% &#xb1; 0.14 of the spore total weight and revealed a reduction in abundance for most known exosporium associated proteins upon CotE deletion. In contrast, several proteins, either known or likely to be interacting with or encased by CotE (i.e., GerQ), were more abundant. The results obtained provide deeper insight into the layered spore structure such as which proteins are exposed on the outside of the spore. This information is important for developing detection methods for targeting spores in a food safety setting. Furthermore, protein stoichiometry and determination of the abundance of germination mediating enzymes provides useful information for germination and outgrowth model development.

### Keywords
Bacillus cereus, Quantitative proteomics, Qconcat, Spores

### Affiliations
University of Amsterdam
Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands

### Submitter
Sacha Stelder

### Lab Head
Dr Chris Gerdinus de Koster
Mass Spectrometry of Biomacromolecules, Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands


