### Accession
PXD041081

### Title
ChemBioID - An integrated chemical biology workflow for the investigation of proximity-induced pharmacology of Iberdomide

### Description
Modulation of protein-protein interactions with small molecules represents an emerging area of interest in drug discovery, enabling new therapeutic paradigms unprecedented with other drug classes such as catalytic enzyme inhibitors. Immunomodulatory or PROTAC drugs are a prime example for proximity-induced pharmacology where in the case of multiple myeloma, degradation of oncogenic transcription factors is achieved via recruitment of an E3 ligase complex. This project is part of the IMI EUbOPEN project.

### Sample Protocol
TurboID-CRBN HEK293 Flp-In cell lines were grown in DMEM with 10% dialyzed FBS (PAN BIOTECH) and 1% P/S (GIBCO). Prior to labelling, doxycycline (Sigma) was added to the cell culture media to a concentration of 1.3 μg/mL for 24h. For TurboID based biotin labelling, additional 1.3µg/mL doxycycline, a final concentration of 50 μM Biotin (Sigma), 10 μM MG132 and 10 μM Iberdomide were directly added to cell culture media. After 4h of treatment the cells were scraped in the media and transferred to 50 mL Falcon tubes, spun at 300 g for 4 min. The cells were then washed with 10 mL PBS and transferred to 15 mL Falcon tubes and again centrifuged. The final wash was done with 1 mL PBS and transferred into 2 mL Eppendorf tubes, centrifuged, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C.  Beads crosslinking: For each sample, 150 μl streptactin sepharose beads (IBA LifeSciences, 50% slurry) were equilibrated with HNN buffer (50 mM HEPES [pH 8], 0.15 M NaCl, 50 mM NaF) and then washed for 6 times. After the last wash, the volume was adjusted to 167 μl. Disuccinimidyl suberate (DSS, Sigma) dissolved in Dimethylformamide (DMF) was added to the suspension to a final concentration of 5 mM. The mixture was incubated at 37°C with 1100 RPM shaking for 30 min. The reaction was quenched with Tris-HCl (2 M) to a final concentration of 50 mM and incubated at 37°C with shaking for 15 min. The beads then were washed 6 times again as described before. The cross-linked beads were filled up to 120 μl with HNN buffer.   Enrichment of biotinylated proteins for mass spectrometry analysis: Frozen HEK293 cell pellets were resuspended in 1 mL / plate (150 mm) RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1% SDS, added freshly 1 mM PMSF, 1:500 Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (P8849, Sigma) and 0.5 µL Benzonase (E1014, Sigma)). The suspension was sonicated and incubated at 10°C for 30 min. The suspension was centrifuged at 18`213 g at 4°C for 20 min. The lysates were then incubated with crosslinked Strep-Tactin beads for 1h on a 4 °C on a overhead rotary wheel. After incubation the beads were intensively washed with RIPA buffer (2ml, 3 times), HNN buffer (2ml, 3 times), and 100 mM NH4CO3 (2ml, 2 times). Beads were transferred with 2x 200 µL 100 mM NH4CO3.   Digestion of biotinylated proteins for mass spectrometry analysis: After removing the supernatant, the proteins on the beads were denatured with 8M urea for 10 min at 20°C. Reduction of disulfide bonds was performed with 5 mM Tris-(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 30 min and 37 °C in the dark. Before protein digestion the sample was diluted with 100 mM NH4CO3 to 4 M urea. The protein digestion was performed on the beads with 0.5 μg LysC (Promega) for 3 h and 37 °C. Then the sample was diluted with 100 mM NH4CO3 to 1 M urea and protein digestion was continued by adding 1 μg trypsin (V5113, Promega) for overnight incubation at 37 °C. Formic acid (FA, 5% final concentration, v/v, Sigma) was added to stop the digestion. The bead-peptide suspension was loaded on FASP column (Vivacon 500 (satorius), MWCO 30K). The peptides were collected in a tube by centrifugation (8000 g, 5 min). The filter device was washed once with 200 µL and once with 100 µL 1 M Urea in 100 mM NH4CO3.  C18-Clean-up of peptides for mass spectrometry analysis: Peptides were purified using C18 UltraMicroSpin columns (The Nest Group, Inc.). First, the C18 stage tips were activated with ACN and equilibrated twice with 5% ACN, 0.1% FA (in HPLC grade water [Fisher Chemical]). After loading of the acidified peptide solution the C18 columns were washed three times with 5% ACN, 0.1% FA. Then peptides were eluted with 100 µl 50% ACN (0.1% FA) twice. The solution was dried in a speed vacuum centrifuge. The samples were resuspended in 19 µL 2% ACN, 0.1% FA. 1 µL iRT peptids (10x) were added. The data was acquired in data independent acquisition mode. Pooled condition samples were used to acquire library data in data dependent acquisition mode.

### Data Protocol
Acquired MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (downloaded on 18th March 2022; http:/www.uniprot.org/) using the MaxQuant software package v1.5.2.8 embedded with the Andromeda search engine (ref) and default settings. The search parameters were set to allow only fully tryptic peptides with maximum two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (at cysteines) was set as fixed peptide modification whereas oxidation (at methionines) was set as variable peptide modification for the search. The “match between runs” option was inactivated. A precursor mass tolerance of 20 ppm and a fragment mass error of 0.5 Da were considered. For protein identification the false discovery rate (FDR) on peptide and protein level was controlled at 1%. For estimation of protein abundances the label-free quantification (LFQ) option was enabled. The LFQ values of identified proteins were determined from the MS1 signal intensity of the top two unique peptides of the respective protein. For quantitative comparison between treated and control groups and the calculation of fold changes log2 transformed LFQ MS intensities were median normalized.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Eubopen crbn iberdomide

### Affiliations
ETHZ IMSB

### Submitter
Sabrina Keller

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Gstaiger
ETHZ IMSB


