### Accession
PXD026190

### Title
Label-free comparative data independent (DIA) nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of protein expression profiles of mouse primary dendritic cells (DC) from B6 mice on normal and high fructose/high fat (HFHF) diet

### Description
A diet rich in saturated fat and carbohydrates causes a low-grade chronic inflammation in several organs including nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. The environment-driven lipotocicity and glucotoxicity induce tissue damage, which promotes dendritic cell adjuvanticity, and supports an MHC-class-II immunopeptidome enriched in peptides derived from proteins involved in cellular metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation and molecular cellular responses to oxidative stress. To investigate the impact of metabolic syndrome on the whole cellular proteome of antigen presenting cells (APCs) we isolated six biological replicates consisted of total proteomic extracts DCs lysates from B6 mice on normal and high fructose/high fat (HFHF) diet and employed a quantitative label-free data independent (DIA) nanoLC-MS/MS analysis of redox stress mediated changes in the protein expression profiles in HFHF vs normal diet.  The LFQ DIA analysis of cellular proteomics changes induced by HFHF diet in the DCs highlighted the involvement of proteins associated with cellular pathways involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, cell death and inflammation. Altogether depicting an image of cells under metabolic and oxidative stress with up-regulated inflammatory pathways.

### Sample Protocol
Pelleted dendritic cells purified by BSA gradient from mice subjected to different diet were lysed on ice with cold MILLIPLEX MAP lysis buffer, (cat # S30043-MXA, Cell Signaling buffer) supplemented with 1mM DTT and complete protease inhibitors (cat# 04693116001, Roche). The lysates were shaken on a rocker at 4ºC for 20 minutes followed by treatment with benzonase nuclease (5 units/ul lysate) on ice, for 20 minutes before being spun at 14,000 rpm in a microcentrifuge for 25 minutes, at 4ºC.  The supernatant was further cleared with EMD Millipore filters (cat # UFC 0DV 25).  Quantitation of total protein from different cell lysates was performed using the Micro BCA™ Protein Assay Kit, (cat # 23235 from Thermofisher Scientific).  Three different enzymes were used for “in solution” digestion in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, pH 8.5, for 18 h, at 37 °C: endoproteinase Lys-C (1:50 enzyme: protein ratio); trypsin (1:20 enzyme: protein ratio) and Glu-C (1:10 enzyme: protein ratio) (sequencing grade Promega, Madison, WI, USA.  Peptide’s mixture, extracted from all enzymatic digestions, were desalted on C18 Prep clean columns before high resolution liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).  Proteomic analysis of murine dendritic cells from mice under HFHF and ND diet using nanoLC DIA mass spectroscopy. Desalted peptides were injected onto EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 50 cm x 75 μm column (Thermo Scientific), which was coupled to the Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  Peptides were eluted with a non-linear 130 min gradient of 5-30% buffer B (0.1% (v/v) formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The column temperature was maintained at a constant 50 ˚C during all experiments.  DIA method1 for peptide MS/MS analysis was employed by performing survey scans of peptide precursors from 350-1200 m/z at 120K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. The instrument was set to run in top speed mode with 3 s cycles for the survey and the MS/MS scans. After a survey scan, 26 m/z DIA segments (windows) were acquired at from 200-2000 m/z at 60K FWHM resolution (at 200 m/z) with a 1 x 106 ion count target and a maximum injection time of 118 ms. HCD fragmentation was applied with 27% collision energy and resulting fragments were detected using the rapid scan rate in the Orbitrap. The spectra were recorded in profile mode.

### Data Protocol
DIA Analysis of proteomic extracts from mouse primary DC under normal and high fat/high fructose (HFHF) diet. DIA-MS samples were analyzed using Scaffold DIA (2.2.1) after DIA-MS data files were converted to mzML format using ProteoWizard (3.0.11748).  SPECTRAL LIBRARY SEARCH. The analytic samples were aligned based on retention times and individually searched against an in-house spectral library derived from proteomics analysis of DDA-MS/MS files provided by the previous published data and deposited at PRIDE with accession number PXD024239 (Clement CC, Padma NN et al., Immunity, 2021, PMCID: PMC8046741, 10.1016/j.immuni.2021.02.019), using a peptide mass tolerance of 15.0 ppm and a fragment mass tolerance of 20.0 ppm. Fixed modifications considered were: Carbamidomethylation (Cys). Variable modifications considered were: Carboxymethylation (CML, CMA) (+58.005; K, R);  Carboxyethylation (CEL) (+72.021; K, R);  Fructosylation (N-hexosyl lysine) (+162.053; K)  Pyrraline (+108.021; K);  GLAP (+109.029; K);  Glycerinylation (+88.016; K);  Acetylation (+42.011; K);  Formylation (+27.995; K);  Glarg (+39.995; R);  MG-H (+54.011; R); G-H1 (+39.990; R); Argpyrimidine (+79.966; R)  Tetrahydropyrimidine (3-deoxyglucosone) (+144.042; R); Dihydroxyimidazolidine (CEAMGDHI) (+72.020; R); N-Pentosyl Lysine (+132.0575; K); N-tetrosyl Lysine (+102.0317; K) (as reported in other proteomic AGE analyses. In addition, the following posttranslational modifications were specified in PEAKS X/X+ as variable modifications for carbonylation: Lys->Allysine (-1.03; K);  Lys->AminoadipicAcid (+14.96; K);  Amino (Y) (+15.01, Y); Trp->Oxolactone (W) (+13.98, W);  Pro->Pyrrolidone (P) (-27.99; P);  Pro->Pyrrolidinone (P) (-30.01; P);  Arg->GluSA (-43.05; R);  Dehydrated 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE-Delta:H(2)O(H)) (+138.21, C,H,K); reduced 4-Hydroxynonenal (HNE+Delta:H(2) (H)) (+158.13, C,H,K);  HNE (+156.12, C,H,K); 4-Oxononenal (ONE) (4-ONE) (+154.10, C,H,K); dehydrated 4-Oxononenal Michael adduct (4-ONE+Delta:H(-2)O(-1)) (+136.09; C,H,K).  The digestion enzyme was assumed to be Trypsin with a maximum of 3 missed cleavage site(s) allowed. Only peptides with charges in the range [2‥4] and length in the range [5‥25] were included for further quantitative analysis. Peptides identified in each sample were filtered by Percolator (3.01. nightly-13-655e4c7-dirty) to achieve a maximum FDR of 0.05 (achieved FDR 0.8%, for peptides). Individual search results were combined, and peptide identifications were assigned posterior error probabilities and filtered to an FDR threshold of 0.05 by Percolator (3.01. nightly-13-655e4c7-dirty).   Peptide quantification was performed by Encyclopedia (0.9.6). For each peptide, the 5 highest quality fragment ions were selected for quantitation.   Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Protein groups were thresholded to achieve a protein FDR less than 3.0%, for proteins having at least one unique peptide.  Gene ontology (GO), molecular and cellular pathways enrichment analysis  Networks functional analyses were generated by employing the ingenuity pathway analysis (IPA; Ingenuity Systems, Redwood City, CA, USA) using the list of identified proteins in the B6 on normal and HFHF diet.  For network generation, datasets containing gene identifiers (gene symbols) were uploaded into the IPA application together with their rescaled log2 transformation of protein’s area ratios. The networks were then algorithmically generated based on their connectivity index using the built-in IPA algorithm. The level of significance was set to a P-value of <0.05.

### Publication Abstract
A diet rich in saturated fat and carbohydrates causes low-grade chronic inflammation in several organs, including the liver, ultimately driving nonalcoholic steatohepatitis. In this setting, environment-driven lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity induce liver damage, which promotes dendritic cell activation and generates a major histocompatibility complex class II (MHC-II) immunopeptidome enriched with peptides derived from proteins involved in cellular metabolism, oxidative phosphorylation, and the stress responses. Here, we demonstrated that lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity, as driven by a high-fat and high-fructose (HFHF) diet, promoted MHC-II presentation of nested T and B cell epitopes from protein disulfide isomerase family A member 3 (PDIA3), which is involved in immunogenic cell death. Increased MHC-II presentation of PDIA3 peptides was associated with antigen-specific proliferation of hepatic CD4<sup>+</sup> immune infiltrates and isotype switch of anti-PDIA3 antibodies from IgM to IgG3, indicative of cellular and humoral PDIA3 autoreactivity. Passive transfer of PDIA3-specific T cells or PDIA3-specific antibodies also exacerbated hepatocyte death, as determined by increased hepatic transaminases detected in the sera of mice subjected to an HFHF but not control diet. Increased humoral responses to PDIA3 were also observed in patients with chronic inflammatory liver conditions, including autoimmune hepatitis, primary biliary cholangitis, and type 2 diabetes. Together, our data indicated that metabolic insults caused by an HFHF diet elicited liver damage and promoted pathogenic immune autoreactivity driven by T and B cell PDIA3 epitopes.

### Keywords
Mouse dendritic cells (cd11c+) proteomics; dia/dda nano lc-ms/ms;orbitrap fusion tribrid mass spectrometer

### Affiliations
Englander Institute of Precision Medicine Department of Radiation Oncology Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue E209 New York, NY 10065
Weill Cornell Medicine

### Submitter
Cristina Clement

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Santambrogio; Cristina C Clement
Englander Institute of Precision Medicine Department of Radiation Oncology Weill Cornell Medicine 1300 York Avenue E209 New York, NY 10065


