### Accession
PXD031192

### Title
Repression of PRMT5-mediated dimethylation stabilizes vimentin and promotes metastasis in MTAP-loss lung cancer

### Description
Abstract The aggressive nature and poor prognosis of lung cancer led us to explore the mechanisms driving disease progression. Utilizing our invasive cell-based model, we identified methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) and confirmed its suppressive effects on tumorigenesis and metastasis, and patients with low MTAP expression displayed worse overall and progression-free survival. Mechanistically, accumulation of methylthioadenosine substrate in MTAP-deficient cells reduced the level of protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5)-mediated symmetric dimethylarginine (sDMA) modification on proteins. Vimentin was revealed as a novel dimethyl-protein with less dimethylation level in response to MTAP loss. The sDMA modification on vimentin reduces its protein abundance and trivially affects its filamentous structure. In MTAP-loss cells, lower sDMA level prevents ubiquitination-mediated vimentin degradation, thereby stabilizing vimentin, contributing to cell invasion. This inverse association of the MTAP/PRMT5 axis with vimentin proteins was clinically corroborated. Taken together, we propose a novel mechanism of vimentin post-translational regulation and provide new insights in metastasis.

### Sample Protocol
To identify differentially symmetrically dimethylated proteins, dimethyl-proteins were immunoprecipitated from CL1-5 Mock/MTAP, CL1-0 sgCTRL/sgMTAP and H1650 sgCTRL/sgMTAP by anti-sDMA antibody and the samples were subjected to SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. Gel areas separated into 5 pieces by molecular weight in each sample were excised and destained, followed by reduction with final 5 mM TCEP at 37oC for 30 min in the dark, alkylation in the dark with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 37oC for 1 h, in-gel trypsin digestion, and LC-MS/MS.  To identify the dimethyl site(s) on vimentin, vimentin was isolated by immunoprecipitation with anti-vimentin antibody and subjected to SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Brilliant Blue staining. The protein band corresponding to vimentin was excised and subjected to in-gel digestion with trypsin. The peptides were extracted, desalted by C18 ziptip and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), and peptide identification was performed by search engines Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.2) and SEQUEST against the Swiss-Prot database (v2015_12). The modifications including Carbamidomethylation at cysteine, oxidation at methionine, deamidation at asparagine or glutamine, and dimethylation at arginine were selected. To reduce false positive identification results, a decoy database containing the reverse sequences was appended to the database. Label-free quantification was performed using the peak area of each precursor ion calculated from extracted ion chromatogram during data processing using the Precursor Ions Area Detector node with mass precision 2 ppm. The abundance of identified protein was calculated from the top three of all unique and razor peptides in Peptide and Protein Quantifier node, and was used to calculate the relative protein abundance between experimental samples. Proteins that were 2-fold or more abundant in the CL1-5 MTAP, CL1-0 sgCTRL or H1650 sgCTRL sample compared with CL1-5 Mock, CL1-0 sgMTAP or H1650 sgMTAP sample were considered dimethyl-protein candidates. All MS/MS files were further processed by search engine Mascot against the Swiss-Prot database (v2015_12). The common modifications including Carbamidomethylation at cysteine, oxidation at methionine, deamidation at asparagine or glutamine were selected. In addition, the dimethyl with neutral losses 30.0344 or 44.0500 at arginine was set up to identify the symmetric and asymmetric dimethylation on vimentin, respectively. A decoy database containing the reverse sequences was appended to the database to reduce false positive identification results.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lung cancer, Dimethylation

### Affiliations
Academia Sinica
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan

### Submitter
Yi-Ju Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Yi-Ju Chen
Institute of Chemistry, Academia Sinica, Taiwan


