### Accession
PXD039050

### Title
Benefit of circadian clocks in adaptive immunity and vaccination responses

### Description
The adaptive immune response is under circadian control, yet, the benefit of this rhythmicity for the organism is unknown. Furthermore, it is not understood why adaptive immune reactions continue to exhibit circadian changes over long periods of time. Using a combination of experimental and mathematical modelling approaches, we show here that dendritic cells (DCs) migrate from the skin to the draining lymph node (LN) in a time-of-day-dependent manner, which provides an enhanced likelihood for functional interactions with T cells. Greater numbers of infiltrating DCs induce rhythmic expression of TNF-α in the draining LN, which enhances ICAM-1 expression in high endothelial venules (HEVs), resulting in lymphocyte infiltration and LN expansion. Icam1 is controlled by binding of the core circadian clock transcription factor BMAL1 to its promoter region, and rhythmic Icam1 expression is lost in mice lacking endothelial cell BMAL1. LN cellularity continues to be different for weeks after the initial time-of-day-dependent challenge, which determines the immune response to vaccinations directed against Hepatitis A virus as well as SARS-CoV-2, as evidenced by rhythmic T cell reactions, germinal center formation and antibody production. Our results provide the mechanistic understanding of the time-of-day dependent development and maintenance of an adaptive immune response, demonstrating its dependency upon the timing of the initial challenge and the interactions of rhythmicity in multiple parameters. This provides a strategy for using time-of-day to optimize vaccination regimes.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets from murine CD4+ T cells were subjected to in-solution digestion and C18 STAGE-tip purification. Detailed protocols are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry RAW data were processed using MaxQuant and analyzed using Perseus. Detailed settings are provided in the associated manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
The adaptive immune response is under circadian control, yet, why adaptive immune reactions continue to exhibit circadian changes over long periods of time is unknown. Using a combination of experimental and mathematical modeling approaches, we show here that dendritic cells migrate from the skin to the draining lymph node in a time-of-day-dependent manner, which provides an enhanced likelihood for functional interactions with T cells. Rhythmic expression of TNF in the draining lymph node enhances BMAL1-controlled ICAM-1 expression in high endothelial venules, resulting in lymphocyte infiltration and lymph node expansion. Lymph node cellularity continues to be different for weeks after the initial time-of-day-dependent challenge, which governs the immune response to vaccinations directed against Hepatitis A virus as well as SARS-CoV-2. In this work, we present a mechanistic understanding of the time-of-day dependent development and maintenance of an adaptive immune response, providing a strategy for using time-of-day to optimize vaccination regimes.

### Keywords
Sars-cov-2, Leukocyte trafficking, Vaccination, Mathematical modeling, Adaptive immunity, Circadian rhythm, Bmal1, Hepatitis a

### Affiliations
BioMedizinisches Centrum Walter-Brendel-Zentrum für Experimentelle Medizin Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Christoph Scheiermann
BioMedizinisches Centrum Walter-Brendel-Zentrum für Experimentelle Medizin Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München


