### Accession
PXD043534

### Title
Primary and hTERT-transduced mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts but not primary or hTERT-transduced mesothelial cells stimulate growth of human mesothelioma cells_ Cytoplasmic proteins & Proteins from nuclear extracts

### Description
Introduction: Pleural mesothelioma (PM) is known as one of the most aggressive malignancies among all cancers, despite of usually absent tumor-driver mutations in oncogenes. It develops in a unique inflammatory tumor microenvironment (TME), which has been postulated as major contributor of PM’s highly aggressive nature. Mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts (Meso-CAFs), a main component of the TME have recently been shown to substantially stimulate several aspects of PM aggressiveness and promote the malignant transformation of pleural mesothelial cells.  However, respective cell models for TME research in PM are still very limited. The most commonly used pleural mesothelial cell line Met5A has been established decades ago and patient-derived Meso-CAFs have just recently been characterized for the first time. The aim of the current study was to generate and characterize pleural mesothelial and Meso-CAF cell models with an extended life span that closely resemble the primary cells isolated from human tissue. Methods: Pleural mesothelial cells and Meso-CAFs were isolated from human tissue of pneumothorax and PM patients, respectively. Retroviral transduction was used to induce stable expression of human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and enhanced green fluorescent protein (EGFP) in the primary cells. The established cell models were evaluated by measuring their doubling times, gene expression and protein activity levels of hTERT, as well as the absolute lengths of telomeres. The transduced cells were compared to their primary counterparts on the protein level using proteome analysis and the impact of their conditioned media (CM) on tumor cell growth was investigated by videomicroscopy. Results: All transduced derivatives exhibit elevated hTERT gene expression and protein activity, increased hTERT protein amounts in the nucleus, and moderately higher absolute telomere lengths compared to their parental primary cells. The transduction with hTERT did not elicit marked changes in the morphology of the cells, as well as in their proteomes and secretomes. The CM of primary and hTERT-transduced Meso-CAFs comparably stimulated PM cell growth, while medium conditioned by normal pleural mesothelial cells including their hTERT-transduced derivatives was not able to induce a growth stimulating effect. Conclusion: The hTERT-transduced cells closely resemble their primary counterparts, while retaining telomerase activity, thus preventing replicative senescence. The new cell models provide valuable tools for the investigation of cellular interactions cellular interactions within the TME of PM and thus may help to identify novel biomarkers for early diagnosis and to develop new therapeutic strategies.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue sample used for the isolation of the non-malignant human pleural mesothelial cell culture NP2 as well as the corresponding hTERT-immortalized NP2-hT+ cells was collected from a surgery specimen of a pneumothorax patient. In addition, the pleural mesothelial cell line Met5A was analyzed. Primary and hTERT-transduced mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts (Meso109F, Meso125F, Meso109F-hT+ and Meso125F-hT+) and normal lung fibroblasts (MRC-5 and Wi38) were analyzed previously; corresponding data were already uploaded to PRIDE (Acc. No. PXD036017 & PXD036127) and partly published (PMID 36683050). All cells were cultivated in FBS-free medium six hours prior to protein extraction.   Preparation of proteins from cell cytoplasm and nuclear extracts To isolate cytoplasmic proteins, cells were suspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (10 mM HEPES/NaOH (pH 7.4), 0.25 M sucrose, 10 mM NaCl, 3.5 mM MgCl2, 0.5% Triton X-100, 1 mM EGTA) including a protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), harvested using a cell scraper and pressed through a 23 g syringe to induce full cell lysis. Cytoplasmic proteins were separated from nuclei by centrifugation (2300 g, 4°C, 5 min) and precipitated in ice-cold ethanol at -20°C overnight. Pellets were lysed on ice with a hypertonic solution (10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), 0.5 M NaCl) and subsequently treated with NP-40 buffer (10 mM Tris/HCl (pH 7.4), 1 mM EDTA (pH 7.5), 0.5% NP-40) containing the protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktail. Centrifugation (2300 g, 4°C, 5 min) separated the nuclear fraction from the remaining cellular components, and the nuclear proteins were precipitated with ethanol at -20°C overnight. After centrifugation (587 g, 4°C, 5 min) the next day, cytoplasmic and nuclear proteins were dissolved in sample buffer (7.5 M urea, 1.5 M thiourea, 4% CHAPS, 0.05% SDS, 100 mM dithiothreitol) and concentrations of distinct protein fractions were assessed using a Bradford assay. Protein (25 µg per sample) was precipitated overnight with ice-cold ethanol to remove SDS, centrifuged and washed with 80% ethanol. After further centrifugation, the samples were dried, dissolved in 90 µl of 4% sodium deoxycholate buffer containing 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0) and heat-treated for 5 min (95 °C). The proteins were reduced with 100 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (pH 8.0), alkylated with 400 mM 2-chloroacetamide (pH 8.0) and enzymatically digested twice at 37 °C using a trypsin/lys-c mixture (Promega Corporation, Fitchburg, WI, USA) with a total incubation time of 20 h. Samples were cleaned-up on SDB-RPS StageTips, and peptides were eluted with a 60% acetonitrile solution containing 0.5% of a 28% ammonium hydroxide solution. The elutes were dried by vacuum centrifugation and stored at -20°C until MS analysis.   LC-MS/MS analyses Reconstitution of dried peptide samples was achieved by adding 5μl of 30 % formic acid (FA) containing 4 synthetic standard peptides and subsequent dilution with 40 μl of loading solvent (97.9 % H2O, 2 % ACN, 0.05 % trifluoroacetic acid). Thereof, 5 µl were injected into the Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)-system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). A pre-column (2 cm × 100 μm C18 Pepmap100; Thermo Fisher Scientific) run at a flow rate of 10 μl/min using mobile phase A (99.9 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) was used to preconcentrate peptides prior to chromatographic separation. Peptides were then separated on an analytical column (25 cm x 75 μm Aurora Series emitter column (Ionopticks)) by applying a flow rate of 300 nl/min and using a gradient of 8 % to 40 % mobile phase B (79.9 % ACN, 20 % H2O, 0.1 % FA) over 90 min, resulting in a total LC run time of 135 min including washing and equilibration steps. Mass spectrometric analyses were performed using the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker) equipped with a captive spray ion source run at 1650 V. Additionally, the timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer was operated in the Parallel Accumulation-Serial Fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Further parameters included a scan range (m/z) from 100 to 1700 to record MS and MS/MS spectra and a 1/k0 scan range from 0.60 – 1.60 V.s/cm2 resulting in a ramp time of 100ms to achieve trapped ion mobility separation. All experiments were performed with 10 PASEF MS/MS scans per cycle leading to a total cycle time of 1.16 s. Furthermore, the collision energy was ramped as a function of increasing ion mobility from 20 to 59 eV and the quadrupole isolation width was set to 2 Th for m/z < 700 and 3 Th for m/z > 700.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification as well as label-free quantification (LFQ) was achieved using the publicly available software package MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 running the Andromeda search engine. Therefore, raw data were searched against the SwissProt database (version 141219 with 20380 entries). Further, search parameter included an allowed peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation on cysteins as fixed modification as well as methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation as variable modification. A minimum of two peptide identifications, one of them unique, per protein was used as search criterium. In addition, the “match between runs” option was applied, using a 0.7 min match time window and a match ion mobility window of 0.1 as well as a 20 min alignment time window and an alignment ion mobility of 1. An FDR≤0.01 was set for all peptide and protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Pleural mesothelioma (PM) is an aggressive malignancy that develops in a unique tumor microenvironment (TME). However, cell models for studying the TME in PM are still limited. Here, we have generated and characterized novel human telomerase reverse transcriptase (hTERT)-transduced mesothelial cell and mesothelioma-associated fibroblast (Meso-CAF) models and investigated their impact on PM cell growth. Pleural mesothelial cells and Meso-CAFs were isolated from tissue of pneumothorax and PM patients, respectively. Stable expression of hTERT was induced by retroviral transduction. Primary and hTERT-transduced cells were compared with respect to doubling times, hTERT expression and activity levels, telomere lengths, proteomes, and the impact of conditioned media (CM) on PM cell growth. All transduced derivatives exhibited elevated hTERT expression and activity, and increased mean telomere lengths. Cell morphology remained unchanged, and the proteomes were similar to the corresponding primary cells. Of note, the CM of primary and hTERT-transduced Meso-CAFs stimulated PM cell growth to the same extent, while CM derived from mesothelial cells had no stimulating effect, irrespective of hTERT expression. In conclusion, all new hTERT-transduced cell models closely resemble their primary counterparts and, hence, represent valuable tools to investigate cellular interactions within the TME of PM.

### Keywords
Mesothelioma-associated fibroblasts, Conditioned medium, Tumor microenvironment, Htert, Pleural mesothelioma, Pleural mesothelial cells, Human telomerase reverse transcriptase

### Affiliations
University of Vienna
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry

### Submitter
Christopher Gerner

### Lab Head
Dr Christopher Gerner
University of Vienna, Faculty of Chemistry, Department of Analytical Chemistry


