### Accession
PXD028359

### Title
Hypoxic Incubation Conditions for Optimized Manufacture of Tenocyte-Based Active Substances of Homologous Standardized Transplant Products in Tendon Regenerative Medicine

### Description
Human fetal progenitor tenocytes (hFPT) produced in defined cell bank systems have recently been characterized and qualified as potential therapeutic cell sources in tendon regenerative medicine. In view of further optimizing the manufacture of the cell-based active substance, the effects of hypoxic (i.e., 2% O2 partial pressure) in vitro culture expansion on key cellular characteristics or process parameters were evaluated. To this end, multiple aspects were comparatively assessed, in either normoxic incubation (i.e., 5% CO2 and 21% O2, standard conditions) or in hypoxic incubation (i.e., 5% CO2 and 2% O2, optimized conditions). Experimentally investigated parameters and endpoints comprised cellular proliferation, cellular morphology and size distribution, cell surface marker panels, cell susceptibility toward adipogenic and osteogenic induction, while relative protein expression levels were analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. Results outlined conserved basic cellular characteristics (i.e., surface marker panels, phenotype under chemical induction) as well as modified key cellular parameters (i.e., cell size distribution, endpoint cell yields, matrix protein contents) potentially procuring tangible benefits with regard to an optimized cell manufacturing workflow. Specific proteomic analyses further shed some light on the effects of hypoxia at a protein level, potentially orienting the further processing of hFPT for cell-free active substance manufacture. Overall, this study indicated that hypoxic incubation impacts specific hFPT key properties and enables optimized manufacture of tenocyte-based active substances in homologous standardized transplant products.

### Sample Protocol
hFPTs were harvested from normoxic and hypoxic confluent T75 flasks (TPP). Adult tenocyte cultures maintained in normoxia were processed in the same way. Harvested cells were split in 2 × 106 cell aliquots and were subsequently washed in PBS. Cell lysis was performed in a pH 8.5 lysis buffer composed of LC-MS grade water supplemented with 2% SDS ,100 mM Hepes and 25 mM DTT . Following the cell lysis step, the samples were sonicated on ice and subsequently heated at 56 °C for 20 min. Total protein content in the samples were then determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein assay kit-Reducing agent compatible according to the manufacturer’s protocol and specifications. The sample concentration was adjusted at 1 µg/mL before the sample digestion steps. Samples were then digested using the Filter-Aided Sample preparation (FASP) protocol with minor modifications [49]. Protein lysates were resuspended in 200 µl of 8 M urea ; 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8 and deposited on top of Microcon-30K devices. Samples were centrifuged at 9,391 × g at 20 °C for 30 min. All subsequent centrifugation steps were performed using the same conditions. An additional 200 µl of 8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl were added, and devices were centrifuged again. Reduction was performed by adding 100 µl of 10 mM TCEP in 8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl on top of the filters, followed by a 60 min incubation period at 37 °C with gentle shaking and light protection. The reduction solution was removed by centrifugation and filters were washed with 200 µl of 8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl. After removal of the washing solution by centrifugation, alkylation was performed by adding 100 µl of 40 mM chloroacetamide in 8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl and incubating the filters at 37 °C for 45 min with gentle shaking and protection from light. The alkylation solution was removed by centrifugation and another washing/centrifugation step with 200 µl of 8 M urea; 100 mM Tris-HCl was performed. This last urea buffer washing step was repeated twice, followed by three additional washing steps with 100 µl of 5 mM Tris-HCl. Proteolytic digestion was performed overnight at 37 °C by adding 100 µl of a combined solution of endoproteinase Lys-C and Mass Spectrometry Grade Trypsin in an enzyme/protein ratio of 1:50 (w/w) on top of the filters. Resulting peptides were recovered by centrifugation. The devices were then rinsed with 50 µl of 4% trifluoroacetic acid and centrifuged. This step was repeated three times, peptides were finally desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips, and were then dried by vacuum centrifugation [50].  For TMT labelling, dried peptides were first reconstituted in 10 μl of 100 mM HEPES pH 8 and 4 μl of TMT solution (i.e., 25 µg/μL in pure acetonitrile) were then added. TMT labelling was performed at room temperature for 90 min and reactions were quenched with hydroxylamine to a final concentration of 0.4% (v/v) for 15 min. TMT-labeled samples were then pooled at a 1:1 ratio across all samples and desalted on SDB-RPS StageTips. A single shot control LC-MS run was performed to ensure similar peptide mixing across each TMT channel, to avoid the need for further excessive normalization. Quantities of each TMT-labeled sample were adjusted according to the control run. The combined samples were then desalted using a 100 mg SEP-PAK C18 cartridge (Waters) and vacuum centrifuged. Pooled samples were fractionated into 12 fractions using an Agilent OFF-Gel 3100 system following the manufacturer’s instructions. Resulting fractions were dried by vacuum centrifugation and desalted again on SDB-RPS StageTips. Each individual fraction was resuspended in 2% acetonitrile; 0.1% formic acid and nano-flow separations were performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected on-line with an Exploris 480 Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. A capillary precolumn (Acclaim Pepmap C18; 3 μm-100 Å; 2 cm x 75 μm ID was used for sample trapping and cleaning. Analytical separations were performed at 250 nL/min over a 150 min biphasic gradient on a 50 cm long in-house packed capillary column (75 μm ID; ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch). Acquisitions were performed through Top Speed Data-Dependent acquisition mode using a 3 second cycle time. First MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 (i.e., at 200 m/z) and the most intense parent ions were selected and fragmented by High energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with a Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 36%, using an isolation window of 0.7 m/z. Fragmented ion scans were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 (i.e., at 200 m/z) enabling use of the turbo TMT mode and selected ions were then excluded for the following 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were processed using SEQUEST, Mascot, MS Amanda and MS Fragger in Proteome Discoverer v.2.4 against the Human reference proteome database (i.e., 74,468 sequences). Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin and a minimum of six amino acids was required for peptide identification. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed and a 1% FDR cut-off was applied both at peptide and protein identification levels. For the database search, carbamidomethylation (C), TMT tags (i.e., K and Peptide N termini) were set as fixed modifications, whereas oxidation (M) was considered as a variable one. Resulting text files were processed through in-house written R scripts (version 3.6.3).

### Publication Abstract
Human fetal progenitor tenocytes (hFPT) produced in defined cell bank systems have recently been characterized and qualified as potential therapeutic cell sources in tendon regenerative medicine. In view of further developing the manufacture processes of such cell-based active pharmaceutical ingredients (API), the effects of hypoxic in vitro culture expansion on key cellular characteristics or process parameters were evaluated. To this end, multiple aspects were comparatively assessed in normoxic incubation (i.e., 5% CO<sub>2</sub> and 21% O<sub>2</sub>, standard conditions) or in hypoxic incubation (i.e., 5% CO<sub>2</sub> and 2% O<sub>2</sub>, optimized conditions). Experimentally investigated parameters and endpoints included cellular proliferation, cellular morphology and size distribution, cell surface marker panels, cell susceptibility toward adipogenic and osteogenic induction, while relative protein expression levels were analyzed by quantitative mass spectrometry. The results outlined conserved critical cellular characteristics (i.e., cell surface marker panels, cellular phenotype under chemical induction) and modified key cellular parameters (i.e., cell size distribution, endpoint cell yields, matrix protein contents) potentially procuring tangible benefits for next-generation cell manufacturing workflows. Specific proteomic analyses further shed some light on the cellular effects of hypoxia, potentially orienting further hFPT processing for cell-based, cell-free API manufacture. Overall, this study indicated that hypoxic incubation impacts specific hFPT key properties while preserving critical quality attributes (i.e., as compared to normoxic incubation), enabling efficient manufacture of tenocyte-based APIs for homologous standardized transplant products.

### Keywords
Tendon affections, Regenerative medicine, Proteomics, Human progenitor tenocytes, Cell manufacture, Hypoxia, Standardized transplants

### Affiliations
PCF
Applied Research Department, LAM Biotechnologies SA, CH-1066 Épalinges, Switzerland Regenerative Therapy Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, University of Lausanne, CH-1066 Épalinges, Switzerland

### Submitter
Romain Hamelin

### Lab Head
Dr Alexis Laurent
Applied Research Department, LAM Biotechnologies SA, CH-1066 Épalinges, Switzerland Regenerative Therapy Unit, Lausanne University Hospital, University of Lausanne, CH-1066 Épalinges, Switzerland


