### Accession
PXD028925

### Title
SFPQ-ABL1 and BCR-ABL1 utilise different signalling networks to drive B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia

### Description
Philadelphia-like (Ph-like) acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) is a high-risk subtype of B-cell ALL characterised by a gene expression profile resembling Philadelphia Chromosome positive ALL (Ph+ ALL) in the absence of BCR-ABL1. Tyrosine kinase activating fusions, some involving ABL1, are recurrent drivers of Ph-like ALL and are targetable with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We identified a rare instance of SFPQ-ABL1 in a child with Ph-like ALL. SFPQ-ABL1 expressed in cytokine-dependent cell lines was sufficient to transform cells which were sensitive to ABL1-targeting TKIs. In contrast to BCR-ABL1, SFPQ-ABL1 localised to the nuclear compartment and was a weaker driver of cellular proliferation. Phosphoproteomics analysis showed upregulation of cell cycle, DNA replication and spliceosome pathways, and downregulation of signal transduction pathways, including ErbB, NF-kappa B, VEGF, and MAPK signalling in SFPQ-ABL1-, compared to BCR-ABL1-expressing cells. SFPQ-ABL1 expression did not activate PI3K/AKT signalling and was associated with phosphorylation of G2/M cell cycle proteins. SFPQ-ABL1 was sensitive to navitoclax and S-63845 and promotes cell survival through upregulation of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL. SFPQ-ABL1 has functionally distinct mechanisms by which it drives ALL, including subcellular localisation, proliferative capacity, and activation of cellular pathways, highlighting the role that fusion partners have in mediating the function of ABL1 fusions.

### Sample Protocol
Ba/F3 cell lines were expanded, washed three times in PBS, and pellets were prepared from 7 x 106 cells, and snap frozen on dry ice for mass spectrometry. Cell pellets were lysed in guanidine hydrochloride (GdnHCl) lysis buffer (6M GdnHCl, 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 10mM TCEP, 40mM Chloroacetamide, max conc. 10mg/ml) and heated for 10min at 95C. Samples were transferred to a sonication vial and sonicated at 150W for 1 minute (Covaris). Samples were heated again for 5 minutes at 95C. Samples were centrifuged at top speed 5min 4C and supernatant collected. Lysate was diluted 1:1 using MQ before precipitating protein using 4x volumes of -20C acetone overnight. Precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 2,000g for 15 minutes at 4C. Protein pellets were washed twice in -20C 80% acetone. Pellets were air dried for approximately 10 minutes, or until no residual acetone odour remains. Pellets were resuspended in digestion buffer (10% 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE), 100mM ammonium bicarbonate) and sonicated in water bath for 5 minutes until homogeneous suspension was formed. Trypsin and LysC were each added at 1:50 ratio (enzyme:protein) in digestion buffer. Solution was incubated overnight at 37C, thermomixer at 1200rpm.   Digested peptides were acidified with 10% TFA (final 1% TFA) and centrifuged at 21,000g for 10 minutes to remove precipitate. ACN was added to achieve a final concentration of 80% ACN/ 0.1% TFA. 50ul of FeIII-NTA loaded magnetic beads (wash 2 x 500ul 80% ACN/ 0.1% TFA prior to use) (CUBE biotech) and incubated for 30 minutes shaking at room temperature. Tubes were placed on a magnet and washed to remove unbound peptides in 3 washed of 250ul Wash buffer (80% ACN, 0.1% TFA). Beads were transferred with 40ul of wash buffer into the top of the pre-wetted C8 stage-tips (2 plugs, pre-wet with 50ul ACN prior to use). Centrifuged C8 stage-tip to remove wash buffer, and 30ul of 10% TFA was added to the bottom of a collection tube. Phospho-peptides were eluted using 2 x 20ul Elution buffer (50% ACN, 2.5% Ammonium Hydroxide, pH 10). Samples were lyophilised until near to dryness. Peptide solution was resuspended in 50 ul 5% FA and transfer into C18 stage tips (2 x plugs, wet with 20ul 100% IPA, 60% ACN, 5% FA, re-equilibrated using 5% FA prior to use). Stage-tips were washed with 2 x 50ul 5% FA and eluted using 50ul 60% ACN, 5% FA. Peptides were lyophilised to dryness and stored at -80°C. Peptides were reconstituted in 2% ACN/1% FA just before running on instrument with 7ul MS loading buffer.  Mass Spectrometry Peptides were resuspended in 2% ACN/1% FA and injected and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a M-class UHPLC system (Waters) using a 250mm × 75um column (1.6um C18, packed emitter tip; Ion Opticks) with a linear 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% FA in MQ) to 35% solvent B (0.1% Formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). The nano-UPLC was coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive Orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electro spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and column oven at 40C (Sonation). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data-dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.1 build 1502 and Xcalibur 3.0. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10000 ions and an isolation width of 3 m/z and fragmented using HCD with NCE of 27. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 150ms for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometer files were analysed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.3). The database search was performed using the Uniprot Mus musculus database plus common contaminants with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to three missed cleavages. Missing peptide expressions were imputed using a method based on low-rank decomposition. The imputed data was corrected for technical variabilities inherent to proteomics experiments, by the Surrogate Variable Analysis (SVA) implemented in R/Bioconductor package limma37. Tests for Differential Peptide Expression (DPE) and Differential Peptide Usage (DPU) were done using Linear Models with Empirical Bayes moderated t-statistics using limma. The primary comparison performed in these analyses was SFPQ-ABL1-expressing cells to BCR-ABL1-expressing cells, and MSCV- and SFPQ-ABL1+SH2/SH3 mutant-expressing Ba/F3 cells were used as additional controls.   For peptides of interest, modified peptide sequences were aligned to Mus musculus protein sequences using the “search sequence” function of PhosphoSitePlus v6.5.938. Evidence of phosphorylation regulation annotated in PhosphoSitePlus were recorded for individual phosphorylation events.  Fragment ion intensities were quantified by MaxQuant in DDA mode. Fragment ion intensities in each sample were summarised at modified peptide level by taking median of values in that sample. Peptides with less than 4 observed values were discarded. Peptide intensities were log2-transformed and quantile normalised. Missing peptide intensities were imputed by fitting a rank 2 approximation model to the log-intensity data using msImpute39. Unwanted variations were estimated from imputed data using wsva() function in limma37, and up to five surrogate variables were removed (regressed out) from the data. A linear model was fitted to each modified peptide, and statistical significance for differential changes in fold-change (differential expression) between SFPQ-ABL1 and BCR-ABL1 was determined by Empirical Bayes moderated t-statistic and 5% False Discovery Rate using limma40. For Gene set enrichment analysis, peptide-level p-values were converted to protein-level p-values using Sime’s test. The logFC of each protein was determined as the logFC of the peptide with the most significant p-value.  Enriched KEGG pathways were determined using protein-level statistics and kegga() function in limma. The differentially used peptides (peptides differentially expressed relative to other peptides of the same protein) were identified using diffSplice() and t-test mode of topSplice() functions in limma.

### Publication Abstract
Philadelphia-like (Ph-like) acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a high-risk subtype of B-cell ALL characterized by a gene expression profile resembling Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL (Ph+ ALL) in the absence of BCR-ABL1. Tyrosine kinase-activating fusions, some involving ABL1, are recurrent drivers of Ph-like ALL and are targetable with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs). We identified a rare instance of SFPQ-ABL1 in a child with Ph-like ALL. SFPQ-ABL1 expressed in cytokine-dependent cell lines was sufficient to transform cells and these cells were sensitive to ABL1-targeting TKIs. In contrast to BCR-ABL1, SFPQ-ABL1 localized to the nuclear compartment and was a weaker driver of cellular proliferation. Phosphoproteomics analysis showed upregulation of cell cycle, DNA replication, and spliceosome pathways, and downregulation of signal transduction pathways, including ErbB, NF-&#x3ba;B, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and MAPK signaling in SFPQ-ABL1-expressing cells compared with BCR-ABL1-expressing cells. SFPQ-ABL1 expression did not activate phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase/protein kinase B (PI3K/AKT) signaling and was associated with phosphorylation of G2/M cell cycle proteins. SFPQ-ABL1 was sensitive to navitoclax and S-63845 and promotes cell survival by maintaining expression of Mcl-1 and Bcl-xL. SFPQ-ABL1 has functionally distinct mechanisms by which it drives ALL, including subcellular localization, proliferative capacity, and activation of cellular pathways. These findings highlight the role that fusion partners have in mediating the function of ABL1 fusions.

### Keywords
Bcr, Aml, Sfpq, Abl1, Leukaemia

### Affiliations
Laboratory Head Children's Cancer Institute Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW Australia PO Box 81 Randwick 2031 Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Paul Ekert
Laboratory Head Children's Cancer Institute Lowy Cancer Research Centre, UNSW Australia PO Box 81 Randwick 2031 Australia


