### Accession
PXD020130

### Title
LC-MS/MS of different developmental stages of human pancreas

### Description
Mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics was used to delineate proteome-wide and extracellular matrix (ECM) alterations at four age groups in human pancreas: fetal (18-20 weeks gestation), juvenile (5-16 years old), young adults (21-29 years old) and older adults (50-61 years old).

### Sample Protocol
Slightly modified SCAD method was used to prepare all pancreas samples and different samples were labeled using our custom developed 12-plex N,N-dimethyl leucine (DiLeu) isobaric tags. Samples were cleaned using SCX spintips and subjected to high pH fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Protein identifications and quantifications were performed using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific). Raw files were searched against the Uniprot H. sapiens reviewed database (September 2018) using Sequest HT algorithm. Quantitation was performed in Proteome Discoverer with a reporter ion integration tolerance of 10 ppm for the most confident centroid. Statistical tests were conducted using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7).

### Publication Abstract
The extracellular matrix (ECM) is unique to each tissue and capable of guiding cell differentiation, migration, morphology, and function. The ECM proteome of different developmental stages has not been systematically studied in the human pancreas. In this study, we apply mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics strategies using N,N-dimethyl leucine isobaric tags to delineate proteome-wide and ECM-specific alterations in four age groups: fetal (18-20 weeks gestation), juvenile (5-16 years old), young adults (21-29 years old) and older adults (50-61 years old). We identify 3,523 proteins including 185 ECM proteins and quantify 117 of them. We detect previously unknown proteome and matrisome features during pancreas development and maturation. We also visualize specific ECM proteins of interest using immunofluorescent staining and investigate changes in ECM localization within islet or acinar compartments. This comprehensive proteomics analysis contributes to an improved understanding of the critical roles that ECM plays throughout human pancreas development and maturation.

### Keywords
Human, Developmental stages, Lc-ms/ms, Matrisome, Pancreas

### Affiliations
School of pharmacy and department of chemistry, University of Wisconsin Madison
University of Wisconsin Madison

### Submitter
Zihui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of pharmacy and department of chemistry, University of Wisconsin Madison


