### Accession
PXD004898

### Title
Cross-linking of mouse laminin 111

### Description
Laminin, a ~800 kD heterotrimeric protein, is a major functional component of the extracellular matrix, contributing to tissue development and maintenance. We used cross-linking and mass spectrometry to determine the order of subunits in the ~750 Å trimeric coiled-coil oligomerization domain of laminin and to achieve an estimate of the register of the three subunits along the length of the coiled coil.

### Sample Protocol
Murine laminin 111 was treated with isotopic mixtures (d12/d0) of the cross-linkers bis(sulfosuccinimidyl)suberate (BS3) or suberic acid 1,8-dihydrazide (SDH). Cross-linked samples, either extracted as bands from a gel or taken as is, were reduced and alkylated with iodoacetamide and then digested with trypsin or a combination of trypsin with chymotrypsin or GluC. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS (HSS T3 nano-column, quadrapole orbitrap - Q Exactive+).

### Data Protocol
Cross-links were searched using Rosetta Elucidator System and/or xQuest.

### Publication Abstract
Laminin, an &#x223c;800-kDa heterotrimeric protein, is a major functional component of the extracellular matrix, contributing to tissue development and maintenance. The unique architecture of laminin is not currently amenable to determination at high resolution, as its flexible and narrow segments complicate both crystallization and single-particle reconstruction by electron microscopy. Therefore, we used cross-linking and MS, evaluated using computational methods, to address key questions regarding laminin quaternary structure. This approach was particularly well suited to the &#x223c;750-&#xc5; coiled coil that mediates trimer assembly, and our results support revision of the subunit order typically presented in laminin schematics. Furthermore, information on the subunit register in the coiled coil and cross-links to downstream domains provide insights into the self-assembly required for interaction with other extracellular matrix and cell surface proteins.

### Keywords
Laminin, Cross linking, Extra cellular matrix

### Affiliations
aDepartment of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
Utrecht University

### Submitter
Gad Armony

### Lab Head
Dr Deborah Fass
aDepartment of Structural Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.


