### Accession
PXD005032

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of EGF stimulated MCF7 cells

### Description
Phosphoproteomic analysis of EGF stimulated MCF7 cells.  This dataset is the basis for the development of modeling of signaling networks.  A fundamental challenge in biology is to delineate the signaling pathways that govern cellular responses to genetic and environmental cues. Phosphoproteomics is an emerging technology that provides key data on activity levels of proteins under conditions of interest. However, the interpretation of these data is hampered by the lack of methods that can translate site-specific information into global maps of active proteins and signaling networks. To meet this challenge, we propose PHOTON, a method for integrating phosphorylation data with protein-protein interaction networks to identify active proteins and pathways and pinpoint functional phosphosites. We demonstrate the utility of PHOTON by applying it to interpret existing and novel phosphoproteomic datasets related to EGF and insulin responses. PHOTON substantially outperforms the widely-used cutoff approach, providing highly reproducible predictions that are more in line with current biological knowledge

### Sample Protocol
The in-house EGF data was generated by stimulating MCF7 cells for 10 min with EGF. MCF7 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA), where they were authenticated. Cell were routinely verified as having no mycoplasma contamination. For SILAC labeling cells were cultured in RPMI devoid of lysine and arginine and supplemented with light or heavy versions of these amino acids. After EGF stimulation cells were lysed with SDS-based buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT in Tris-HCl pH 7.5). Proteins were digested using the FASP protocol. Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed with titanium dioxide. Phosphopeptides were analyzed on the LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer, with higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were analyzed by MaxQuant, and included phospho(STY) sites as variable modifications. All protein identifiers were mapped to Entrez Gene IDs with duplications removed. Experiments were performed using two biological replicates. Replicate measurements were averaged and transformed into a z-scored log2 fold-change. In the cases that the phosphorylation site was identified only in a single replicate the site was excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Egf, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Tel Aviv University

### Submitter
Tamar Geiger

### Lab Head
Dr Tamar Geiger
Tel Aviv University


