### Accession
PXD036093

### Title
Proteomics Reveals the Potential Mechanism of Tanshinone IIA Promoting the Ex Vivo Expansion of Human Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

### Description
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (BMSCs) is a promising cell type for tissue engineering, however, the application of BMSCs are largely hampered for the limited number harvested from bone marrow cells. The methods or strategies that focused on promoting the capacity of BMSCs expansion ex vivo become more and more important. Tanshinone IIA (Tan IIA), the main active components of Danshen, has been found to promote BMSCs proliferation, but the underlying mechanism is still unclear. This present work employed biological techniques combined with quantitative proteome analysis to explore the effect and underlying mechanism of Tan IIA on the ex vivo expansion capacity of BMSCs from human. The results showed that a total of 84 differentially expressed proteins were annotated and among them 51 upregulated proteins and 33 downregulated proteins were identified. Besides, Tan IIA could promote hBMSCs proliferation by regulating the progression of S phase via increasing the release of fibroblast growth factor 2 (FGF2), FGF-mediated PI3K/AKT signaling pathways may play an important role in Tan IIA’s effect on hBMSCs expansion. The results of this study may provide further evidence about the potential of Tan IIA to be used for the research of hBMSCs therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics Sample Preparation For establishing the proteomics model for studying the proliferative effects of Tan IIA, hBMSCs were cultured in 60-mm dishes (triplicate of each model ) and treated with Tan IIA (1 μM, experimental samples) or DMEM/F12 (control samples) for 24 hours. Then, collecting cells for quantitative proteomic analysis at 48 hpi as previously described (Chen et al., 2021; Xu et al., 2022). Briefly, samples were removed from the -80 ℃ refrigerator and 4×volume cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor) was added into each group. Then the lysates were sonicated on ice and centrifuged at 4 ◦C, 12,000g for 10 min to remove the cellular debris. After that, the resulting supernatant was collected to quantify the protein concentration by BCA protein assay kit (Beyotime, China).  Trypsin Digestion, and Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) Labeling For tryptic digestion, equal amounts of protein samples were taken and lysis solution was added to adjust the volume to uniformity. Then, 20% Trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was added, vortexed, mixed and precipitated at 4 ◦C for 2 hours. Next, the samples were centrifuged at 4500 g for 5 min to discarded the supernatant, and the precipitate was washed three times with pre-cooled acetone (Hannuo Chemical Technology, China). After drying, 200 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was added and the precipitate was ultrasonically broke up. Subsequently, trypsin (Promega, USA) at a ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, m/m) was added to digest overnight. Afterwards, Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and reduced at 37 ◦C for 1 hour. Finally, iodoacetamide (IAM, Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) was added to a final concentration of 11 mM and incubated at room temperature for 45 min in the dark. After digestion, the peptides were desalted with a Strata X SPE (Phenomenex, USA) column and then vacuum freeze-dried. Subsequently, the prepared peptides were dissolved in 0.5 M TEAB and labeled with a TMT kit (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Briefly, the labeling reagent was thawed and reconstituted in acetonitrile (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA), then mixed with the peptides and incubated at room temperature for 2 hours. After that the labeled peptides were mixed, and desalted with a Strata X SPE column again, and finally the mixtures were dried through vacuum freeze.  HPLC Fractionation The TMT-labeled peptides were fractionated using high pH reverse-phase HPLC on a Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm ID, 250 mm length). In brief, the peptides were fractionated over 64 min with a gradient of 8%−32% acetonitrile, PH 9.0, and were separated into 54 fractions. Then combined peptides into 6 fractions and dried through vacuum freeze for the following operation.  Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS) Analysis The combined peptides were dissolved with liquid chromatography mobile phase A and then separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid phase system. The mobile phase A was an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, and the mobile phase B contained 0.1% formic acid (Fluka, USA) and 90% acetonitrile. The liquid phase gradient was set as follows: 0-4 min, 7%~11% B; 4-54 min, 11%~32% B; 54-57 min, 32%~80% B; 57-60 min, 80% B, and the flow rate was maintained at 500.00 nL/min. Following separated, the peptides were injected into a NSI ion source for ionization, and then entered into the Orbitrap Exploris™ 480 MS for analysis. The ion source voltage was set at 2.3 kV and the FAIMS Compensation Voltage (CV) was set at -45 V. All the peptide parent ions and their secondary fragments were detected and analysed by a high resolution Orbitrap. The primary MS scan range was set to 400-1200 m/z and the scan resolution was set at 60,000; the secondary scan range has a fixed starting point of 110 m/z and the scan resolution was set at 15,000. A date-dependent procedure (DDA) was used as date acquisition model. In addition, the Automatic Gain Control (AGC) was set at 100%, the signal threshold was set at 5E4 ions/s and the maximum injection time was set at 50 ms. The dynamic exclusion time of the tandem MS scans was set to 30 s to avoid repeated scans of the parent ions.

### Data Protocol
Database Search The raw date of secondary MS were retrieved using tool Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.4.1.15). Search parameter settings as follows: the database was Homo_sapiens_9606_SP_20201214.fasta, containing 20,395 sequences, adding the inverse library to calculate the false discovery rate (FDR) due to random matching and adding the standard contamination library to the database to eliminate the influence of contaminated proteins in the identification results; the digestion mode was set to Trypsin (Full); the number of missed cut sites was set to 2; the minimum length of the peptide was set to 6 amino acid residues; the maximum number of peptide modifications was set to 3; the quality error tolerance of primary parent ion was set to 10 ppm and the quality error tolerance of secondary fragment ion was set to 0.02 Da. Moreover, Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT6plex (peptide N-Terminus) and TMT6plex (K) were set as fixed modification; Acetyl (protein N-Terminus) and Oxidation (M) were set as variable modification. The quantitation method was set to TMT-6plex, the FDR for identification of proteins, peptides and PSM were all set to 1%, and the identified protein must contain at least one unique peptide.  Bioinformatics Analysis of Proteomics Data The DEPs were determined based on the quantification Fold Change (FC)＞1.2 and the P value＜0.05 (Tan IIA-treated group vs control group) as previously described 34-37. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/); Clusters of Orthologous Groups of proteins (COG) datebase (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/COG/) provided COG annotation data; Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) was used to annotate protein pathway; WOLF PSORT (http://www.genscript.com/psort/wolf_psort.html), a subcellular localization predication soft was carried out to predict subcellular localization; and the STRING database (http://string-db.org, version 11.0) was searched against for protein-protein interactions (PPI) network analysis. For GO enrichment analysis, for each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The GO with a corrected p-value < 0.05 is considered significant; for KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, KEGG database was used to identify enriched pathways by a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a corrected p-value < 0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells; tanshinone iia; proteomics; expansion; fibroblast growth factor 2; autocrine.

### Affiliations
The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University; Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province; The Medical Frontier Innovation Research Center, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; The Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Institute of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province, China.
The First Clinical Medical College of Lanzhou University

### Submitter
Pei Yuan

### Lab Head
Dr Xun Li
The First Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University; Key Laboratory of Biotherapy and Regenerative Medicine of Gansu Province; The Medical Frontier Innovation Research Center, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; The Department of General Surgery, The First Hospital of Lanzhou University; Hepatopancreatobiliary Surgery Institute of Gansu Province, Lanzhou 730000, Gansu Province, China.


