### Accession
PXD037291

### Title
Quantitative proteome and phosphoproteome datasets of DNA replication and mitosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Description
Cell division is a highly regulated process that secures the generation of healthy progeny in all organisms, from yeast to human. Dysregulation of this process can lead to uncontrolled cell proliferation and genomic instability, both which are hallmarks of cancer. Cell cycle progression is dictated by a complex network of kinases and phosphatases. These enzymes act on their substrates in a highly specific temporal manner ensuring that the process of cell division is unidirectional and irreversible. Key events of the cell cycle, such as duplication of genetic material and its redistribution to daughter cells, occur in S-phase and mitosis, respectively. Deciphering the dynamics of phosphorylation/dephosphorylation events during these cell cycle phases is important. Here we showcase a quantitative proteomic and phosphoproteomic mass spectrometry dataset that profiles both early and late phosphorylation events and associated proteome alterations that occur during S-phase and mitotic arrest in the model organism S. cerevisiae. This dataset is of broad interest as the molecular mechanisms governing cell cycle progression are conserved throughout evolution.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared following the SL-TMT protocol. Yeast pellets were resuspended in lysis buffer (8M urea in 200mM EPPS, pH 8.5 supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors) and lysed mechanically. A standard BCA assay was performed to determine protein concentration of each sample. Reduction of lysates (5 mM TCEP for 15 min.) was followed by alkylation (10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min.) and quenching (5 mM DTT for 15 min.).  A total of 2 mg of protein from each sample was chloroform-methanol precipitated. The precipitated proteins were resuspended in 200 mM EPPS pH 8.5, digested first by Lys-C overnight at room temperature and later by trypsin (6 h at 37°C). Both enzymes were used at a 1:100 enzyme-to-protein ratio.   To enrich phosphopeptides, each sample was desalted over a 200 mg SepPak column and phosphopeptides were enriched with the Pierce High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide enrichment kit following manufacturer’s instructions. The washes and the unbound fraction of this enrichment were desalted, and 50 mg of each sample was used for whole proteome level analysis.   The samples were then labeled with tandem mass tag (TMTpro) reagents as follows: early S-phase triplicates: 126, 127n,127c; late S phase triplicates:128n,128c,129n; mitosis triplicates:129c,130n,130c. Acetonitrile was added to a final volume of 30% prior to adding the TMTpro labeling reagent. For protein level analysis, ~50 µg of peptides were labeled with 100 µg of TMT. For phosphopeptide analysis, we estimated the phosphopeptide enrichment to be ~1.5:100 and so ~30 µg of peptides were labeled with 60 µg of TMT. Labeling occurred at room temperature for 1h. ~2 µg of peptide from each sample was pooled, desalted and analyzed by mass spectrometry to check labeling efficiency.

### Data Protocol
Once the spectra were converted to mzXML, database searching could be performed. For this database, we included all entries from the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; August 2021) which was concatenated with a version of the database in which the order of the amino acid residues of each protein was reversed. Our forward database has 6077 reviewed yeast entries and 115 common contaminants. Database searches used a 50-ppm precursor ion tolerance and a product ion tolerance of 0.03 Da. We have traditionally used the 50ppm mass tolerance for our Sequest, and now Comet, database searches. These wide mass tolerance windows were chosen to maximize sensitivity in conjunction with Comet searches and linear discriminant analysis. For static modifications, lysine residues and peptide N-termini were modified with +304.207 Da due to the TMTpro labels. Meanwhile, all cysteine residues were modified with iodoacetamide (carbamidomethylation) that results in a +57.021 Da increase in mass. Also, methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da) was set as a variable modification. Likewise, deamidation (+0.984 Da) at glutamine and asparagine residues and phosphorylation (+79.966 Da) at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were also set as variable modifications for phosphopeptide enrichment.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Yeast, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Dna replication, Tmt, Isobaric tagging

### Affiliations
Harvard Medical School Dept. of Cell Biology Boston, MA USA
Harvard Medical School

### Submitter
Joao Paulo

### Lab Head
Dr Joao A. Paulo
Harvard Medical School Dept. of Cell Biology Boston, MA USA


