### Accession
PXD038388

### Title
Waldenström Macroglobulinemia immune microenvironment

### Description
In this study, we evaluated clonal Waldenström macroglobulinemia cells with mapping of maturation stages of B cell lymphomagenesis concurrently with the innate and adaptive immune tumor microenvironment in active WM patients (newly diagnosed (NDWM, n = 19) and relapsed or relapsed/refractory (RRWM, n = 42) compared to 10 healthy donors (HD) by mass cytometry.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed in cell staining media (CSM; PBS with 0.5% BSA and 0.02% NaN3) and collected by centrifugation at 600 x g for 6 min at RT. Before staining with cell surface marker antibody cocktails of respective panel, cells were incubated with 5 l of Fc-receptor blocking solution for 10 minutes at RT to block non-specific binding, and then labeled with cell surface antibody cocktail to a final volume of 100 l by CSM for 30 min at RT. After staining, cells were washed twice in CSM and centrifuged at 600 x g for 6 min at RT. For intracellular staining, samples were permeabilized with 1 mL of 4 °C cold methanol and stored at -80 °C or with 1 mL of 1 x FOXP3 Perm buffer working solution (diluted in PBS from 10 x FOXP3 Perm buffer) for 30 min at RT. Then, cells were washed twice in CSM to remove the remaining permeabilization solution, and stained with intracellular antibody cocktails according to the appropriate panel and 1 L of 191/193 Iridium (Ir) DNA intercalator in a final volume of 100 l by CSM for 1 hour at RT. Cells were then washed twice in CSM and collected by centrifugation at 600 x g for 6 min at RT. Immediately prior to acquisition, cells were washed with PBS alone and then with ddH2O. Cells were diluted to 0.5 x 106 cells/ml in ddH2O containing 10% of EQ Four Element Calibration Beads. Samples were acquired on a CyTOF 2 mass cytometer (Fluidigm, San Francisco, CA) at an even rate of 300-500 events per second with instrument-calibrated dual-count detection.

### Data Protocol
Individual .fcs files collected from each set of samples were concatenated using the .fcs concatenation tool from Cytobank, and data were normalized using the Normalizer tool with EQ Four Element Calibration Beads to correct for signal fluctuations within each experiment and across all batch analyses. Signal intensities for each channel were arcsinh transformed with a cofactor of 5 (x_transf =asinh(x/5)). All gating strategies and extraction of median expression level were defined using Cytobank software. First, the populations of interest were manually gated based on the visualization of biaxial marker expression by hierarchy of manual gating. Using biaxial 191Ir (DNA1) and 193Ir (DNA2) marker expression cells (to avoid debris) were identified followed by gating on singlets (to remove doublets). Similarly, in following gating strategy calibration beads were removed from the analysis based on gate “beads out’’ (gated out). Then, gate on viable cells based on negative expression of cleaved caspase-3 and cleaved PARP, which were used as cell surface marker labeling, was defined. The viable cell gate was manually defined as last gate in the TME panel, whereas in B panel final manual gate (CD3&CD14&CD15 out) was defined by removing CD3+/CD14+/CD15+ population. Furthermore, viable (in TME panel) and CD3&CD14&CD15 out (in B panel) gates were used for further high-dimensional clustering analyses, such as spanning-tree progression analysis of density-normalized events (SPADE).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mass cytometry, B cell lymphomagenesis, Tumor microenvironment, Innate and adaptive immunity, Waldenström macroglobulinemia

### Affiliations
Department of Tumor Immunology, Cancer Research Institute, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia

### Submitter
Jana Jakubikova

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Jana Jakubikova
Department of Tumor Immunology, Cancer Research Institute, Biomedical Research Center, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia


