### Accession
PXD010932

### Title
To invesigate the role of autophagy in Arabidopsis shoot cellular protein turnover and proteostasis, part 2

### Description
Protein turnover analysis using partial 15N labelling and protein abundance analysis using 15N spike-in were coupled to investiage the role of autophagy in protein degradation and proteostasis. Our findings show that dysfuncional autophagy due to loss-of-function autophagy components ATG5 and 11 lead to accumulation of protein targets with/without starvation stress. Further protein turnover analysis uncover a subgroup of proteins with retarded degradation. New selective autophagy protein targets involving glycolytic proteins were uncovered by this strategy. Furthermore, we found plasma membrane and cytoskeleton proteins show a general reduction, supporting the cross-interaction between autopahgy and vesicle trafficking pathway. Metabolomics changes in autophagy mutants due to a changed proteostasis was further investigated.

### Sample Protocol
Total proteins (200 µg) were extracted from wild type or autophagy mutants hydroponically grown Arabidopsis root/shoot that are 15N labelled for three days. Purified total proteins were in-solution trypsin digested and fractionated into 6 fractions by high pH HPLC. Niteen samples were fractioned into 114 and in-gel digested. Tryptic peptides were run in Agilent QTOF6550.

### Data Protocol
114 Agilent QTOF6550 raw (.d) files were first transferred to .mzml by MSconvert and then to .mgf by TPP. The .mgf files were searched by Mascot and output files exported as .dat files. 114 .mz files and 114 .dat files are provided.

### Publication Abstract
Identification of autophagic protein cargo in plants in autophagy-related genes (ATG) mutants is complicated by changes in protein synthesis and protein degradation. To detect autophagic cargo, we measured protein degradation rate in shoots and roots of Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) atg5 and atg11 mutants. These data show that less than a quarter of proteins changing in abundance are probable cargo and revealed roles of ATG11 and ATG5 in degradation of specific glycolytic enzymes and of other cytosol, chloroplast, and ER-resident proteins, and a specialized role for ATG11 in degradation of proteins from mitochondria and chloroplasts. Protein localization in transformed protoplasts and degradation assays in the presence of inhibitors confirm a role for autophagy in degrading glycolytic enzymes. Autophagy induction by phosphate (Pi) limitation changed metabolic profiles and the protein synthesis and degradation rates of atg5 and atg11 plants. A general decrease in the abundance of amino acids and increase in secondary metabolites in autophagy mutants was consistent with altered catabolism and changes in energy conversion caused by reduced degradation rate of specific proteins. Combining measures of changes in protein abundance and degradation rates, we also identify ATG11 and ATG5-associated protein cargo of low Pi-induced autophagy in chloroplasts and ER-resident proteins involved in secondary metabolism.

### Keywords
15n labelling, Arabidopsis, Autophagy, Protein turnover

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia

### Submitter
Lei Li

### Lab Head
Dr Harvey Millar
ARC Centre of Excellence in Plant Energy Biology, M316, 35 Stirling Hwy, 6009, WA, Australia Faculty of Science, The University of Western Australia


