### Accession
PXD024929

### Title
SILAC APMS anlysis of TSSC4 interactome

### Description
U5 snRNP is a complex particle essential for RNA splicing. U5 snRNPs undergo an intricate biogenesis that ensures that only a fully mature particle assembles into a splicing competent U4/U6•U5 tri-snRNP and enters the splicing reaction. During splicing, U5 snRNP is substantially rearranged and leaves as a U5/PRPF19 post-splicing particle, which requires re-generation before a next round of splicing. Here, we show that a previously uncharacterized protein TSSC4 is a new component of U5 snRNP that promotes tri-snRNP formation. We provide evidence that TSSC4 associates with U5 snRNP chaperones, U5 snRNP and the U5/PRPF19 particle.  Specifically, TSSC4 interacts with U5-specific proteins PRPF8, EFTUD2 and SNRNP200. We also identified TSSC4 domains critical for the interaction with U5 snRNP and the PRPF19 complex, as well as for TSSC4 function in tri-snRNP assembly. TSSC4 emerges as a specific chaperone that acts in U5 snRNP de novo biogenesis as well as post-splicing recycling.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, HeLa Flp-In clones expressing GFP and FLAG-tagged TSSC4 were grown for 15 days in isotopically labeled media (CIL/Eurisotop), to ensure complete incorporation of semi-heavy label L-Lysine-2HCl (2H4, 96–98%)/L-Arginine-HCl (13C6, 99%) (percentages represent the isotopic purity of the labeled amino acids). Parental HeLa cells that did not express the tagged protein were used in control condition and not labelled. For each condition, 100.106 cells were trypsinized and cryogrinded before being resuspended in the lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES, pH 7.9, 100 mM KCl, 2mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 0.5% TritonX100, protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete, Roche)). Extracts were then incubated 20 min at 4°C, clarified by centrifugation for 10 min at 20,000 x g and finally pre-cleared by incubation with Protein G Sepharose beads (GE healthcare) for 1 h at 4°C. For SILAC IP done with GFP tag, extracts were incubated with 50 µL of GFP-Trap beads (Chromotek) while for SILAC IP with FLAG tag, agarose beads coated with M2 antibodies were used (Sigma). After incubating 1.5 h at 4°C, beads were washed 5 times with lysis buffer, and the two isotopic conditions (light for control IP and medium for IP with tagged TSSC4) were finally pooled. Bound proteins were eluted by adding 1% SDS to the beads and boiling for 10 min. Proteomic analysis was performed as previously described (Maurizy et al., 2018).  Reduction and alkylation were performed on the eluate with DTT (BDH 443553B, 10 mM) for 2 min at 95 °C followed by iodoacetamide treatment (Sigma I1149, 50 mM) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were separated by SDS/PAGE and in gel-digested with trypsin in 20 mM NH4HCO3 (Trypsin Gold, Promega V5280). Ten slices were cut, and extracted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid/2% acetonitrile solution before being analyzed by mass spectrometry. Peptides were analyzed by nano-flow liquid chromatography coupled to Fourier transform tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-FT-MS/MS) using a LTQ Velos Pro Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalting and pre-concentration of samples were performed on-line on a Pepmap precolumn (0.3 mm 10 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in buffer A (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). A gradient consisting of 2–40% buffer B (B=99.9% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid; 3–33 min) and 40–80% B (33–34 min) was used to separate peptides at 300 nL/min from a Pepmap capillary reversed-phase column (0.075 mm × 150 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Mass spectra were acquired using a top-20 collision-induced dissociation (CID) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. The Orbitrap was programmed to perform a FT 400–1,400 Th mass scan (60,000 resolution) with the top 20 ions in intensity selected for collision-induced dissociation (CID) datadependent acquisition (DDA) MS/MS in the LTQ. FT spectra were internally calibrated using a single lock mass (445.1200 Th). Target ion numbers were 500,000 for FT full scan on the Orbitrap and 10,000 MSn on the LTQ. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software v2.2.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantitation were performed using the program MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8;http://www. maxquant.org/). Few parameters were not default: database: human reference proteome set (canonical isoforms downloaded from Expasy on May 29th 2017); enzyme specificity trypsin/P; variable modifications: methionine oxidation and protein N-Acetylation; Fixed modifications: Cysteine carbamidomethylation; MS/ MS tolerance: 0.5 Da; False Discovery Rate (FDR): 1%. In addition to the FDR, proteins were considered to be identified if they had at least two peptides including one unique/Razor peptide and they were considered quantified if they had at least one quantified SILAC pairs. Proteins labeled as REV (non-real proteins from the reverse database) and CONT (contaminants) were automatically discarded, as well as proteins that did not show any SILAC M/L, H/L and H/M ratio. B Significance calculation were done with the software Perseus v1.4.2, as previously described 57 to highlight statistically significant protein ratios (pvalue < 0.05)

### Publication Abstract
U5 snRNP is a complex particle essential for RNA splicing. U5 snRNPs undergo intricate biogenesis that ensures that only a fully mature particle assembles into a splicing competent U4/U6&#x2022;U5 tri-snRNP and enters the splicing reaction. During splicing, U5 snRNP is substantially rearranged and leaves as a U5/PRPF19 post-splicing particle, which requires re-generation before the next round of splicing. Here, we show that a previously uncharacterized protein TSSC4 is a component of U5 snRNP that promotes tri-snRNP formation. We provide evidence that TSSC4 associates with U5 snRNP chaperones, U5 snRNP and the U5/PRPF19 particle. Specifically, TSSC4 interacts with U5-specific proteins PRPF8, EFTUD2 and SNRNP200. We also identified TSSC4 domains critical for the interaction with U5 snRNP and the PRPF19 complex, as well as for TSSC4 function in tri-snRNP assembly. TSSC4 emerges as a specific chaperone that acts in U5 snRNP de novo biogenesis as well as post-splicing recycling.

### Keywords
Apms; silac; immunoprecipitation

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences
IGF, CNRS, INSERM, University of Montpellier, Montpellier, France

### Submitter
Franck Vandermoere

### Lab Head
Dr David Stanek
Institute of Molecular Genetics of the Czech Academy of Sciences


