### Accession
PXD027847

### Title
Lentil and fava bean with contrasting germination kinetics: a focus on digestion of proteins and bioactivity of resistant peptides

### Description
Germination offers advantages to improve legume protein digestibility as it disintegrates seed structure and hydrolyzes proteins and anti-nutrients. Seed permeability (related to polyphenol content of seed coats) is an important factor affecting the duration of seed germination and its impact in protein digestibility and bioactivity. The objective was to compare the effect of seed germination on protease activity, structure and proteolysis of four selected legumes with contrasting seed coat polyphenol profiles (gray zero tannin [GZL], beluga [BL] and dehulled red [DL] lentils; and zero tannin/low vicine-convicine fava bean [ZF]). Protein hydrolysis was characterized during germination and digestion with respect to proteins, peptides and free amino acids (FAA). In vitro antihypertensive and antioxidant activities of digests were investigated, and peptidomic characterization (HPLC-MS/MS) and identification of bioactive fragments in intestinal digests were performed. Regardless of seed type, germination increased protease activity and reduced levels of phytic acid, trypsin inhibitors and tannins (only in BL). Significant proteolysis of the 7S and 11S globulins and concomitant increase peptides and FAA was observed in all sprouted legumes. Digestion kinetics in sprouts revealed a faster generation of FAA and peptides than in dry seeds, with changes more evident for DL associated to faster imbibition, germination and sprout growth. In contrast, BL sprouts showed the lowest protein digestibility, likely due to lower protease activity levels, seed structure disintegration and higher anti-nutrient levels in comparison to GZL, DL and ZF. Moreover, digestion of sprouts resulted in a higher number of resistant peptides in DL and ZF that matched with previously reported bioactive sequences, suggesting a promising health potential of legume sprouts that was confirmed in vitro. Results suggested that the germination process improved protein digestibility and health promoting potential of lentil and fava bean proteins although these changes were more evident in DL due to its rapid imbibition, faster germination and sprout development. This study will provide important information for either plant breeders to develop legume varieties with permeable seed coats or food producers that could use dehulled seeds for efficient production of sprouts as sustainable food sources of plant proteins with improved nutritional and healthy properties.

### Sample Protocol
For peptide identification, intestinal digests of seeds were analyzed by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (UPLC-MS/MS) using a nano Easy-nLC 1000 (Proxeon), connected to an LTQ–Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (ThermoScientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization source. Lyophilized samples were suspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid until reaching a concentration of 0.5 mg/mL. Intestinal digests were purified using a C18 ZipTip (Millipore) reversed phase columns and eluted using 2% acetonitrile in water containing 0.1% formic acid. Sample aliquots of 4 µL were injected in the nLC-MS/MS equipment and desalted in Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 precolumn and loaded onto a 0.075 x 500 mm, 2 μm bead Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 column (ThermoFisher Scientific) for analytical separation. Peptides were eluted using a gradient of 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 99.9% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (solvent B) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectra corresponding to the complete scan (m/z 400-2000) were obtained with a resolution of 70,000 and the 15 most intense ions of each scan were selected for fragmentation by means of collision-induced dissociation in the ionic trap, with the collision energy normalized to 35%. Ions with single charge or no charge assignment were discarded. A dynamic exclusion was carried out with a duration of 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Lentil and fava bean databases were prepared by combining the NCBI (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) and Uniprot (https://www.uniprot.org) “Lens” and “Vicia faba” protein sequences. The peptide mass spectra were compared with protein database using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, ThermoScientific). Carbamidomethylation of cysteine and oxidation of methionine as  fixed and dynamic modifications, and proteases trypsin and chymotrypsin (allowing 2 "miscleavages") were selected in the search parameters. Tolerance of the selection of precursors and product ions was set at 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Identification of the peptides was validated by the Percolator algorithm using a q-value ≤ 0.01 (Käll et al., 2007). Each detected peptide was associated with its annotated sequence, intensity, parent protein accessions, and positions in the parent protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteins, Lentil, Peptidome; bioactivity, Fava bean, Digestion, Seed imbibition; germination

### Affiliations
1Department of Food Characterization, Quality and Safety, Institute of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN-CSIC), Madrid, Spain
Institute of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN-CSIC)

### Submitter
Cristina Martínez Villaluenga

### Lab Head
Dr Cristina Martínez-Villaluega
1Department of Food Characterization, Quality and Safety, Institute of Food Science, Technology and Nutrition (ICTAN-CSIC), Madrid, Spain


