### Accession
PXD019886

### Title
METTL21C methylates Alanine tRNA synthetase at lysine 943 in muscle tissue

### Description
Protein lysine methylation is a common post-translational modification (PTM) detected throughout the human proteome that plays important roles in diverse biological processes. In the human genome, there are greater than one hundred known and candidate protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs), many with important links to human disease. METTL21C (methyltransferase-like protein 21C) is a PKMT implicated in muscle biology and reported to methylate VCP (valosin-containing protein/p97) and HSPA8 (heat shock 70kDa protein 8). However, a clear in vitro methyltransferase activity for METTL21C is yet to be demonstrated. Thus, whether METTL21C is indeed an active enzyme that directly methylates substrate/s is unclear. Here, we use an unbiased biochemical-based screening assay coupled to mass spectrometry to identify Alanine-tRNA-Synthetase 1 (AARS1) as a direct substrate of METTL21C. METTL21C catalyzes mono-, di- and tri-methylation of lysine 943 of AARS1 (AARS1-K943me) in vitro and in vivo. In vitro methylation of AARS1 by METTL21C is independent of ATP or tRNA molecules. In contrast to AARS1, and in conflict with previous reports, we do not detect METTL21C methylation activity on VCP and HSPA8. Depletion of METTL21C in METTL21C-expressing cells leads to depletion of AARS1-K943 methylation. Finally, METTL2C is almost exclusively expressed in muscle tissue, and accordingly we detect the METTL21C-catalyzed methylation event of AARS1 in mouse skeletal muscle tissue. Together, our work identifies AARS1 as a bona fide substrate of METTL21C and suggests a role for the METTL21C-AARS1 axis in the regulation of protein synthesis in muscle tissue. In addition, our study describes a straightforward protocol for elucidating physiologic substrates of little characterized or uncharacterized PKMTs

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant or immunoprecipitated proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and stained using InstantBlue Protein Stain (Expedeon). Bands were cut and destained in 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 50% ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3, 50mM) for 10min twice. Gel pieces were incubated in 50mM NH4HCO3 containing 10mM DTT at 60°C for 30min, followed by treatment with 25mM iodoacetamide in 50mM NH4HCO3 at room temperature for 45min, results in the covalent addition of a carbamidomethyl group to cystines (57.07Da). In-gel digestion was performed using 100ng/mL Glu-C in 50mM phosphate buffer (pH 7.8) at 37°C or 10ng/mL trypsin in 50mM NH4HCO3 at 37°C temperature for overnight (Promega). Two consecutive peptide extractions were processed with 5% formic acid, 49% water, and 50% ACN. The resulting peptides were dried by speedvac, desalted using C18 StageTips (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by online capillary nanoLC-MS/MS. Samples were separated on an in-house made 20cm reversed phase column (100µm inner diameter, packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3.0µm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)) equipped with a laser-pulled nanoelectrospray emitter tip. Peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 400nL/min using a two-step linear gradient including 2-25% buffer B in 70 min and 25-40% B in 20 min (buffer A: 0.2% formic acid and 5% DMSO in water; buffer B: 0.2% formic acid and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile) in a Dionex Ultimate 3000 LC-system (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were then analyzed using a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Data acquisition was executed in data dependent mode with full MS scans acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60000 and m/z scan range of 340-1600. The top 20 most abundant ions with intensity threshold above 500 counts and charge states 2 and above were selected for fragmentation using collision- induced dissociation (CID) with isolation window of 2 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35%, activation Q of 0.25 and activation time of 5ms. The CID fragments were analyzed in the ion trap with rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 30s. The AGC target was set to 1000000 and 5000 for full FTMS scans and ITMSn scans, respectively. The maximum injection time was set to 250ms and 100ms for full FTMS scans and ITMSn scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.1 platform, against a database combining Uniprot human (downloaded 2016-08-24) containing 21014 proteins and common contaminants or against AARS1 protein sequence. The precursor mass range was set to 350-10000 Da, the mass error tolerance was set to FTMS of 20ppm, and deisotoping tolerance of 7ppm, and the fragment mass error tolerance; ITMS MS/MS match tolerance of 0.5Da, and deisotoping tolerance of 0.15Da. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin or GLU-C with Max miss cleavage of 2. carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.021) was set as fixed modification, while oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-terminus (+42.011); Methyl (K deuterated +3), Di-methyl (K deuterated +3);Tri-methyl (K deuterated +3) were set as variable modifications. MaxQuant was used to filter peptides and proteins to estimation of false discovery rate (FDR); PSM FDR 0.01, protein FDR 0.01 which was calculated by MaxQuant (Ref). Abundance quantification was based on intensities. Selected ion chromatograms for peptides spanning were extracted using Xcalibur Qual Browser (Thermo).

### Publication Abstract
Protein-lysine methylation is a common posttranslational modification (PTM) throughout the human proteome that plays important roles in diverse biological processes. In humans, there are &gt;100 known and candidate protein lysine methyltransferases (PKMTs), many of which are linked to human diseases. Methyltransferase-like protein 21C (METTL21C) is a PKMT implicated in muscle biology that has been reported to methylate valosin-containing protein/p97 (VCP) and heat shock 70-kDa protein 8 (HSPA8). However, a clear <i>in vitro</i> methyltransferase activity for METTL21C remains yet to be demonstrated, and whether it is an active enzyme that directly methylates substrate(s) <i>in vivo</i> is unclear. Here, we used an unbiased biochemistry-based screening assay coupled to MS, which identified alanine tRNA synthetase 1 (AARS1) as a direct substrate of METTL21C. We found that METTL21C catalyzes methylation of Lys-943 of AARS1 (AARS1-K943me) both <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i><i>In vitro</i> METTL21C-mediated AARS1 methylation was independent of ATP or tRNA molecules. Unlike for AARS1, and in conflict with previous reports, we did not detect METTL21C methylation of VCP and HSPA8. AARS1-K943 methylation in HEK293T cells depends upon METTL21C levels. Finally, METTL2C was almost exclusively expressed in muscle tissue, and, accordingly, we detected METTL21C-catalyzed methylation of AARS1 in mouse skeletal muscle tissue. These results reveal that AARS1 is a <i>bona fide in vitro</i> substrate of METTL21C and suggest a role for the METTL21C-AARS1 axis in the regulation of protein synthesis in muscle tissue. Moreover, our study describes a straightforward protocol for elucidating the physiological substrates of poorly characterized or uncharacterized PKMTs.

### Keywords
Human, Aars1, Lc-ms/ms, Methylation

### Affiliations
Stanford
Biology department, Stanford, USA

### Submitter
Mohamad Zoabi

### Lab Head
Dr Or Gozani
Biology department, Stanford, USA


