### Accession
PXD029520

### Title
Transcriptional repression activity of androgen receptor targets cell plasticity in prostate cancer: kinetic analysis after DHT treatment

### Description
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling remains the key therapeutic target in the management of hormone-naïve advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). Recently, landmark molecular features have been reported for CRPC, including the expression of constitutively active AR variants that lack the ligand-binding domain. Besides their role in CRPC, AR variants lead to the expression of genes involved in tumor progression. However, little is known about the specificity of their mode of action compared with that of wild-type AR (AR-WT). We performed AR transcriptome analyses in an androgen-dependent PCa cell line as well as cross-analyses with publicly available RNA-seq dataset and established that transcriptional repression capacity that was marked for AR-WT was pathologically lost by AR variants. Functional enrichment analyses allowed us to associate AR-WT repressive function to a panel of genes involved in cell adhesion and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. So, we postulate that a less documented AR-WT normal function in prostate epithelial cells could be the repression of a panel of genes linked to cell plasticity, and that this repressive function could be pathologically abrogated by AR variants in PCA.

### Sample Protocol
Stably eGFP-AR-WT expressing LNCaP cells were seeded in complete medium, then starved during 48 hours in RPMI-1640 complete medium with charcoal-treated FBS before treatment with 10 nM DHT or vehicle. After 24 and 48 hours, cells were collected by centrifugation and washed 4 times in phosphate-buffered saline. Sample preparation and mass spectrometry (MS) were performed at the IGBMC proteomics platform (Strasbourg, France). Briefly, cell pellets containing about 2x106 cells were lysed in 1% SDS, 0.1 M Tris pH 8.5, 50 mM DTT and sonicated. Protein samples were then reduced, alkylated and double digested with Lys-C and trypsin at 37°C. Peptide mixtures were then desalted on C18 spin-column and dried on Speed-Vacuum before LC-MS/MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Scientific, San Jose California). Briefly, one microgram of tryptic peptides was loaded in triplicate on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with linear gradients of acetonitrile, 5% to 35%, 35% to 80%, 99%, and then 5% sequentially. Peptides were analyzed in TOP20 CID data-dependent MS method.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified by database searching using Sequest-HT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on Homo Sapiens database (Swissprot, reviewed, release 2020_04_06, 20286 entries). Oxidation and carbamidomethylation were set as variable and fixed modification respectively. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%, rank 1 and proteins were identified with a minimum of 2 unique peptides. The Label-Free Quantification was based on the XIC (Extracted Ion Chromatogram.

### Publication Abstract
Androgen receptor (AR) signaling remains the key therapeutic target in the management of hormone-na&#xef;ve-advanced prostate cancer (PCa) and castration-resistant PCa (CRPC). Recently, landmark molecular features have been reported for CRPC, including the expression of constitutively active AR variants that lack the ligand-binding domain. Besides their role in CRPC, AR variants lead to the expression of genes involved in tumor progression. However, little is known about the specificity of their mode of action compared with that of wild-type AR (AR-WT). We performed AR transcriptome analyses in an androgen-dependent PCa cell line as well as cross-analyses with publicly available RNA-seq datasets and established that transcriptional repression capacity that was marked for AR-WT was pathologically lost by AR variants. Functional enrichment analyses allowed us to associate AR-WT repressive function to a panel of genes involved in cell adhesion and epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition. So, we postulate that a less documented AR-WT normal function in prostate epithelial cells could be the repression of a panel of genes linked to cell plasticity and that this repressive function could be pathologically abrogated by AR variants in PCa.

### Keywords
Androgen receptor; ar-v7; cell plasticity; prostate cancer; emt; transcriptional repression

### Affiliations
CNRS
ICANS - FMRS - IGBMC - University de Strasbourg - France

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Jocelyn Céraline
ICANS - FMRS - IGBMC - University de Strasbourg - France


