### Accession
PXD000477

### Title
Mspire-Simulator: LC-MS shotgun proteomic simulator for creating realistic gold standard data - HEK cell lysate

### Description
The most important step in any quantitative proteomic pipeline is feature detection (aka peak picking). However, generating quality hand-annotated data sets to validate the algorithms, especially for lower abundance peaks, is nearly impossible. An alternative for creating gold standard data is to simulate it with features closely mimicking real data. We present Mspire-Simulator, a free, open source shotgun proteomic simulator that goes beyond previous simulation attempts by generating LC-MS features with realistic m/z and intensity variance along with other noise components. It also includes machine learned models for retention time and peak intensity prediction and a genetic algorithm to custom fit model parameters for experimental data sets. We show that these methods are applicable to data from three different mass spectrometers, including two fundamentally different types, and show visually and analytically that simulated peaks are nearly indistinguishable from actual data. Researchers can use simulated data to rigorously test quantitation software, and proteomic researchers may benefit from overlaying simulated data on actual data sets.        While not directly relevant in this case, a search was conducted by Proteome-Discoverer v1.4 by both mascot and Sequest-HT.  The parameters included 2 missed cleavages by Trypsin, carboamidomethylation of the Cysteines, Phosphorylations of STY residues, and Oxidations of HW residues, and at a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm.

### Sample Protocol
Simulated data were used, i.e. no sample processing applicable.

### Data Protocol
Mspire-Simulator takes as its input FASTA files containing the protein sequences that are to be in the simulated run. Using one of 16 proteolytic enzymes and relevant digestion parameters each protein sequence is in silico digested into peptides. Each peptide’s charge, mass, and theoretical spectrum, including the isotopic distribution, is calculated. These calculations are currently used to create centroided data. The simulator will be extended to create profile data in the future. Centroided data will be most useful initially because most analytical software deals with this type data. The simulator is implemented in the Ruby programing language and makes use of and extends the mspire9 (mass spectrometry proteomics in Ruby) library. It is available under the MIT license and works out of the box with sensible defaults. Customization to data from different instruments is achieved through an included Ruby script, which uses a genetic curve fitting algorithm. This script produces SVG files that visualize the fits as well as the necessary parameters for Mspire-Simulator to adapt its simulations. The actual data used to create our default simulation model were obtained from our in-house LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to reverse-phase liquid chromatography using nanospray ionization. The data are derived from an LCMS shotgun proteomic run of complex Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK-293T) cells. We used a Waters Nano Acuity column (15 cm long). ‘A’ solvent used was 95:5 water to acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid and ‘B’ solvent was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Gradient was formed by 5−60% solvent mix over 70% of the run. These data along with all files produced and used are deposited at https://chorusproject.org/anonymous/download/experiment/-17116340021687089 and at ProteomeXchange (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org) via the PRIDE partner repository10 with dataset identifier PXD000477. The MM14 data are already available at http://msbi.ipb-halle.de/msbi/ centwave/, and the Orbitrap-Velos data are available upon request. Orbitrap-Velos data were generously provided by the Christine Vogel lab and were from a ubiquitin pulldown from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (Eksigent NanoFlow Plus, LC gradient 2−90% acetonitrile over 4.5 h at flow rate 400 nL/min). MM14 data are from the Bruker MicrOTOF-Q instrument and are described by Tautenhahn et al.; details can be found in that publication.

### Publication Abstract
The most important step in any quantitative proteomic pipeline is feature detection (aka peak picking). However, generating quality hand-annotated data sets to validate the algorithms, especially for lower abundance peaks, is nearly impossible. An alternative for creating gold standard data is to simulate it with features closely mimicking real data. We present Mspire-Simulator, a free, open-source shotgun proteomic simulator that goes beyond previous simulation attempts by generating LC-MS features with realistic m/z and intensity variance along with other noise components. It also includes machine-learned models for retention time and peak intensity prediction and a genetic algorithm to custom fit model parameters for experimental data sets. We show that these methods are applicable to data from three different mass spectrometers, including two fundamentally different types, and show visually and analytically that simulated peaks are nearly indistinguishable from actual data. Researchers can use simulated data to rigorously test quantitation software, and proteomic researchers may benefit from overlaying simulated data on actual data sets.

### Keywords
Human, Hek-293t, Ms-simulator, Fasp

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, Brigham Young University , 701 East University Parkway, BNSN C100, Provo, Utah 84602, United States
Chemistry and Biochemistry

### Submitter
Ryan Taylor

### Lab Head
Dr John T. Prince
Department of Biochemistry, Brigham Young University , 701 East University Parkway, BNSN C100, Provo, Utah 84602, United States


