### Accession
PXD033226

### Title
Enrichment and Fragmentation Approaches for Enhanced Detection and Characterization of Endogenous Glycosylated Neuropeptides

### Description
Glycosylation, a common and heterogeneous post-translational modification plays a key role in altering biomolecule function and other properties. Prior to monitoring regulatory roles, basal glyconeuropeptide expression must be determined. Characterization is partially limited by the lower abundance of glycosylated neuropeptides in vivo compared to non-modified neuropeptides and thus requires effective enrichment and characterization strategies. A hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography enrichment strategy is modified, and fragmentation schemes are evaluated to establish a workflow for future glyconeuropeptide studies to improve the understanding of neuropeptide glycosylation, as well as its distribution across the neuroendocrine system and several neuropeptide families. Product ion-triggered electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation and stepped collision energy higher-energy collisional dissociation are evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
The following neural tissue were collected from blue crabs: pericardial organs (POs), sinus glands, brain, commissural ganglia, and thoracic ganglion. Dissection was performed in chilled saline and stored in acidified methanol. Tissues were homogenized and neuropeptides extract in acidified methanol, and desalted. Glycopeptide enrichment was performed via a spin-tip cotton HILIC enrichment method as described previously. Briefly, HILIC beads were loaded in a 1% TFA slurry on top of 3 mg cotton wool in a pipette tip. Desalted tissue extract was resuspended in a mixture of ACN, water, and 1% TFA for loading. Subsequent washing and elution steps were performed with varying concentrations of ACN, water, and TFA (wash) or FA (elution). MS analyses were performed using a Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were reconstituted and injected onto a homemade C18 column. Separation was performed with a gradient starting with 3% mobile phase B (0.1% FA in ACN) and 97% mobile phase A (0.1% FA in water). The gradient was ramped to 30% B over 90 min, then to 75% B for 20 min. MS spectra were acquired in positive polarity mode from 400 – 1800 m/z in the Orbitrap with 60k resolution with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 2.0e5 and maximum injection time of 50 ms.  For sceHCD experiments, fragmentation was performed in the Orbitrap with 30k resolution using stepped collisional energy of 30 ± 10 % normalized collision energy via a data-dependent acquisition method with a 3 s fragmentation cycle time with dynamic precursor charge states from 2+ to 6+. A dynamic exclusion of 20 s, AGC target of 1.0e5, and maximum injection time of 60 ms was used. For pd-EThcD, a cursory HCD scan was performed to fragment the most abundant precursor ions between 2+ to 6+ charge state at a resolution of 30k, with 35 % normalized collision energy, 20 s dynamic exclusion, AGC target of 1.0e5, and maximum injection time of 60 ms. When oxonium ions at m/z 138.0545, m/z 204.0867, or m/z 366.1396 (±m/z 0.01) were detected within the top 30 most abundant peaks, pd-EThcD MS/MS fragmentation would be triggered and further applied to the precursor in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 60k, AGC target of 3.0e5, and maximum injection time of 250 ms. For pd-EThcD scans, a decision tree was used to subject precursors of different charges to different ETD reaction times (z = 2, 50 ms; z = 3−4, 20 ms; z = 5, 10 ms; z = 6, use instrument charge-dependent ETD parameters), with a subsequent supplemental activation energy of 33%.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by Proteome Discoverer embedded with the Byonic node. Spectra were searched against an in-house crustacean neuropeptide database and mammalian/insect combined glycan database using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. Enzyme was set to nonspecific with a max missed cleavage of -1. The false discovery rate was set to 0.05. Set common dynamic modifications include C-terminal amidation, oxidation of M, pyro-Glu from Q and E, with a max of 2 per peptide. Only 1 glycan per peptide was allowed during the search. PEAKS StudioXPro was used for de novo sequencing with the following parameters: unspecific cleavage with a max missed cleavage of 100, precursor mass tolerance of 20.0 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Variable modifications include C-terminal amidation, dehydration, oxidation of M, and pyro-Glu from Q and E. Using a de novo score cutoff of 75, the generated do novo sequences were processed. De novo sequenced peptides containing the conserved peptide sequence pattern belonging to a neuropeptide family were used to create a new putative neuropeptide database which was input to Proteome Discoverer as described above for novel glyconeuropeptide detection.

### Publication Abstract
Glycosylated neuropeptides were recently discovered in crustaceans, a model organism with a well-characterized neuroendocrine system. Several workflows exist to characterize enzymatically digested peptides; however, the unique properties of endogenous neuropeptides require methods to be re-evaluated. We investigate the use of hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) enrichment and different fragmentation methods to further probe the expression of glycosylated neuropeptides in Callinectes sapidus. During the evaluation of HILIC, we observed the necessity of a less aqueous solvent for endogenous peptide samples. This modification enabled the number of detected neuropeptide glycoforms to increase almost two-fold, from 18 to 36. Product ion-triggered electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation enabled the site-specific detection of 55 intact N- and O-linked glycoforms, while the faster stepped collision energy higher-energy collisional dissociation resulted in detection of 25. Additionally, applying this workflow to five neuronal tissues enabled the characterization of 36 more glycoforms of known neuropeptides and 11 more glycoforms of nine putative novel neuropeptides. Overall, the database of glycosylated neuropeptides in crustaceans was largely expanded from 18 to 136 glycoforms of 40 neuropeptides from 10 neuropeptide families. Both macro- and micro-heterogeneity were observed, demonstrating the chemical diversity of this simple invertebrate, establishing a framework to use crustacean to probe modulatory effects of glycosylation on neuropeptides.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Neuropeptides, Glycosylation, Mass spectrometry, Endogenous peptides

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin - Madison
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry, Lingjun Li Lab, University of Wisconsin - Madison, USA

### Submitter
Ashley Phetsanthad

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
School of Pharmacy and Department of Chemistry, Lingjun Li Lab, University of Wisconsin - Madison, USA


