### Accession
PXD007801

### Title
Trichostatin A alters cytoskeleton and energy metabolism of pancreatic adenocarcinoma cells: an in depth proteomic study.

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal of all human cancers with a high mortality rate. Resistance to conventional treatments and chemotherapeutics is a typical feature of PDAC. To investigate the causes of drug resistance it is essential to deeply investigate the mechanism of action of chemotherapeutics. In this study, we performed an in depth shotgun proteomic approach using the label-free proteomic SWATH-MS analysis to investigate novel insights of the mechanism of action of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) in PDAC cells. This proteomic analysis in PaCa44 cells and data elaboration of TSA-regulated proteins by bioinformatics showed an overall up-regulation of cytokeratins and other proteins related to the cytoskeleton organization, keratinization, and apoptotic cell death. On the contrary, a large amount of the down-regulated proteins by TSA treatment belongs to the cellular energetic metabolism and to the machinery of protein synthesis, such as ribosomal proteins, determining synergistic cell growth inhibition by the combined treatment of TSA and the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-D-glucose in a panel of PDAC cell lines

### Sample Protocol
Lysated cells were collected before and after trichostatin A treatment to pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell line PaCa44. The sample was subjected to trypsin digestion and then desalted. After the desalting, the sample was vacuum evaporated and reconstituted with 20 μL of 0.05% formic acid in water. The cell proteins were analyzed with a micro-LC Eksigent Technologies (Eksigent Technologies) system that included a micro LC200 Eksigent pump with flow module 5-50 µL, interfaced with a 5600+ TripleTOF system (Sciex) equipped with DuoSpray Ion Source and CDS (Calibrant Delivery System). The stationary phase was a Halo C18 column (0.5 x 100 mm, 2.7 µm; Eksigent Technologies). The mobile phase was a mixture of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water (A) and 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile (B), eluting at a flow-rate of 15.0 µL min−1 at an increasing concentration of solvent B from 2% to 40% in 30 min. The injection volume was 4.0 μL and the oven temperature was set at 40 °C. For identification purposes the samples were subjected to a data dependent acquisition (DDA): the mass spectrometer analysis was performed using a mass range of 100–1500 Da (TOF scan with an accumulation time of 0.25 s), followed by a MS/MS product ion scan from 200 to 1250 Da (accumulation time of 5.0 ms) with the abundance threshold set at 30 cps (35 candidate ions can be monitored during every cycle). For the label-free quantification the samples were subjected to cyclic data independent analysis (DIA) of the mass spectra, using a 25-Da window: the mass spectrometer was operated such that a 50-ms survey scan (TOF-MS) was performed and subsequent MS/MS experiments were performed on all precursors.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were acquired with Analyst TF 1.7 (Sciex). The DDA files were searched using Protein Pilot software v. 4.2 (Sciex), Mascot v. 2.4 (Matrix Science) and DIA-Umpire, an open source Java program for computational analysis of data independent acquisition (DIA) mass spectrometry-based proteomics data. Trypsin as digestion enzyme was specified for the software. For Mascot we used 2 missed cleavages, the instrument was set to ESI-QUAD-TOF and the following modifications were specified for the search: carbamidomethyl cysteins as fixed modification and oxidized methionine as variable modification. A search tolerance of 50 ppm was specified for the peptide mass tolerance, and 0.1 Da for the MS/MS tolerance. The charges of the peptides to search for were set to 2 +, 3 + and 4 +, and the search was set on monoisotopic mass. The UniProt Swiss-Prot reviewed database containing human proteins was used and a target-decoy database search was performed. False Discovery Rate was fixed at 1%. The quantification was performed by integrating the extracted ion chromatogram of all the unique ions for a given peptide.  Skyline was employed to build an integrated assay library, built with the DDA acquisitions, using a protein FDR threshold of 1%. The MSStats tool is an open-source R package for statistical relative quantification of proteins and peptides in global. The identified and regulated proteins  were classified with PANTHER Classification System. The enriched pathways were analyzed by using STRING.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is one of the most lethal of all human cancers with a high mortality rate. Resistance to conventional treatments and chemotherapeutics is a typical feature of PDAC. To investigate the causes of drug resistance it is essential to deeply investigate the mechanism of action of chemotherapeutics. In this study, we performed an in depth shotgun proteomic approach using the label-free proteomic SWATH-MS analysis to investigate novel insights of the mechanism of action of the histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) in PDAC cells. This proteomic analysis in PaCa44 cells and data elaboration of TSA-regulated proteins by bioinformatics showed an overall up-regulation of cytokeratins and other proteins related to the cytoskeleton organization, keratinization, and apoptotic cell death. On the contrary, a large amount of the down-regulated proteins by TSA treatment belongs to the cellular energetic metabolism and to the machinery of protein synthesis, such as ribosomal proteins, determining synergistic cell growth inhibition by the combined treatment of TSA and the glycolytic inhibitor 2-deoxy-d-glucose in a panel of PDAC cell lines. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD007801.

### Keywords
Pancreatic cancer, 2-deoxy-d-glucose, Cytoskeleton, Trichostatin a, Shotgun proteomics, Metabolism

### Affiliations
Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy
University of Eastern Piedmont 

### Submitter
Marcello Manfredi

### Lab Head
Dr Marcello Manfredi
Department of Sciences and Technological Innovation, University of Piemonte Orientale, Italy


