### Accession
PXD038695

### Title
The ATAC and SAGA coactivator complexes assemble co-translationally, but their cellular localization properties and functions are distinct

### Description
To understand the precise mechanism that guide the formation of multisubunit complexes is of key importance. Nascent proteins can find and bind their interaction partners during their translation, leading to co-translational assembly. Here we demonstrate that the distinct modules of ATAC (ADA Two A Containing) and SAGA (SPT ADA GCN5 Acetyltransferase), two lysine acetyl transferase-containing transcription coactivator complexes, assemble co-translationally in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells. Fully assembled SAGA complex forms in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells and cytoplasmic SAGA acetylates non-histones proteins, before imported in the nucleus. In contrast, ATAC has no cytoplasmic functions as it cannot be detected in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells. However, fully assembled endogenous ATAC complex containing two functional modules forms and functions in the nucleus. Thus, the two related co-activators, ATAC and SAGA, assemble by using co-translational pathways, but their subcellular localization, cytoplasmic detectability and functions are distinct.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation experiments Protein-G or Protein-A beads were washed twice with 1× PBS and twice with IP100 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.9, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 100 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, and 1× EDTA free protein inhibitor cocktail). For mass spectrometry analysis, starting input protein extracts were either HeLa cytoplasmic extracts (CEs) (6-12 mg), HEK293T CEs (6-12 mg), mESC CEs (3 mg) or HeLa nuclear extracts (NEs) (2-4 mg), HEK293T NEs (2-4 mg), mESC NEs (1 mg), for co-IP experiments, starting input protein extracts Baculovirus-infected Sf9 WCEs (2–5 mg). Protein inputs were then precleared by the addition of 1/10 volume of 100% protein A or G beads for 1h at 4 °C with overhead agitation. During this time beads were coupled to the corresponding antibodies. Approximately, 1 mg of indicated antibody per ml of protein A or G bead was bound. Beads were incubated with the antibodies for 1 h at room temperature with agitation, unbound antibody was removed by washing the beads twice with IP500 buffer (25 mM Tris-HCl 7.9, 5 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.1% NP40, 500 mM KCl, 2 mM DTT, and 1× EDTA free protein inhibitor cocktail) and twice with IP100 buffer before addition of the precleared protein extracts, and further incubated overnight at 4°C with end-to-end shaking. The following day the beads were collected, and subjected to two rounds of washing for 5 min each with ten volumes of IP500 buffer, followed by 2× IP100 buffer washes. Proteins (IP-ed in Fig. 1 and 5) were eluted with 0.1 M pH 2.8 glycine, then neutralized with 1.5 M Tris pH 8.8. Eluted proteins were analysed by mass spectrometry. LC MS/MS mass spectrometry analyses Protein mixtures were precipitated with TCA (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# T0699) overnight at 4°C. Samples were then centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. Pellets were washed twice with 1 ml cold acetone and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. Washed pellet were then urea-denatured with 8 M urea (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# U0631) in Tris-HCl 0.1 mM, reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 30 min, and then alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# I1149) for 30 min in the dark. Both reduction and alkylation were performed at room temperature and under agitation (850 rpm). Double digestion was performed with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako, Cat# 125-05061) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 8 M urea for 4 h, followed by an overnight modified trypsin digestion (Promega, CAT# V5113) at a ratio 1/100 (enzyme/proteins) in 2 M urea for 12 h. Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled in line with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide mixtures were loaded on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 μm ID × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3.5 min at 5 μl/min with 2% ACN (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 1207802), 0.1% formic acid (Sigma Aldrich, Cat# 94318) in water and then separated on a C18 Accucore nano-column (75 μm ID × 50 cm, 2.6 μm, 150Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 90 min linear gradient from 5% to 35% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in water/B: 99% ACN, 0.1% FA in water), then a 20 min linear gradient from 35% to 80% buffer B, followed with 5 min at 99% B and 5 min of regeneration at 5% B. The total duration was set to 120 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The oven temperature was kept constant at 38 °C. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350 to 1500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks (TOP20) from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35%. Unassigned and single charged states were rejected. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3, respectively, and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was used. Exclusion duration was set to 20 s, repeat count was set to 1, and exclusion mass width was ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching against Homo Sapiens or Mus Musculus Uniprot Proteome database (www.uniprot.org) using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Oxidation (M, +15.9949), was set as variable modification and Carbamidomethylation (C, +57.0215) as fixed modification. Proteins and peptides were filtered with False Discovery Rate <1% (high confidence filter).

### Publication Abstract
To understand the function of multisubunit complexes, it is of key importance to uncover the precise mechanisms that guide their assembly. Nascent proteins can find and bind their interaction partners during their translation, leading to co-translational assembly. Here, we demonstrate that the core modules of ATAC (ADA-two-A-containing) and SAGA (Spt-Ada-Gcn5-acetyltransferase), two lysine acetyl transferase-containing transcription co-activator complexes, assemble co-translationally in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells. In addition, a SAGA complex containing all of its modules forms in the cytoplasm and acetylates non-histone proteins. In contrast, ATAC complex subunits cannot be detected in the cytoplasm of mammalian cells. However, an endogenous ATAC complex containing two functional modules forms and functions in the nucleus. Thus, the two related co-activators, ATAC and SAGA, assemble using co-translational pathways, but their subcellular localization, cytoplasmic abundance, and functions are distinct.

### Keywords
Subcellular function, Subcellular localization, Atac, Saga

### Affiliations
CNRS
IGBMC,Illkirch,France ORCID iD: 0000-0001-7398-2250

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Laszlo Tora
IGBMC,Illkirch,France ORCID iD: 0000-0001-7398-2250


