### Accession
PXD032041

### Title
Drug-induced epigenomic plasticity reprograms circadian rhythm regulation to drive prostate cancer towards androgen-independence

### Description
In prostate cancer, androgen receptor (AR)-targeting agents are very effective in various stages of the disease. However, therapy resistance inevitably occurs and little is known about how tumor cells adapt to bypass AR suppression. Here, we performed integrative multi-omics analyses on tissues isolated before and after 3 months of AR-targeting enzalutamide monotherapy from high-risk prostate cancer patients enrolled in a neoadjuvant clinical trial. Transcriptomic analyses demonstrated that AR inhibition drove tumors towards a neuroendocrine-like disease state. In addition, epigenomic profiling revealed massive enzalutamide-induced reprogramming of pioneer factor FOXA1 – from inactive chromatin binding sites towards active cis-regulatory elements that dictate pro-survival signals. Notably, treatment-induced FOXA1 sites were enriched for the circadian rhythm core component ARNTL. Post-treatment ARNTL levels associated with poor outcome, and ARNTL suppression decreased cell growth in vitro. Our data highlight a remarkable cistromic plasticity of FOXA1 following AR-targeted therapy, and revealed an acquired dependency on circadian regulator ARNTL, a novel candidate therapeutic target.

### Sample Protocol
Peptide mixtures were prepared and measured as previously described, with the following exceptions. Peptide mixtures (10% of total digest) were loaded directly onto the analytical column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 2.4 μm, 75 μm × 500 mm, packed in-house) and analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a Proxeon nLC1200 system (Thermo Scientific). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid/water and solvent B was 0.1% formic acid/80% acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a constant flow of 250 nl/min in a 120-min gradient, containing a 105-min stepped increase from 7% to 34% solvent B, followed by an 15-min wash at 80% solvent B.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed by MaxQuant (version 2.0.1.0) using standard settings for label-free quantitation (LFQ). MS/MS data were searched against the Swissprot human database (20,397 entries, release 2021_01)) complemented with a list of common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed version of all sequences. The maximum allowed mass tolerance was 4.5ppm in the main search and 0.5Da for fragment ion masses. False discovery rates for peptide and protein identification were set to 1%. Trypsin/P was chosen as cleavage specificity allowing two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation and deamidation were used as variable modifications. LFQ intensities were Log2-transformed in Perseus (version 1.6.15.0), after which proteins were filtered for at least 3 out of 4 valid values in at least one sample group. Missing values were replaced by imputation based on a normal distribution (width: 0.3 and downshift: 1.8). Differentially expressed proteins were determined using a Student's t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Foxa1, Androgen receptor(ar), Lc-msms, Enzalutamide, Arntl, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. & Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

### Submitter
Liesbeth Hoekman

### Lab Head
Dr Maarten Altelaar
Proteomics Facility, Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, Netherlands. & Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University and Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Utrecht, The Netherlands.


