### Accession
PXD016008

### Title
Mass spectrometry proteomics detecting interaction proteins of Kindlin-2

### Description
We aim to find out the Kindlin-2 interaction proteins. We transfected plasmids Flag or Flag-Kindlin-2 to HKC cell lines and then used Flag-M2 beads to do the coimmunoprecipitation experiments and followed by NuPAGE Tris-Acetate Mini Gels detection and stained by Coomassie brilliant blue. Compared the two groups,and then we will find the proteins interact with Kindlin-2.

### Sample Protocol
We transfected plasmids Flag or Flag-Kindlin-2 to HKC cell lines and then used Flag-tagged-M2 beads to do the coimmunoprecipitation experiments and followed by NuPAGE Tris-Acetate Mini Gels detection and stained by Coomassie brilliant blue. Compared the two groups,and then we will find the proteins interact with Kindlin-2.

### Data Protocol
After Coomassie brilliant blue staining, we cut the indicated lines of the two groups and put them to different clean tubes, and then send to Mass Spectrometry Center of Tsinghua University.

### Publication Abstract
The Hippo signaling pathway plays a key role in development and cancer progression. However, molecules that intrinsically inhibit this pathway are less well known. Here, we report that the focal adhesion molecule Kindlin-2 inhibits Hippo signaling by interacting with and degrading MOB1 and promoting the interaction between MOB1 and the E3 ligase praja2. Kindlin-2 thus inhibits the phosphorylation of LATS1 and YAP and promotes YAP translocation into the nucleus, where it activates downstream Hippo target gene transcription. Kindlin-2 depletion activates Hippo/YAP signaling and alleviates renal fibrosis in Kindlin-2 knockout mice with unilateral ureteral occlusion (UUO). Moreover, Kindlin-2 levels are negatively correlated with MOB1 and phosphorylated (p) YAP in samples from patients with renal fibrosis. Altogether, these results demonstrate that Kindlin-2 inhibits Hippo signaling through degradation of MOB1. A specific long-lasting siRNA against Kindlin-2 effectively alleviated UUO-induced renal fibrosis and could be a potential therapy for renal fibrosis.

### Keywords
Human renal tubular epithelial cell(hkc)

### Affiliations
Department of Human Anatomy, Histology, and Embryology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education) and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs,Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.
Peking University Health Science Center

### Submitter
Jiagui Song

### Lab Head
Dr Hongquan Zhang
Department of Human Anatomy, Histology, and Embryology, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Translational Research (Ministry of Education) and State Key Laboratory of Natural and Biomimetic Drugs,Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing 100191, China.


