### Accession
PXD024203

### Title
Potential, Properties and Sources of Plant Derived Extracellular Vesicles and Nanovesicles

### Description
The ascending interest in human extracellular vesicles (EVs) has transferred only a little to plant derived EVs and nanovesicles yet. Although a series of investigations already pointed out promising health beneficial effects and drug delivery properties, adequate (pre)clinical studies are rare. This fact might be caused by the lack of sources with appropriate qualities. Our results demonstrate a new and well controllable source for plant EVs: plant cell suspension culture. In vitro cultured plant cells release EVs into the growth medium which could be harvested for pharmaceutical applications.

### Sample Protocol
The lyophilized plant nanovesicles were directly denatured in fresh lysis buffer [urea 7M, thiourea 2M, CHAPS 0.5% (w/v)] and subsequently loaded on a precast gel (Criterion™ XT precast 1D gel 12% Bis-Tris, Bio-Rad) for a short migration. Proteins were stained with Instant Blue (Gentaur BVBA, Kampenhout, Belgium), reduced and alkylated. Thereafter, proteins were digested with trypsin 5 ng/µl (sequencing mass grade, Promega) o/n at 37 °C. The extracted peptides were solubilized to perform protein identification by nanoLC-MS/MS, using a NanoLC-425 Eksigent system coupled to high-resolution MS TripleTOF® 6600+ (SCIEX, Darmstadt, Germany). The protocol is essentially the one described previously (Figuereido et al. 2020). The 30 most intense precursors were selected for fragmentation in high sensitivity mode using the dynamic rolling collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The MS data were processed with Mascot (version 2.4.2) using Mascot Daemon interface (version 2.4.2, Matrix Science, London, UK) by searching against an in-house annotated database of Craterostigma plantagineum (288 270 sequences). The parameters were set as follows: peptide tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, maximum two missed cleavages, carbamido-methylation of cysteine as fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal protein acetylation, N-terminal glutamine to pyroglutamate and tryptophan to kynurenine as variable modifications. Only the proteins identified with a significance Mascot-calculated threshold corresponding to a p-value < 0.05 and at least two sequences per protein and one unique sequence per protein were accepted

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles; plant nanovesicles; exosome-like nanoparticles; plant cell culture; lipids; metabolomics; proteomics

### Affiliations
LIST-ERIN-ERTP-BEAP-HAU platform
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG

### Submitter
Céline LECLERCQ

### Lab Head
Dr Celine LECLERCQ
LIST-ERIN-BEAP Belvaux, LUXEMBOURG


