### Accession
PXD006760

### Title
Proteomic Sample Preparation in the Low Microgram Range – A Critical Evaluation of Current Workflows

### Description
Efficient and reproducible sample preparation is a prerequisite for any robust and sensitive quantitative bottom-up proteomics workflow. Over the past years, several protocols been specifically developed for the preparation of samples, which are limited in quantity. In the present study, we carried out an independent comparison between three recently described methods: Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3), Filter Aided Sample Preparation (FASP) and a commercial kit based on the in-Stage Tip (iST) method.  We assessed their performance for the processing of proteomic samples in the low μg-range using varying amounts of HeLa cell lysate (1 µg - 20 μg of total protein). All three workflows showed similar performance for 20 µg of starting material.  When handling sample sizes below 10 µg, the number of identified proteins and peptides as well as the quantitative reproducibility and precision drastically dropped in case of FASP. In contrast, SP3 and iST provided high proteome coverage even in the low µg-range. Even when digesting 1 µg of starting material both methods still enabled the identification of over 3,000 proteins and between 25,000 to 30,000 peptides. On average, the quantitative reproducibility between experimental replicates was slightly higher in case of SP3 (R2= 0.97 (SP3); R2= 0.93 (iST)).

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysis followed by FASP, SP3 and iST protein digest, LC separation of peptides using a nanoAcquity nanoUPLC system, mass spectrometric analysis performed on a Synapt G2S

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification with ProteinLynx Global SERVER (PLGS), and run alignment and label-free quantification with ISOQuant

### Publication Abstract
Efficient and reproducible sample preparation is a prerequisite for any robust and sensitive quantitative bottom-up proteomics workflow. Here, we performed an independent comparison between single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3), filter-aided sample preparation (FASP), and a commercial kit based on the in-StageTip (iST) method. We assessed their performance for the processing of proteomic samples in the low &#x3bc;g range using varying amounts of HeLa cell lysate (1-20 &#x3bc;g of total protein). All three workflows showed similar performances for 20 &#x3bc;g of starting material. When handling sample sizes below 10 &#x3bc;g, the number of identified proteins and peptides as well as the quantitative reproducibility and precision drastically dropped in case of FASP. In contrast, SP3 and iST provided high proteome coverage even in the low &#x3bc;g range. Even when digesting 1 &#x3bc;g of starting material, both methods still enabled the identification of over 3000 proteins and between 25&#x202f;000 and 30&#x202f;000 peptides. On average, the quantitative reproducibility between experimental replicates was slightly higher in case of SP3 (R<sup>2</sup> = 0.97 (SP3); R<sup>2</sup> = 0.93 (iST)). Applying SP3 toward the characterization of the proteome of FACS-sorted tumor-associated macrophages in the B16 tumor model enabled the quantification of 2965 proteins and revealed a "mixed" M1/M2 phenotype.

### Keywords
In-stagetip digestion (ist), Sample preparation, Filter-aided sample preparation (fasp), Single-pot solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation (sp3), Bottom-up proteomics

### Affiliations
Institute for Immunology
University Medical Center of the Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Malte Sielaff

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Tenzer
Institute for Immunology, University Medical Center of Mainz, Langenbeckstr. 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany


