### Accession
PXD023907

### Title
Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. vasinfectum (UP000030701) extracellular vesicle, secretome, and cell lysate proteomes

### Description
We performed a comparative  study to determine the proteome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) from the cotton pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. vasinfectum (Fov), recovered from two growth conditions in vitro. Label-free quantitative protemics was used to find significant enrichment of proteins between EV samples, the secretome (secreted-soluble proteins) and the cell lysate. Our results show that some proteins were exclusive to EVs and were upregulated compared to the secretome or cell lysate.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lysates were obtained by griding mycelia with glass beads and centrifugation at 4000 g, retaining the supernatant. Secretomes were obtained by concentrating clarified supernatant with 3000 MWCO ultrafiltration columns. EVs were recovered from liquid cultures (n=3), which were grown on Czapek Dox (CD) or Saboraud's Dextrose broth (SDB) for 3 days at 25°C with 100 rpm of agitation. Mycelia were removed and the supernatant concentrated and purified by size-exclusion chromatography. Fractions containing EVs were pooled and concentrated. Protein content of all samples was determined with a Qubit4. 15 µg of protein from EV fractions, secretome and cell lysates were loaded on an SDS-PAGE gel and resolved for 6 min at 150 V. The gel was fixed in 50% (v/v) methanol and 7% (v/v) acetic acid. Samples were excised and proteins were reduced with 2 mM TCEP for 1 h, alkylated with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min, and digested with 1 µg trypsin for 18 h at 37°C. Peptides were recovered with 85% (v/v) ACN, 0.5% (v/v) TFA. Then peptides were lyophilised and resuspended in 5% (v/v) ACN and 0.5% (v/v) TFA.

### Data Protocol
One µg of peptides was injected twice per biological replicate in a nanoflow UPLC instrument (Scientific UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano, Thermo Fisher Scientific) attached to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Ppeptides were loaded onto a C18 PepMap 300 μm ID x 2 cm trapping column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and washed before separation with a 90-minute linear ACN gradient on an analytical column (BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 130 Å and 75 μm ID x 25 cm, Waters). Data were collected in data-dependent acquisition mode using an MS scan range of m/z 350 – 1500 and resolution of 60,000. HCD MS/MS spectra were collected for the 15 most intense ions per MS scan at 15,000 resolution with a normalised collision energy of 28% and an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. Raw MS data were analysed using MaxQuant 1.6.3.3. Peptide matching was performed with the Fov Uniprot proteome (UP000030701, downloaded 12th of June 2019). Trypsin was selected as the digestion enzyme and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable modifications. Peptide mass tolerances were 20 ppm (first search) and 4.5 ppm (main search), and false discovery rate (FDR) cut offs were 0.01 for both proteins and peptides. Minimum and maximum peptide lengths were set to 8 and 25 respectively and match between runs was not selected. Label-free quantification (LFQ) of protein abundances was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm (doi.org/10.1074/mcp.M113.031591). Fast LFQ was selected and normalisation was skipped.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are nano-sized compartments involved in cell communication and macromolecule transport that are well characterized in mammalian organisms. Fungal EVs transport virulence-related cargo and modulate the host immune response, but most work has been focused on human yeast pathogens. Additionally, the study of EVs from filamentous fungi has been hindered by the lack of protein markers and efficient isolation methods. In this study we performed the isolation and proteomic characterization of EVs from the filamentous cotton pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. vasinfectum (Fov). EVs were recovered from two different growth media, Czapek Dox and Saboraud's dextrose broth, and purified by size-exclusion chromatography. Our results show that the EV proteome changes depending on the growth medium but EV production remains constant. EVs contained proteins involved in polyketide synthesis, cell wall modifications, proteases and potential effectors. These results support a role in modulation of host-pathogen interactions for Fov EVs.

### Keywords
Fungi, Fusarium oxysporum, Lc-ms/ms, Cotton

### Affiliations
La Trobe University
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, School of Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
Donovan Garcia Ceron

### Lab Head
Dr Marilyn Anderson
Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, School of Molecular Science, La Trobe University, Melbourne, Australia


