### Accession
PXD002145

### Title
Towards understanding male infertility after spinal cord injury through quantitative proteomics

### Description
The study of male infertility after spinal cord injury (SCI) has enhanced the understanding of seminal plasma (SP) as an important regulator of spermatozoa function. However, the most important factors leading to the diminished sperm motility and viability observed in semen of men with SCI remained unknown. Thus, to explore SP related molecular mechanisms underlying infertility after SCI we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to compare SP retrieved from SCI patients to normal controls.  As a result, we present an in-depth characterization of the human SP proteome, identifying ~2,800 unique proteins, and describe, in detail, the differential proteome observed in SCI. Our analysis demonstrates that a hyper-activation of the immune system may influence some seminal processes, which probably are not triggered by microbial infection. Moreover, we show evidence of an important prostate gland functional failure, i.e. diminished abundance of metabolic enzymes related to ATP turnover, secreted via prostasomes and identify the main outcome related to this fact and that it is intrinsically linked to the low sperm motility in SCI. Together, our data suggest the molecular pathways hindering fertility in SCI and shed new light on other causes of male infertility.

### Sample Protocol
MS-based quantitative proteomic strategy was used to compare the SP proteome in SCI patients versus controls. SP was obtained from 12 SCI patients and from 11 healthy control donors. All control samples were grouped together forming a representative protein pool whereas SCI samples were either grouped together (10 samples) or analyzed individually (12 samples). Major differences between groups were accessed through the comparison of pooled samples (“pool experiment”) whereas particular variations among individuals were investigated through the analysis of single samples (“individual experiment”). Samples from the “pool experiment” and from the “individual experiment” were subjected to a Lys-C/Trypsin combinatorial protein digestion. The resulting peptides were dimethyl labeled, “light” for peptides from SCI samples (pool and individuals) and “medium” for peptides from control sample (pool). Light and medium labeled peptides were mixed 1:1 and the final mixture submitted to an off-line fractionation on a hSAX column. A total of 48 fractions were collected for the “pool experiment” and 30 fractions for the “individual experiment”. The hSAX fractions were finally analyzed by LC-MS/MS on an LTQ-Orbitrap Elite (“pool experiment”) or on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (“individual experiment”) mass spectrometer. Differential quantification was accessed using the software package MaxQuant version 1.3.0.3 and the mass difference of the dimethyl labels were used to compare the peptide abundance in different samples, making it possible to calculate the corresponding control/patient protein expression ratios.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS spectra were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.3) for peak detection and quantification. MS/MS spectra were searched against the IPI human database human (version 3.68, 87,061 sequences) by Andromeda search engine enabling contaminants and the reversed versions of all sequences with the following search parameters: Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification and Acetyl (Protein N-term), Oxidation (M) as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was specified as the proteolytic enzyme with up to 2 miss cleavages were allowed. The mass accuracy of the precursor ions was decided by the time-dependent recalibration algorithm of MaxQuant, fragment ion mass tolerance was set to of 0.6 Da. The maximum false discovery rate for proteins and peptides was 0.01 and a minimum peptide length of six amino acids was required. Quantification mode with the dimethyl Lys 0 and N-term 0 as light labels and dimethyl Lys 4 and N-term 4 as heavy labels was selected. All other parameters are the default setting in MaxQuant. Quantitative ratios were calculated by MaxQuant based on two light and medium label partners for each protein and normalized by shifting the median of the total ratio population to 1. Normalized ratios were used for the differential expression analysis and statistical significance was assessed using paired t test on proteins that are quantified all replicates of the pool experiment and in at least 2 samples of the individual experiment.  Statistical analyses were performed using R software (version 3.0.0).

### Publication Abstract
The study of male infertility after spinal cord injury (SCI) has enhanced the understanding of seminal plasma (SP) as an important regulator of spermatozoa function. However, the most important factors leading to the diminished sperm motility and viability observed in semen of men with SCI remained unknown. Thus, to explore SP related molecular mechanisms underlying infertility after SCI, we used mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics to compare SP retrieved from SCI patients to normal controls. As a result, we present an in-depth characterization of the human SP proteome, identifying &#x223c;2,800 individual proteins, and describe, in detail, the differential proteome observed in SCI. Our analysis demonstrates that a hyper-activation of the immune system may influence some seminal processes, which likely are not triggered by microbial infection. Moreover, we show evidence of an important prostate gland functional failure,i.e.diminished abundance of metabolic enzymes related to ATP turnover and those secreted via prostasomes. Further we identify the main outcome related to this fact and that it is intrinsically linked to the low sperm motility in SCI. Together, our data highlights the molecular pathways hindering fertility in SCI and shed new light on other causes of male infertility.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Male infertility, Human seminal plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Anejaculation, Spinal cord injury

### Affiliations
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Muenchen

### Submitter
Dominic Helm

### Lab Head
Dr Dominic Helm
Chair of Proteomics and Bioanalytics, TU Muenchen


