### Accession
PXD018091

### Title
Quantitative proteomics revealed modulation of macrophages by MetQ gene of Streptococcus suis serotype 2.

### Description
MetQ gene of Streptococcus suis serotype 2 deletion strain has attenuated antiphagocytosis. However,the mechanism of antiphagocytosis and pathogenesis of MetQ in SS2 has remained unclear. In this study, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and subsequent bioinformatics analysis was used to determine differentially expressed proteins of RAW264.7 cells infected with △MetQ and ZY05719, aimed at elucidating the mechanism of antiphagocytosis and innate immunity of macrophages infected by Streptococcus suis.

### Sample Protocol
The heavy isotope-labeled RAW264.7 cells were infected with ZY05719 and light-labeled RAW264.7 cells were infected with △MetQ at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 10:1 and incubated for 4 h at 37℃ under 5% CO2. After incubation, the total protein of RAW264.7 cells was extracted with RIPA Lysis and Extraction Buffer supplemented with Protease Inhibitor Cocktail (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). Protein concentrations were measured by BAC Protein Assay Kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Equal amount of protein from each lysate was mixed in a new tube. Mixed lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE and each gel was excised into five slices according to the abundance. Two biological replicates were performed for the experiment.  The gels were decolorized by 200 uL of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate/30% acetonitrile (ACN) and washed to transparency state. The supernatant was discarded and 10mM DTT (dithiothreitol) was added and incubated for 1.5 h at 37℃. The supernatant was removed and 100% ACN was added, which was discarded after 5min. Then 60 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and the treatment was performed in the dark for 20 min. The liquid was discarded, and 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate was added for a 15min reaction. The supernatant was removed and 100% ACN was added and incubated for 5 min before discarding. After thorough drying, the lyophilized gel was digested with 15μL of 10 ng/μL trypsin (Promega) at 37℃ overnight. The tryptic digests were separated with Easy-nLC 1000 System (Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). After the peptides were separated by chromatography, mass spectrometry analysis was conducted by a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Scanning range of precursor ion was 300-1800 m/z. The resolution of full mass spectrometry was 70,000 fwhm (full width at half maxima) and the full scan AGC contained 3x106 targets. The Maximum IT was 50 ms. The MS2 had a resolution of 17,500 fwhm, maximum IT of 60 ms, normalized collision energy of 27eV and dynamic exclusion of 60.0 s. The activation type of MS2 was HCD.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data was analyzed by MaxQuant software for protein identification and quantification. A 1.5-fold change of protein abundance ratio and a p-value ≤ 0.05 was chosen to indicate significant change. Differentially expressed proteins were analyzed with Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) analysis. The upregulated and downregulated proteins were analyzed separately. GO classifications were analyzed by Blast2Go software and categorized into biological process (BF), molecular function (MF) and cellular component (CC). KEGG classification was conducted with KAAS (KEGG Automatic Annotation Server) software to explore the involvement of signal pathways in differentially abundant proteins. Protein-protein interaction network was analyzed by STRING and Cytoscape software.

### Publication Abstract
Streptococcus suis serotype 2 (SS2) is a serious zoonotic pathogen; it can lead to symptoms of streptococcal toxic shock syndrome (STSS) in humans and sepsis in pigs, and poses a great threat to public health. The SS2 MetQ gene deletion strain has attenuated antiphagocytosis, although the mechanism of antiphagocytosis and pathogenesis of MetQ in SS2 has remained unclear. In this study, stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) based liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) and subsequent bioinformatics analysis was used to determine differentially expressed proteins of RAW264.7 cells infected with &#x25b3;MetQ and ZY05719. Proteomic results were verified by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) and Western blotting for selected proteins. Further research was focused mainly on immune system processes related to downregulated proteins, such as Src and Ccl9, and actin cytoskeleton and endocytosis related upregulated proteins, like Pstpip1 and Ppp1r9b. The proteomic results in this study shed light on the mechanism of antiphagocytosis and innate immunity of macrophages infected with &#x25b3;MetQ and ZY05719, which might provide novel targets to prevent or control the infection of SS2.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Mouse, Raw264.7 cell, Silac

### Affiliations
MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China
Nanjing agricultural university

### Submitter
Xiaomeng  Pei

### Lab Head
Dr Hongjie Fan
MOE Joint International Research Laboratory of Animal Health and Food Safety, College of Veterinary Medicine, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, China


