### Accession
PXD033010

### Title
Lung macrophages utilize unique cathepsin K-dependent phagosomal machinery to degrade intracellular collagen

### Description
Resident tissue macrophages (RTMs) are organ-specialized phagocytes responsible for the maintenance and protection of residing tissue. It is well established that tissue diversity is reflected by the heterogeneity of RTMs origin and phenotype. However, much less is known about tissue-specific phagocytic macrophage functions. Here, using quantitative proteomics approach, we identify cathepsins as key determinants of phagosome maturation in primary peritoneal, lung and brain resident macrophages. The data further uncover cathepsin K (CtsK) as a molecular marker for lung phagosomes required for intracellular protein and collagen degradation. Pharmacological blockade of CtsK activity diminished phagosomal proteolysis and collagenolysis in lung resident macrophages. Furthermore, pro-fibrotic TGF-β negatively regulated CtsK-mediated phagosomal collagen degradation independently from classical endocytic proteolytic pathways. In humans, phagosomal CtsK activity was reduced in lung COPD macrophages and lung macrophages exposed to cigarette smoke extract. Taken together, this study provides a comprehensive map of how peritoneal, lung and brain tissue environment shapes phagosomal composition of resident macrophages, revealing CtsK as a key molecular determinant of lung phagosomes contributing to phagocytic collagen clearance in lungs.

### Sample Protocol
RTMs were incubated for 30 min with carboxylated magnetic beads (Dynabeads, Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted at 1:20 ratio by complete DMEM/F-12 medium. Cells were then washed by PBS, scraped, and lysed by dounce homogenizer in hypotonic lysis buffer (250 mM sucrose/3 mM imidazole, pH 7.4) containing inhibitors of phosphatases and proteases (EDTA-free, Thermo Scientific) and 250 U/ml of Nuclease (Thermo Scientific). Tubes with lysates were then transferred into magnetic holder and supernatants were removed. Phagosomes were washed by PBS, lysed in 5% SDS/50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer (pH 7.6), and protein concentration was determined by BCA assay. Approx. 6 µg of phagosomal proteins from each sample were reduced by tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP), alkylated by iodoacetamide, and digested using S-Trap (Protifi) according to manufacturer instructions. Briefly, samples were acidified by phosphoric acid, mixed with 90% methanol/100 mM TEAB, and loaded onto S-Trap phase. Captured proteins were digested by 1 µg of trypsin (Pierce) at 37 °C overnight. After digestion, peptides were eluted, desalted using reversed-phase spin columns (Thermo Scientific), and analysed using Easy nanoLC 1200 liquid chromatography system connected to Orbitrap Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Positive ion MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 120,000 within m/z range of 400-1600 using AGC target 5×10^5 and maximum injection time 50 ms. MS/MS analysis was performed in data-dependent mode with a top speed cycle of 1 s for the most intense multiply charged precursor ions. MS precursors above 50,000 threshold were isolated by quadrupole using 0.7 m/z isolation window and then fragmented in ion trap by collision-induced dissociation (CID) at a collision energy of 35%. Dynamic exclusion was set to 60 s with 10 ppm tolerance. MS/MS spectra were acquired by ion trap using AGC target 5×10^5 and maximum injection time 35 ms.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic datasets were processed by MaxQuant ver. 1.6.10.43. Data were searched against reference proteome of Mus musculus (UP000000589; August 7, 2020) downloaded from Uniprot. MaxQuant-implemented database was used for the identification of contaminants. Protein identification was done using these MaxQuant parameters as follows: mass tolerance for the first search 20 ppm, for the second search from recalibrated spectra 4.5 ppm; maximum of 2 missed cleavages; maximal charge per peptide z = 7; minimal length of peptide 7, maximal mass of peptide 4600 Da; carbamidomethylation (C) as fixed and acetylation (protein N-term) and oxidation (M) as variable modifications with the maximum number of variable modifications per peptide set to 5. Trypsin with no cleavage restriction was set as a protease. Mass tolerance for fragments in MS/MS was 0.5 Da, taking the 8 most abundant peaks per 100 Da for search (with enabled possibility of cofragmented peptide identification). FDR filtering on peptide spectrum match was 0.01 and only proteins with at least one identified unique peptide were considered further. Proteins were quantified using MaxLFQ function with at least one peptide ratio required for pair-wise comparisons of protein abundance between samples. Proteins identified as contaminants were removed before any further interpretation of data.

### Publication Abstract
Resident tissue macrophages are organ-specialized phagocytes responsible for the maintenance and protection of tissue homeostasis. It is well established that tissue diversity is reflected by the heterogeneity of resident tissue macrophage origin and phenotype. However, much less is known about tissue-specific phagocytic and proteolytic macrophage functions. Here, using a quantitative proteomics approach, we identify cathepsins as key determinants of phagosome maturation in primary peritoneum-, lung-, and brain-resident macrophages. The data further uncover cathepsin K (CtsK) as a molecular marker for lung phagosomes required for intracellular protein and collagen degradation. Pharmacological blockade of CtsK activity diminished phagosomal proteolysis and collagenolysis in lung-resident macrophages. Furthermore, profibrotic TGF-&#x3b2; negatively regulated CtsK-mediated phagosomal collagen degradation independently from classical endocytic-proteolytic pathways. In humans, phagosomal CtsK activity was reduced in COPD lung macrophages and non-COPD lung macrophages exposed to cigarette smoke extract. Taken together, this study provides a comprehensive map of how peritoneal, lung, and brain tissue environment shapes phagosomal composition, revealing CtsK as a key molecular determinant of lung phagosomes contributing to phagocytic collagen clearance in lungs.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Phagosome maturation, Cathepsins, Resident tissue macrophages, Phagocytosis

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Center, University Hospital Hradec Kralove
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden

### Submitter
Ivo Fabrik

### Lab Head
Dr Anetta Härtlova
Institute of Biomedicine, Department of Microbiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, Sweden


