### Accession
PXD021165

### Title
Overexpression of the human mutation P209L of cochaperone BAG3 in mouse

### Description
An amino acid exchange (P209L) in the HSPB8 binding site of the human cochaperone Bcl2-associated athanogene 3 (BAG3) gives rise to severe dominant childhood cardiomyopathy. To phenocopy the disease in mouse and gain insight into its mechanisms, we have generated humanized transgenic mouse models. Expression of human BAG3P209L-eGFP in mice caused Z-disc disintegration and formation of protein aggregates containing BAG3, components of the Z-disc, and the protein quality control system in cardiomyocytes. This was accompanied by massive fibrosis resulting in a severe, early-onset restrictive cardiomyopathy with increased mortality, as observed in patients. Here we present the shotgun proteome data of mice expressing hBAG3P209L-eGFP compared to control.

### Sample Protocol
Heart samples from the mouse were harvested, weighed, and frozen in liquid N2 until use. For proteome analysis about 100 mg of heart sample was homogenized using a TissueLyser LT  in 1 ml of 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 6.8) containing 8M Urea, 2% SDS, 1.5% Triton-X100, 1 mM DTT, 1mM PMSF and 1:100 (v/v) protease inhibitor cocktail. The protein concentration was measured using Pierce BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific 23225) and 100 µg proteome was reduced using 10 mM DTT at 37°C for 30 min followed by Carbamidomethylation using 50 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature (RT) in dark for another 30 min. The reaction was quenched with 50 mM DTT at RT for 20 min. The protein was then purified using SP3 beads and eluted with the digestion buffer containing 50 mM HEPES pH 7.4 and 5 mM CaCl2. Trypsin (company, catalog numberSERVA, 37286.03) was added to the eluted proteome in a 1:100 (w/w) ratio and incubated in a shaker at 37°C for 18 h. Digested peptides were de-salted using a C18 Stage Tip before analysis with a nano-LC system (Dionex NCS-3500 RS) operated in two column-setup (PharmaFluidics µPAC C18 trap column and a 50 cm PharmaFluidics µPAC C18 analytical column). 500 µg ng peptide were separated at a flow rate of 600 nl/min with a binary gradient from 2-32%  eluent B (A, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water; B, 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) and introduced into coupled to a high-resolution Q-TOF mass spectrometer (Impact-II, Bruker) via a CaptiveSpray ion source. The HyStar Software (v3.2, Bruker Daltonics) was used for data acquisition in line mode in a mass range from 200 – 1750 m/z with an acquisition rate of 4 Hz for MS1 spectra and the top 17 most intense ions were selected for fragmentation. A dynamic exclusion window of precursors selected within 30 s was applied unless the signal to noise ratio improved more than 3-fold. Fragmentation spectra were acquired between 5Hz for low-intensity precursor ions (> 500 cts) and 20 Hz for high intensity (> 25k cts) ions, each with stepped parameters, each with 50% of the acquisition time dedicated for each precursor: 100 μs transfer time, 7 eV collision energy and a collision RF of 1500 Vpp followed by 100 μs transfer time, 9 eV collision energy and a collision RF of 1700 Vpp.

### Data Protocol
Spectrum to sequence matching was performed with MaxQuant version 1.6.6.0 and 1.6.10.43  for data acquired from 2week-old and 5-week old mice, respectively, using standard settings for Bruker Q-TOF instruments. The UniProt Mus mMusculus protein database with appended common contaminants listed in MaxQuant, the human BAG3P209L-GFP sequence and reverse-decoy sequences was downloaded from Uniprot and was used for target-decoy database searches with an FDR of 0.01 at the PSM and protein level  along with common contaminants already present in the MaxQuant configuration. Label-free quantification (LFQ) and the “Match between runs” features were enabled. Typsin was set as digestion enzyme, oOxidation (M) and, acetylation (protein N-term) were set as variable modifications while Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification. The LFQ data was analyzed using Perseus version 1.6.10.0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Heart, Human bag3 p209l, Mouse

### Affiliations
Forschungszentrum Jülich
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Jülich

### Submitter
Pitter Huesgen

### Lab Head
Dr Pitter F Huesgen
ZEA-3 Analytics Forschungszentrum Jülich


