### Accession
PXD039403

### Title
RNA Helicase DDX3X Modulates Herpes Simplex Virus 1 Nuclear Egress

### Description
DDX3X is a mammalian RNA helicase that regulates RNA metabolism, cancers, innate immunity and several RNA viruses. We discovered that herpes simplex virus 1, a nuclear DNA replicating virus, highjacks redirects DDX3X to the nuclear envelope where it surprisingly modulates the exit of newly assembled viral particles. DDX3X depletion also led to an accumulation of virions in intranuclear herniations. Mechanistically, we show that DDX3X physically and functionally interacts with the virally encoded nuclear egress complex at the inner nuclear membrane. DDX3X also bound to and stimulated the incorporation in mature particles of pUs3, a herpes kinase that promotes viral nuclear release across the outer nuclear membrane. Overall, the data highlights two unexpected roles for an RNA helicase during the passage of herpes simplex viral particles through the nuclear envelope. This reveals a highly complex interaction between DDX3X and viruses and provides new opportunities to target viral propagation.

### Sample Protocol
Gel sections were shrunk in 50% acetonitrile (ACN), reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM TCEP (Tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) and vortexed for 1 h at 37°C. Alkylation was performed with 55 mM chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) for an hour at 37°C with vortexing. Samples were next digested for 8 h at 37°C with 1 µg of trypsin and peptides subsequently extracted using 90% ACN. The extracted peptides were dried down and solubilized in 5% ACN-0.2% formic acid (FA). Digested peptides were loaded on a home-made C4 precolumn (Optimize Technologies) and separated on a home-made reversed-phase column (150 μm i.d. by 150 mm) with a 56 min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600 nl/min flow rate on a EasynLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). All the full MS spectrums were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 and followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for a maximum of 3 s

### Data Protocol
PEAKS X (Bioinformatics solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a concatenated UniProt human and herpesvirus database were used to process the data. Mass tolerances on precursor of 10 ppm and fragment ions of 0.01 Da were chosen. Variable selected post-translational modifications were carbamidomethyl (C), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), and phosphorylation (STY).

### Publication Abstract
DDX3X is a mammalian RNA helicase that regulates RNA metabolism, cancers, innate immunity and several RNA viruses. We discovered that herpes simplex virus 1, a nuclear DNA replicating virus, redirects DDX3X to the nuclear envelope where it surprisingly modulates the exit of newly assembled viral particles. DDX3X depletion also leads to an accumulation of virions in intranuclear herniations. Mechanistically, we show that DDX3X physically and functionally interacts with the virally encoded nuclear egress complex at the inner nuclear membrane. DDX3X also binds to and stimulates the incorporation in mature particles of pUs3, a herpes kinase that promotes viral nuclear release across the outer nuclear membrane. Overall, the data highlights two unexpected roles for an RNA helicase during the passage of herpes simplex viral particles through the nuclear envelope. This reveals a highly complex interaction between DDX3X and viruses and provides new opportunities to target viral propagation.

### Keywords
Helicase, Us3, Herpes, Ddx, Hsv, Ddx3, Nec, Ul31, Host-pathogen interaction, Herpesvirus

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche du CHU Ste-Justine
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Roger Lippe
Centre de Recherche du CHU Ste-Justine


