### Accession
PXD008894

### Title
Proteomic characterisation of lysosomal and mitochondrial perturbations in human iPSC-derived neurons with PARK2 mutation

### Description
Mitochondrial dysfunction plays a major role in the pathogenesis of sporadic Parkinson’s disease (PD) and familial PD caused by mutations in the PARK2 gene. The protein, parkin, is vital for mitochondrial function, but the lack of key PD phenotypes in PARK2 knockout (KO) rodent models has hindered investigations into parkin’s role in PD pathogenesis. Human isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) lines with and without PARK2 KO enable studies of the effect of parkin dysfunction in dopaminergic neuronal cultures.

### Sample Protocol
Mitochondrial enrichment, reduction, alkylation, Trypsin digestion, TMT6-plex labeling, enrichment of phosphopeptides, HILIC fractionation, nano-LC-MSMS

### Data Protocol
The raw data were processes using Proteome Discoverer (v2.1, ThermoFisher) and searched against the Swissprot human database using an in-house Mascot server (v2.3, Matrix Science Ltd.) and the Sequest HT search engine. Database searches were performed with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da (HCD fragmentation), TMT 6-plex (Lys and N-terminal) as fixed modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin. Variable modifications were carbamidomethylation of alkylated Cys and N-terminal acetylation along with phosphorylation of Ser/Thr/Tyr for the phosphorylated group. Only peptides with up to a q-value of 0.01 (Percolator), Mascot rank 1 and cut-off value of Mascot score > 15 were considered for further analysis. Only proteins with more than one unique peptide were considered for further analysis in the non-modified group. Pathway analysis on proteomics data was performed using String 10.0, ProteinCenter (ThermoFisher) and the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software (IPA, QIAGEN).

### Publication Abstract
The protein parkin, encoded by the <i>PARK2</i> gene, is vital for mitochondrial homeostasis, and although it has been implicated in Parkinson's disease (PD), the disease mechanisms remain unclear. We have applied mass spectrometry-based proteomics to investigate the effects of parkin dysfunction on the mitochondrial proteome in human isogenic induced pluripotent stem cell-derived neurons with and without <i>PARK2</i> knockout (KO). The proteomic analysis quantified nearly 60% of all mitochondrial proteins, 119 of which were dysregulated in neurons with <i>PARK2</i> KO. The protein changes indicated disturbances in oxidative stress defense, mitochondrial respiration and morphology, cell cycle control, and cell viability. Structural and functional analyses revealed an increase in mitochondrial area and the presence of elongated mitochondria as well as impaired glycolysis and lactate-supported respiration, leading to an impaired cell survival in PARK2 KO neurons. This adds valuable insight into the effect of parkin dysfunction in human neurons and provides knowledge of disease-related pathways that can potentially be targeted for therapeutic intervention.

### Keywords
Human, Mitochondria, Lc-msms, Ipsc, Tmt, Park2

### Affiliations
University of Southern Denmark
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research group, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark

### Submitter
Pia Jensen

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Røssel Larsen
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Protein Research group, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark


