### Accession
PXD038287

### Title
Differential intracellular trafficking of exosomes in microglia and astrocytes

### Description
Exosomes have emerged as key players in cell-to-cell communication in both physiological and pathological processes in the Central Nervous System. Thus far, the intracellular pathways involved in uptake and trafficking of exosomes within different cell types of the brain are poorly understood. In our study, the endocytic processes and subcellular sorting of exosomes were investigated in primary glial cells, particularly linked with the exosome- associated α-synuclein (α-syn) transmission. Mouse microglia and astrocytic primary cultures were incubated with DiI-stained mouse brain-derived exosomes. The internalization and trafficking pathways were analysed in cells treated with pharmacological reagents that block the major endocytic pathways. Brain-derived exosomes were internalized by both glial cell types; however, uptake was more efficient in microglia than in astrocytes. Colocalization of exosomes with early and late endocytic markers (Rab5, Lamp1) indicated that exosomes are sorted to endolysosomes for subsequent processing. Treatment with Cytochalasin D, that blocks actin-dependent phagocytosis and/or macropinocytosis, inhibited exosome entry into glial cells, whereas treatment with inhibitors that strip off cholesterol from the plasma membrane, induced uptake, however differentially altered endosomal sorting. Exosome-associated fibrillar α-Syn was efficiently internalized and detected in Rab5- and Lamp1- positive compartments within microglia. Our study strongly suggests that exosomes enter glial cells through an actin network-dependent endocytic pathway and are sorted to endolysosomes for subsequent processing. Further, brain-derived exosomes are capable of mediating cell-to-glia transmission of pathological α-Syn that is also targeted to the endosomal pathway, suggesting a possible beneficial role in microglia-mediated clearance of toxic protein aggregates, present in numerous neurodegenerative diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The exosomal protein extracts from both fractionation methods were processed according to the SPSp3 method. The proteins were digested using a mixture of trypsin/LysC. The generated peptidic samples wereas evaporated, solubilized in Buffer A, sonicated and theirits peptide concentration was determined through UV nNanodDrop measurement at A280. 500 ng of peptides were injected and pre-concentrated on a C18 trap column (Acclaim pepmap, Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then loaded onto a 50 cm C18 column (Acclaim pepmap, Thermo Fisher Scientific), operated at 40 o C. Binary pumps of the HPLC (RSLCnano, Thermo Scientific) consisted of solution A (100%H 2 O in 0.1% v/v formic acid) and solution B(100% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). Separation of the peptides was performed using a flow rate of 0.300 nl/min and gradual changes in the ratios between gradients A and B, with a total of 100 min long run. Full scan Mass Spectrometry (MS) spectra were acquired in the orbitrap using profile mode with a data-dependent acquisition (DDA) method. Three technical replicas was run.

### Data Protocol
The generated mass spectral raw files were processed using MaxQuant software 21 (version 1.6.14.0). Trypsin was defined as a protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. Minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues were set as variable modifications. False Discovery Rate (FDR) for both peptides and proteins was set to 1%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was performed in order to calculate protein abundances. The “match between run” and “second peptides” options were enabled. The MS data was searched against a reviewed canonical fasta database of Mus musculus from UniProt.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have emerged as key players in cell-to-cell communication in both physiological and pathological processes in the Central Nervous System. Thus far, the intracellular pathways involved in uptake and trafficking of EVs within different cell types of the brain are poorly understood. In our study, the endocytic processes and subcellular sorting of EVs were investigated in primary glial cells, particularly linked with the EV-associated &#x3b1;-synuclein (&#x3b1;-syn) transmission. Mouse microglia and astrocytic primary cultures were incubated with DiI-stained mouse brain-derived EVs. The internalization and trafficking pathways were analyzed in cells treated with pharmacological reagents that block the major endocytic pathways. Brain-derived EVs were internalized by both glial cell types; however, uptake was more efficient in microglia than in astrocytes. Colocalization of EVs with early and late endocytic markers (Rab5, Lamp1) indicated that EVs are sorted to endo-lysosomes for subsequent processing. Blocking actin-dependent phagocytosis and/or macropinocytosis with Cytochalasin D or EIPA inhibited EV entry into glial cells, whereas treatment with inhibitors that strip cholesterol off the plasma membrane, induced uptake, however differentially altered endosomal sorting. EV-associated fibrillar &#x3b1;-Syn was efficiently internalized and detected in Rab5- and Lamp1-positive compartments within microglia. Our study strongly suggests that EVs enter glial cells through phagocytosis and/or macropinocytosis and are sorted to endo-lysosomes for subsequent processing. Further, brain-derived EVs serve as scavengers and mediate cell-to-glia transfer of pathological &#x3b1;-Syn which is also targeted to the endolysosomal pathway, suggesting a beneficial role in microglia-mediated clearance of toxic protein aggregates, present in numerous neurodegenerative diseases.

### Keywords
Brain-derived exosomes; α-synuclein ko mouse brain hemispheres (cd57bl6)

### Affiliations
Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens- BRFAA, Centre of Basic Research, Athens, Greece
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Kostas Vekrellis
Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens- BRFAA, Centre of Basic Research, Athens, Greece


