### Accession
PXD007794

### Title
Orthogonal interactome profiling of RNF41

### Description
Ring finger protein 41 (RNF41) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ubiquitination and degradation of many proteins such as ErbB3 receptors, BRUCE and parkin. Next to this, RNF41 regulates the intracellular trafficking of certain JAK-2 associated cytokine receptors by ubiquitinating and suppressing USP8 which in turn destabilizes the ESCRT-0 complex. To further elucidate the function of RNF41 we used different orthogonal approaches to reveal the RNF41 protein complex:  Affinity Purification-Mass Spectrometry, BioID and Virotrap.  We combined these results with known datasets for RNF41obtained with microarray MAPPIT and Y2H screens. By combining all these datasets ,  we provide a comprehensive high resolution interactome network. To further remove potential methodological artifacts from this network, we further distilled the data into a high confidence interactome map by retaining protein hits identified in two or more of the orthogonal methods. AP2S1, a novel RNF41 interaction partner, was selected from this high confidence interactome for further functional validation. We reveal a role for AP2S1 in leptin and LIF receptor signaling and show that RNF41 stabilizes and relocates AP2S1.

### Sample Protocol
For every AP-MS condition we seeded 2 PD150 dishes with 8.106 HEK293T cells 48hrs before transfection.  After PolyEthylene Imine (PEI)-based transfection for 8hrs using 14.5 g of pMET7-GAG-RNF41 C34S/H36Q or pMET7-FLAG-EGFP (controls), cells were scraped the next day in ice cold PBS. Pellets were weighed and 400ul lysis buffer (50mM HEPES-KOH pH 8.0, 100mM KCl, 2mM EDTA, 0.1% NP40, 10% glycerol, 1mM DTT, 0.5mM PMSF, Protease inhibitor cocktail tablet [Roche], 0.25mM NaOVO3, 50mM glycerophosphate, 10mM NaF) was added for every 100mg of pelleted cell material. 50l of prewashed MyOne Streptavidin T1 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) were pre-incubated with 5l BioM2 antibody (Sigma). The beads were added after washing to the pre-cleared lysates (20min 16000xg 4°C) and left to bind complexes for 2hrs at 4°C by end-over-end rotation. After washing, beads were incubated overnight with 750ng trypsin, followed by an additional incubation step with 250ng trypsin for 4hrs after removal of the beads.   After acidification, peptides were analyzed by liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry (LC-MS) using a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. The pDEST-pCDNA5-RNF41 C34S/H36Q-BirA*-FLAG-C-term vector was stably integrated in the genome of Flp-In™ T-REx 293 cells using the Flp-In™ reaction according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Inducible expression of the fusion construct was verified by Western blot using anti-FLAG antibody (M2, Sigma). 80 g of cleared lysates were loaded on 4-12% gradient gels. For BioID experiments, 2 PD150 dishes were seeded the day before doxycycline induction for each sample. Cells were treated with doxycycline (4 repeat samples) for 48hrs or left untreated as controls (4 repeat control samples) the day after transfection. At around 85% confluency cells were washed and collected in PBS. After removal of PBS, the cells were lysed using ice-cold RIPA lysis buffer (50mM TRIS-HCl pH7.5, 150mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1mM EGTA, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% Sodium Deoxycholate, 250U Benzonase and Protease inhibitor cocktail [Sigma 1/500]). Lysates were cleared after sonication by 15min. at 16000xg and at 4°C. 150l bed volume of pre-washed Streptavidin Sepharose® High Performance Beads (GE) was added to each sample and was allowed to bind biotinylated proteins for 3hrs at 4°C by end-over-end rotation. After extensive washing of the beads, on bead trypsin digest and LC-MS was performed as described for the AP-MS approach. Virotrap experiments were performed essentially as described in Titeca et al. After acidification, peptides were analyzed by LC-MS using a Thermo Scientific™ Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer. Analysis was performed on 4 independent transfections for RNF41 and control experiments. The peptide mixtures were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm I.D. × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the sample was loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 150 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) packed in the nanospray needle (PicoFrit SELF/P PicoTip emitter, PF360-75-15-N-5, NewObjective, Woburn, USA). The samples were loaded and separated with a linear gradient from 98% solvent A’ (0.1% formic acid in water) to 40% solvent B′ (0.08% formic acid in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) in 30 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. This was followed by a 15 min wash reaching 99% solvent B’. The Q Exactive instrument was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 10 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was 3.4 kV, and the capillary temperature was 275°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 400−2000, AGC target 3 × 106  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms) acquired at a resolution of 70,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 10 tandem MS scans (resolution 17,500 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling the defined selection criteria (AGC target 5 × 104  ions, maximum ion injection time 80 ms, isolation window 2 Da, fixed first mass 140 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, minimum AGC target 1000, intensity threshold 1.3xE4,  exclusion of unassigned, 1, 5-8, and >8 charged precursors,  peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 25% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.120025 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
All MS data was searched using MAXQUANT (version 1.5.7.4) against the human SwissProt database (Jan 2017; complemented with GAG, VSV-G and eDHFR sequences for Virotrap; complemented with EGFP for AP-MS, and BirA* for BioID), with 4,5 ppm and 20 ppm tolerance on precursor and fragment mass respectively, with trypsin/P settings allowing up to 2 missed cleavages, and with methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation formation as variable modifications. Minimum peptide length was set to 7, maximum peptide mass was 4,600 Da. PSM FDR and protein FDR were set to 0.01. Min. peptides and min. razor + unique peptides were set to 1. The searches were performed together with the corresponding control samples to allow matching of MS spectra between runs. Contaminants and identifications against the REVERSE database were removed in the PERSEUS (version 1.5.5.3) analysis after the log2 transformation of the non-normalized protein LFQ ratios.  A two-sided t-test was performed with multiple testing correction using 1000 randomizations. FDR was set at 1% with the S0 curve set at 1.

### Publication Abstract
Ring finger protein 41 (RNF41) is an E3 ubiquitin ligase involved in the ubiquitination and degradation of many proteins including ErbB3 receptors, BIRC6, and parkin. Next to this, RNF41 regulates the intracellular trafficking of certain JAK2-associated cytokine receptors by ubiquitinating and suppressing USP8, which, in turn, destabilizes the ESCRT-0 complex. To further elucidate the function of RNF41 we used different orthogonal approaches to reveal the RNF41 protein complex: affinity purification-mass spectrometry, BioID, and Virotrap. We combined these results with known data sets for RNF41 obtained with microarray MAPPIT and Y2H screens. This way, we establish a comprehensive high-resolution interactome network comprising 175 candidate protein partners. To remove potential methodological artifacts from this network, we distilled the data into a high-confidence interactome map by retaining a total of 19 protein hits identified in two or more of the orthogonal methods. AP2S1, a novel RNF41 interaction partner, was selected from this high-confidence interactome for further functional validation. We reveal a role for AP2S1 in leptin and LIF receptor signaling and show that RNF41 stabilizes and relocates AP2S1.

### Keywords
Human ap-ms viortrap bioid

### Affiliations
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Gent Belgium
VIB Center for Medical Biotechnology

### Submitter
Sven Eyckerman

### Lab Head
Dr Sven Eyckerman
VIB-UGent Center for Medical Biotechnology A. Baertsoenkaai 3 B-9000 Gent Belgium


