### Accession
PXD033942

### Title
Identification of myeloid-derived growth factor as a mechanically-induced, growth-promoting angiocrine signal for human hepatocytes

### Description
Recently, we have shown that after partial hepatectomy (PHx), an increased hepatic blood flow initiates liver growth in mice by vasodilation and mechanically-triggered release of angiocrine signals. Here, we use mass spectrometry to identify a mechanically-induced angiocrine signal in human hepatic endothelial cells, that is, myeloid-derived growth factor (MYDGF). We show that it induces proliferation and promotes survival of primary human hepatocytes derived from different donors in two-dimensional cell culture, via activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3). MYDGF also enhances proliferation of human hepatocytes in three-dimensional organoids. In vivo, genetic deletion of MYDGF decreases hepatocyte proliferation in the regenerating mouse liver after PHx; conversely, adeno-associated viral delivery of MYDGF increases hepatocyte proliferation and MAPK signaling after PHx. We conclude that MYDGF represents a mechanically-induced angiocrine signal and that it triggers growth of, and provides protection to, primary mouse and human hepatocytes

### Sample Protocol
Supernatants from unstretched and stretched human hepatic endothelial cells ECs (3.5-3.6ml) were centrifuged at 85,000 x g, 4°C for 30 minutes and afterwards concentrated via centrifugal filters with a 3 kDa cut-off (Merck, Amicon Ultra UFC500324) following manufacturers protocol. From each of the resulting concentrated supernatants 20 µl were loaded onto a short SDS-Page (10% polyacrylamide, 0.5 cm separation distance. Protein bands were excised and subjected to in-gel protease (Trypsin) digestion. Lyophilized peptides were reconstituted in 1% TFA (v/v) and separated by liquid chromatography (LC, Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an EASYspray ion source equipped to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped and desalted on an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 LC trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, 164535) and subsequently separated via EASY-Spray C18 column (Thermo Fisher Scientific, P/N ES803) using a 100 min linear gradient from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to 4-34% buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min followed by a 20 min linear gradient increasing buffer B to 50% and a 1min linear gradient increasing buffer B to 90%. Column temperature was set to 40 C°. For identification MS data were acquired in DDA (data dependent acquisition) mode. MS spectra were obtained at 120,000 resolution (3s cycle time), m/z range of 350-1600 and a target value of 4e5 ions, with maximum injection time of 50 ms. For fragmentation precursor selection filter were set to charge state between 2 and 7, dynamic exclusion of 30 s and intensity threshold of 2.5e4. Fragmentation of precursors was done with an isolation window (m/z) 1.2, HCD energy of 32%, Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 and an ion target value of 1.0e5 with maximum injection time of 50ms.

### Data Protocol
For identification MS spectra were analyzed with Proteome Discover (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Version 2.2.0.388). Used HTSequest search settings were: enzyme trypsin (full), max missed cleavages 2, peptide length 6-144, fragment mass tolerance 0.04 Da, modifications: carbamidomethyl (C) (fixed); oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) (dynamic) and FASTA files (Homo sapiens (SwissProt TaxID 9606 (v2017-10-25)) Bos taurus (SwissProt TaxID 9913 and (v2017-10-25) and a general contaminant fasta file, consist of ~250 sequences from different origin). For peptide spectrum match (PSM) validation Percolator node was used with standard settings (for input data max delta Cn 0.05, decoy database target FDR 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed) and validation based on q-value). For protein grouping only rank 1 peptides were used and the parsimony principle were applied with protein FDR 0.01 (strict) and 0.05 (relaxed). For protein distribution across different samples, only unique peptide based on protein groups were used. Proteins that originate from contaminants, bovine, or with an undefined origin, either from bovine or from human were not considered for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Lc-ms-ms, Liver, Myeloid-derived growth factor

### Affiliations
Institute of Metabolic Physiology Heinrich Heine University of Duesseldorf Universitätsstr. 1 D-40225 Duesseldorf Germany
Heinrich Heine University 
Institute for metabolic physiology 

### Submitter
Paula Follert

### Lab Head
Professor Eckhard Lammert
Institute of Metabolic Physiology Heinrich Heine University of Duesseldorf Universitätsstr. 1 D-40225 Duesseldorf Germany


