### Accession
PXD017198

### Title
Evaluation of protein purification techniques and effects of storage duration on LC-MS/MS analysis of archived FFPE human CRC tissues

### Description
To elucidate cancer pathogenesis and its mechanisms at the molecular level, the collecting and characterisation of large individual patient tissue cohorts are required. Since most pathology institutes routinely preserve biopsy tissues by standardised methods of formalin fixation and paraffin embedment, these archived FFPE tissues are important collections of pathology material that include patient’s metadata (medical history/treatments). FFPE blocks can be stored under ambient conditions for decades, while retaining cellular morphology, due to modifications induced by formalin. However, the effect of long-term storage, at resource-limited institutions in developing countries, on extractable protein quantity/quality has not yet been investigated. In addition, the optimal sample preparation techniques required for accurate, reproducible results from label-free LC-MS/MS analysis across block ages remains unclear. This study investigated protein extraction efficiency of 1, 5 and 10-year old human colorectal carcinoma resection tissue and assessed three different gel-free sample preparation methods for label-free LC-MS/MS analysis. The results indicate that the amount of protein extracted (mg/ml) is significantly dependent on block age, with older blocks yielding less protein than newer blocks. This may be due to the effect of formalin-fixation, which is an ongoing process, over long periods of storage. Detergent removal plates were the most efficient and overall reproducible sample preparation method with regard to number of peptide and protein identifications, followed by the SP3/HILIC method, and lastly the APFAR method. Therefore, block age mainly affects initial protein extraction and does not show significant differences/biases with regard to subsequent label-free LC-MS/MS analysis results.

### Sample Protocol
FFPE tumour tissue sections were deparaffinised (2 consecutive incubations in xylene for 2.5min and 1.5min each respectively, at room temperature) and rehydrated by successive incubations in absolute ethanol, 70%(v/v) ethanol, and twice with distilled water, for 1min each at room temperature (RT). Tissues were collected in protein LoBind microcentrifuge tubes by scraping it off the glass using clean sterile scalpel blades. Protein extraction buffer (50 mM AmBic, pH 8.0 and 2%(w/v) SDS was added to the samples at a volume of approx 20 μl protein extraction buffer per mm3 of tissue (approx 25 mm3 tissue per sample). Samples were mixed by vortexing and incubated at 99°C in a heating block with agitation set at 600 RPM for 1 hr, after which they were cooled on ice before centrifugation at 16,000 x g, 18°C for 20min. Clarified lysates of each sample were transferred to new LoBind tubes and protein yield determined using Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit according to manufacturer’s instructions. Each sample was split in 3 and protein was digested and purified via 3 different methods, namely detergent removal plates (DRP), acetone precipitation and formic acid resolubilisation (APFAR), and Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation (SP3). For the DRP method, detergent removal was carried out using detergent removal spin plates (Pierce, 88304) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Purified samples were transferred to protein Lobind tubes and dried down by vacuum centrifugation. Dried samples were resuspended in 30 μl of 50mM TEAB. For the APFAR method samples, a total of 100 μg protein was transferred to each protein Lobind tube and precipitated by addition of four volumes of ice cold acetone followed by overnight incubation at -20˚C. Samples were centrifuged at 21,000 x g for 15min at 4 ˚C. The supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed with ice cold acetone. This process was repeated for a total of three pelleting steps. Thereafter, the pellets were air-dried and subsequently solubilised by re-suspension in 50mM TEAB. In-solution digestion was carried out on samples processed by the APFAR and DRP methods – briefly, the protein was reduced by the addition of 0.1 volumes of 100 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) to each sample followed by incubation at 60˚C for 1 hour. Alkylation was accomplished by addition of 0.1 volumes of 100 mM methyl methanethiosulphonate (MMTS), which was prepared in isopropanol, to each sample and subsequent incubation at RT for 15min. Protein digestion was accomplished by addition of 1:50 (trypsin: final protein ratio) trypsin in a solution with 50mM TEAB, and overnight incubation at 37˚C. Samples were dried down and resuspended in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) prior to clean-up via Zip-Tip (Sigma-Aldrich, USA), after which the samples were again dried down and resuspended in a final volume of 12 μl liquid chromatography (LC) loading buffer (0.1% Formic Acid (FA), 2% Acetonitrile (ACN). For the HILIC bead workflow, MagReSyn® HILIC beads (ReSyn Biosciences, South Africa) were aliquoted into new tubes, shipping solution removed and beads washed with 250μl wash buffer (15% ACN, 100mM Ammonium acetate pH 4.5) for 1min then resuspended in loading buffer (30% ACN, 200mM Ammonium acetate, pH 4.5). The rest of the process was performed using a Hamilton MassSTAR robotics liquid handler. A total of 50μg of protein from each sample was transferred to a protein LoBind plate. Protein was reduced with 10mM TCEP and incubated at 60˚C for 1 hour. Samples were cooled to RT and alkylated with 10mM MMTS at RT for 15min. HILIC magnetic beads were added at an equal volume to that of the sample and a ratio of 5:1 total protein. The plate was incubated at RT on a shaker at 900 RPM for 30min for protein binding to beads. After binding, the beads were washed 4 times with 500μl of 95% ACN for 1min each. Trypsin in 50mM TEAB was added at a ratio of 1:10 total protein and the plate incubated at 37˚C on shaker for 4 hours. After digestion the supernatant/peptides was removed, dried down and resuspended in LC loading buffer. LC-MS/MS analysis was conducted with a Q-Exactive quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled with Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano-UPLC system. Peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and 2% ACN and loaded on a C18 trap column (PepMap100, 300μm×5mm×5μm). Samples were trapped onto the column and washed for 3min before the valve was switched and peptides eluted onto the analytical column as follows: A gradient of increasing organic proportion was used for peptide separation, chromatographic separation was performed with Waters nanoEase (Zenfit) M/Z Peptide CSH C18 column (75μm ×25cm× 1.7μm) and solvent system employed was solvent A (0.1% FA in LC water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in ACN). The multi-step gradient for peptide separation was generated at 300 nL/min. The gradient was held at 80% solvent B for 10min before returning it to 2% solvent B and conditioning the column for 15min.

### Data Protocol
All data acquisition was obtained using Proxeon stainless steel emitters (Thermo Fisher, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320°C. The applied electrospray voltage was 1.95 kV. The mass spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner using XcaliburTM software version 4.1.31.9 (Thermo Fisher, USA), Chromeleon v6.8 (SR13), Orbitrap MS v2.9 (build 2926) and Thermo Foundations 3.1 (SP4). Raw data containing centroid MS/MS spectra were converted into mgf (Matrix Science, UK) files using msconvert from the Proteo-Wizard software suite (Kessner et al., 2008). Peak lists obtained from MS/MS spectra were identified using X!Tandem version X!Tandem Vengeance (2015.12.15.2) (Craig & Beavis, 2004), MS Amanda version 2.0.0.9706 (Dorfer et al., 2014) and MS-GF+ version 2018.04.09 (Kim & Pevzner, 2014). The search was conducted using SearchGUI (version 3.3.3) (Vaudel et al., 2011) and protein identification was conducted against a concatenated target/decoy protein sequence database: The protein sequences database was generated by combining the 20,341 Homo sapiens sequences (obtained from UniProtKB human reviewed Swiss-Prot proteome) and one trypsin Sus scrofa sequence obtained from UniProtKB (Apweiler et al., 2004), downloaded on 21/05/2018. The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI. The identification settings were as follows: Trypsin, Specific, with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages; 10.0 ppm as MS1 and 0.02 Da as MS2 tolerances; fixed modifications: Methylthio of C (+45.987721 Da), variable modifications: Oxidation of M (+15.994915 Da), Deamidation of N and Q (+0.984016 Da); fixed modifications during refinement procedure: Methylthio of C (+45.987721 Da), variable modifications during refinement procedure: Acetylation of protein N-term (+42.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from E (--18.010565 Da), Pyrolidone from Q (--17.026549 Da), Pyrolidone from carbamidomethylated C (--17.026549 Da). (The decoy sequences were created by reversing the target sequences in SearchGUI). Peptides and proteins were inferred from the spectrum identification results using PeptideShaker version 1.16.40 (Vaudel et al., 2015). Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSMs), peptides and proteins were validated at a 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) estimated using the decoy hit distribution. Post-translational modification localizations were scored using the D-score (Vaudel et al., 2013) and the phosphoRS score (Taus et al., 2011) with a threshold of 95.0 as implemented in the compomics-utilities package (Barsnes et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Colon cancer, Ffpe, Protein purification, Label-free shotgun mass spectrometry, Archival storage, Colorectal cancer

### Affiliations
University of the Western Cape
South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western Cape, South Africa

### Submitter
Catherine Rossouw

### Lab Head
Dr Alan Gilbert Christoffels
South African National Bioinformatics Institute, University of the Western Cape, South Africa


