### Accession
PXD022319

### Title
WDR4 conditional knockout in mouse cerebellar granule progenitors for proteome analysis

### Description
To uncover candidates which are WDR4 downstream effectors regulating cerebellar granule neuron proliferation phenotype, we utilized quantitative proteomics analysis (TMT labeling) with granule neuron progenitors from P7 wdr4 conditional knockout (using Atoh1-Cre) and control cerebella.

### Sample Protocol
Granule neuron progenitor cells were isolated from P7 mouse cerebella using fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FASC). Cells were lysed with 8M urea. After lysis and centrifugation, the extracted proteins were linearized with dithioerythritol (DTE) and iodoacetamide (IAM) and then digested to peptides with endoproteinase Lys-C and trypsin. The digested peptides were purified using C18 ZipTip and labeled by different tandem mass tag (TMT). TMT-126, 127, 128 were used to label 3 controls groups, while TMT-129, 130, 131 were used to label 3 mutant groups, individually. Subsequently, equal amounts of labeled peptides from each group were pooled together, and fractionated using high pH reversed-phase chromatography before analyzed using Orbitrap Elite Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
To map the identified peptides to their corresponding proteins, Proteome Discoverer 2.3 software (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) was used to perform database searching against the Swiss-Port Mouse database using the Sequest algorithms with the settings of 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance and 0.02 Da fragment mass tolerance. Trypsin was specified as the digesting enzyme. Only peptides unique for a given protein were considered for quantitation.

### Publication Abstract
Patients with mutations of WDR4, a substrate adaptor of the CUL4 E3 ligase complex, develop cerebellar atrophy and gait phenotypes. However, the underlying mechanisms remain unexplored. Here, we identify a crucial role of Wdr4 in cerebellar development. Wdr4 deficiency in granule neuron progenitors (GNPs) not only reduces foliation and the sizes of external and internal granular layers but also compromises Purkinje neuron organization and the size of the molecular layer, leading to locomotion defects. Mechanistically, Wdr4 supports the proliferation of GNPs by preventing their cell cycle exit. This effect is mediated by Wdr4-induced ubiquitination and degradation of Arhgap17, thereby activating Rac1 to facilitate cell cycle progression. Disease-associated Wdr4 variants, however, cannot provide GNP cell cycle maintenance. Our study identifies Wdr4 as a previously unappreciated participant in cerebellar development and locomotion, providing potential insights into treatment strategies for diseases with WDR4 mutations, such as primordial dwarfism and Galloway-Mowat syndrome.

### Keywords
Cerebellum, Mouse, Wdr4, Granule progenitors, Tmt

### Affiliations
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica

### Submitter
Pei-Rung Wu

### Lab Head
Dr Ruey-Hwa Chen
Institute of Biological Chemistry, Academia Sinica


