### Accession
PXD028584

### Title
Sarcoglycan interactions in murine muscle membranes

### Description
The sarcoglycan complex (SC) is part of a network that links the striated muscle cytoskeleton to the basal lamina across the sarcolemma. The SC coordinates changes in phosphorylation and Ca++-flux during mechanical deformation, and these processes are disrupted with loss-of-function mutations in gamma-sarcoglycan (Sgcg) that cause Limb Girdle Muscular Dystrophy 2C/R5. To gain insight into how the SC mediates mechano-signaling in muscle, we utilized LC-MS/MS proteomics to identify SC-associated proteins in immunoprecipitates from enriched sarcolemmal fractions. Criteria for inclusion were selective co-immunoprecipitation with anti-Sgcg from C57BL/6 control muscle, but under-representation in parallel experiments with Sgcg-null muscle or with non-specific IgG. Co-immunoprecipitation from archvillin-deleted muscle (Svil-null) was also evaluated.

### Sample Protocol
Mouse muscle plasma membranes. Mouse gastrocnemius muscles were dissected and cut into ~100 mg pieces (wet tissue mass) and flash frozen. One half of each sample was minced and covered with 900 µl of buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 0.5 mM DTT, 0.1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, and protease inhibitors) followed by a multistep protocol (too detailed for inclusion here) of sonication and centrifugation to produce initially pellets, then ultimately membranes. Two types of extraction/solubilization were performed: one using Rx Buffer (25 mM MOPS, pH 7.5, 0.1 M NaCl, 0.5 M KCL, 10 mM MgCl2, 5 mM ATP, 60 mM octylglucopyranoside, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 10% glycerol, and protease inhibitors) and one using RIPA1 buffer (100 mM MOPS, pH 7.5, 0.3 M NaCl, 2% IGEPAL CA-630, 1% deoxycholic acid, 0.2% SDS, and protease inhibitors). Following additional multistep sample processing, the final Rx pellet was resuspended in an equal volume of 2x Laemmli sample buffer while the RIPA1 pellet was resuspended in a Laemmli sample buffer volume equivalent to the corresponding RIPA supernatant.  Co-IPs. For each IP from muscle lysates, 15 µg of antibody was used per 50 µl of Dynabeads Protein A.  Protein A-bound IgG was cross-linked using 20 mM dimethylpimelimidate. The Rx membrane lysate was diluted with an equal volume of Rx buffer without KCL or ATP (25 mM MOPS, pH 7.5, 0.1 M NaCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 60 mM octylglucopyranoside, 0.5% IGEPAL CA-630, 10% glycerol), and the RIPA1 extract was diluted to 750 µl using RIPA1 buffer. Both the diluted Rx and RIPA1 lysates were pre-cleared with 20 µl Dynabeads Protein A (pre-rinsed in Rx or RIPA1 buffer) for 30 minutes at 4°C. A 100-µl aliquot was removed as “input” before proceeding with each IP. The lysates were divided among the IP antibodies (200 µl each for RIPA1, 300 µl each for Rx), and incubated at 4°C for 2h. Dynabeads were collected magnetically, and rinsed 5 times with 500 µl ice-cold 0.5 x TBST (5 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 83 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween-20); beads were transferred to a fresh tube at the second rinse. Immunoprecipitated proteins were eluted under non-reducing conditions in Laemmli sample buffer lacking dithiothreitol, and the eluate was transferred to a fresh tube.  In-gel digestion > LC-MS/MS. IPs and subsequent analyses were performed using triplicate biological samples for each antibody and muscle genotype. Gastrocnemius muscles containing the SC were from C57BL/6 (WT) mice and a mouse strain homozygous for the genetic ablation of a large 5' coding exon in the Svil gene (Svil-/-) yielding archvillin-null muscle. Negative controls were gastrocnemius muscles from Sgcg-/- mice and IPs with nonspecific rabbit IgG. DTT (final concentration of 2 mM) was added to the immunoprecipitated samples before they were electrophoresed into a 10% Laemmli resolving gel without a stacking gel, until the dye front was ~1 cm below the bottom of the loading wells; at least two blank wells separated samples. Gel proteins were then visualized by colloidal blue staining. Each sample was excised as a single gel piece and were subjected to in-gel trypsin digestion after reduction with DTT and alkylation (iodoacetamide). Peptides eluted from the gel were lyophilized and re-suspended in 25 µl of 5% acetonitrile containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Three microliter injections were loaded by a Waters nanoAcquity UPLC in 5% acetonitrile (0.1% formic acid) at 4.0 µl/min for 4.0 min to a 100 µm I.D. fused-silica pre-column (Kasil frit) packed with 2 cm of 5 µm (200Å) Magic C18AQ (Bruker-Michrom). Peptides were then eluted at 300 nl/min using a 75 µm I.D. gravity-pulled analytical column packed with 25 cm of 3 µm (100Å) Magic C18AQ using a linear gradient from 5-35% B (mobile phase A, water + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid; mobile phase B, acetonitrile + 0.1% (v/v) formic acid) over 90 minutes. Ions were introduced by positive electrospray ionization via liquid junction electrode into a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive hybrid mass spectrometer. Mass spectra were acquired over m/z 300-1750 at 70,000 resolution (m/z 200) using an AGC (automatic gain control) target ion population of 1e6. Data-dependent acquisition selected the top 10 most abundant precursor ions for tandem mass spectrometry using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) using an isolation width of 1.6 Da, a normalized collision energy of 27, a maximum ion fill time of 110 ms, and an AGC target ion population of 1e5. Tandem mass spectra were acquired at 17,500 (m/z 200) resolution.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were peak processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific) followed by identification using Mascot (version 2.5, Matrix Science) against the SwissProt Mus musculus database (download 04/2018). Search parameters included full trypsin specificity with up to 2 missed cleavages, fixed modification of cysteine carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of methionine oxidation, glutamine to pyroglutamic acid conversion, and protein N-terminal acetylation. Assignments were made using a 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursors and a 0.05 Da mass tolerance for fragments. All non-filtered search results were processed by Scaffold (version 4.4.4, Proteome Software) utilizing the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (Institute for Systems Biology, Seattle, WA). Rx buffer and RIPA1 buffer extracts were analyzed separately. For both extracts, threshold values were set at 80% for peptides (false-discovery rate (FDR) of 0.45% for Rx extracts and 0.55% for RIPA extracts) and 99% for proteins (2 peptide minimum; Rx extracts, FDR 20.0%; RIPA extracts, FDR 12.0%). Quantitative comparisons were made in Scaffold using normalized weighted spectral counts.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sarcolemma, Sarcoglycan complex, Membrane biochemistry, Immunoaffinity purification, Muscle proteomics, Limb girdle muscular dystrophy, Shotgun proteomics, Skeletal muscle, Protein-protein interactions, Archvillin

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Medical School
Department of Radiology, Division of Cell Biology & Imaging, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA

### Submitter
Scott Shaffer

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth J. Luna
Department of Radiology, Division of Cell Biology & Imaging, University of Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, MA, USA


