### Accession
PXD006791

### Title
The Role of Microtubules in the Trafficking of Ectopic ATP Synthase

### Description
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) synthase is located on the inner membrane of mitochondria which generate ATP for various cellular processes. Our previous studies showed that ATP synthases existed on plasma membrane of several types of cancer cells, which was defined as ectopic ATP synthase. However, the trafficking pathway of ectopic ATP synthase is still unclear. To investigate how ATP synthase subunits are involved in the trafficking process, we performed shot-gun proteomic analysis to reveal the plasma membrane proteins of A549 lung cancer cells and identified four subunits of ATP synthases, ATP5A1, ATP5B, ATP5H, and MT-ATP6. With the results of gene set enrichment analysis, we inferred that ectopic ATP synthase subunits are assembled as complex consistently and then translocated to cell surface through the trafficking of mitochondria. On the other hand, microtubules are involved in many intracellular transport. During protein trafficking, mitochondria and vesicles are transported to their final destination along microtubules by motor proteins such as kinesins and dyneins. To explore the function of microtubules in the trafficking of ectopic ATP synthase, we treated MCF-7 breast and A549 lung cancer cells with nocodazole, a microtubule depolymerization agent, and found that the expression level of ectopic ATP synthase decreased using both immunocytochemistry and flow cytometry. Besides, since kinesin family member 5B (KIF5B) is an important motor proteins involved in the transport of mitochondria, we further performed the immunoprecipitation of KIF5B followed by liquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (LC−MS/MS). The result revealed that one of the mitochondrial outer membrane proteins, dynamin-1 like proteins (Drp1), was able to associate to KIF5B. From our recent research results and other reports show that Drp1 is a mediator of mitochondrial dynamic through regulation of mitochondrial fission. Taken together, our findings suggested that Drp1-KIF5B complex-mediated mitochondrial trafficking along microtubules may play a critical role in the transport of ectopic ATP synthase

### Sample Protocol
Plasma membrane proteins were extracted by cell surface isolation kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). When 90~95% confluent, the cells were washed with 8 mL iced phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) for twice and labeled with 12 mg Sulfo-NHS-SS-Biotin at 4C for 30 minutes. The cells were treated with 3 mL quenching solution to stop the reaction at 4C for 30 minutes and were washed with 5 mL iced tris-buffered saline (TBS) for twice. The cells were then treated with 500 μL lysis buffer with protease inhibitor and phosphatase inhibitor and homogenized on ice using the sonicator (0.6-second bursts, about 30 seconds) for 4~5 times. The cell lysates were incubated on ice for 30 minutes with 5 seconds vortex every 5 minutes. The supernatant containing whole cell proteins were collected by centrifugation at 10000 × g for 2 minutes at 4C. 500 μL NeutrAvidin agarose were added to the column, centrifuged at 1000 × g for 1 minute and washed with 500 μL wash buffer for twice. The collected supernatant were transferred to the column and rotated at 4C overnight. The samples were centrifuged at 1000 × g for 1 minute and washed with 500 μL wash buffer for five times. The samples were then treated with 400 μL 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB, Sigma-Aldrich) with 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at room temperature for 1 hour. The eluate were collected by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 2 minutes. 4 times the sample volume of cold acetone (Burdick and Jackson) was added to the eluate. The samples were incubated at -20C overnight and the pellet of plasma membrane proteins were obtained by centrifugation at 15000 × g for 20 minutes at room temperature. The samples were then vacuum-dried and dissolved with phase-transfer surfactants solution (690μL ddH2O, 100 μL 120 mM sodium deoxycholate, 100 μL 120 mM sodium lauryl sulfate, 100 μL 1 M TEAB, 10 μL protease inhibitor). The concentration of sample was measured by the PierceTM BCA Protein Assay Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The sample was reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol (BioShop) at room temperature for 30 min, and carbidomethylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 30 min in the dark. The samples were treated with Lys-C (1:100 w/w) (WAKO) for 3 hours and then trypsin (1:100 w/w) (Promega) at 37C overnight. The peptides were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma-Aldrich) until the pH value was lower than 3. The acidified peptides were desalted by StageTips with SDB-XC Empore disk membranes (SDB-XC StageTip) (3M, St. Paul). The peptides were treated with 10% TFA and ethyl acetate (EtOAc, Sigma-Aldrich) and the detergent was removed by centrifugation at 16100 × g at room temperature for 2 minutes. The peptides were vacuum-dried and dissolved with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 5% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN, Thermo Fisher Scientific). SDB-XC StageTips were conditioned with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) ACN, and equilibrated with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 5% (v/v) ACN, by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 2 minutes. The peptides were loaded into SDB-XC StageTips with centrifugation at 500 × g for 4 minutes. The tips were washed with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 5% (v/v) ACN by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 2 minutes. The peptides were eluted with 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 80% (v/v) ACN by centrifugation at 1000 × g for 3 minutes. The desalted peptides (150 μg) were vacuum-dried and dissolved with 0.1 M TEAB solution. The peptides of A549 and the peptides of IMR-90 were treated with 6 μL 4% formaldehgyde-D2 (Sigma-Aldrich) and 6 μL 4% formaldehyde-H2 (Sigma-Aldrich), respectively. The samples were both catalyzed by 6 μL 0.6 M sodium cyanoborohydride (Sigma-Aldrich) at room temperature for 1 hour. The reaction was stopped by 24 μL 1% (v/v) ammonium hydroxide (WAKO) and acidified with 30 μL 10% (v/v) formic acid. H-labeled peptides and L-labeled peptides were mixed together with the ratio of H/D-labeled sample being 1:1. The sample was desalted by SDB-XC StageTips and vacuum-dried. Finally, the sample was dissolved with 0.5% TFA for NanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The MS analyses were conducted by LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo Electron Corp.) with nanoACQUITY UPLC system (Waters Corp.). The sample was loaded in 2 cm × 180 μm capillary trap column and then separated to a 75 μm × 25 cm nanoACQUITY 1.7 μm BEH C18 column (Waters Corp.), with flow rate at 300 nL/minute. Mobile phase was composed of (A) 0.1% formic acid and (B) 0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. The linear gradient of B was 10% to 40% in 90 minutes and 40% to 85% in 10 minutes. The resolution was set to 60000 at m/z 400, with the automated gain control being 1 × 106 ions. The top ten intensity of precursor ions were selected for subsequent collision-induced dissociation MS/MS scan by ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was analyzed for peak detection and quantification by using MaxQuant software version 1.3.0.5. The identification of peptides sequences were analyzed by Andromeda search engine and Swiss-Prot database. The parameters setting for search criteria consisted the length of peptides (must longer than 6 amino acids), the precursor mass tolerance (3 ppm), the fragment ion tolerance (0.5 Da). The decoy database strategy was used to make sure the posterior error probability (PEP) of analysis of peptides sequences was lower than 1%. The identified proteins were analyzed by DAVID (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/tools.jsp) and annotated with their GO terms.

### Publication Abstract
Ectopic ATP synthase complex (eATP synthase), located on cancer cell surface, has been reported to possess catalytic activity that facilitates the generation of ATP in the extracellular environment to establish a suitable microenvironment and to be a potential target for cancer therapy. However, the mechanism of intracellular ATP synthase complex transport remains unclear. Using a combination of spatial proteomics, interaction proteomics, and transcriptomics analyses, we find ATP synthase complex is first assembled in the mitochondria and subsequently delivered to the cell surface along the microtubule via the interplay of dynamin-related protein 1 (DRP1) and kinesin family member 5B (KIF5B). We further demonstrate that the mitochondrial membrane fuses to the plasma membrane in turn to anchor ATP syntheses on the cell surface using super-resolution imaging and real-time fusion assay in live cells. Our results provide a blueprint of eATP synthase trafficking and contribute to the understanding of the dynamics of tumor progression.

### Keywords
Ectopic atp synthases; proteomic analysis; the trafficking of mitochondria; microtubule; kif5b; drp1

### Affiliations
National Taiwan University
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Ting-Yu Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Hsueh-Fen Juan
Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan


