### Accession
PXD039382

### Title
Systematic investigation of dose-dependent protein thermal stability changes to uncover the mechanisms of the pleiotropic effects of metformin

### Description
Metformin is the most popular drug to treat type II diabetes. Besides lowering blood sugar, it is proven to have more beneficial effects, including extending life expectancy. However, the underlying mechanisms remain largely elusive. Here, we systematically studied the proteome thermal stability changes induced by a wide dosage range of metformin in a liver cancer cell line using the proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay. This work provides valuable and unique information about the interactions between proteins and this drug, which is not able to obtain using commonly used abundance-based proteomics. The current results demonstrated that the most acceptable target of metformin responsible for lowering blood glucose levels, complex I, was stabilized only under the high-concentration metformin treatment. Intriguingly, the complex IV subunits were significantly stabilized by low concentrations of (such as 0.2 μM) metformin, indicating that the complex IV may play an important role in the sugar-lowering effect. Moreover, low-dose metformin significantly altered ribosome and histone protein stabilities, correlated with the inhibitive effect of cell proliferation by metformin. We further found that low-concentration metformin impacted mitochondrial cargo transport and vesicle transport, while high-concentration metformin affected cell redox responses and cell membrane protein sorting. Systematic investigation of metformin-induced proteome thermal stability changes provides intriguing insights into the molecular mechanisms of lowering blood sugar and the pleiotropic effects of metformin.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture HepG2 cells (ATCC) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM, Gibco) supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco) and 1% (v/v) penicillin/ streptomycin (Gibco) with 5% CO2 at 37 °C in a humidified incubator.   PISA assay and cell lysis When the cells reached 75% confluence, they were treated with 0, 0.2 μM, 2 μM, 20 μM, 200 μM, and 2000 μM metformin (MedChemExpress) dissolved in autoclaved water for 1.5 h. The triplicate experiments were performed and for each one, cells were harvested by trypsinization, washed with cold phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, Gibco) twice, and resuspended in 550 μL PBS. Then cells were evenly separated into five aliquots, 100 μL each, and pelleted by centrifugation at 200 g, 3 min. After the removal of 80 μL supernatant, five cell aliquots were heated at 47.3°C, 50.4°C, 52.6°C, 55.7°C, 59.8°C for 3 min with a thermal cycler (C1000 TouchTM, BIO-RAD), respectively. Cells were then lysed by adding 130 μL ice-cold lysis buffer (0.8% NP-40 (Sigma-Aldrich), cOmplete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche), 50 U/mL benzonase (Sigma-Aldrich), 1 mM MgCl2 dissolved in PBS) and incubated at 4 °C for 1 h. The cell lysates were centrifuged at 25000 g, 10 min at 4 °C, and 120 μL of the supernatant was further filtered using a 0.45-µm 96-well filter plate (Millipore) on an extraction plate vacuum manifold (Promega) to remove insoluble proteins. Then for the five filtered lysates from the same experiment, 100 μL of each were pooled together. Samples were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT, Sigma-Aldrich) at 56 °C for 30 min, alkylated with 14 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at room temperature for 15 min, followed by being quenched with 5 mM DTT at room temperature for 15 min. The concentration of proteins was determined using the BCA assay (Thermo), and then proteins were purified using the methanol-chloroform precipitation approach.  Protein digestion and peptides labeled with TMT Protein pellets were resuspended in 500 μL digestion buffer (50 mM 2-[4-(2-hydroxyethyl)piperazin-1-yl]ethanesulfonic acid (HEPES), pH = 8.5, 1.6 M urea, 5% ACN) and digested by trypsin (Promega) for 16 h at 37 °C. After digestion, the solution was acidified with trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final pH value of ~2. Peptides were desalted using the tC18 Sep-Pak cartridges (Waters) and then lyophilized. The purified peptides were labeled with the tandem mass tag (TMT) reagents, respectively, following the manufacturer's instructions with slight modifications. Briefly, 10% peptides were resuspended in 100 mM HEPES pH=8.5, and their concentrations were measured using the BCA assay. Peptides in each sample were labeled with each channel of the sixplex TMT reagents (Thermo) in 30% ACN/HEPES solution for 1 h at room temperature. The reaction was quenched using 5% hydroxylamine for 15 min. Six labeled peptide samples were combined, desalted, and lyophilized. The mixed samples were then fractionated using high-pH reversed-phase HPLC (pH=10). The sample was separated into 20 fractions using a 4.6 × 250 mm reversed-phase column packed with 5 μm particles (Waters) using a 40 min gradient of 5–50% ACN with 10 mM ammonium acetate. Every fraction was further purified with StageTip before LC-MS analysis.  MS analysis The peptide samples were dissolved in a solvent containing 5% ACN and 4% FA, and 4 µL of the solution was loaded onto a microcapillary column packed with C18 beads (Magic C18AQ, 3 μm, 200 Å, 75 μm x 16 cm, Michrom Bioresources) using a Dionex WPS-3000TPLRS autosampler (UltiMate 3000 thermostatted Rapid Separation Pulled Loop Wellplate Sampler). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography using an UltiMate 3000 binary pump with a 120 min gradient of 1-17% ACN (with 0.125% FA). Peptides were detected with a data-dependent Top15 method in a hybrid dual-cell quadrupole linear ion trap - Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap Elite, Thermo Scientific, with Xcalibur 3.0.63 software). For each cycle, one full MS scan (resolution: 60,000) in the Orbitrap cell at the automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 x 106 was followed by up to 15 MS/MS recorded in the Orbitrap cell with high mass accuracy and high resolution for the most intense ions with the isolation window width of 1.2 m/z. The selected ions were excluded from further analysis for 90 seconds. Ions with singly or unassigned charges were not fragmented and sequenced. MS/MS scans were activated under high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) with 35% normalized collision energy, and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap cell.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and filtering The resulting raw files were converted into mzXML files and then searched against the human (Homo sapiens) protein database (downloaded from Uniprot) using the SEQUEST algorithm (version 28)21. The following parameters were used during the search: 10 ppm precursor mass tolerance; 0.025 Da product ion mass tolerance; two missed cleavages; variable modifications: oxidation of methionine (+15.9949 Da); static modifications: TMT (+229.1629) on the lysine residue and the peptide N-terminus; carboxyamidomethylation (+57.0215) on the cysteine residue. The false discovery rates (FDR) of peptide and protein identifications were evaluated and controlled using the target-decoy method22. Each protein sequence was listed in both forward and reversed orders. Linear discriminant analysis (LDA) was employed to control the quality of peptide identifications using multiple parameters, including XCorr, mass accuracy (ppm), peptide length, and charge state23. Peptides with shorter than seven amino acid residues in length were discarded. Furthermore, FDRs were filtered to < 1% at both the peptide and protein levels.  Ratio correction and curve fitting Only proteins that were quantified in all three replicates were considered. The summed protein abundance and its fold change compared with those in the vehicle group were calculated for each protein at each metformin concentration. The resultant data were then scaled with a p value weighted correction, as described previously24. Briefly, this correction weighs the mean corrected protein abundance of biological replicates (n = 3) according to the relative confidence with which it deviates from the expected value (in this case, 1) as per:   where m corresponds to the mean of the corrected protein ratio and p refers to the p value derived from a one-sample t-test of the corrected protein ratio against the expected value at each metformin concentration.  The corrected protein ratios across metformin concentrations were transformed such that with increasing compound concentrations they range from 0 to 1 for stabilized proteins and from 1 to 0 for destabilized proteins and fitted with a sigmoidal curve below, as described previously25:  if the R2 for the curve fit was > 0.8, we regarded the observed stabilization or destabilization to be a compound-induced effect as opposed to random fluctuation. Additionally, for proteins with the p value < 0.05 for every concentration and all log2 fold changes having the same direction (positive or negative), they were selected and grouped separately.  Data analysis All analyses were performed in Microsoft Excel and OriginPro 2022 unless mentioned otherwise. ReactomeFI gene set analysis was performed in Cytoscape 3.8.2 softerware26 with ReactomeFI 8.0.4 plugin27. Gene sets were then functional interaction annotated and clustered, then modules were analyzed for Reactome pathway enrichment with an FDR cutoff of 0.001. Modules were then manually annotated using the most prominent enriched pathways. Gene Ontology analysis was performed using the database for annotation, visualization, and integrated discovery (DAVID)28, where all identified proteins in the experiments were served as the background.

### Publication Abstract
Metformin is a widely used drug to treat type II diabetes. Beyond lowering blood sugar, it has been reported to have pleiotropic effects such as suppressing cancer growth and attenuating cell oxidative stress and inflammation. However, the underlying mechanisms of these effects remain to be explored. Here, we systematically study the thermal stability changes of proteins in liver cells (HepG2) induced by a wide dosage range of metformin by using the proteome integral solubility alteration (PISA) assay. The current results demonstrate that, besides the most accepted target of metformin (complex I), low concentrations of metformin (such as 0.2 &#x3bc;M) stabilize the complex IV subunits, suggesting its important role in the sugar-lowering effect. Low-dose metformin also results in stability alterations of ribosomal proteins, correlating with its inhibitive effect on cell proliferation. We further find that low-concentration metformin impacts mitochondrial cargo and vesicle transport, while high-concentration metformin affects cell redox responses and cell membrane protein sorting. This study provides mechanistic insights into the molecular mechanisms of lowering blood sugar and the pleiotropic effects of metformin.

### Keywords
Thermal proteome profiling, Proteome integral solubility alteration assay, Metformin

### Affiliations
School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology
Georgia Institute of Technology

### Submitter
Kejun Yin

### Lab Head
Dr Ronghu Wu
School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology


