### Accession
PXD005150

### Title
Proteomic analysis of Kveim reagent identifies targets of cellular immunity in sarcoidosis

### Description
Kveim-reagent (Kv) skin testing was a historical method of diagnosing sarcoidosis. Intradermal injection of treated sarcoidosis spleen tissue resulted in a granuloma response at injection site by 4-6 weeks. Previous work indicates proteins as the possible trigger of this reaction. We aimed to identify Kv-specific proteins and characterise the ex vivo response of Peripheral Blood Mononuclear Cells (PBMCs) from sarcoidosis, tuberculosis and healthy control patients when stimulated with both Kv and selected Kv-specific proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Each gel lane of a 1D-SDS-PAGE gel was cut into 10 sections and selected gel spots of the 2D-DIGE gels were also excised with a scalpel. 1D-SDS-PAGE gel slices and 2D-DIGE gel spots underwent subsequent in-gel tryptic digest as follows: in brief, gel pieces were washed in 30 µL 50% acetonitrile (ACN) for protein destaining. Gel pieces were dried in a SpeedVac for 10 min, reduced with 15 µL 10mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 8.0 (AmBic) for 45 min at 50°C and then alkylated with 15 µL 50 mM IAM (Bioultra-Sigma-Aldrich) in 10 mM AmBic for 1 h at room temperature in the dark. Gel pieces were washed three times in 30 µL 50% ACN, vacuum-dried before being reswollen with 50 ng of modified trypsin (Promega, Southampton, UK) in 5 µL 10mM AmBic and eventually overlaid with 10 µL 10mM AmBic. After incubation for 16 h at 37°C peptides were extracted twice with 10 µL 5% TFA (Sigma-Aldrich) in 50% ACN, vacuum-dried,  resuspended in 8.0 μL of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and stored at -80 oC until further use.   Mass spectrometric identification was conducted as previously described (15) using electrospray Q-TOF LC-MS/MS with a chip cube interface (model 6520, Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, California, USA). Essentially, obtained tryptic peptides (7 μL) were loaded onto the enrichment column of the chip and washed with eight column volumes of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Tryptic peptides were separated on the analytical column using an acetonitrile gradient 4.0% to 50% [v/v]) over 19 min and eluted directly into the mass spectrometer. The mass spectrometer was run in positive ion mode, and MS survey scans were run over a range of m/z 250 to 3,000 and at five spectra per second. Precursor ions were selected for automatic tandem MS (MS/MS) at an absolute threshold of 2,000 and a relative threshold of 0.01, with a maximum of five precursors per cycle.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS/MS data was analysed using MassHunter Mass Profiler software version B.02.01 (Agilent Technologies). Data were then searched with MASCOT Version 2.2.07 (Matrix Science, London, UK) against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Database Release 2011_11 (533049 sequences; 189064225 residues) for the DIGE dataset or against UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Database Release 2012_01 (534242 sequences; 189454791 residues) for the Kveim dataset. Database search was performed with settings as follows: taxonomy filter was set for human entries, MS tolerance (Parent Tolerance) ±20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance (Fragment Tolerance) ±0.20 Da. Trypsin was set as the digesting enzyme, two missed cleavages of the digest were accepted and carbamidomethylation of cysteines (C) was set as fixed modification. Acetylation of peptide N-termini and lysine residues (K), methionine oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ) and Gln-pyroGlu (N-term Q) as well as amidated C-termini, carbamylated lysine residues and carbamylated N-termini were selected as variable modifications.   Search result filters were set to MudPIT scoring, permitted peptides with a score >20 and below the Mascot significance threshold filter of p = 0.01  as valid identification. Resulting dat.-files were then imported into Scaffold Version 3.4.7 (DIGE data) or 3.6.7 (Kveim data) (Scaffold, Proteome Software, Portland, OR, USA) and an additional database search with the X! Tandem algorithm (Version CYCLONE 2010.12.01.1) was performed with equally stringend search criteria. Besides aforementioned modification pyro-cmC (S-carbamoylmethylcysteine cyclization) on N-termini was added as another variable modification. Here, data are presented in Scaffold that were confidently identified by the two independent search engines i.e. Mascot and X! Tandem and further fulfil the Scaffold implemented criteria of 99% minimum protein probability score, 95% minimum peptide probability score with at least two identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunology, Sarcoidosis, Interstitial lung diseases, Proteomics

### Affiliations
Imperial College London
Jenner Institute

### Submitter
Robert Parker

### Lab Head
Dr Ajit Lalvani
Imperial College London


