### Accession
PXD042082

### Title
Immortalized mouse caput epididymal (mECap18) cell line recapitulates in vivo environment

### Description
Between the testes and the vas deferens lies the epididymis, a highly convoluted tubule whose unique environmental characteristics are crucial for the functional maturation of spermatozoa. Within the epididymal epithelium, the secretory system releases small non-coding RNA molecules (sncRNAs) and proteins housed within extracellular vesicles (epididymosomes) that are destined for delivery to recipient sperm cells which play key roles in fertility success and act as major conduits of epigenetic information delivered to the oocyte. The epithelial cells of the epididymis have proven to be highly sensitive to environmental stressors which can influence the sperm epigenome. Utilizing a label-free mass spectrometry proteomic approach we sought to characterize an immortalized mouse caput epididymal epithelial cell line (mECap18) and sequenced >5,100 proteins. When compared to a previous in-vivo mouse caput epithelial proteomic profile, a significant overlap (>75%) and proportionally similar patterns of protein classification were observed. Furthermore, key pathways associated with protein synthesis (e.g. EIF2 signaling) and cellular protection in the male reproductive tract (e.g. sirtuin signaling) were enriched in both proteomes.  Leveraging this comparison supports mECap18 cells as a promising in-vitro model for recapitulating the in-vivo environment, providing a platform for testing therapeutic invention.

### Sample Protocol
mECap18 cells were cultured in supplemented DMEM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA) as previously described, until approximately 70% confluent. Cells were detached using Trypsin EDTA (Thermo Fisher Scientific) prior to three consecutive washes and centrifugation cycles in DMEM and sterile PBS. Cell pellets (n = 4) were snap frozen and stored at -80°C, until resuspended in chilled 4% w/v sodium deoxycholate (SDC), 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) and prepared for MS-based proteomic analysis as previously described [7, 20, 21]. In brief, lysed cell pellets were quantified and concentration equalized (200 μg / 270 μL) prior to reduction, alkylation, and overnight trypsinization in a deep-well plate. Tryptic peptides were diluted 1:1 with 100mM Tris-HCl (ensuring SDC concentration <1%) and vortexed briefly before adding 1:1 of 99% ethylacetate /1% TFA and thoroughly mixed on a ThermoMixer (2,000 rpm). Peptides (7.5 µg) were desalted using styrenedivinylbenzene-reverse phase sulfonated StageTips. RP nLC-MS/MS was performed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000RSLC nanoflow high-performance LC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 75 μm × 20 mm trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for pre-concentration and online de-salting. Separation was then achieved using an EASY-Spray PepMap C18 75 μm × 250 mm column (Thermo Fisher Scientific), employing a 125 min liner gradient of ACN (2 - 35%). Full MS/data dependent acquisition MS/MS mode was utilized on Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific; v4.2.47) using the FAIMS ProTM interface with two compensation voltages (-50, -60), individually run on each biological replicate. The Orbitrap mass analyzer was set at a resolution of 60,000, to acquire full MS with an m/z range of 350 – 1200, incorporating a normalized automatic gain control target of 300% and maximum fill times of 50 ms. The 20 most intense multiply charged precursors were selected for higher-energy collision dissociation fragmentation with a collisional energy of 30%. MS/MS fragments were measured at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000 using standard mode for automatic gain control target and maximum fill times of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Database searching of raw files were performed using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). SEQUEST HT was used to search against the UniProt Mus musculus database (25,444 sequences, downloaded 29th November 2022). Database searching parameters included up to two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance set to 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Trypsin was designated as the digestion enzyme. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, while acetylation (K, N-terminus) and oxidation (M) were assigned as dynamic modifications. Examination of the corresponding reversed database was performed to assess the FDR of peptide identification using Percolator on the basis of q-values, which were estimated from the target-decoy search approach. For the purpose of filtering out target peptide spectrum matches over decoy peptide spectrum matches, a fixed FDR of 1% was set at the peptide level. Protein list was refinement to include only those with four quantitative values and ≥2 unique peptides. By exception, proteins with 1 unique peptide were retained if their coverage sequence ≥ 25.50%, the average sequence coverage of the full complement of proteins with ≥ 2 unique peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Residing between the testes and the vas deferens, the epididymis is a highly convoluted tubule whose unique luminal microenvironment is crucial for the functional maturation of spermatozoa. This microenvironment is created by the combined secretory and resorptive activity of the lining epididymal epithelium, including the release of extracellular vesicles (epididymosomes), which encapsulate fertility modulating proteins and a myriad of small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) that are destined for delivery to recipient sperm cells. To enable investigation of this intercellular communication nexus, we have previously developed an immortalized mouse caput epididymal epithelial cell line (mECap18). Here, we describe the application of label-free mass spectrometry to characterize the mECap18 cell proteome and compare this to the proteome of native mouse caput epididymal epithelial cells. We report the identification of 5,313 mECap18 proteins, as many as 75.8% of which were also identified in caput epithelial cells wherein they mapped to broadly similar protein classification groupings. Furthermore, key pathways associated with protein synthesis (e.g., EIF2 signaling) and cellular protection in the male reproductive tract (e.g., sirtuin signaling) were enriched in both proteomes. This comparison supports the utility of the mECap18 cell line as a tractable in-vitro model for studying caput epididymal epithelial cell function.

### Keywords
Proteomics., Epididymis, Sperm maturation, Fertility, Male reproduction

### Affiliations
The University of Newcastle
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, College of Engineering, Science and Environment, The University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia.  Infertility and Reproduction Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, NSW, Australia.

### Submitter
David Skerrett-Byrne

### Lab Head
Dr David Skerrett-Byrne
Priority Research Centre for Reproductive Science, School of Environmental and Life Sciences, College of Engineering, Science and Environment, The University of Newcastle, NSW, Australia.  Infertility and Reproduction Research Program, Hunter Medical Research Institute, NSW, Australia.


