### Accession
PXD014033

### Title
Protein-tyrosine kinase 2-beta activates Interferon Regulatory Factor 5 to control inflammation

### Description
Interferon regulatory factor 5 (IRF5) plays a distinct role in the regulation of immune responses in health and disease and is a genetic risk factor several autoimmune conditions, including systemic lupus erythematosus, diabetes, arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. IRF5 function as a transcription factor requires post-translational modifications of the protein such as phosphorylation. Though several upstream signalling regulators of IRF5 have been identified, there is as yet little understanding of how they control IRF5 activity or whether other unknown kinases are involved. In this study, we systematically searched for IRF5 kinases using a reporter-based method for screening a library of 365 inhibitors of protein kinases. Based on the pool of the identified IRF5-inhibiting compounds we have compiled a list of putative IRF5 kinases, which we tested in subsequent in vitro assays. Protein-tyrosine kinase 2-beta (Ptk2b or PYK2) was one of the top hits, capable of binding to and phosphorylating mouse IRF5 at tyrosine (Y) 171. We have shown that IRF5 recruitment to target genes and IRF5-dependent transcription was impaired in cells treated with highly selective PYK2 inhibitors or in PYK2-deficient cells. Moreover, expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines was blocked in the supernatants of human biopsies from inflamed colon of patients with ulcerative colitis and treated ex vivo with a PYK2 inhibitor. Thus, we have identified a major role for PYK2 in regulating the inflammatory response and mapped its activity to the IRF5 innate sensing pathways.

### Sample Protocol
IRF5 was immunoprecipitated from LPS-stimulated WT and PYK2 KO RAW264.7 cells (5x107 cells) as described in immunoprecipitation section. Eluents were subjected to in-solution digestion as described previously. In brief samples were reduced and alkylated before double precipitation with Chloroform/Methanol as described. Protein pellets were resuspended in 50 µL 6M urea for solubilisation. The samples were diluted to 1M Urea in 100mM Tris buffer for tryptic digest. Following overnight digestion, peptides were acidified with 3% Formic acid and desalted with solid phase extraction Sola cartridges (Thermo). Peptides were eluted with 600 uL glycolic acid solution  (1M glycolic acid, 80% acetonitrile, 5% trifluoroacetic acid). Phospho-peptide enrichment was performed using a TiO2 protocol as described with eluates from the Sola cartridges adjusted to 1 mL with 1M glycolic acid solution and incubated for 5 minutes with 50 uL TiO2 bead slurry solution.  Bead washes (200 uL) were carried out as previously described. In short, beads were sequentially washed with 200 uL glycolic acid solution, ammonium acetate solution (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% acetonitrile) and 10% acetonitrile solution repeated in triplicate. Phospho-peptides were eluted, following incubation for 5 minutes at room temperature with 50 ul ammonia solution (5%) and centrifuged, this was repeated in triplicate. The three eluate fractions were combined and dried using a SpeedVac and pellets were stored at -80oC until analysis. For analysis by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS), a Dionex UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer was used as described previously.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were subjected to processing using PEAKS (version 8.5) software and searched against the UniProtSP Mus Musculus database. Searches included the data refine, denovo PEAKS and PEAKS PTM modes, the latter of which included phosphorylation on Ser (S), Thr (T) and Tyr (Y) residues.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pyk2, Irf5

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility Oxford


