### Accession
PXD027203

### Title
Evaluation of mass spectrometry MS/MS spectra for the presence of isopeptide crosslinked peptides

### Description
Chronic low dose exposure to organophosphorus pesticides is associated with risk of neurodegenerative disease. The mechanism of neurotoxicity is unknown, though it is independent of acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Adducts on tyrosine, lysine, threonine, and serine can occur after exposure to organophosphorus pesticides, the most stable being adducts on tyrosine. Rabbit monoclonal 1C6 to diethoxyphosphate modified tyrosine (depY) was created by single B cell cloning. The amino acid sequence and binding constant (Kd 3.2 x 10-­‐8  M) were determined.  Cultured human neuroblastoma SH-­‐SY5Y and mouse neuroblastoma N2a cells incubated with a sub-­‐cytotoxic dose of 10 µM chlorpyrifos oxon contained depY-­‐modified proteins detected by monoclonal 1C6 on Western blots.  DepY-­labeled peptides from tryptic digests of cell lysates were imunopurified by binding to immobilized 1C6. Peptides released with 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid were analyzed by LC-­‐MS/MS on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer.  Protein Prospector database searches identified 51 peptides modified on tyrosine by diethoxyphosphate in human SH-­‐SY5Y cell lysate and 73 diethoxyphosphate-­‐modified peptides in mouse N2a cell lysate. Adducts appeared most frequently on the cytoskeleton proteins tubulin, actin, and vimentin. It was concluded that rabbit monoclonal 1C6 can be useful for studies that aim to understand the mechanism of neurotoxicity resulting from low dose exposure t organophosphorus pesticides.

### Sample Protocol
Human neuroblastoma SH-­‐SY5Y in T75 flasks cells were grown in DMEM/F12 Glutamax, pen-­‐strep DMEM/F12 Glutamax, pen-­‐strep (no serum) with 10 µM retinoic acid in the absence or presence of 10 µM chlorpyrifos oxon for 2 days at 37°C in a humidified chamber with 5% CO2. Cells were harvested from fourteen T75 flasks and combined into one 15 ml tube where they were lysed with 0.6 mL of IP lysis buffer (25 mM TrisCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-­‐40, 1 mM EDTA, 5% glycerol) and Halt Protease inhibitor cocktail.  Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and desalted on G25 Sepharose column equilibrated with 20 mM (NH4)HCO3.  The non-­‐ionic detergent NP-­‐40 did not separate from proteins on the desalting column.  Desalted samples were concentrated 3-­‐fold. A 0.29 mL aliquot with a protein concentration of 0.67 mg/mL (194 µg) was digested with 4 µg trypsin at 37˚C for 16 h.  Trypsin was inactivated by boiling for 3 min.  Tryptic peptides were incubated with immobilized antibody 1C6 (105 µg monoclonal 1C6 on 50 µL Sepharose beads in 0.5 mL PBS, plus 0.01% azide) overnight at room temperature on a rotating mixer. The beads were washed with PBS and water on 0.45 µm PVDF spin filters that retained the beads and the bound peptides. Bound peptides were released by incubating the washed beads with 0.2 mL of 50% acetonitrile, plus 1% formic acid for 1.5 h.  Peptides were recovered by centrifuging the 0.45 µm spin filter, leaving beads on the membrane while eluting peptides. The peptide volume was reduced to 24 µL in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were centrifuged before the top 12 µL were transferred to autosampler vials. Mouse N2a cells in 100 mm dishes were treated with 0, 10 µM or 100 µM chlorpyrifos oxon in serum free Opti-­‐MEM for 24 h.  Cells were lysed with 500 µL IP lysis buffer containing Halt protease inhibitor. Lysates were centrifuged at 4˚C for 20 min at 13,000xg. Protein concentrations in the supernatants were 4.3 mg/mL for control and 2.2 mg/mL for treated cells. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol in a boiling water bath; the heating step caused the mouse proteins to precipitate. The pellet was dissolved in 100 µL 8 M urea, alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and desalted by filtration through a YM-­‐30 spin filter.  Proteins captured on the filter were digested with 1 µg trypsin (2.5 µL of 0.4 µg/µL trypsin) in 0.1 mL of 20 mM  (NH4)HCO3 at 37˚C overnight. Tryptic peptides were collected by centrifuging the digests through the YM-­‐30 spin filter. The filter was washed with 20 mM  (NH4)HCO3 to recover more peptides. The 300 µL tryptic peptide samples were incubated with a 0.5 mL suspension containing 105 µg immobilized 1C6 monoclonal conjugated to 50 µL of Sepharose beads. After 16 h rotation at room temperature, the beads were transferred to 0.45 µm spin filters, washed with PBS, and with water Peptides were released by incubating the washed beads with 0.2 mL of 50% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid for 1 h followed by centrifugation. Samples were dried by vacuum centrifugation, dissolved in 50 µL of 0.1% formic acid, and centrifuged to pellet particulates. The top 10 µL were transferred to autosampler vials. Peptides were separated by C-­‐18 chromatography and sprayed directly into the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Chromatography was performed with a Thermo RSLC Ultimate 3000 ultra-­‐high pressure liquid chromatography system using 0.1% formic acid in water (solvent A) and 0.1% formic acid in 70% acetonitrile (solvent B), at 36°C. A 5 µL aliquot of peptides was applied to an Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 trap column at 4 µL/min and washed with 0.1% formic acid in 2% acetonitrile for 10 minutes. The flow was switched to a PepMap RSLC C18 separation column and the flow rate was reduced to 300 nL/min. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 3 to 70% solvent B over 50 minutes followed by 70-­‐99% solvent B over 4 minutes, and a wash with 99% solvent B for 4 minutes. The level of solvent B was reduced from 99 to 3% over 4 minutes and the column was re-­‐equilibrated with 3% solvent B for 15 minutes. Data were collected using data dependent acquisition.  A full survey scan from 350-­‐1800 m/z was acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 120,000. The automatic gain control was set at 4 x 105 and the ion filling time at 100 msec. The 25 most intense ions with a charge state of 2-­‐6 were isolated in a 3 second cycle and fragmented using high energy collision-­‐induced dissociation with 35% normalized collision energy. Fragment ions were detected in the Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. The automatic gain control target for the MS/MS was set at 5 x 104, ion filling time at 60 msec, and dynamic exclusion was set to 30 sec with a 10 ppm mass window. Data were reported in *.raw format.

### Data Protocol
Protein Prospector search for diethoxyphosphate adducts on tyrosine The *.raw data files from the Orbitrap Fusion Lumos were converted to *.mgf files using MSConvert (ProteoWizard Tools from SourceForge).  The *.mgf files were analyzed using Batch-­‐Tag Web on the Protein Prospector website https://prospector.ucsf.edu[prospector.ucsf.edu.  The search parameters added to the Batch-­‐Tag page in Protein Prospector were Database: SwissProt 2017.11.01, or SwissProt 2020.09.02 or NCBInr 2013.6.17, Taxonomy: Homo sapiens, or Mus musculus. Digest: Trypsin, Constant mods: Carbamidomethyl (C), Variable Mods: Oxidation (M), User defined variable modifications Mod 1 label: depY. Mod 1 Elem Comp: C4H9P1O3, Specificity: Y. Mass modification range: 135 to 137, Parent tolerance: 20 ppm, fragment tolerance: 30 ppm.  Instrument: ESI-­‐Q-­‐high res.  Expectation Calc Method: None. A checkmark in box Uncleaved avoids reports of peptides cleaved at the modified lysine. The software provided a list of modified peptides, the retention time of each modified peptide, statistical scores reflecting confidence, mass and charge state of the parent ion, percent matched intensity, protein accession number, amino acid number of the modified residue, MS/MS spectra of the modified peptide, and a list of theoretical and observed fragment ions for each modified peptide. We manually evaluated each MS/MS spectrum to identify false positives.  Proteome Discoverer search for diethoxyphosphate adducts on tyrosine, serine, threonine, and lysine Database searching was performed with Proteome Discoverer v 2.4 (Thermo Scientific). The processing method was PWF_Tribrid_Basic_Sequest HT. Parameters for the Spectrum Files RC node were Protein Database either Homo sapiens Swiss-­‐Prot 20200706 or Mus musculus UniProt 11-­‐24-­‐2020; Enzyme was Trypsin full; static modification was carbamidomethyl Cys; all others were default. Parameters for the Spectrum Selector node were default. Parameters for the Sequest HT node were Protein Database either Homo sapiens Swiss-­‐Prot 20200706 or Mus musculus UniProt 11-­‐24-­2020; Enzyme was Trypsin full; Precursor mass tolerance was 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance was 0.02 Da; Dynamic modifications were oxidized Met, diethylphosphate Ser, Thr, Tyr, Lys, ethylphosphate Ser, Thr, Tyr, Lys, O-­‐dimethylphosphate Ser, Thr, Tyr, Lys, and O-­‐methylphosphate Ser, Thr, Tyr, Lys; static modification was carbamidomethyl Cys; all others were default. The Fixed Value PSM Validator was replaced with Target Decoy PSM Validator and default parameters were used. The consensus method was CWF_Basic with nodes MSF Files, PSM Grouper, Peptide Validator, Peptide and Protein Filter, Protein Scorer, and Protein Grouping. Default parameters were used for all nodes. The significance threshold of the ion score was calculated based on a false discovery rate of ≤ 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic low-dose exposure to organophosphorus pesticides is associated with the risk of neurodegenerative disease. The mechanism of neurotoxicity is independent of acetylcholinesterase inhibition. Adducts on tyrosine, lysine, threonine, and serine can occur after exposure to organophosphorus pesticides, the most stable being adducts on tyrosine. Rabbit monoclonal 1C6 to diethoxyphosphate-modified tyrosine (depY) was created by single B cell cloning. The amino acid sequence and binding constant (<i>K</i><sub>d</sub> 3.2 &#xd7; 10<sup>-8</sup> M) were determined. Cultured human neuroblastoma SH-SY5Y and mouse neuroblastoma N2a cells incubated with a subcytotoxic dose of 10 &#x3bc;M chlorpyrifos oxon contained depY-modified proteins detected by monoclonal 1C6 on Western blots. depY-labeled peptides from tryptic digests of cell lysates were immunopurified by binding to immobilized 1C6. Peptides released with 50% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid were analyzed by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. Protein Prospector database searches identified 51 peptides modified on tyrosine by diethoxyphosphate in SH-SY5Y cell lysate and 73 diethoxyphosphate-modified peptides in N2a cell lysate. Adducts appeared most frequently on the cytoskeleton proteins tubulin, actin, and vimentin. It was concluded that rabbit monoclonal 1C6 can be useful for studies that aim to understand the mechanism of neurotoxicity resulting from low-dose exposure to organophosphorus pesticides.

### Keywords
Map-rich tubulin, Dansyl-aminohexyl qqiv, Crosslinks, Dansyl cadaverine, Isopeptide, Neurodegenerative disease, Transglutaminase, Protein prospector

### Affiliations
University of Nebraska Medical Center
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center

### Submitter
Lawrence Schopfer

### Lab Head
Dr Oksana Lockridge
Eppley Institute University of Nebraska Medical Center


