### Accession
PXD011867

### Title
Proteaphagy contributes to bortezomib resistance in mantle cell lymphoma

### Description
TUBE and GST enrichment followed by 1D-gel-LC-MS analysis on cell exract from bortezomib (BTZ)-resistant or sensitive mantle cell lymphoma cells.

### Sample Protocol
Cell Culture: Z-138, ZBR, GRANTA-519, MINO, JVM-2 and REC-1 cells were cultured in RPMI 1640 with 2 mM L-glutamine, 100 Units/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin and 10% or 20% (JeKo-1 and JBR) fetal bovine serum (FCS). Cells were incubated at 37°C, 5% CO2. Cell lines authentication was based on short tandem repeat (STR) profiling by DSMZ services (Braunschweig, Germany). TUBEs capture: Protocol were performed as described in Hjerpe et al. 2009 and Aillet et al. 2012. Twenty and 15 million cells per sample were used respectively for Z-138/ZBR and JeKo-1/JBR cells. For ubiquitin proteome, 10x106 cells were used and treated according to the protocol reported in  (Xolalpa et al., 2016b).  Mass spectrometry analysis Protein sample preparation and SDS-PAGE Samples were precipitated using the 2D-Clean Up Kit (GE Healthcare), and resuspended in a buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 6.8, 5% glycerol, 1.67% β-mercaptoethanol, 1.67% SDS and 0.0062% bromophenol blue. Protein samples were boiled for 5 min and resolved in 12.5% acrylamide gels, using a Mini-Protean II electrophoresis cell (Bio-Rad). A constant voltage of 150 V was applied for 45 min. Gels were fixed in a solution containing 10% acetic acid, 40% ethanol for 30 min, and stained overnight in SYPRO Ruby (Bio-Rad). Gels were then washed in a solution containing 10% ethanol and 7% acetic acid for 30 min, and the image was acquired using a Typhoon Trio scanner (GE Healthcare). Each lane subjected to tryptic digestion, followed by LC–MS/MS analysis. Tryptic digestion Gel bands were sliced into 10 small pieces as accurately as possible to guarantee reproducibility. The slices were subsequently washed in milli-Q water. Reduction and alkylation were performed using ditiothreitol (10 mM DTT in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) at 56 ºC for 20 min, followed by iodoacetamide (50 mM iodoacetamide in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for another 20 min in the dark. Gel pieces were dried and incubated with trypsin (12.5 µg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate) for 20 min on ice. After rehydration, the trypsin supernatant was discarded. Gel pieces were hydrated with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and incubated overnight at 37ºC. After digestion, acidic peptides were cleaned with TFA 0.1% and dried out in a RVC2 25 speedvac concentrator (Christ). Peptides were resuspended in 10 µl 0.1% FA and sonicated for 5 min prior to analysis.  NanoLC-MS/MS and Data Analysis  Peptide mixtures obtained from in gel trypsin digestion were separated by online nanoLC and analyzed by electrospray tandem mass spectrometry. Peptide separation was performed on a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) connected to an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron). Approximately 40% of each sample was loaded onto a Symmetry 300 C18 UPLC Trap column, 180 µm x 20 mm, 5 µm (Waters). The precolumn was connected to a BEH130 C18 column, 75 μm x 200 mm, 1.7 μm (Waters) equilibrated in 3% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic Acid (FA) and peptides were eluted at 300 nl/min using a 60 min linear gradient of 3–50% acetonitrile directly onto the nanoelectrospray ion source (Proxeon Biosystems). The mass spectrometer automatically switched between MS and MS/MS acquisition in DDA mode. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 400–2000) were acquired in the orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 400. The 6 most intense ions were sequentially subjected to collision-induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation in the linear ion trap. Precursors with charge states of 2 and 3 were specifically selected for CID. Collision-energy applied to each peptide was automatically normalized as a function of the m/z and charge state. Analyzed peptides were excluded for further analysis during 30 s using dynamic exclusion lists.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data from the 120 LC-MS runs were searched using VEMS (Carvalho et al., 2014) and MaxQuant (Cox and Mann, 2008) using both Higher-energy induced collisional dissociation (HCD) and ETD scoring. A standard human proteome database from UniProt (3AUP000005640) including common contaminating proteins (Bunkenborg et al., 2010). Permutated protein sequences, where Arg and Lys were not permutated, were included in the database. The total number of protein entries in the database was 140149. Trypsin cleavage allowing a maximum of 4 missed cleavages was used. Carbamidomethyl cysteine was included as fixed modification. Methionine oxidation (UNIMOD: 35), N-terminal protein acetylation (UNIMOD: 1), GG tag (UNIMOD: 121) on lysine, LRGG tag (UNIMOD: 535) on lysine deamidation (UNIMOD: 7) of asparagine and glutamine was included as variable modifications. Five ppm mass accuracy was specified for precursor ions and 0.5 m/z for fragment ions. The false discovery rate (FDR) for protein identification was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. No restriction was applied for minimal peptide length for VEMS search. Identified proteins were divided into evidence groups (Matthiesen et al., 2012).

### Publication Abstract
Protein ubiquitylation coordinates crucial cellular events in physiological and pathological conditions. A comparative analysis of the ubiquitin proteome from bortezomib (BTZ)-sensitive and BTZ-resistant mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) revealed an enrichment of the autophagy-lysosome system (ALS) in BTZ-resistant cells. Pharmacological inhibition of autophagy at the level of lysosome-fusion revealed a constitutive activation of proteaphagy and accumulation of proteasome subunits within autophagosomes in different MCL cell lines with acquired or natural resistance to BTZ. Inhibition of the autophagy receptor p62/SQSTM1 upon verteporfin (VTP) treatment disrupted proteaphagosome assembly, reduced co-localization of proteasome subunits with autophagy markers and negatively impacted proteasome activity. Finally, the silencing or pharmacological inhibition of p62 restored the apoptosis threshold at physiological levels in BTZ-resistant cells both in vitro and in vivo. In total, these results demonstrate for the first time a proteolytic switch from the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) to ALS in B-cell lymphoma refractory to proteasome inhibition, pointing out a crucial role for proteaphagy in this phenomenon and paving the way for the design of alternative therapeutic venues in treatment-resistant tumors.

### Keywords
Bortezomib resistance, Ubiquitin proteasome system, Tubes, Lymphoma, Proteaphagy

### Affiliations
Computational and Experimental Biology Group, CEDOC

NOVA MEDICAL SCHOOL / FACULDADE DE CIÊNCIAS MÉDICAS

UNIVERSIDADE NOVA DE LISBOA

Rua Câmara Pestana, 6-6A | 1150-082 Lisboa

Portugal
1) CNRS - ITAV USR3505, 31106 Toulouse, France 2) Nova Medical School, CEDOC- Chronic Diseases, 1150-082, Lisboa, Portugal

### Submitter
Rune Matthiesen

### Lab Head
Dr Manuel S. Rodriguez [1]/Rune Matthiesen [2]
1) CNRS - ITAV USR3505, 31106 Toulouse, France 2) Nova Medical School, CEDOC- Chronic Diseases, 1150-082, Lisboa, Portugal


