### Accession
PXD019296

### Title
Quantitative proteomics uncovers the regulation of energy metabolism by Shexiang Baoxin Pill in myocardial infarction model rats

### Description
Ethnopharmacological relevance: Shexiang Baoxin Pill (SBP) is a traditional formulation of a Chinese patent medicine, which has been commonly used for the treatment of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in China since the 1980s. Previous clinical studies have shown that SBP is safe and effective in patients with CVD, but the mechanism of the therapeutic effect is still poorly understood and requires further research. Aim of the study: This study aims to comprehensively understand the effects and the underlying mechanisms of SBP for CVD treatment by analyzing the whole proteome of myocardial infarction (MI) model rats with or without SBP treatment. Materials and methods: We evaluated the therapeutic effects of SBP on myocardial infarction model (MI) rats by performing the echocardiography analyses after 15-day treatment. And the label-free quantitative proteomic approach was utilized to investigate the whole proteome of the rat heart tissues from MI group (MI rats, n=3), SBP group (MI rats treated with SBP, n=3) and SOG group (sham operated rats, n=3) on the operation day (Day 0) and 15 days after operation (Day 15), respectively. The differentially expressed proteins were subsequently analyzed with bioinformatical methods such as KEGG pathway enrichment analysis, gene ontology (GO)-annotation analysis and protein-protein interaction (PPI) network analysis. Finally, the expression levels of two promising proteins were validated by immunoblotting. Results: The echocardiography analyses show SBP significantly improved the left ventricular fractional shortening (LVFS) and left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) of MI rats. Additionally, 134 proteins were differentially expressed both between SBP/MI and SOG/MI, and 15 proteins were found closely related to CVD. The pathway enrichment and GO-annotation analysis of these differentially expressed proteins revealed that the proteins involved in cellular mitochondrial energy metabolism processes, such as fatty acid beta-oxidation and aerobic respiration, were significantly regulated under SBP treatments, of which fatty acid-binding protein 3 (FABP3) and myoglobin (MB) was significantly down-regulated in MI model group compared with SOG group and was returned to the basal level by SBP treatment. Expression levels of these two proteins were confirmed by immunoblotting experiments. Conclusions: These results we obtained in current study probably demonstrated that the cardio-protective effects of Shexiang Baoxin Pill might be achieved through the regulation of energy metabolism homeostasis in cardiac tissue.

### Sample Protocol
The collected rat heart tissues were lysed with SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS (m/v), 100 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris, pH=7.6). The lysates were homogenized (Homogenizer; BiHeng Biotechnology Inc: SKSI, China) and centrifuged at 14,000 g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatants were collected and protein concentrations were determined by tryptophan fluorescence emission at 350 nm using an excitation wavelength of 295 nm. A total of 100 μg of protein from each sample was processed by the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method with slight modification. Briefly, proteins from each sample were transferred to a 30 kDa filter (Millipore Corporation) and centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 min. Then, 200 μL of urea buffer (8 M urea, 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) was added followed by another centrifugation at 12,000 g for 30 min. These steps were repeated for 3 times. The concentrate was then mixed with 100 μL of 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in urea buffer and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in darkness. The IAA was removed by centrifugation at 12,000g for 30 min and the sample was diluted with 200 μL of urea buffer and centrifuged for 2 more times. A total of 200 μL of 50 mM tetraethylammonium bromide (TEAB) was added and the sample was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 30 min (repeated 3 times). Finally, samples were digested by adding trypsin (Promega, America. 1:50, enzyme to protein in 50 mM TEAB) and incubated at 37 °C for 16 h. After digestion, the peptides were collected by centrifugation and subsequently desalted on C18 solid-phase extraction column (3M Empore, America).

### Data Protocol
The MS data was analyzed via software MaxQuant (http://maxquant.org/, version 1.6.5.0). Carbamidomethyl (C) was set as a fixed modification, while oxidation (M) and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the Rat UniProt FASTA database (UP000002494, December, 2019, containing 29953 entries) and Trypsin/P was selected as the digestive enzyme with two potential missed cleavages. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptides and proteins was controlled <1% by Andromeda search engine. Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was performed on MetaboAnalyst (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/). Functional annotations were performed by Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID; https://david.ncifcrf.gov/). Protein-protein interaction was performed on STRING (https://string-db.org/) and visualized by Cytoscape. Gene associated with the occurrence of CVD are obtained from the DisGeNet database. Student’s t test was used to screen out differentially expressed proteins between different groups, and p value < 0.05 indicated significance.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Shexiang baoxin pill; cardiovascular disease; lc-ms/ms; quantitative proteomics; energy metabolism

### Affiliations
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201203, China

### Submitter
Yue Yu

### Lab Head
Dr Hu Zhou
Department of Analytical Chemistry and CAS Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201203, China


