### Accession
PXD041711

### Title
Distinct lactation-associated macrophages exist in murine mammary tissue and human milk

### Description
Macrophages are involved in immune defense, organogenesis and tissue homeostasis. They also contribute to the different phases of mammary gland remodeling during development, pregnancy and involution post-lactation. Yet, less is known about the dynamics of mammary gland macrophages in the lactation stage. Here, we describe a macrophage population present during lactation in mice. By multi-parameter flow cytometry and single-cell RNA sequencing we reveal this population as distinct from the two resident macrophage subsets present pregestationally. These lactation-induced macrophages (LiMacs) are predominantly monocyte-derived and expand by proliferation in situ concomitant with nursing. LiMacs develop independently of IL-34 but require CSF-1 signaling and are partly microbiota-dependent. Locally, they reside adjacent to the basal cells of the alveoli and extravasate into the milk. Moreover, we also found several macrophage subsets in human milk, resembling LiMacs. Collectively, these findings reveal the emergence of unique macrophages in the mammary gland and milk during lactation.

### Sample Protocol
Dams were anesthetized with 6.5 mg/kg body weight xylazine and 65 mg/kg body weight ketamine injected i.p. Subsequently, dams were stimulated with 4 IU of oxytocin i.p., and milk was pressed out manually from the mammary glands and collected using an insulin syringe. For isolation of milk cells, milk was diluted in a 1:1 ratio with PBS and centrifuged at 800 g for 20 minutes at 15°C. The lipid layer and skim milk were removed, and the cell pellet was washed twice in PBS by centrifugation at 400 g for 5 minutes and resuspension in PBS.  Sample preparation: 80 µl per sample were mixed with 100 µl of SDS buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris / HCL pH 8.2, 0.1M DTT), boiled at 95°C for 5 minutes and processed with High Intensity Focused Ultrasound for 90 seconds. Proteins were then diluted in 800 µl of UT buffer (Urea 8 M in 100 mM Tris/HCL pH 8.2), loaded on Ultracel 30000 MWCO centrifugal unit (Amicon Ultra, Merck) and centrifuged at 14000 g. SDS buffer was exchanged by one centrifugation round of 200 µl UT buffer. Alkylation of reduced proteins was carried out by 5 minute incubation with 100 µl iodoacetamide 0.05 M in UT buffer, followed by three 100 µl washing steps with UT and three 100 µl washing steps with NaCl 0.5 M. Finally, proteins were on-filter digested using 120 µl of 0.05 Triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8) containing trypsin (Promega) in ratio 1:50 (w/w), adapted from the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol77. Digestion was performed overnight in a wet chamber at room temperature. After elution, the solution containing peptides was acidified to a final 0.1% TFA, 3% acetonitrile concentration. Peptides were desalted using in-house C18 stage tips, dried and re-solubilized in 20 µl of 3% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid for MS analysis. Peptide concentration was estimated using nanodrop and the volumes normalized to a peptide concentration of 0.6 µg/µl. Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis: Mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a Digital PicoView source (New Objective) and coupled to a M-Class UPLC (Waters). Solvent composition at the two channels was 0.1% formic acid for channel A and 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile for channel B. Column temperature was 50°C. For each sample 2 μL of peptides were loaded on a commercial ACQUITY UPLC M-Class Symmetry C18 Trap Column (100 Å, 5 µm, 180 µm x 20 mm, Waters) followed by ACQUITY UPLC M-Class HSS T3 Column (100 Å, 1.8 µm, 75 µm x 250 mm, Waters). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. After a 3 minute initial hold at 5% B a gradient from 5 to 22% B in 83 minutes and 22 to 32% B in additional 10 minutes was applied. The column was cleaned after the run by increasing to 95% B and holding 95% B for 10 min prior to re-establishing loading condition. Samples were acquired in a random order. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode (DDA) acquiring a full-scan MS spectra (300−1’500 m/z) at a resolution of 120’000 at 200 m/z after accumulation to a target value of 500’000. Data-dependent MS/MS were recorded in the linear ion trap using quadrupole isolation with a window of 0.8 Da and HCD fragmentation with 35% fragmentation energy. The ion trap was operated in rapid scan mode with a target value of 10’000 and a maximum injection time of 50 ms. Only precursors with intensity above 5’000 were selected for MS/MS and the maximum cycle time was set to 3 s. Charge state screening was enabled. Singly, unassigned, and charge states higher than seven were rejected. Precursor masses previously selected for MS/MS measurement were excluded from further selection for 20 s, and the exclusion window was set at 10 ppm. The samples were acquired using internal lock mass calibration on m/z 371.1012 and 445.1200. The mass spectrometry proteomics data were handled using the local laboratory information management system (LIMS)78.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were processed by MaxQuant (version 1.6.2.3), followed by protein identification using the integrated Andromeda search engine. Spectra were searched against a Uniprot mouse reference proteome (taxonomy ID 10090, proteome ID UP000000589), concatenated to its reversed decoyed fasta database and common protein contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal protein acetylation were set as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin/P, allowing a minimal peptide length of 7 amino acids and a maximum of two missed cleavages. MaxQuant Orbitrap default search settings were used. The maximum false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 for peptides and 0.05 for proteins. Label-free quantification was enabled, and a 2-minute window for match between runs was applied. In the MaxQuant experimental design template, each file was kept separate in the experimental design to obtain individual quantitative values. Protein intensity values reported in the MaxQuant generated proteinGroups.txt file were used. Pre-processing of the protein intensities was performed as follows: intensities equal to zero were removed, while non-zero intensities were log2 transformed and modified using robust z-score transformation to remove systematic differences between samples. To estimate log2 fold changes and p-values, the Bioconductor package limma was used. The p-values for multiple testing were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg procedure and FDRs were obtained.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are involved in immune defense, organogenesis and tissue homeostasis. Macrophages contribute to the different phases of mammary gland remodeling during development, pregnancy and involution postlactation. Less is known about the dynamics of mammary gland macrophages in the lactation stage. Here, we describe a macrophage population present during lactation in mice. By multiparameter flow cytometry and single-cell RNA sequencing, we identified a lactation-induced CD11c<sup>+</sup>CX3CR1<sup>+</sup>Dectin-1<sup>+</sup> macrophage population (liMac) that was distinct from the two resident F4/80<sup>hi</sup> and F4/80<sup>lo</sup> macrophage subsets present pregestationally. LiMacs were predominantly monocyte-derived and expanded by proliferation in situ concomitant with nursing. LiMacs developed independently of IL-34, but required CSF-1 signaling and were partly microbiota-dependent. Locally, they resided adjacent to the basal cells of the alveoli and extravasated into the milk. We found several macrophage subsets in human milk that resembled liMacs. Collectively, these findings reveal the emergence of unique macrophages in the mammary gland and milk during lactation.

### Keywords
Lactation, Mammary gland, Macrophages, Milk

### Affiliations
Myeloid Cell Immunology Institute of Experimental Immunology University of Zurich  Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Ekaterina Petrova

### Lab Head
Dr Melanie Greter
Myeloid Cell Immunology Institute of Experimental Immunology University of Zurich  Switzerland


