### Accession
PXD048693

### Title
CRISPR screen for protein inclusion formation uncovers a role for SRRD in the regulation of intermediate filament dynamics and aggresome assembly

### Description
The presence of large protein inclusions is a hallmark of neurodegeneration, and yet the precise molecular factors that contribute to their formation remain poorly understood. Screens using aggregation-prone proteins have commonly relied on downstream toxicity as a readout rather than the direct formation of aggregates. Here, we combined a genome-wide CRISPR knockout screen with Pulse Shape Analysis, a FACS-based method for inclusion detection, to identify direct modifiers of TDP-43 aggregation in human cells. Our screen revealed both canonical and novel proteostasis genes, and unearthed SRRD,a poorly characterized protein, as a top regulator of protein inclusion formation. APEX biotin labeling reveals that SRRD resides in proximity to proteins that are involved in the formation and breakage of disulfide bonds and to intermediate filaments, suggesting a role in regulation of the spatial dynamics of the intermediate filament network. Indeed, loss of SRRD results in aberrant intermediatefilament fibrils and the impaired formation of aggresomes, including blunted vimentin cage structure, during proteotoxic stress. Interestingly, SRRD also localizes to aggresomes and unfolded proteins, and rescues proteotoxicity in yeast whereby the its N-terminal low complexity domain is sufficient to induce this affect. Altogether this suggests an unanticipated and broad role for SRRD in cytoskeletal organization and cellular proteostasis.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were solubilized and digested with the iST kit (PreOmics GmbH, Martinsried, Germany) per manufacturers protocol. Briefly, the resulting pellet was solubilized, reduced, and alkylated by addition of SDC buffer containing TCEP and 2-chloroacetamide and heated to 95℃ for 10 minutes. Proteins were enzymatically hydrolyzed for 1.5 hours at 37℃ by addition of LysC and trypsin. The resulting Peptides were de-salted, dried by vacuum centrifugation, and reconstituted in 0.1% TFA containing iRT peptides (Biognosys).

### Data Protocol
Mass Spectrometry: Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA for APEX proximity labeling) Samples were randomized and 2ug of each was analyzed on an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and an EasySpray source. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 75μm x 2cm trap column (Thermo) at 5uL/min, and separated by reverse phase (RP)-HPLC on a nanocapillary column, 75 μm id × 50cm 2μm PepMap RSLC C18 column (Thermo). Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid and mobile phase B of 0.1% formic acid/acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted into the mass spectrometer at 300 nL/min with each RP-LC run comprising a 90 minute gradient from 3% B to 38% B. For Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA), the mass spectrometer was set with a master scan at 120000 MS resolution, a scan range of 300-1400, AGC target set to standard, maximum injection time set to auto, and dynamic exclusion set to 30 seconds. Charge state 2-5 were included and Top 15 data dependent MS2 scans collected at 45000 resolution with normalized AGC target at 300%. Maximum injection time and HCD NCE were set to auto and 30, respectively.  Mass Spectrometry: Data Independent Acquisition (DIA for quantitative proteomics) Samples were randomized and 2ug of each was analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermofisher Scientific San Jose, CA) coupled with an Ultimate 3000 nano UPLC system and an EasySpray source. The LC settings were the same as what we described in the previous section. Data was acquired using Data Independent Acquisition (DIA). Mass spectrometer settings were: one full MS scan at 120,000 resolution and a scan range of 300-1650 m/z with an AGC target of 3e6 and a maximum inject time of 60ms. This was followed by 22 (DIA) isolation windows with varying sizes at 30,000 resolution. AGC target and injection time were set to 3e6 and auto, respectively. The default charge state was 4, the first mass was fixed at 200 m/z and the normalized collision energy (NCE) for each window was stepped at 25.5, 27 and 30.   System suitability and quality control The suitability of Exploris 480/QE HF mass spectrometers was monitored using QuiC software (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) for the analysis of the spiked-in iRT peptides. Meanwhile, as a measure for quality control, we injected standard E. coli protein digest in between samples (one injection after every 4 biological samples) and collected the data in the Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA) mode. The collected DDA data were analyzed in MaxQuant  and the output was subsequently visualized using the PTXQC package to track the quality of the instrumentation.  Database Searching for DDA raw files MS/MS raw files were searched against reference human protein sequence database including reviewed isoforms from the Uniprot using MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0. Carbamidomethyl of Cys was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met and Acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. Trypsin/P was selected as the digestion enzyme, and a maximum of 3 labeled amino acids and 2 missed cleavages per peptide were allowed. The false discovery rate for peptides and proteins were set at 1%. Fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The MS/MS tolerance was set at 20 ppm. The minimum peptide length was set at 7 amino acids. The rest of the parameters were kept as default.  Database Searching for DIA raw files Protein identification/quantification was performed in Spectronaut (Bruderer et al. 2015) version 15. Whole proteome analysis was conducted in the DirectDIA mode using reference human protein sequence database including reviewed isoforms. Carbamidomethyl of Cys was defined as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met and Acetylation of protein N-terminal were set as variable modifications. The cutoff values for precursor Qvalue, precursor PEP, and protein Qvalue were set at 0.01, 0.2, and 0.01, respectively. The quantitation was performed at MS2 level and the intensity values were normalized using default cross-run normalization algorithm. The rest of the parameters in Spectronaut were kept as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cellular proteostasis, Neurodegeneration, Cytoskeletal organization, Crispr, Apex biotin labeling, Aggresome assembly

### Affiliations
University of Pennsylvania Department of Genetics 5050 Colket Translational Research Building 3501 Civic Center Boulevard Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA
Children's Hospital of Philadelphia

### Submitter
Hossein Fazelinia

### Lab Head
Dr Ophir Shalem, Ph.D.
University of Pennsylvania Department of Genetics 5050 Colket Translational Research Building 3501 Civic Center Boulevard Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA


