### Accession
PXD003231

### Title
Bacterial antisense RNAs are mainly the product of transcriptional noise

### Description
Cis-encoded antisense RNAs (asRNAs) are widespread along bacterial transcriptomes. However, the role of the vast majority of these RNAs remains unknown, and there is an ongoing discussion as to what extent these transcripts are the result of transcriptional noise. We show, by comparative transcriptomics of 20 bacterial species and one chloroplast, that the number of asRNAs is exponentially dependent on the genomic AT content, and that expression of asRNA at low levels exerts little impact in terms of energy consumption. A transcription model simulating mRNA and asRNA production indicates that the asRNA regulatory effect is only observed above certain expression thresholds, substantially higher than physiological transcript levels. These predictions were verified experimentally by overexpressing 9 different asRNAs in M. pneumoniae. Our results suggest that most of the antisense transcripts found in bacteria are the consequence of transcriptional noise, arising at spurious promoters throughout the genome.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics data obtaining and analysis M. pneumoniae strain M129 was grown for 6 h at 37°C. The medium was then removed, and cells were washed twice with PBS. Total protein extract was obtained by breaking the cells with 200 µl of lysis buffer (4% SDS, 0.1M DTT and 0.1M Hepes). Total protein extracts of two biological replicates were analyzed by MS. Each fraction (with amounts ranging from 20 to 486 µg) was trypsin-digested. Briefly, samples were dissolved in 6 M urea, reduced with DTT (10 mM, 37 ºC, 60 min), and alkylated with iodoacetamide (20 mM, 25ºC, 30 min). Samples were diluted 10-fold with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 before being digested at 37 ºC overnight with trypsin (with a protein:enzyme ratio of 10:1). Peptides generated in the digestion were desalted, evaporated to dryness, and dissolved in 300 µl of 0.1% formic acid. An aliquot of 2.5 µl of each fraction (amounts ranging from 0.17 to 4 µg) was run on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher) fitted with a nanospray source (Thermofisher) after a nanoLC separation in an EasyLC system (Proxeon). Peptides were separated in a reverse phase column, 75 μm x 150 mm (Nikkyo Technos Co., Ltd.) with a gradient of 5 to 35% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 60 min at a flow of 0.3 mL/min. The Orbitrap Velos was operated in positive ion mode with nanospray voltage set at 2.2 kV and source temperature at 325 °C. The instrument was externally calibrated using Ultramark 1621 for the FT mass analyzer and the background polysiloxane ion signal at m/z 445.120025 was used as lock mass. The instrument was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode and full-MS scans were acquired in all experiments over a mass range of m/z 350-2000 with detection in the Orbitrap mass analyzer set at a resolution setting of 60.000. Fragment ion spectra produced via collision-induced dissociation (CID) were acquired in the ion trap mass analyzer. In each cycle of data-dependent analysis, the top twenty most intense ions with multiple charged ions above a threshold ion count of 5000 were selected for fragmentation at normalized collision energy of 35% following each survey scan. All data were acquired with Xcalibur 2.1 software. Total extract (20 µg) was also digested and desalted, and 1 µg of the resulting peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Velos Pro in the same conditions as the fractions but with a longer gradient (120 min).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification was performed by Proteome Discoverer software v.1.3 (ThermoFisher) using MASCOT v2.4.01 (Matrix Science) as search engine (48). MS/MS spectra were searched against a HomoConTrans19 database comprising all putative M. pneumoniae proteins longer than 19 (after in silico translation of M. pneumoniae genome in the six putative frames) and a list of the common contaminants (599 entries). We set a precursor ion mass tolerance of 15 ppm at the MS1 level and a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.5 Da. We allowed up to three miscleavages for trypsin. Oxidation of methionine and protein acetylation at the N-terminus were defined as variable modifications, whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. False discovery rates (FDR) in peptide identification were evaluated using a decoy database set to a maximum of 5%.

### Publication Abstract
cis-Encoded antisense RNAs (asRNAs) are widespread along bacterial transcriptomes. However, the role of most of these RNAs remains unknown, and there is an ongoing discussion as to what extent these transcripts are the result of transcriptional noise. We show, by comparative transcriptomics of 20 bacterial species and one chloroplast, that the number of asRNAs is exponentially dependent on the genomic AT content and that expression of asRNA at low levels exerts little impact in terms of energy consumption. A transcription model simulating mRNA and asRNA production indicates that the asRNA regulatory effect is only observed above certain expression thresholds, substantially higher than physiological transcript levels. These predictions were verified experimentally by overexpressing nine different asRNAs in Mycoplasma pneumoniae. Our results suggest that most of the antisense transcripts found in bacteria are the consequence of transcriptional noise, arising at spurious promoters throughout the genome.

### Keywords
Non-coding rnas, Asrnas, Srnas, Bacteria

### Affiliations
Centre for Genomic Regulation, CRG

### Submitter
Veronica Llorens-Rico

### Lab Head
Dr Luis Serrano
Centre for Genomic Regulation, CRG


