### Accession
PXD037793

### Title
Identification of SENP3 and SENP5 target proteins by endogenous SUMO2/3 IP-MS

### Description
Ribosome biogenesis is a complex and energy demanding process requiring tight coordination with cell growth and proliferation. Impairment of ribosome biogenesis activates a well-defined cell-cycle checkpoint that primarily relies on the activation of p53 signaling. However, there is mounting evidence that p53-independent signaling networks connect impaired ribosome biogenesis to cell cycle-checkpoints. So far, however, these pathways have remained largely enigmatic. By characterizing the nucleolar SUMO isopeptidase SENP3 and SENP5 we found that both isopeptidases control the SUMOylation state of specific ribosome biogenesis factors and regulate the 60S and 40S ribosome maturation pathways. Accordingly, inactivation of SENP3 and SENP5 induces a canonical p53-mediated G1/S arrest. Intriguingly, however, we discovered that inactivation of SENP3 or SENP5 drastically and specifically downregulates the expression of the key-cell cycle regulator CDK6 in a p53-independent process. Accordingly, depletion of SENP3 or SENP5 impairs G1/S transition and cell proliferation in both p53-proficient and p53-deficient cells. Strikingly, we further revealed that impaired ribosome maturation induced by depletion of a panel of ribosome biogenesis factors or by chemical inhibition of RNA polymerase I, generally triggers loss of CDK6 independent of the cellular p53 status. Altogether our data unveil a long-sought p53-independent checkpoint of impaired ribosome biogenesis. Since CDK6 represents a dependency in a subset of cancer entities, such as AML and lymphoma, we propose that this checkpoint can serve as an actionable drug target in tumor therapy.

### Sample Protocol
SENP3 targets were enriched by the method already established by Barysch et at. (2014) in U-2-OS WT vs SENP3KO cells. Each IP (anti-SUMO2/3 or anti-IgG control) was done in triplicates using 8 mg of protein. Afterwards IP samples were separated by SDS-PAGE, digested and purified as stated before (Wagner et al. 2019).

### Data Protocol
Raw data analysis was achieved by using the MaxQuandt Software (Cox and Mann, 2008) applying the same settings as Wagner et al. (2019). Analysis and statistics was done using Perseus software (version 1.6.7.0). First, contaminants, reverse entries and hits only identified by a modified peptide were removed prior to log2 value calculation of the LFQ intensities. Samples were grouped respective to the number of replicates and the matrix was filtered for minimal 2 valid values in at least one group. Not matching rows were discarded. Afterwards imputation of missing values, based on normal distribution, was done using default settings of Perseus. Finally, Student’s t test was performed applying a Benjamini Hochberg FDR of 0.05. Microsoft Excel was used to determine significant hits by using following criteria: log2 ratio >= 0.58, -log10 p-value >= 1.3.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Sumo, Senp, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IBCII, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, Medical School
Institute of Biochemistry II    
University Hospital Building 75    
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7    
60590 Frankfurt (Main)


### Submitter
Stefan Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan Müller
IBCII, Goethe University Frankfurt, Germany, Medical School


