### Accession
PXD023643

### Title
Changes of the muscle stem cell niche during aging

### Description
During aging, the regenerative capacity of skeletal muscle decreases due to intrinsic changes in muscle stem cells (MuSCs) and alterations in their niche. Here, we used quantitative mass spectrometry to characterize intrinsic changes in the MuSC proteome and remodeling of the MuSC niche during aging. We generated a network connecting age-affected ligands located in the niche and cell surface receptors on MuSCs. Thereby, we revealed signaling via Integrins, Lrp1, Egfr and Cd44 as the major cell communication axes perturbed through aging. We investigated the effect of Smoc2, a secreted protein that accumulates with aging, originating from fibro-adipogenic progenitors. Increased levels of Smoc2 contribute to the aberrant Itgb1/MAPK signaling observed during aging, thereby causing impaired MuSC functionality and muscle regeneration. By connecting changes in the proteome of MuSCs to alterations of their niche, our work will enable a better understanding of how MuSCs are affected during aging.

### Sample Protocol
For lysis the MuSC samples were sonicated 10x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus (Diagenode) on high intensity at 20 °C, boiled for 10 min at 95 °C using a block heater and sonicated again 10x 1 min as before. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM dithioreitol (Roth #6908.3) for 30 min at 37 °C followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma #I1149) for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Subsequently proteins were precipitated with 100 % Acetone (Biosolve # 0001037801BS) over night at -20 °C. Then samples were spun down 21,000x g, 30 min, 4 °C, the pellet was washed with 80 % acetone (v/v), spun down 21,000x g, 10 min, 4 °C, washed again with 80 % acetone (v/v) and spun down 21,000x g for 2 min at 4°C. The pellets were air dried and resuspended in 30 μl M Urea (Sigma #U6504), 100 mM HEPES (Sigma #H3375), pH8 by sonication for 3x 1 min using a Bioruptor Plus. Lysyl endopeptidase (Lys-C, Wako Chemical GmbH #125- 05061) was added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio and incubated for 4 h at 37 °C with shaking at 650 rpm. Samples were then diluted 1:1 with HPLC grade water (Sigma #270733) and trypsin (Promega #V5111) added at 1:100 enzyme:protein ration. The samples were digested for 16 h at 37 °C at 650 rpm shaking. The digested samples were acidified by the addition of trifluoroacetic acid (Biosolve #0020234131BS) to a final concentration of 2% (v/v) and then desalted using Waters Oasis® HLB µElution Plate 30 µm (Waters #186001828BA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For phosphoproteomics, 200 µg of proteins were digested as described above. The last desalting step was performed using 50 µl of a 80% ACN and 0.1% TFA buffer solution. Before phosphopeptide enrichment, samples were filled up to 210 µl. Phosphorylated peptides were enriched using Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges (…) in an automated fashion using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform (Agilent Technologies). Fe(III)-IMAC cartridges were washed with 250 μL of 100% ACN/0.1% TFA and conditioned using 250 μL of loading buffer consisting of 80% ACN/0.1% TFA. After loading the samples into the cardridge, the columns were washed with 250 μL of loading buffer, and then the phosphopeptides were eluted with 25 μL of 1% ammonia directly into 25 μL of 10% FA in water. Samples were dried down with a speed vacuum centrifuge and stored at −20 °C until LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Prior to analysis, samples were reconstituted in in MS Buffer (5% acetonitrile, 95% Milli-Q water, with 0.1% formic acid) and spiked with iRT peptides (Biognosys, Switzerland). Peptides were separated in trap/elute mode using the nanoAcquity MClass Ultra-High Performance Liquid Chromatography system (Waters, Waters Corporation, Milford, MA,USA ) equipped with a trapping (nanoAcquity Symmetry C18, 5 μm, 180 μm × 20 mm) and an analytical column (nanoAcquity BEH C18, 1.7 μm, 75 μm × 250 mm). Solvent A was water and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B was acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. 8 µl of the sample (∼μg) were loaded with a constant flow of solvent A at 5 μl/min onto the trapping column. Trapping time was 6 min. Peptides were eluted via the analytical column with a constant flow of 0.3 μl/min. During the elution step, the percentage of solvent B increased in a nonlinear fashion from 0–40% in 60 min. Total run time was 75 min. For MS analysis, both an Orbitrap Q exactive HF-X (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer were used. The MS were coupled to the LC using the Proxeon nanospray source. The peptides were introduced into the mass spectrometer via a Pico-Tip Emitter 360-μm outer diameter × 20-μm inner diameter, 10-μm tip (New Objective) heated at 300 °C, and a spray voltage of 2.2 kV was applied. The capillary temperature was set at 300°C.  For analysis on the Q Exactive HF-X, the radio frequency ion funnel was set to 40%. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 30 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 47 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.0 (Thermo Fisher) and Tune version 2.9 were used. For analysis on the Exploris 480, the radio frequency ion funnel was set to 30%. %. For DIA data acquisition, full scan mass spectrometry (MS) spectra with mass range 350–1650 m/z were acquired in profile mode in the Orbitrap with resolution of 120,000 FWHM. The default charge state was set to 3+. The filling time was set at maximum of 60 ms with limitation of 3 × 106 ions. DIA scans were acquired with 30 mass window segments of differing widths across the MS1 mass range. Higher collisional dissociation fragmentation (stepped normalized collision energy; 25.5, 27, and 30%) was applied and MS/MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 30,000 FWHM with a fixed first mass of 200 m/z after accumulation of 3 × 106 ions or after filling time of 47 ms (whichever occurred first). Data were acquired in profile mode. For data acquisition and processing of the raw data, Xcalibur 4.4 (Thermo Fisher) and Orbitrap Exploris 480 Tune version 2.0 were used.  DIA raw data were analyzed using the directDIA pipeline in Spectronaut (v.13, Biognosysis, Switzerland). The data were searched against a species specific (Mus Muculus, 16.747 entries) and a contaminants (247 entries) Swissprot database. The data were searched with the following modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C) (Fixed) and Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Phospho (STY) (Variable). PTM localization probability was set to 0.75. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages for trypsin and 5 variable modifications were allowed. The identifications were filtered to satisfy FDR of 1 % on peptide and protein level. Relative quantification was performed in Spectronaut for each paired comparison using the replicate samples from each condition. The data (candidate table) and data reports (protein quantities) were then exported and further data analyses and visualization were performed with Rstudio using in-house pipelines and scripts. To select significant phosphosites, a log2FC cutoff of 0.58 and a qvalue<0.05 were defined.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Stem cells, Skeletal muscle

### Affiliations
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena
Leibniz Institute on Ageing Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena

### Submitter
Emilio Cirri

### Lab Head
Dr Alessandro Ori
Leibniz Institute on Aging - Fritz Lipmann Institute Jena


