### Accession
PXD035903

### Title
Hepatitis C virus induces HuR relocalization by coordinating PKC-δ and AMPK-α function

### Description
Huh7.5 cells were transfected with HCV-JFH1 RNAand harvested after 48h of transfection. Total proteins were extracted in IP lysis buffer (Pierce, Thermo Scientific) containing 1× halt-protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) with intermediate vortexing followed by mild sonication. The lysate was centrifuged at 14,000 × g for 30 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was quantified by the BCA method (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). An equivalent amount (4 mg) of proteins from each condition was incubated with 3g of anti-HuR antibody for overnight at 4 °C. The immunocomplex was captured by using protein G Sepharose 4 fast flow beads (17-0618-01/ GE Healthcare). The immunoprecipitated complex was washed two times with IP lysis buffer and one time with mili-Q. Bound protein complexes were eluted in 50 µl SDS-PAGE 2X Laemmli sample buffer. The samples were resolved on 12% SDS–PAGE and stained with Coomassie stain (0.1% w/v). The gel was subjected to further in-gel mass spectrometry analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Gel slices corresponding to each lane were excised in individual eppendorf and destained using wash buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) and 50% ACN). Slices were hydrated with 10 mM DTT (56°C, 30 min), alkylated using 50 mM IAA (30 min, RT, dark), and further dehydrated using 100% ACN before digestion. The available proteins in-gel pieces were digested with MS grade trypsin (Pierce™ Trypsin Protease MS grade, cat no. 1862743, USA) and incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Digested peptides were extracted by adding 60% ACN with 0.1% FA and 100% ACN with 0.1% FA, followed by ultra-sonication. The digested peptides were collected, vacuum dried, and reconstituted in 40 μl of solvent A (2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA in water) and subjected to LC−MS/MS experiments using Sciex 5600+ Triple-TOF mass spectrometer coupled with ChromXP reversed-phase 3 μm C18-CL trap column (350 μm × 0.5 mm, 120 Å, Eksigent, AB Sciex) and nanoViper C18 separation column (75 μm × 250 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å; Acclaim Pep Map, Thermo Scientific, USA) in EksigentnanoLC (Ultra 2D plus) system. The binary mobile solvent system was consisted with solvent A (2% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA in water) and solvent B (98% (v/v) ACN, 0.1% (v/v) FA). The peptides were analysed with 300 nl/min flow rate in a 60 min gradient with a total run time of 75 minutes. The acquisition was executed with conventional data-dependent IDA mode. Each cycle consisted of 250 and 100 ms acquisition time for MS1 (m/z 350−1250 Da) and MS/MS (100–1500 m/z) scans respectively with a total cycle time of 2.8 s. Each fraction was run in duplicate.

### Data Protocol
All raw files (.wiff) were processed to ProteinPilot software (version 4.5, SCIEX) using the Paragon algorithm (version 4. 5. 0. 0,1654). The phospho-peptides along with phospho-sites were identified against the complete sequence of Hepatitis C virus JFH-1 polyprotein. The identification settings were used as follows: (a) trypsin for proteolytic cleavage (b) Iodoacetic acid used for Cys alkylation and (c) phosphorylation emphasis used as a special factor. Peptides and proteins were validated at ˂1% false discovery rate (FDR) and with unused ProtScore ˃ 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Host protein HuR translocation from nucleus to cytoplasm following infection is crucial for the life cycle of several RNA viruses including hepatitis C virus (HCV), a major causative agent of hepatocellular carcinoma. HuR assists the assembly of replication-complex on the viral-3'UTR, and its depletion hampers viral replication. Although cytoplasmic HuR is crucial for HCV replication, little is known about how the virus orchestrates the mobilization of HuR into the cytoplasm from the nucleus. We show that two viral proteins, NS3 and NS5A, act co-ordinately to alter the equilibrium of the nucleo-cytoplasmic movement of HuR. NS3 activates protein kinase C (PKC)-&#x3b4;, which in-turn phosphorylates HuR on S318 residue, triggering its export to the cytoplasm. NS5A inactivates AMP-activated kinase (AMPK) resulting in diminished nuclear import of HuR through blockade of AMPK-mediated phosphorylation and acetylation of importin-&#x3b1;1. Cytoplasmic retention or entry of HuR can be reversed by an AMPK activator or a PKC-&#x3b4; inhibitor. Our findings suggest that efforts should be made to develop inhibitors of PKC-&#x3b4; and activators of AMPK, either separately or in combination, to inhibit HCV infection.

### Keywords
Hepatitis c virus, Pkc-δ in virus infection, Ampk in virus infection, Hur phosphorylation, Hur translocation

### Affiliations
Regional Centre for Biotechnology

### Submitter
TUSHAR KANTI MAITI

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Tushar K Maiti
Regional Centre for Biotechnology


