### Accession
PXD008584

### Title
Synthetic circular RNA functions as a miR-21 sponge to suppress gastric carcinoma cell proliferation

### Description
MicroRNA (miRNA) sponges containing miRNA complementary binding sites constitute a potentially useful strategy for miRNA-inhibition therapeutics in cancer patients. Recently, naturally occurring circular RNAs (circRNAs) have been revealed to function as efficient microRNA sponges. We hypothesized that synthetic circRNA sponges targeting oncomiRs could be constructed and used to achieve potentially therapeutic microRNA loss of function. In this study, linear RNA molecules containing five miR-21 binding sites were transcribed in vitro. After dephosphorylation by calf intestinal phosphatase and phosphorylation by T4 polynucleotide kinase, circRNA sponges were circularized using 5’-3’ end ligation by T4 RNA ligase 1. Synthetic circular sponge stability was assayed in the presence of RNase R or fetal bovine serum. Luciferase reporter and cell proliferation assays were performed to assess competitive inhibition of miR-21 activity by circRNA sponges in NCI-N87 gastric cancer cells. Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling proteomics analysis and Western blotting were performed to delineate effects of circRNA sponges on miR-21 downstream targeted proteins. Our experiments revealed that artificial circRNA sponges can be synthesized using enzymatic ligation. These synthetic circRNA sponges are more resistant than their linear RNA counterparts to nuclease degradation in vitro. They effectively suppress the activity of miR-21 on its downstream protein targets, including the important cancer protein DAXX. Finally, they also inhibit gastric cancer cell proliferation. Our results suggest that synthetic circRNA sponges represent a rapid, effective, convenient strategy to achieve loss of miRNA function in vitro, with potential future therapeutic application in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) Labeling and Proteomics Sample Preparation NCI-N87 cells were transfected in a 6-well plate with 420 ng per well of either scRNA21, nscRNA, or phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) blank control using Lipofectamine RNAiMax (Invitrogen); a specific synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 was also included as an experimental control. Because we reasoned that some downstream proteomic effects of scRNAs would occur shortly after treatment, while others might take longer to become apparent, total protein was extracted from treated and control cells at three different treatment time intervals: at 1 h, 8 h, and 24 h after transfection. Cells were harvested and washed with ice-cold PBS 5 times to remove serum proteins. The cells were then scraped using 0.1 ml 2% SDS containing freshly prepared 1 mM PMSF and 1 mM EDTA per well of each 6-well plate, while maintaining the cells at 4°C. The lysate was sonicated on ice using 20% power input for 5 seconds followed by a 10-second gap, repeated 20 times or until the cloudy cell lysate became clear. The lysate was then centrifuged to remove any pellet. Total protein concentration was determined by BCA Protein Assay Kits (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). An SDS-page gel stained with Protea's Super Coomassie Blue was performed to confirm that samples were reproducible. Samples were aliquoted for subsequent proteomic analyses and Western Blotting.  TMT Labeling and Liquid Chromatography−Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC−MS/MS) Analyses  Ten samples (NCI-N87 cells were transfected with either scRNA21, nscRNA, or PBS blank control at 1 h, 8 h, and 24 h after transfection, or transfected with synthetic circRNA directed against miR-93 at 8 h after transfection), each containing 50 ug protein, were reduced in 5 mmol/L dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h at 57°C, then alkylated with in mmol/L iodoacetamide. Proteins were precipitated with TCA/acetone overnight, re-constituted in 100mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), and proteolyzed with trypsin (Promega, V511A). For quantification, peptides were labeled with TMT 10-plex isobaric mass tags according to the manufacturer’s guidelines (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides in the combined TMT labeled sample were then fractionated by basic reverse phase (bRP) chromatography on an Agilent HPLC system using XBridge C18 Guard Column (Waters, Milford, MA). The resulting 24 bRP fractions were analyzed by LC−MS/MS using a Nano-Acquity HPLC system (Waters) interfaced with a QExactive HF (Thermo-Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a C18 trap (S-10µM, 120Å, 75 µm x 2 cm, YMC, Japan) in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid and separated by reverse-phase liquid chromatography in-line with a 75 μm x 150 mm ProntoSIL-120-5-C18 H column (5µm, 120Å, BISCHOFF). Peptides eluting during the 2%-90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid gradient over 90 min were directly sprayed into a QExactive HF mass spectrometer through a 1 µm emitter tip (New Objective, Woburn, MA) at 2.0 kV.  Survey scans (full MS) were acquired from 350-1700 m/z with up to 15 peptide masses (precursor ions), each individually isolated in a 1.0 Da window and fragmented using HCD activation collision energy at 32 and 30 s dynamic exclusion. Precursor and fragment ions were analyzed at 120,000 and 60,000 resolution, respectively.  Isotopically resolved masses in precursor (MS) and fragmentation (MS/MS) spectra were extracted from raw MS data with and without deconvolution using the Thermo Scientific Xtract or MS2 Processor in Proteome Discoverer v1.4 (http://portal.thermo-brims.com/). All extracted data were searched using Mascot v2.5.1 (www.matrixscience.com) against the 2015RefSeq_72r_human protein database with the added enzymes and BSA, using the following criteria: trypsin as the enzyme, allowing two missed cleavage; cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT 10-plex on N-terminus as fixed modifications; methionine oxidation, asparagine and glutamine deamidation and TMT 10plex on lysine as variable modifications. Peptide identifications from Mascot searches were filtered at 1% False Discovery Rate (FDR) confidence threshold, based on a concatenated decoy database search. Proteome Discoverer uses TMT reporter ions for quantification only from the peptide identifications with the highest Mascot score from the three different extraction methods of the same peptide matched spectrum (PSM). Protein quantification is based on the normalized median ratio of all spectra of tagged peptides from the same protein.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data derived from a 10-plex TMT labeling Mass-Spec analysis using the Proteome Discoverer platform (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham MA USA) were imported into Partek Genomics Suite v6.6 (Partek Inc. Saint Louis MO, USA) for protein annotation and further analysis. One or more mass spectra were assigned to each NCBI gi identifier, which represented a single protein, and for each protein the median of these multiple spectra values was calculated to produce a single value representing that protein. These protein identifiers were mapped to their cognate NCBI Entrez genes to facilitate downstream analyses. Only those spectra with a Proteome Discoverer Isolation Interference value of <30% were accepted for further evaluation. The values of these human proteins were converted to log2 notation for statistical analysis and quantile-normalized to minimize possible noise and experimental variation across the ten experimental samples. For QC, Partek Genomics Studio was used to create boxplots and PCA plots to detect possible outliers. Different pairs of biological samples’ values were compared, yielding linear and log2 fold change values for each protein/gene.  To examine differential protein expression further, these results were imported into Spotfire DecisionSite with Functional Genomics v9.1.2 (TIBCO Spotfire, Boston, MA, USA). To characterize the proteins’ fold changes, their log2 values underwent standard deviation (SD) analyses, allowing us to set appropriate fold-change thresholds of differential expression

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNA (miR) sponges containing miR binding sequences constitute a potentially powerful molecular therapeutic strategy. Recently, naturally occurring circular RNAs (circRNAs) were shown to function as efficient miR sponges in cancer cells. We hypothesized that synthetic circRNA sponges could achieve therapeutic loss-of-function targeted against specific miRs. Linear RNA molecules containing miR-21 binding sites were transcribed in&#xa0;vitro; after dephosphorylation and phosphorylation, circularization was achieved using 5'-3' end-ligation by T4 RNA ligase 1. circRNA stability was assessed using RNase R and fetal bovine serum. Competitive inhibition of miR-21 activity by a synthetic circRNA sponge was assessed using luciferase reporter, cell proliferation, and cell apoptosis assays in three gastric cancer cell lines. circRNA effects on downstream proteins were also delineated by Tandem Mass Tag (TMT) labeling (data available via ProteomeXchange identifier PRIDE: PXD008584), followed by western blotting. We conclude that artificial circRNA sponges resistant to nuclease digestion can be synthesized using simple enzymatic ligation steps. These sponges inhibit cancer cell proliferation and suppress the activity of miR-21 on downstream protein targets, including the cancer protein DAXX. In summary, synthetic circRNA sponges represent a simple, effective, convenient strategy for achieving targeted loss of miR function in&#xa0;vitro, with potential future therapeutic application in human patients.

### Keywords
Synthetic circular rna; microrna sponge; microrna loss of function; gastric carcinoma; gene therapy

### Affiliations
JOHNS HOPKINS UNIVERSITY
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, and Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA

### Submitter
Xi Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen J. Meltzer
Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, and Department of Oncology, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA


