### Accession
PXD044993

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of isolated murine brain endothelial cells (EC) and full brain tissue (FT) preparations from 3-months-old mice followed by label-free quantification (LFQ)

### Description
Age-related decline in brain endothelial cell (BEC) function critically contributes to cerebrovascular and neurodegenerative disease. Comprehensive atlases of the BEC transcriptome have become available but results from proteomic profiling are lacking. To gain insights into endothelial pathways affected by aging, we developed a magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS)-based mouse BEC enrichment protocol compatible with high-resolution mass-spectrometry based proteomics. In this experiment, we have compared MACS sorted BEC and full brain tissue a massive enrichment of endothelial markers including Nos3, Cdh5, and Pecam1 in BECs compared to FT.

### Sample Protocol
The entire brain of 3 months old mice without the olfactory bulb was used for BEC isolation. First, the brain was transferred to a Petri Dish placed on ice and minced with a scalpel. BECs were isolated using a modified version of the Adult Brain Dissociation kit (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-107-677), which allows for mechanical and enzymatic tissue dissociation. After tissue homogenization and filtration through 70 µm cell strainers (Corning, Cat# 431751), myelin was removed using a 30 % Percoll gradient (GE Healthcare Cat# 17-5445-02) followed by removal of erythrocytes using the Red Blood Cell Removal Solution (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-094-183). BECs were enriched from the single cell suspension using CD31 MicroBeads (Miltenyi Biotec, Cat# 130-097-418) and magnetic activated cell sorting (MACS) using a modified MACS buffer with low bovine serum albumin (BSA) content (L-MACS buffer; containing 0.25 % BSA (BSA Fraction V, Sigma-Aldrich, Cat#10735096001) and 2 mM EDTA (ThermoFisher, Cat# 15575020) in PBS with calcium and magnesium (Corning, Cat#21-030-CV)). Following CD31 enrichment, the cell suspension was washed twice with PBS to remove residual L-MACS buffer and subsequently pelleted cells were used for further protein extraction. Protein was extracted from isolated BECs and iECs with RIPA buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (Roth, Cat# 3957.1), 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Roth, Cat# 9090.3), 1 % NP40 (Sigma Alrich Cat# 74385), 0.5 % Deoxycholate (Roth, Cat# 3484.3), and 0.1 % SDS (Serva, Cat# 20765.03) and protein inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Cat# 4693159001). Samples were incubated in RIPA buffer for 30min on ice followed by centrifugation at 18,000 g for another 30 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and kept at -80 °C for further analysis. Full tissue was homogenized in RIPA buffer containing 150 mM NaCl (Roth, Cat#3957.1), 1 M Tris-HCl pH 7.5 (Roth, Cat# 9090.3), 1 % NP40 (Sigma Alrich Cat#74385), 0.5 % Deoxycholate (Roth, Cat# 3484.3), 0.1 % SDS (Serva, Cat#20765.03) and protein inhibitors cocktail (Roche, Cat# 4693159001) with a TissueLyzer and 5 mm steel beads (Qiagen). Samples were homogenized at 50 Hz for 3 min followed by 30 min incubation of ice. After RIPA incubation samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min and supernatants were collected and kept at -80 ºC for further analysis. The whole sample of acutely isolated BECs (~5 µg) and 20 µg of full brain tissue lysates according to a BCA assay were subjected to proteolytical digestion. After 1:2 dilution with water, a benzonase digestion with 12.5 units was performed to remove remaining DNA/RNA the single-pot solid-phase enhanced sample preparation (SP3) was used for protein digestion according to a previously published protocol (Hughes et al., Nat Prot, 2019) Samples were filtered with 0.22 µm spin filters (Costar Spin-x, Corning, USA) to remove remaining beads, and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried peptides were dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic. The peptide concentration after proteolytic digestion was estimated using the Qubit protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, US). Samples were analyzed on a nanoElute nanoHPLC which was coupled to a TimsTOF pro mass spectrometer with a CaptiveSpray ion source (Bruker, Germany). An amount of 350 ng of peptides were separated on a on an in-house packed C18 analytical column (15 cm × 75 µm ID, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) using a binary gradient of water and acetonitrile (B) containing 0.1% formic acid at flow rate of 250 nL/min (0 min, 2 % B; 2 min, 5% B; 70 min, 24 % B; 85 min, 35 % B; 90 min, 60 % B) and a column temperature of 50°C. A standard Data Dependent Acquisition Parallel Accumulation–Serial Fragmentation (DDA-PASEF) method with a cycle time of 1.1 s was used for spectrum acquisition. Briefly, ion accumulation and separation using Trapped Ion Mobility Spectrometry (TIMS) was set to a ramp time of 100 ms. One scan cycle included one TIMS full MS scan and 10 PASEF peptide fragmentation scans. The m/z scan range was set to 100-1700 for both, MS and MS/MS scans. The ion mobility scan range was set to 1/k0 0.75-1.40.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was analyzed by the software Maxquant (maxquant.org, Max-Planck Institute Munich) version 2.0.1.0. The MS data was searched against a one protein per gene canonical fasta databases of Mus musculus (downloads: September 09th 2020, 21997 entries) from UniProt. Trypsin was defined as protease. Two missed cleavages were allowed for the database search. The option first search was used to recalibrate the peptide masses within a window of 20 ppm. For the main search peptide mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm. Peptide fragment mass tolerances were set to 40 ppm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as static modification. Acetylation of the protein N-term as well as oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. The false discovery rate for both peptides and proteins were adjusted to less than 1 %. Label free quantification (LFQ) of proteins required at least two ratio counts of unique peptides. The option “match between runs” was enabled with a matching time of 1 min and an ion mobility window of 0.05 1/k0.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Macs, Brain endothelial cells

### Affiliations
DZNE Munich Neuroproteomics
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Stephan Mueller

### Lab Head
Dr Stefan F. Lichtenthaler
DZNE Munich, Neuroproteomics, Feodor-Lynen Str. 17, 81377 Munich, Germany


