### Accession
PXD028541

### Title
Perilipin 5-mediated lipid droplet-mitochondria coupling determines mitochondrial capacity

### Description
Disturbances in lipid homeostasis can cause mitochondrial dysfunction and lipotoxicity requiring tight regulation of intracellular lipid metabolism and fatty acid (FA) flux. Perilipin 5 (PLIN5) decorates intracellular lipid droplets (LD) in oxidative tissues and controls triacylglycerol (TG) turnover via its interactions with Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) and the ATGL co-activator Comparative gene identification-58 (CGI-58). Furthermore, PLIN5 anchors mitochondria to the LD membrane via its carboxyl-terminal domain. However, the role of this LD-mitochondria coupling (LDMC) in cellular FA flux and energy catabolism is less established. In this study, we investigated the impact of abolished LDMC on cellular FA flux, mitochondrial respiration and protein interaction. To do so, we established novel PLIN5 truncation variants lacking LDMC while maintaining normal interactions with lipolytic key players. Radiotracer studies with transgenic cell lines stably overexpressing either wild type or truncated PLIN5 revealed that LDMC has no significant impact on FA esterification upon lipid loading or TG catabolism during stimulated lipolysis. Moreover, we found that LDMC is not essential for FA shuttling into mitochondria, which was in line with only minor effects of disrupted LDMC on FA oxidation. In contrast, LDMC significantly improved the mitochondrial respiratory capacity and metabolic flexibility of lipid-challenged cardiomyocytes, which was corroborated by LDMC-dependent interactions of PLIN5 with mitochondrial proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration, dynamics and cristae organization. Taken together, this study suggests that PLIN5 preserves mitochondrial function by adjusting FA supply via the regulation of TG hydrolysis and that LDMC is a vital part of mitochondrial integrity.

### Sample Protocol
Lentivirus-transduced AC16 cells were harvested by scraping and lysed in ice cold RIPA buffer [50 mM TRIS/HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% (v/v) NP-40, 20 μg/ml leupeptine, 2 μg/ml antipain, 1 μg/ml pepstatin] at 4°C for one hour. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 1,000 × g and 4°C for 10 minutes. 1 mg of the cleared cell extract was incubated with 20 μl Anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (A2220, Merck Millipore) at 4°C for 16 hours on a rotating wheel. The agarose beads were then washed six times with ice cold RIPA buffer and the bound proteins were eluted with 0.1 M glycine-HCL (pH 3.5). 50-100 µg of the whole-cell lysates (input fractions) and the total glycine-eluted IP fractions were reduced and alkylated with 5 mM TCEP and 20 mM chloroacetamide, respectively. The input samples were then digested with trypsin (1:50 wt/wt) and purified on S-trap mini columns (Protifi), following the manufacturer’s instructions, lyophilized and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. 200 ng digest was used per injection. The IP fractions were processed using S-trap micro columns following the high recovery protocol and trypsin as a carrier protein, lyophilized and resuspended in 7 µl 0.1% formic acid. 1 µl digest was used per injection. Samples were analysed on timsTOF ion mobility mass spectrometer (Bruker) in-line with UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a reversed-phase C18 Aurora column (25 cm × 75 µm) with an integrated CaptiveSpray Emitter (IonOpticks). Mobile phases A and B were 0.1 vol% formic acid in water and 0.1 vol% formic acid in ACN, respectively and the flow rate was 300 nl/min. The fraction of B was linearly increased from 2% to 25% in 90 min, followed by an increase to 40% in 10 min and a further increase to 80% in 10 min and re-equilibration. The spectra were recorded in DIA mode, each time as triplicate for the input samples and as a single acquisition for the IPs.

### Data Protocol
The DIA data were quantified with DIA-NN (v17.7.16) (ref2). The spectral library was built from 4 HEK293T whole-cell extract and 144 fractionation samples, and 6 HeLa whole-cell lysate (Pierce) acquisitions using FragPipe (v15.0) ‘SpecLib’ workflow with EasyPQP and UniProt human protein database (downloaded on 12.03.2020) supplemented with the transgene protein sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Disturbances in lipid homeostasis can cause mitochondrial dysfunction and lipotoxicity. Perilipin 5 (PLIN5) decorates intracellular lipid droplets (LDs) in oxidative tissues and controls triacylglycerol (TG) turnover via its interactions with adipose triglyceride lipase and the adipose triglyceride lipase coactivator, comparative gene identification-58. Furthermore, PLIN5 anchors mitochondria to the LD membrane via the outermost part of the carboxyl terminus. However, the role of this LD-mitochondria coupling (LDMC) in cellular energy catabolism is less established. In this study, we investigated the impact of PLIN5-mediated LDMC in comparison to disrupted LDMC on cellular TG homeostasis, FA oxidation, mitochondrial respiration, and protein interaction. To do so, we established PLIN5 mutants deficient in LDMC whilst maintaining normal interactions with key lipolytic players. Radiotracer studies with cell lines stably overexpressing wild-type or truncated PLIN5 revealed that LDMC has no significant impact on FA esterification upon lipid loading or TG catabolism during stimulated lipolysis. Moreover, we demonstrated that LDMC exerts a minor if any role in mitochondrial FA oxidation. In contrast, LDMC significantly improved the mitochondrial respiratory capacity and metabolic flexibility of lipid-challenged cardiomyocytes, which was corroborated by LDMC-dependent interactions of PLIN5 with mitochondrial proteins involved in mitochondrial respiration, dynamics, and cristae organization. Taken together, this study suggests that PLIN5 preserves mitochondrial function by adjusting FA supply via the regulation of TG hydrolysis and that LDMC is a vital part of mitochondrial integrity.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Lipid droplet, Fatty acid metabolism, Plin5

### Affiliations
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences
University of Graz
Institut für Pharmazeutische Wissenschaften, Universitry of Graz, Austria

### Submitter
Natalia Kunowska

### Lab Head
Dr Urlich Stelzl
Institut für Pharmazeutische Wissenschaften, Universitry of Graz, Austria


