### Accession
PXD035038

### Title
Identification and validation of yak (Bos grunniens) frozen-thawed sperm proteins associated with the capacitation and acrosome reaction

### Description
We used a comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling based on LC-MS/MS combined with TMT labeling strategy to analyze frozen-thawed Ashidan yak spermatozoa proteomic dynamic changes under three sequential conditions: density gradient centrifugation-based purification（FTH sperm）, incubation in capacitation medium(CAP sperm), and treatment with the calcium ionophore A23187 to induce the acrosome reaction process(AR sperm). FTH sperm Briefly, sperm-containing straws were thawed for 30 s at 37ºC prior to addition to a prepared 45-90% Percoll solution (Percoll P1644; 3.1mM KCl, 2.9mM NaH2PO4,80mM NaCl, 10mM HEPES, 2mM CaCl2·H2O, 0.4mM MgCl2·6H2O, 26mM Sodium DL-Lactate Solution, 25mM NaHCO3; pH 7.3-7.4) and diluted using modified Tyrode's Hepes buffered medium (Sp-TALPH, 114mM NaCl, 3.2mM KCl, 2mM NaHCO3, 0.4mM NaH2PO4·H2O, 10mM Na Lactate, 2mM CaCl2·H2O, 0.5mM MgCl2·6H2O, 10mM HEPES, 3mg/ml BSA, 0.2mM Na pyruvate, 7.5x10-3mg/ml Gentamicin; pH 7.3-7.4) followed by centrifugation for 10 min at 700 xg to enable the isolation of highly motile sperm. To ensure that the gradient material was completely eliminated from these samples, the sperm cells collected from the bottom layer were washed two times using supplemented Sp-TALPH medium and centrifuged for 5 min at 300 xg. Sperm were then isolated and adjusted to a concentration of 100x106/mL using modified Tyrode's bicarbonate buffered medium (Sp-TALP; 114mM NaCl, 3.2mM KCl, 25mM NaHCO3, 0.4mM NaH2PO4·H2O, 10mM Na Lactate, 2mM CaCl2·H2O, 0.5mM MgCl2·6H2O, 6mg/ml BSA, 0.2mM Na pyruvate, 5x10-3mg/ml Gentamicin; pH 7.3-7.4). A CASA approach was then used to assess sperm motility, with only those samples exhibiting >70% total motility being retained for further analyses, as per previously published protocols. An aliquot containing 100 million FTH sperm was taken from each sample for subsequent protein isolation, with the remaining sperm being incubated in capacitation medium. CAP sperm Capacitation medium was composed of Sp-TALP containing heparin (50 ug/ml) and caffeine (5 mM), and sperm were incubated in this medium for 30 min at 38.5ºC in a 5%CO2 incubator, as these conditions have previously been shown to be optimal for the induction of capacitation in frozen-thawed yak sperm. An aliquot containing 100 million CAP sperm was taken from each sample for subsequent protein isolation. AR sperm  AR induction was achieved by treating 990 uL capacitated sperm samples with 10 µL of A23187 (1.0mM in DMSO, CSNpharm, IL, USA) to a final concentration of 10 µM, followed by a 15 min incubation at 38.5ºC, For individual replicates, aliquots of 100 million AR sperm were collected for subsequent protein analyses.

### Sample Protocol
Protein Extraction and Trypsin Treatment FTH, CAP, and AR sperm samples were rinsed two times in PBS (pH 7.4) prior to resuspension in a lysis buffer composed of 1% SDS supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. These homogenates were then subjected to three rounds of sonication with a high-intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo, China). Samples were then centrifuged for 10 min at 12,000 xg at 4ºC, after which supernatants were collected and the protein levels therein were quantified using a BCA kit (Beyotime Biotechnology, Wuhan, China) based on provided directions. Protein samples were reduced via treatment for 30 min with dithiothreitol (5 mM) at 56ºC, followed by alkylation via treatment at room temperature with iodoacetamide (11 mM) while protected from light. Samples were then diluted to a final urea concentration of under 2 M. Trypsin (Promega, USA) was then added at a 1:50 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio, and samples were incubated overnight at 37ºC, followed by a second 4 h incubation at a 1:100 (trypsin: protein) mass ratio.  TMT labeling and HPLC fractionation A Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenes, USA) was used to desalt the digested peptides, which were then vacuum-dried, dissolved using 0.5M TEAB, and labeled with a TMT kit (Thermo, USA) based on provided directions. After labeling, proteins were separated into fractions via high pH reverse-phase HPLC with a Thermo Betasil C18 column (5 μm particles, 10 mm ID, 250 mm length). Peptides were initially separated into 60 fractions using an 8-32% acetonitrile (pH 9.0; Fisher Chemical, USA) gradient over 60 min. These peptides were then combined into 6 fractions and dried via vacuum centrifugation. LC-MS/MS Analyses After using 0.1% formic acid to dissolve all tryptic peptides, they were directly loaded on a homemade reversed-phase analytical column. Gradient elution was performed by increasing solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) concentrations from 6-23% over 26 min, 23-35% solvent B over 8 min, and 35-80% solvent B over 3 min, after which samples were held at 80% solvent B for 3 min. The flow rate was maintained at 450 nL/min using an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA). Peptides were then introduced into an NSI source followed by MS/MS in a Q ExactiveTM plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled online to the UPLC apparatus. The electrospray voltage was set to 2.0 kV, and peptides were detected at a resolution of 70,000 in the Orbitrap with a full scan range from 350 - 1700 m/z. A normalization collision energy (NCE) setting of 28 was then used to detect selected MS/MS peptides at a resolution of 17,500 in the Orbitrap. A data-dependent procedure was alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with a 15.0 s dynamic exclusion. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set at 5E4, and the fixed first mass was set at 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The resultant data were analyzed with the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8) by comparing MS/MS spectra to the Uniprot bovine database (37513 sequences) concatenated with a reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as the utilized cleavage enzyme with up to 4 missing cleavages being allowed. For the initial search the mass ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm, followed by a limit of 5 ppm for the main search (fragment ions: 0.02 Da). Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification on Met, while Met acetylation and oxidation was specified as a variable modification. The FDR was set to < 1%, and the minimum peptide score was > 40.

### Publication Abstract
To achieve fertilization, mammalian spermatozoa must undergo capacitation and the acrosome reaction (AR) within the female reproductive tract. However, the effects of cryopreservation on sperm maturation and fertilizing potential have yet to be established. To gain insight into changes in protein levels within sperm cells prepared for use in the context of fertilization, a comprehensive quantitative proteomic profiling approach was used to analyze frozen-thawed Ashidan yak spermatozoa under three sequential conditions: density gradient centrifugation-based purification, incubation in a capacitation medium, and treatment with the calcium ionophore A23187 to facilitate AR induction. In total, 3280 proteins were detected in these yak sperm samples, of which 3074 were quantified, with 68 and 32 being significantly altered following sperm capacitation and AR induction. Differentially abundant capacitation-related proteins were enriched in the metabolism and PPAR signaling pathways, while differentially abundant AR-related proteins were enriched in the AMPK signaling pathway. These data confirmed a role for superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) as a regulator of sperm capacitation while also offering indirect evidence that heat shock protein 90 alpha (HSP90AA1) regulates the AR. Together, these findings offer a means whereby sperm fertility-related marker proteins can be effectively identified. Data are available via Proteome Xchange with identifier PXD035038.

### Keywords
Yak sperm capacitation acrosome reaction proteomic

### Affiliations
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding on Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Yak Breeding Engineering of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Husbandry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China
PTM Biolabs Inc.

### Submitter
zhang renzheng

### Lab Head
Dr Zhang Renzheng
Key Laboratory of Animal Genetics and Breeding on Tibetan Plateau, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, Key Laboratory of Yak Breeding Engineering of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Institute of Husbandry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, China


