### Accession
PXD004092

### Title
Human_Testis_QE-HF -  Deep Coverage Proteomics Identifies More Low-Abundance Missing Proteins in Human Testis Tissue with Q-Exactive HF Mass Spectrometer

### Description
The Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) aims at finding existence evidence of missing proteins (MPs) at the early stage. Based on previous research, it has been proved that human testis tissue is suitable for further research of MPs because of its high gene expression level and high transcriptome complexity. However, the limits of dynamic range in mass spectrometric analysis and the deficiency in sensitivity and resolution will seriously affect the detection efficiency. In this study, we used Q-Exactive HF to detect three individual testis tissues dealted with two separation methods (tricine-SDS-PAGE and SDS-PAGE).

### Sample Protocol
Human testis samples were obtained and processed as previously described. Briefly, three testis tissue samples (50 mg) collected post mortem from three adult donors were ground in liquid nitrogen and sonicated in lysis buﬀer (8 M urea, 5 mM IAA, 50mM NH4HCO3, 1 × protease cocktail) on ice. The extracted proteins were respectively separated by SDS-PAGE (10%) and tricine-SDS-PAGE(12%) followed by in-gel trypsinizing for further analysis. Prior LC-MS/MS analysis, peptides were resuspended in loading buffer (1% acetonitrile and 1% formic acid in water) and 500ng of them were automatically injected in LC (Ultimate 3000，Thermo Scientific) equipped with self-packed capillary column (150μm i.d. × 12cm, 1.9μm C18 reverse-phase fused-silica, Trap), using a 90 min nonlinear gradient ramped from 9% to 95% mobile phase B (phase A, 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water; phase B, 0.08% FA +80%ACN in water). Eluted samples were analyzed by Q Exactive HF (Thermo Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany). MS full scans were performed in the ultra-high-field Orbitrap mass analyzer in ranges m/z 300-1400 at a resolution of 120,000, the maximum injection time (MIT) was 80 ms and the automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 3×106. The top 20 intense ions were subjected to dual-pressure-linear ion trap for further fragmentation via high energy collision dissociation (HCD) activation over a mass range between m/z 200 and 2000 at a resolution of 15,000 with the intensity threshold kept at 8.3×103. Normalized collision energy (NCE) was set at 27. For each scan, the AGC was set at 2 × 104 and the MIT was 60 ms. The following dynamic exclusion of precursor ion masses over a time window of 12s was used to suppress repeated peak fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
To evaluate the properties of QE and Velos, MS/MS raw data produce by QE this year and Velos last year were both searched with Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (v2.0.0.802) against the human SwissProt database (20,055 sequences, release 2015-12). Several parameters were set for database searching: Cysteine carbamidomethyl was speciﬁed as a ﬁxed modiﬁcation. Oxidation of methionine were set as variable modiﬁcations. For QE dataset, the tolerances of peptides and fragment ions were set at 15 ppm and 20 mmu respectively. For Velos dataset, the tolerances of peptides and fragment ions were set at 20 ppm and 0.5 Da respectively. For digestion, trypsin was set as protease with two missed cleavage permitted. Only the identiﬁcations satisfying the following criteria were considered: (1) the peptide length ≥7; (2) the FDR ≤ 1% at peptide level; (3) the FDR ≤ 1% at protein level; (4) at least two different peptides for protein identiﬁcation.

### Publication Abstract
Since 2012, missing proteins (MPs) investigation has been one of the critical missions of Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) through various biochemical strategies. On the basis of our previous testis MPs study, faster scanning and higher resolution mass-spectrometry-based proteomics might be conducive to MPs exploration, especially for low-abundance proteins. In this study, Q-Exactive HF (HF) was used to survey proteins from the same testis tissues separated by two separating methods (tricine- and glycine-SDS-PAGE), as previously described. A total of 8526 proteins were identified, of which more low-abundance proteins were uniquely detected in HF data but not in our previous LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Velos) reanalysis data. Further transcriptomics analysis showed that these uniquely identified proteins by HF also had lower expression at the mRNA level. Of the 81 total identified MPs, 74 and 39 proteins were listed as MPs in HF and Velos data sets, respectively. Among the above MPs, 47 proteins (43 neXtProt PE2 and 4 PE3) were ranked as confirmed MPs after verifying with the stringent spectra match and isobaric and single amino acid variants filtering. Functional investigation of these 47 MPs revealed that 11 MPs were testis-specific proteins and 7 MPs were involved in spermatogenesis process. Therefore, we concluded that higher scanning speed and resolution of HF might be factors for improving the low-abundance MP identification in future C-HPP studies. All mass-spectrometry data from this study have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004092.

### Keywords
Human, Testis, Qe-hf

### Affiliations
BPRC
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Engineering Research Center for Protein Drugs, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, China

### Submitter
Wei Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Ping Xu
State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, National Engineering Research Center for Protein Drugs, National Center for Protein Sciences, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 102206, China


