### Accession
PXD003614

### Title
Titration of Sall4 by the NuRD complex facilitates neural differentiation of ES cells

### Description
Sall4 is a transcription factor essential for early mammalian development. Though it is reported to play an important role in embryonic stem (ES) cell self-renewal, whether it is an essential pluripotency factor has been disputed. Though Sall4 is known to associate with the Nucleosome Remodeling and Deacetylase (NuRD) complex, the nature of this interaction is unclear as NuRD and Sall4 serve opposing functions in ES cells. Here we use defined culture conditions and single-cell gene expression analyses to show that Sall4 prevents activation of the neural gene expression programme in ES cells but is dispensable for maintaining the pluripotency gene regulatory network. We further show using genome-wide analyses that while Sall4 interacts with NuRD, it neither recruits NuRD to chromatin nor influences transcription via NuRD. Rather we propose a model where, by titrating Sall4 protein, NuRD limits the differentiation-inhibiting activity of Sall4 in ES cells to enable lineage commitment.

### Sample Protocol
Label-free Flag-Sall4 pulldowns were performed in triplicate as previously described (Smits, AH et al NAR 2013) with the following modifications. For each pulldown, 2mg of nuclear extract were incubated with 10 ul anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma) and 50 ug/mL ethidium bromide in a total volume of 400 ul. Affinity purified proteins were subject to on-bead trypsin digestion as previously described (Baymaz, Spruijt, Vermeulen 2014).  Tryptic peptides were acidified and desalted using StageTips (Rappsilber, 2007) prior to mass spec analyses.   Tryptic peptides were separated with an Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific).  Buffer A was 0.1% formic acid and Buffer B was 80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid.  Peptides were separated using a 94-min gradient from 9-32% Buffer B followed by washes at 50% then 95% Buffer B for 120 min of total data collection time. Mass spectra were recorded on an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), selecting the top 10 most intense precursor ions for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files from LFQ AP-MS/MS were analyzed with MaxQuant version 1.5.1.0 using default settings and searching against the UniProt curated mouse proteome, release 2014_01. Additional options for Match between runs, LFQ, and iBAQ were selected. Stoichiometry calculations and volcano plots were produced essentially as described (Smits et al 2013) using Perseus version 1.4.0.8 and in-house R scripts. Statistical cutoffs were chosen such that no proteins were present as outliers on the control, non-Flag side of the volcano plot.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ap-ms of flag-tagged sall4 in mouse embryonic stem cells

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud University

### Submitter
Susan Kloet

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, The Netherlands


