### Accession
PXD044183

### Title
Paralogue specific TTC30A knockout downregulates Sonic hedgehog signaling

### Description
Cilia assembly, maintenance and the localization of signal-transduction proteins necessitate a functioning intraflagellar transport (IFT). The IFT machinery moves cargo along a microtubule scaffold from the proximal to the distal end of the cilium. This anterograde transport is facilitated by a large multiprotein complex IFT-B, which consists of 16 proteins in total and recruits motor protein Kinesin-2 for active movement. TTC30A and TTC30B are integral components of this complex and were shown before to have redundant function in context of IFT. One paralogue could compensate the loss of the other, preventing the disruption of IFT-B and thus a severe ciliogenesis defect with no formation of the cilium. Affinity-based protein complex analysis of endogenously tagged cells, generated via CRISPR/Cas9 system as described before, revealed paralogue specific protein interactors proposing the involvement of TTC30A or TTC30B in other ciliary functions, particularly Sonic hedgehog signaling (Shh). Defects in this ciliary signaling pathway are often correlated to synpolydactyly, which intriguingly is also linked to a rare TTC30 variant. In this study we focus on the so far unknown interaction of TTC30A with protein kinase A catalytic subunit α PRKACA, which is a negative regulator of Shh pathway. For an in-depth analysis of this unique interaction and the influence on Shh, we used previously, via the CRISPR/Cas9 system, generated TTC30A or B single- and double-knockout hTERT-RPE1 cells as well as rescue cells harboring the TTC30 mutation. Our systematic approach revealed the paralogue specific influence of TTC30A KO and mutated TTC30A on the activity of PRKACA as well as the uptake of Smoothened into the cilium resulting in a downregulation of Sonic hedgehog signaling. Affinity-based protein complex analysis of wildtype versus mutated TTC30A or TTC30B uncovered differences in interaction pattern. These interactome alterations combined with Shh downregulation suggest a possible mechanism of how mutant TTC30A and respectively TTC30A KO are linked to synpolydactyly.

### Sample Protocol
For a comparative interactome analysis by Strep/FLAG-tag-based affinity purification, HEK293T controls cells were transfected with Strep/FLAG-tagged constructs containing either TTC30A/B wildtype sequence or the mutated A375V variant. After lysis, the protein concentration was measured using Bradford assay. Identical amounts of protein for each sample were incubated with anti-FLAG-M2-agarose bead (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) suspension or Strep-Tactin Superflow (IBA, Göttingen, Germany) followed by several washing steps and elution of bound protein with FLAG-peptide (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) or Strep elution buffer (IBA, Germany). A methanol–chloroform-based protein extraction was performed with subsequent trypsin digestion. The digested proteins were desalted via stop-and-go extraction tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and prepared for mass spectrometry (MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
For LC-MS/MS analysis, an Ultimate3000 nano-RSLC was coupled to a Fusion by a nanospray ion source. Prepared peptide mixtures were loaded onto a nanotrap column (µ-Precolumn 300 µm i.d. × 5 mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 5 µm, 100 Å; Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). Injection was conducted with a flow rate of 30 µL/min in 98% of buffer C (0.1% TFA in HPLC-grade water) and 2% of buffer B (80% ACN, 0.08% formic acid in HPLC-grade water). After 3 min, peptides were eluted and separated on an analytical column (75 µm × 25 cm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC, 2 µm, 100 Å; Dionex, USA) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min with a linear gradient from 2% up to 30% of buffer B in buffer A (2% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) for 82 min after an initial step of 3 min at 2% buffer B. Remaining peptides were eluted with a steep gradient (30% to 95% in 5 min) followed by 5 min at constant 95% of buffer B before the gradient was decreased rapidly in 5 min to 2% of solvent B for the final 20 min. In the data-dependent analysis, full-scan MS spectra were measured on the Fusion in a mass-charge range from m/z 335–1500 with a resolution of 70,000. The ten most abundant precursor ions were selected with a quadrupole mass filter, if they exceeded an intensity threshold of 5.0 e4 and were at least doubly charged, for further fragmentation using higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) followed by mass analysis of the fragments in the iontrap. The selected ions were excluded for further fragmentation the following 20 s. Max Quant software 1.6.0.16 was used for label-free quantification with current SwissProt database and Perseus software 1.6.2.3/1.6.5.0 [27] for data and statistical analysis (Student t-Test; Significance A).

### Publication Abstract
The intraflagellar transport (IFT) machinery is essential for cilia assembly, maintenance, and trans-localization of signaling proteins. The IFT machinery consists of two large multiprotein complexes, one of which is the IFT-B. TTC30A and TTC30B are integral components of this complex and were previously shown to have redundant functions in the context of IFT, preventing the disruption of IFT-B and, thus, having a severe ciliogenesis defect upon loss of one paralog. In this study, we re-analyzed the paralog-specific protein complexes and discovered a potential involvement of TTC30A or TTC30B in ciliary signaling. Specifically, we investigated a TTC30A-specific interaction with protein kinase A catalytic subunit &#x3b1;, a negative regulator of Sonic hedgehog (Shh) signaling. Defects in this ciliary signaling pathway are often correlated to synpolydactyly, which, intriguingly, is also linked to a rare TTC30 variant. For an in-depth analysis of this unique interaction and the influence on Shh, TTC30A or B single- and double-knockout hTERT-RPE1 were employed, as well as rescue cells harboring wildtype TTC30 or the corresponding mutation. We could show that mutant TTC30A inhibits the ciliary localization of Smoothened. This observed effect is independent of Patched1 but associated with a distinct phosphorylated PKA substrate accumulation upon treatment with forskolin. This rather prominent phenotype was attenuated in mutant TTC30B. Mass spectrometry analysis of wildtype <i>versus</i> mutated TTC30A or TTC30B uncovered differences in protein complex patterns and identified an impaired TTC30A-IFT57 interaction as the possible link leading to synpolydactyly. We could observe no impact on cilia assembly, leading to the hypothesis that a slight decrease in IFT-B binding can be compensated, but mild phenotypes, like synpolydactyly, can be induced by subtle signaling changes. Our systematic approach revealed the paralog-specific influence of TTC30A KO and mutated TTC30A on the activity of PRKACA and the uptake of Smoothened into the cilium, resulting in a downregulation of Shh. This downregulation, combined with interactome alterations, suggests a potential mechanism of how mutant TTC30A is linked to synpolydactyly.

### Keywords
Ift, Pka, Ttc30 paralogues, Sonic hedgehog signaling, Affinity proteomics, Cilia

### Affiliations
Uniklinik Tübingen
Molecular Biology of Retinal Degenerations  Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen

### Submitter
Tina Beyer

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Karsten Boldt
Molecular Biology of Retinal Degenerations  Institute for Ophthalmic Research Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen


