### Accession
PXD046575

### Title
MMV665806 Target Identification with MS-CETSA

### Description
ITDR MS-CETSA was conducted on MMV665806-treated live parasites and lysate of P. falciparum trophozoites in order to identify potential drug protein targets.

### Sample Protocol
For both intact-cell and lysate MS-CETSA, synchronized mid-trophozoite stage (28+4 HPI) culture was used. In case of intact-cell MS-CETSA, packed blood was loaded on MACS CS column (Milteny Biotech), washed, and eluted. Enriched infected RBC (iRBC)(>80% parasitaemia) were then divided into 10 aliquots (75-90 million cells in 6 mL media for each aliquot) and treated with 4-fold dilution series of MMV665806 at 10 µM top concentration or an equivalent volume of their respective solvent at 0.1% concentration, and incubated for 1 hour at 37°C. Cells were washed with PBS and resuspended in 200 µL PBS per aliquot and transferred in 50 µL aliquots to four 96-well plates, each representing different heat challenge temperature (37°C, 50°C, 55°C or 60°C). Samples were subjected to thermal challenge for 3 minutes, followed by 3 minutes cooling at 4°C. After heat treatment, 50 µL of lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 5 mM beta-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM Na3VO4, 10 mM MgCl2, 2 mM TCEP, and cocktail EDTA-free protease inhibitors (Sigma)) were added to each well. Samples were then subjected to 3x freeze/thaw cycle, followed by mechanical shearing and centrifugation to isolate the soluble protein fraction. In case of lysate MS-CETSA, the parasite culture was pelleted and incubated with 10x volume of 0.1% saponin in PBS (pH 7.2) for 5 minutes. Following centrifugation the supernatant was removed, whilst intact parasite pellet was washed 3 times with PBS. Parasite was then resuspended in lysis buffer and subjected to 3x freeze/thaw cycle, followed by mechanical shearing. Parasite lysate was then centrifuged and supernatant containing soluble parasite proteins was isolated. Ten aliquots of 20 µg of proteins were added to MMV665806 at 100 µM top concentration or an equivalent volume of their respective solvent at 0.1% concentration, incubated at room temperature for 3 minutes, and heated at 37°C, 50°C, 55°C, or 60°C for 3 minutes followed by 3 minutes cooling at 4°C. The post heating lysates were centrifuged at 20,000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh Eppendorf tube for further processing. Following quantification of lysate and intact-cell samples, the volume equivalent to 20 µg total protein in post heating treatment was aliquoted and incubated with buffer containing 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (pH 8.5), 20 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine) (pH 7.0), and 1% (w/v) Rapigest (Waters) at 55°C for 20 minutes, followed by alkylation with 55 mM chloroacetamide at room temperature for 30 minutes. Samples were then sequentially digested with Lys-C (0.23 AU LysC/µg of protein) for 3 hours, followed by trypsin (0.05 µg trypsin/µg of protein) for 18 hours at 37°C. Enzyme deactivation was performed by incubation with 1% trifluoroacetic acid for 45 minutes at 37°C and the supernatant containing peptides was collected by centrifugation. Digested peptides were labeled with TMT10plex Isobaric Label Reagent Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, 4 µg of the digested protein was labeled for at least 1 hour at a condition of pH 7.5-8 and then quenched with 1 M Tris (pH 7.4). The labeled samples were pooled and desalted using a Oasis HLB column (Waters), followed by vacuum drying. Samples were resuspended in 5% (v/v) acetonitrile, 5% (v/v) ammonia and separated using high pH reverse phase Zorbax 300 extend C-18 4.6 mm x 250 mm (Agilent) column and liquid chromatography AKTA Micro system (GE Healthcare) was used for offline sample pre-fractionation into 96 fractions with mobile phase A consisting of 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) and mobile phase B consisting of 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 10.0) in 90% (v/v) acetonitrile. The fractions were then concatenated into 20 fractions and vacuum-dried. The dried fractions were resuspended in 1% acetonitrile, 0.5% (v/v) acetic acid, and 0.06% TFA in water prior to analysis on LC/MS. Online chromatography was performed using the reverse phase liquid chromatography Dionex 3000 UHPLC system coupled to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Each fraction was separated on a 50 cm x 75 µm Easy-Spray analytical column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 70 minutes gradient of programmed mixture of mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid) and mobile phase B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) to the following gradient over time: 1-55 min (2-25%), 55-57 min (25-50%), 57-58 min (50-85%), 58-63 min (85%), 63-70 min (2%). MS data were acquired using data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with full scan MS spectra acquired in the range of 350-1550 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 and AGC target of 3e6; Top12 MS2 35,000 and AGC target of 1e5, and 1e5 isolation window at 1.2 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to perform protein identification and quantification based in the Xcalibur raw files. Raw spectra was submitted for database searching with Sequest HT (Thermo Scientific) search engine using combined Sanger Institute P. falciparum 3D7 coding sequences database and Uniprot database for human proteins. MS precursor mass tolerance was set at 30 ppm, fragment mass tolerance set at 0.06 Da and maximum missed cleavage sites of 3. Dynamic modifications include oxidation (M), deamidated (NQ), acetylation (N-terminal protein) while static modification includes carbamidomethyl (C). Forward/decoy searches were used for false discovery rate (FDR) estimation. Peptide and peptide spectrum matches (PSMs) with high=FDR 1% and medium=FDR 5% levels were accepted.  For downstream analysis, only unique peptides were used for quantification of associated protein abundance and only proteins quantified by at least 3 PSMs were used. Relative abundances of proteins under different compound concentrations were normalized against untreated control and fed into “mineCETSA” R package (available at https://github.com/nkdailingyun/mineCETSA) for data extraction, clean-up, normalization, curve fitting, hit selection, and plotting. The ITDR hit selection considers the global responses from the measured protein population and applies two thresholds: a Median Absolute Deviation scheme where the threshold was set at median + 2.5*MAD and the R2 value of curve fitting (indicating goodness of fit) for the selection of the most prominent hits.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Antimalarial, Drug target, Ms-cetsa

### Affiliations
Nanyang Technological University
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University

### Submitter
Grennady Wirjanata

### Lab Head
Dr Zbynek Bozdech
School of Biological Sciences, Nanyang Technological University


