### Accession
PXD003260

### Title
Proteomics assisted studies of the host nuclear proteome identifies candidate regulators of immunity modified during Phytophthora capsici-tomato interactions

### Description
In this study we have combined nuclei enrichment with quantitative proteomics to study tomato nuclear proteome dynamics during early infection with the devastating broad host-range oomycete pathogen Phytophthora capsici. Using this method we have identified hundreds of host nuclear proteins that show specific changes in abundance during P. capsici infection including proteins implicated in nucleic acid binding, oxidoreductase activity, helicase activity, RNA binding and transcription regulator activity. A number of these proteins have known links to plant immunity or defence signalling. We have confirmed the nuclear localisation of a selection of proteins which show P. capsici infection dependant changes in abundance and have examined the impact of their expression on resistance. As direct proof of biological relevance we demonstrate that in planta overexpression of an AT-hook family protein which decreased in abundance during infection, causes enhanced resistance to P. capsici. We conclude that organelle enrichment combined with quantitative proteomics represents a valuable strategy, suited to interrogate dynamic proteomes during stress, and allows the identification of promising targets to bolster immunity in crops.

### Sample Protocol
P. capsici spores were counted using a hemocytometer and adjusted to 500,000 spores/ml for inoculations. The second and third leaves from 4 week old S. lycopersicum were detached and placed in square petri dishes with damp tissue paper. Leaves were spray inoculated with P. capsici spores or with distilled water as a control. Inoculated leaves were incubated at 23 °C under continuous light. Leaves were harvested after 8 and 24 hours and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen before storage at – 80 °C until being used for nuclei isolations. The experiment was carried out 3 times to generate independent biological replicates.   To isolate nuclei, 40 g of frozen leaf tissue was ground to a fine powder in liquid nitrogen and re-suspended in 200 ml ice-cold nuclei isolation buffer (NIB) (25 mM pipes, 10 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 250 mM sucrose, 1% thiodiglycol, 0.15 mM spermine, 0.5 mM spermidine, 0.1% nonident P40, 0.2 mM PMSF, 1 x protease inhibitor (Thermo Scientific) pH 7.0). The suspension was filtered through 2 layers of miracloth and then 500 µm, 100 µm and 60 µm filters. The filtered suspension was centrifuged at 4650 g for 20 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was retained and gently re-suspended in 25 ml NIB before centrifugation at 1940 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was then re-suspended in 15 ml NIB and centrifuged at 1480 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was gently re-suspended in 15 ml NIB and centrifuged at 1480 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was again re-suspended in 15 ml NIB and filtered through 2 layers of miracloth to remove any remaining cell debris before being centrifuged at 1480 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The pellet was then washed twice by suspending in 25 ml NIB and centrifuging at 1480 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C, and repeating this process. The final pellet was re-suspended in 1 ml NIB and transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube before being spun at 1500 g for 10 minutes at 4 °C. The supernatant was removed and the pellet flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at – 80 °C.   Proteins were isolated from the enriched nuclei pellet by suspending in 200 µl protein extraction buffer (100 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 15 mM MgCl2, 7.5 % glycerol, 1 % SDS, 8 M urea, 5 mM DTT, 2 x protease inhibitor (Sigma), 1 % triton X 100). The suspension was vortexed well and then placed on ice for 2 hours with vortexing every 20 minutes for 2 minutes. The suspension was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4 °C and the supernatant kept. The protein extract was quantified using BCA protein assay reagent (Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions.     For each protein sample (8 hours non-infected, 8 hours infected, 24 hours non-infected and 24 hours infected) 50 ug was loaded onto pre-cast 4-20 % polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad) and samples run 2/3 of the way down the gel. Each lane was cut into 8 equally sized pieces and each section cut into 1 mm square cubes. Gel pieces were washed with 100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile before reduction and alkylation with 10 mM DTT and 55 mM iodoacetamide respectively. Proteins were subject to in-gel digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (Roche) and digestions carried out at 37 °C overnight. The resulting peptides were cleaned using a C18 (POROS R2, Applied Biosystems) column. Before loading peptides onto the column it was activated with 50 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % trifluoro acetic acid (TFA) and then washed with 0.1 % TFA. Peptides were loaded onto the column and washed with 0.1 % TFA. Bound peptides were eluted from the column using 2 x 40 µl of 50 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % TFA. Samples were dried down to approximately 10 µl using a vacuum centrifuge before being re-adjusted to a final volume of 30 µl with 0.1 % TFA.   Peptide samples were analysed on an Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer with a 156 minute gradient using the following buffer conditions: A = 0.1 % formic acid, B = 80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid. The gradient run consisted of the following steps; 0-4 min 2 % B, 4-128 min 2 %-40 % B, 128-130 min 40 %-98 % B, 130-150 min 98 % B, 151-156 min 2 % B. The parent ion scan was set at a resolution of 60,000 while the MS/MS was set at ‘Normal scan’ with a peak width of 0.6. Scans were undertaken at 335-1800 M/Z and the MS/MS had a minimum signal of 5000 ions. The mass window tolerances were set to 10 ppm for all data dependant acquisition. The top 15 ions were selected for MS/MS, using collision induced dissociation (CID), on ions 2+ and over (1+ ions excluded) with a collision energy of 35 and an activation time of 10 milliseconds. Dynamic exclusion repeat count was 1, with a repeat duration of 30 seconds, exclusion list size of 500 and exclusion duration of 45 seconds. A 5µl fraction of the 30µl peptide solution was loaded on to the instrument for each run.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was carried out using MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 (19). Raw mass spec data files were searched against a combined S. lycopersicum (20) and P. capsici genome file and quantification data was acquired using the label free quantification tool (LFQ) within MaxQuant. The maximum mass deviation for fragment ions was set at 0.5 Da. Using MaxQuant the Posterior Error Probability (PEP) was calculated for each protein. This PEP score was used to calculate the protein False Discovery Rate (FDR) and the FDR threshold was set at 0.01 (Cox and Mann, 2008). Protein identification and quantification data was analysed in the Perseus software package using two sample T-tests with an FDR of 0.05 to identify proteins showing significant differences in expression between infected and non-infected samples and across all replicates. Only those proteins identified with at least two peptides were selected for downstream analysis. Those proteins with missing LFQ intensity values in some replicates or treatments were filtered to identify only those with a consistent presence/absence expression profile between treatments and across all biological replicates, using simple custom R scripts.

### Publication Abstract
Plant-pathogen interactions are complex associations driven by the interplay of host and microbe-encoded factors. With secreted pathogen proteins (effectors) and immune signalling components found in the plant nucleus, this compartment is a battleground where susceptibility is specified. We hypothesized that, by defining changes in the nuclear proteome during infection, we can pinpoint vital components required for immunity or susceptibility. We tested this hypothesis by documenting dynamic changes in the tomato (Solanum&#xa0;lycopersicum) nuclear proteome during infection by the oomycete pathogen Phytophthora capsici. We enriched nuclei from infected and noninfected tissues and quantitatively assessed changes in the nuclear proteome. We then tested the role of candidate regulators in immunity through functional assays. We demonstrated that the host nuclear proteome dynamically changes during P.&#xa0;capsici infection. We observed that known nuclear immunity factors were differentially expressed and, based on this observation, selected a set of candidate regulators that we successfully implicated in immunity to P.&#xa0;capsici. Our work exemplifies a powerful strategy to gain rapid insight into important nuclear processes that underpin complex crop traits such as resistance. We have identified a large set of candidate nuclear factors that may underpin immunity to pathogens in crops.

### Keywords
Nucleus, Quantitative proteomics, Plant-microbe interactions, Phytophthora, Tomato, Immunity

### Affiliations
University of Dundee
Division of Plant Sciences, University of Dundee at JHI, Scotland, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Howden

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Edgar Huitema
Division of Plant Sciences, University of Dundee at JHI, Scotland, UK


