### Accession
PXD005414

### Title
Landscape of the Regulatory Elements for Lysine 2-Hydroxyisobutyrylation Pathway

### Description
This project reported a comprehensive global lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylome that provided a dataset of 6548 reliable lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (Khib) sites on 1725 proteins in HeLa cells. This dataset represents the first Khib proteome in mammalian cell to date, and illustrates a broad landscape of the Khib pathway.

### Sample Protocol
To globally identify Khib substrate proteins and their modification sites, we carried out proteomic screening in HeLa cells involving peptide fractionation, affinity enrichment of Khib-peptides, and HPLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data were analyzed by Maxquant software with a false discovery rate of less than 1% at protein, peptide, and site levels. We further remove those hits with Andromeda scores lower than 40. The experiments were performed as biological triplicates. Using this procedure, we identified 7937 Khib sites on 1901 proteins. To improve the reliability of the identified peptides, we removed 1213 Khib sites with localization probability scores below 0.75, and eliminated redundant sites. Using these criteria, we identified 6548 unique K hib sites on 1725 proteins in triplicate analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Short-chain fatty acids and their corresponding acyl-CoAs sit at the crossroads of metabolic pathways and play important roles in diverse cellular processes. They are also precursors for protein post-translational lysine acylation modifications. A noteworthy example is the newly identified lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation (K<sub>hib</sub>) that is derived from 2-hydroxyisobutyrate and 2-hydroxyisobutyryl-CoA. Histone K<sub>hib</sub> has been shown to be associated with active gene expression in spermatogenic cells. However, the key elements that regulate this post-translational lysine acylation pathway remain unknown. This has hindered characterization of the mechanisms by which this modification exerts its biological functions. Here we show that Esa1p in budding yeast and its homologue Tip60 in human could add K<sub>hib</sub> to substrate proteins both in vitro and in vivo. In addition, we have identified HDAC2 and HDAC3 as the major enzymes to remove K<sub>hib</sub>. Moreover, we report the first global profiling of K<sub>hib</sub> proteome in mammalian cells, identifying 6 548 K<sub>hib</sub> sites on 1 725 substrate proteins. Our study has thus discovered both the "writers" and "erasers" for histone K<sub>hib</sub> marks, and major K<sub>hib</sub> protein substrates. These results not only illustrate the landscape of this new lysine acylation pathway, but also open new avenues for studying diverse functions of cellular metabolites associated with this pathway.

### Keywords
Hela, Lysine 2-hydroxyisobutyrylation, Ptm

### Affiliations
The University of Chicago
Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica

### Submitter
He Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yingming Zhao
The University of Chicago


