### Accession
PXD020304

### Title
Regression of breast cancer metastases following treatment with irradiated SV-BR-1-GM, a GM-CSF overexpressing breast cancer cell line: clinical, molecular, and immune markers of response

### Description
BACKGROUND:   While many authorities theorize that  cancer vaccines  are too weak to be widely effective,  there are quite a few reports  with clearly demonstrated, significant clinical benefit in some patients. The literature of cellular cancer immunotherapies shows that 53% (78/147) of phase II studies showed evidence of clinical activity.  While not all reached their primary endpoints,  75% (12/16) of phase III studies had positive data. SV-BR-1-GM, derived from a patient with grade 2 (moderately differentiated) breast cancer, is a GM-CSF-secreting breast cancer cell line with properties of antigen-presenting cells we established. METHODS:  We report detailed molecular and clinical findings from an open-label phase I, single-arm pilot study  in breast (3 subjects) and ovarian (1 subject) cancer with irradiated SV-BR-1-GM cells (ClinicalTrials.gov Identifier NCT00095862).  Inoculations of SV-BR-1-GM were preceded by low-dose cyclophosphamide and followed by injections of interferon-alpha2b into the SV-BR-1-GM inoculation sites.  We assessed both cellular (delayed-type hypersensitivity (DTH) reactions) and humoral (anti-SV-BR-1 antibody) immune responses and conducted molecular analyses on patient blood cells and SV-BR-1-GM cells. RESULTS: Treatment was generally safe and well tolerated. Immune responses were elicited universally.   Overall survival was more than 33 months for three of the four patients. As previously reported, one patient (Subject A002, with grade 2 breast cancer) had  regression of metastases in lung, breast and soft tissue within 2 months of treatment initiation.  At later relapse, with multiple metastases including several in the brain, rapid tumor response was again seen, including complete regression of CNS metastases. Consistent with a role of Class II HLA in contributing to SV-BR-1-GM’s mechanism of action, Subject A002 allele-matched SV-BR-1-GM at the HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DRB3 loci. Only the HLA-DRB1 alleles were clearly expressed in SV-BR-1-GM cells. However, interferon-gamma (possibly also present in situ) upregulated both HLA-DRB1 and HLA-DRB3 to substantial levels. Gene expression data supports the hypothesis that SV-BR-1-GM cells have retained some of the original breast cancer’s grade 2 character.   CONCLUSIONS: We describe a whole-cell immunotherapy regimen with remarkable rapidity of response and a speedy rescue response, including complete resolution of CNS metastases after relapse. Class II HLA matches might be critical for SV-BR-1-GM’s therapeutic potential.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation: SV-BR-1 cells were detached using TrypLE Express (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and cell pellets submitted to  Biognosys AG (Schlieren, Switzerland) for liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS) analysis. Cell pellets were resuspended in 8 M urea, 0.1 M ammonium bicarbonate, and benzonase. Samples were then reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) and alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide (1 h, 37°C), diluted to 2 M urea and digested with trypsin (1:50 enzyme to protein ratio, 16 h, 37°C). Peptides were desalted using a C18 MicroSpin plate (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA, USA), according to the manufacturer’s instructions, dried, and resuspended in 1% acetonitrile (ACN) with 0.1% formic acid (FA). Samples were then spiked with iRT kit calibration peptides (Biognosys) following the manufacturer’s instructions, and the peptide concentration was measured using a SPECTROstar Nano spectrophotometer (BGM Labtech).  High-pH reversed phase fractionation: Peptide samples were pooled and ammonium hydroxide was added to reach pH 10. The fractionation was performed using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RS pump (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on an Acquity UPLC CSH C18 1.7 µm, 2.1 x 150 mm column (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA). The gradient was 1 to 40 % solvent B in 30 min, with solvent A: 20 mM ammonium formate in water, and solvent B: ACN. Fractions were taken every 30 seconds and sequentially pooled to 10 fraction pools. Fractions were dried and resuspended in 17 µL 1% ACN and 0.1% FA. Prior to mass spectrometric analyses, samples were spiked with iRT kit calibration peptides and peptide concentration was determined using the SPECTROstar Nano spectrophotometer. Proteomic LC-MS/MS analysis: Two micrograms of peptides per sample were injected to a self-packed C18 column (Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur, 1.9 µm particle size, 120 Å pore size, 75 µm inner diameter, 50 cm length; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) on a Thermo Scientific Easy nLC 1200 nano liquid chromatography system connected to a Thermo Scientific QExactive HF-X mass spectrometer equipped with a standard nano electrospray source. LC solvents were A: 1 % ACN and 0.1 % FA in water, B: 15 % water and 0.1 % FA in ACN. The nonlinear LC gradient was 1-55 % solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 55-90 % B in 10 seconds, 90 % B for 10 minutes, 90-1 % B in 10 seconds and 1% B for 5 minutes. For data-dependent acquisition (DDA; shotgun LC-MS/MS), a modified TOP 15 method was used. For HRM data-independent acquisition (DIA), a method with one full range survey scan and 22 DIA variable windows was used.

### Data Protocol
The spectral library was generated by searching all DDA and DIA raw data using Spectromine software (Biognosys). The default settings were used, the false discovery rate on peptide and protein level was set to 1 %. A human UniProt fasta database (Homo sapiens, 2019-07-01) was used for the search engine, allowing for 2 missed cleavages, one fixed modification (carbamidomethylation of cysteine) and three variable modifications (N-term acetylation, methionine oxidation and phosphorylation (STY)). DIA raw data were analyzed using Spectronaut Software (Biognosys) using default settings with the following modifications: data was filtered using q-value sparse and local normalization was used.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Gvax, Antigen-presenting cells, Therapeutic cancer vaccine, Whole-cell vaccine, Targeted immunotherapy, Sv-br-1-gm

### Affiliations
BriaCell Therapeutics Corporation, Berkeley, CA, USA
Biognosys SA

### Submitter
Vito Dozio

### Lab Head
Dr Markus D. Lacher
BriaCell Therapeutics Corporation, Berkeley, CA, USA


