### Accession
PXD031787

### Title
Differential centrifugation coupled to affinity purification-mass spectrometry of mcherry-ATG8E

### Description
Autophagosomes are double-membraned vesicles that traffic harmful or unwanted cellular macromolecules to the vacuole for recycling. Although autophagosome biogenesis has been studied extensively, autophagosome maturation, i.e., delivery and fusion with the vacuole, remains largely unknown in plants. To start filling these gaps, we devised a differential centrifugation set up, where we enriched intact autophagosomes and performed affinity purification-mass spectrometry (AP-MS), using ATG8 as a bait. This method enabled the identification of an autophagy adaptor protein.

### Sample Protocol
Seven-day-old Arabidopsis seedlings expressing mcherry or mcherry-ATG8E were subjected to Torin treatment (3 μM for 90 min) and immediately ground in 10% glycerol, 30 mM Tris (pH 7.5), 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA (pH 8), 0.4 M sorbitol, 5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT), 1x liquid protease inhibitor cocktail 1% PVPP in a 3:1 v/w ratio. Afterwards lysates underwent several differential centrifugation steps where each time the supernatant was transferred. Samples were spun for (1) 10 min at 1000 g, to remove cell debris and nuclei; (2) 10 min at 10000 g, to remove bigger organelles like mitochondria and chloroplasts; (3) 10 min at 15000 g, to further remove organelles (S3 fraction) and finally (4) 60 min at 100000 g (P4 and S4 fractions). equal amount of protein of S3 was loaded before ultracentrifugation step. The P4 fraction was dissolved gently in GTEN-based buffer (without PVPP). Half of S4 and P4 samples was further subjected to 30 ng/μl proteinase K treatment for 30 min on ice. The reaction was stopped with 5 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF). Control P4 and S4 reactions (no proteinase K treatment) were kept on ice in the meantime. For affinity purification, samples were incubated for 1 h with 40 μl RFP-Trap® Magnetic Agarose beads (Chromotek). Mass spectrometry sample preparation and measurement were performed as previously described in Stephani and Picchianti et al., 2020 (Stephani et al., 2020).

### Data Protocol
The total number of MS/MS fragmentation spectra was used to quantify each protein. The data matrix of spectral count values was submitted to a negative-binomial test using the R package IPinquiry4 (https://github.com/hzuber67/IPinquiry4) that calculates fold change and p-values using the quasi-likelihood negative binomial generalized log-linear model implemented in the edgeR package. The pairwise comparisons were the following: 1- mCherry P4 vs. mCherry-ATG8E P4, 2- mCherry-ATG8E S4 vs. mCherry-ATG8E P4 and 3- mCherry-ATG8E P4 + protease K vs. mCherry-ATG8E P4 untreated. In each case, comparisons were obtained from two independent biological replicates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Autophagosomes, Lc-msms, Arabidopsis, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
IMBA Vienna
Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.

### Submitter
Richard Imre

### Lab Head
Dr Yasin Dagdas
Gregor Mendel Institute (GMI), Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna BioCenter (VBC), Vienna, Austria.


