### Accession
PXD034892

### Title
Protein expression and identification of Tyrp1 Mutant Variants Associated with OCA3 form of albinism.

### Description
Oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3) is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by mutations in the TYRP1 gene. Tyrosinase-related protein 1 (Tyrp1) is involved in eumelanin synthesis, catalyzing the oxidation of 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid oxidase (DHICA) to 5,6-indolequinone-2-carboxylic acid (IQCA). In our work, we are trying to understand the effect of genetic mutations at the level of protein atomic structure and establish a link between the effect of mutations and disease phenotype.  Here, for the first time, four OCA3-causing mutations of Tyrp1, C30R, H215Y, D308N, and R326H, were investigated computationally and experimentally to understand Tyrp1 protein stability and catalytic activity. Using the Tyrp1 crystal structure (PDB:5M8L), global mutagenesis was conducted to evaluate mutant protein stability. Consistent with our predictions the foldability parameter, C30R and H215Y should exhibit greater instability, and two other mutants, D308N and R326H, are expected to keep a native conformation. Mass-spectroscopy analysis has confirmed the identity of mutant recombinant variants. SDS-PAGE and Western blot analysis of the purified recombinant proteins confirmed that the foldability parameter correctly predicted the effect of mutations critical for protein stability.

### Sample Protocol
Recombinant human wild-type intra-melanosomal domain of the tyrosinase-related protein (residues 25–537 of the native protein), Tyrp1, and OCA3-related mutants, C30R, H215Y, D308N, and R326H were expressed in baculovirus and produced in the whole insect T. ni larvae. Proteins were purified using the combination of affinity and gel-filtration chromatographies. Protein identity was confirmed by Western blot analysis using an anti-Tyrp1 antibody. To confirm the presence of the amino acid substitution in the working isolate we used bottom-up mass spectrometry analysis. Due to the properties of the expected variant peptides an easy spray C4 column was used while a C18 column was used for a WT vs. C30R variant. Details for the mass spec. analysis are found in the publication. The different identifiers are used to describe these two data sets. This is for C4 based data.

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 was used to analyze the resulting data searching against the common contaminants list and a list containing each of the variants. Lower FDR’s were used due to the low complexity of the sample and the internal controls available from the set of raw files.

### Publication Abstract
Tyrosinase related protein 1 (TYRP1) is the most abundant melanosomal protein of the melanocyte, where plays an important role in the synthesis of eumelanin, possibly catalyzing the oxidation of 5,6-dihydroxyindole-2-carboxylic acid to 5,6-quinone-2-carboxylic acid. Mutations to the TYRP1 gene can result in oculocutaneous albinism type 3 (OCA3), a rare disease characterized by reduced synthesis of melanin in skin, hair, and eyes. To investigate the effect of genetic mutations on the TYRP1 structure, function, and stability, we engineered the intramelanosomal domain of TYRP1 and its mutant variants mimicking either OCA3-related changes, C30R, H215Y, D308N, and R326H or R87G mutant variant, analogous to OCA1-related pathogenic effect in tyrosinase. Proteins were produced in Trichoplusia Ni larvae, then purified, and analyzed by biochemical methods. Data shows that D308N and R326H mutants keep the native conformations and demonstrate no change in their stability and enzymatic activity. In contrast, mutations C30R and R87G localized in the Cys-rich domain show the variants misfolding during the purification process. The H215Y variant disrupts the binding of Zn<sup>2+</sup> in the active site and thus reduces the strength of the enzyme/substrate interactions. Our results, consistent with the clinical and in silico studies, show that mutations at the protein surface are expected to have a negligible phenotype change compared to that of TYRP1. For the mutations with severe phenotype changes, which were localized in the Cys-rich domain or the active site, we confirmed a complete or partial protein misfolding as the possible mechanism of protein malfunction caused by OCA3 inherited mutations.

### Keywords
Oca3, Albinism, Tyrp1

### Affiliations
Pediatric, Developmental & Genetic Ophthalmology Section AND Ophthalmis Clinical Genetics Section, Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute Intramural Research Program, NIH, US Government
NIH/NIDDK

### Submitter
David Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Brian P. Brooks
Pediatric, Developmental & Genetic Ophthalmology Section AND Ophthalmis Clinical Genetics Section, Ophthalmic Genetics and Visual Function Branch, National Eye Institute Intramural Research Program, NIH, US Government


