### Accession
PXD018623

### Title
USP7 and VCPFAF1 define the SUMO/Ubiquitin landscape at DNA replication forks

### Description
The AAA+ ATPase VCP regulates the extraction of SUMO and/or ubiquitin modified factors from chromatin. We previously showed that active DNA synthesis is associated with a SUMO-high and ubiquitin-low environment that is maintained by the deubiquitylase USP7. Here we unveil a functional cooperation between USP7 and VCP in the control of DNA replication conserved from Caenorhabditis elegans to mammals. The function of VCP during DNA replication is mediated by its cofactor FAF1, which facilitates the extraction of SUMOylated proteins that accumulate on chromatin upon USP7 inhibition. Supporting this cooperative role, the inactivation of the orthologues of USP7 and FAF1 is synthetic lethal in C. elegans, and USP7 and FAF1 inhibitors display synergistic toxicity. Together, these results reveal a coordinated activity of USP7 and VCPFAF1 in limiting SUMOylation at active replication forks and promoting the extraction and degradation of ubiquitylated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for proteomic analysis  Proteins were eluted from the magnetic beads in two consecutive steps by shaking for 45 min at 1400 rpm in an Eppendorf Thermomixer in 2 bead volumes (aprox 100ul) of elution buffer (8M Urea, 15mM TCEP, 100mM Tris-HCl pH=8.0). The beads were separated using a magnetic stand. The supernatant obtained was digested by means of standard FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were alkylated (50 mM CAA, 20 min in the dark, RT) and sequentially digested with Lys-C (Wako) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:50, o/n at RT) and trypsin (Promega) (protein:enzyme ratio 1:100, 6 h at 37°C). Resulting peptides were desalted using C18 stage-tips. Mass spectrometry (Velos) LC-MS/MS was done by coupling a nanoLC-Ultra 1D+ system (Eksigent) to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) via a Nanospray Flex source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were loaded onto a reversed-phase ReproSil Pur C18-Aq 5 µm 0.3 x 10 mm trapping cartridge (SGE Analytical), and washed for 10 min at 2.5 μL/min with loading buffer (0.1% FA). The peptides were eluted from a RP ReproSil Pur C18-AQ 1.9 µm 400 x 0.075 mm home-made column by application of a binary gradient consisting of 4% ACN in 0.1% FA (buffer A) and 100% ACN in 0.1%FA (buffer B), with a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptides were separated using the following gradient: 0 to 2 min 2-6% B, 2 to 90 min 6-20% B, 90 to 103 min 20-35% B, 103 to 113.5 min 35-98% B and 103.5 to 113.5 min 98%B. The peptides were electrosprayed (1.8 kV) into the mass spectrometer with a PicoTip emitter (360/20 Tube OD/ID µm, tip ID 10 µm) (New Objective), a heated capillary temperature of 325°C and S-Lens RF level of 60%. The mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode, with an automatic switch between MS and MS/MS scans using a top 15 method (threshold signal ≥ 800 counts and dynamic exclusion of 60 sec). MS spectra (350-1500 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 FWHM (400 m/z). Peptides were isolated using a 1.5 Th window and fragmented using collision induced dissociation (CID) with linear ion trap read out at a NCE of 35% (0.25 Q-value and 10 ms activation time). The ion target values were 1E6 for MS (500 ms max injection time) and 5000 for MS/MS (100 ms max injection time).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Raw files were processed with MaxQuant (v 1.5.3.30) using the standard settings against a human protein database (UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot, December 2013, 20,187 sequences) supplemented with contaminants. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification whereas oxidation of methionines and protein N-term acetylation as variable modifications. Minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and a maximum of two tryptic missed-cleavages were allowed. Results were filtered at 0.01 FDR (peptide and protein level). Afterwards, the “proteinGroup.txt” file was loaded in Perseus (v1.5.5.2) for further statistical analysis. LFQ values were normalized using the VCP protein levels, except for IgG controls. Missing values were imputed from the observed normal distribution of intensities. A Welch´s T-test with a permutation-based FDR was performed comparing each condition (P22 treatment, NMS treatment and not treated control) vs the IgG controls and only proteins with a q-value<0.05 and a log2 ratio higher than 2 were considered as potential interactors. Only interactors with a log2 ratio >1.5 or <-1.5 for the P22 and NMS treated samples vs not treated samples were considered as regulated.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Dsp, Vcp, Crosslinking, Usp7

### Affiliations
Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas
CNIO

### Submitter
Eduardo Zarzuela

### Lab Head
Dr Javier Muñoz
CNIO


