### Accession
PXD020246

### Title
Correction of indels in the atpB gene by genetic recoding in the chloroplast of Oenothera and tobacco

### Description
Genetic recoding, a process that modifies genome templated protein sequence, plays an important role especially in the small genomes of viruses and bacteria. Chloroplasts have evolved from cyanobacterial ancestry and mainly retain the prokaryotic gene expression machinery. I-iota, a plastome mutant of Oenothera (the evening primrose), carries a single adenine insertion in a polyA stretch near to the 5’-end of the atpB gene, encoding the β-CF1 subunit of the ATP synthase This causes formation of a truncated protein. Surprisingly, a full-length AtpB protein is detectable in I-iota leaves, suggesting the presence of genetic recoding operating in I-iota. In order to analyze this phenomenon in more detail, several tobacco transplastomic lines were generated inducing and destroying genetic recoding of atpB. We identified that a two adenine (+2A) insertion was more efficiently compensated in plants than +1A, -1A or -2A mutations at the same location. Furthermore, a homopolymeric composition of the polyA stretch is essential for successful recoding: plants carrying a destroyed polyA stretch have an albino-phenotype, indicating the absence of genetic recoding. Here we show evidence for genetic recoding acting in the chloroplast that plays presumablya compensatory function and enables correction of indels in an essential gene for autotrophic growth.

### Sample Protocol
Thylakoids from Oe-WT and I-iota (50 µg each) were solubilized in UTU buffer (6 M urea/2 M thiourea, pH 8.0) and subsequently incubated in reduction buffer (1 µg/µl DTT in ddH20) followed by incubation with alkylation buffer (55 mM iodoacetamide in ddH2O) for 30 min at room temperature each. Then samples were treated with Endoproteinase Lys-C (0.5 µg/µl 10 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.0) for four hours at room temperature and digested in 0.4 µg/µl of Trypsin (both purchased from Promega, Mannheim, Germany) overnight at room temperature. Bovine Serum Albumin (BSA) was used a control and treated identically as above. Digestion was stopped by addition of TFA (0.2% [v/v] final concentration). Peptides were purified using Zip tip C18 pipette tips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer instructions. Samples generated by in-solution digestion and aiming the quantification of AtpA, AtpB, and AtpE in Oe-WT and I-iota were subjected LC-MS/MS with free labeling approach. The peptides were resuspended in 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1 % (v/v) TFA and were injected using nanoflow HPLC (Proxeon Biosystems) onto the analytical column (length of 12 cm and diameter of 75 μm) filled with C18 (Reprosil C18; Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were eluted from the column in a 90 minutes linear gradient of 5 to 80% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 250µl/min. Samples were analyzed using selected reaction monitoring method (SRM) with fragmentation and detected using TSQ Quantum UltraTM Triple Stage Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Schwerte, Germany). Specific peptide sequences unique for target proteins (AtpA, AtpB, AtpE) were created using the Pinpoint software (version 1.0, Thermo Scientific) and are listed in the Supplemental Table 5.

### Data Protocol
Peptide obtained from TSQ MS were analyzed using Pinpoint and subsequently Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
Translational recoding, also known as ribosomal frameshifting, is a process that causes ribosome slippage along the messenger RNA, thereby changing the amino acid sequence of the synthesized protein. Whether the chloroplast employs recoding is unknown. I-iota, a plastome mutant of Oenothera (evening primrose), carries a single adenine insertion in an oligoA stretch [11A] of the atpB coding region (encoding the &#x3b2;-subunit of the ATP synthase). The mutation is expected to cause synthesis of a truncated, nonfunctional protein. We report that a full-length AtpB protein is detectable in I-iota leaves, suggesting operation of a recoding mechanism. To characterize the phenomenon, we generated transplastomic tobacco lines in which the atpB reading frame was altered by insertions or deletions in the oligoA motif. We observed that insertion of two adenines was more efficiently corrected than insertion of a single adenine, or deletion of one or two adenines. We further show that homopolymeric composition of the oligoA stretch is essential for recoding, as an additional replacement of AAA lysine codon by AAG resulted in an albino phenotype. Our work provides evidence for the operation of translational recoding in chloroplasts. Recoding enables correction of frameshift mutations and can restore photoautotrophic growth in the presence of a mutation that otherwise would be lethal.

### Keywords
Targeted, Oenothera, Tabacco, Proteomics, Chloroplast, Srm

### Affiliations
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology
Max Planck Institute for Terrestrial Microbiology

### Submitter
Witold Szymanski

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Search Results Web results Stephan Greiner
Max-Planck-Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology


