### Accession
PXD017451

### Title
15N labeling of mouse microbiota

### Description
This study investigated the in vivo dynamics of the microbiome using metaproteomics coupled with protein-SIP in mice.

### Sample Protocol
Stool samples collected over 10 time points from the mice fed 15N diet were subjected to protein extraction using SDS/Urea buffer. Day 0 sample was used as light sample and an equal amount of this light sample was spiked into each heavy labeled sample with a 1:1 light-to-heavy ratio for in-solution trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data were processed by OpenMS, MetaLab and MetaProfiler to identify and quantified peptides and proteins and to establish profiles of 15N incorporations over time.

### Publication Abstract
The gut microbiome and its metabolic processes are dynamic systems. Surprisingly, our understanding of gut microbiome dynamics is limited. Here, we report a metaproteomic workflow that involves protein stable isotope probing (protein-SIP) and identification/quantification of partially labeled peptides. We also developed a package, which we call MetaProfiler, that corrects for false identifications and performs phylogenetic and time series analysis for the study of microbiome dynamics. From the stool sample of five mice that were fed with <sup>15</sup>N hydrolysate from <i>Ralstonia eutropha</i>, we identified 12&#x202f;326 nonredundant unlabeled peptides, of which 8256 of their heavy counterparts were quantified. These peptides revealed incorporation profiles over time that were different between and within taxa, as well as between and within clusters of orthologous groups (COGs). Our study helps unravel the complex dynamics of protein synthesis and bacterial dynamics in the mouse microbiome. MetaProfiler and the bioinformatic pipeline are available at https://github.com/northomics/MetaProfiler.git.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Mouse, 15n stable isotope labeling, Metaproteomics

### Affiliations
University of Ottawa

### Submitter
Xu Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
University of Ottawa


