### Accession
PXD005650

### Title
Highly reproducible improved label-free quantitative analysis of cellular phosphoproteome by optimization of LC-MS/MS gradient and analytical column construction

### Description
Expanding the sequencing depth of the peptides showing a statistically significant quantitative change arising from a biological stimulation is critical. Here we demonstrate that optimization of LC gradient and analytical column construction can reveal over 30,000 unique peptides and 23,000 phosphopeptides at high confidence. The quantitative reproducibility of different analytical workflows was evaluated by comparing the phosphoproteome of CD3/4 stimulated and unstimulated T-cells as a model system.  A fritless, 50 cm-long column packed with 1.9 µm particles operated with a standard pressure HPLC significantly improved the sequencing depth 51% and decreased the selected ion chromatogram peak spreading. Most importantly, under the optimal workflow we observed an improvement of 330% in detection of significantly changed phosphopeptides in the stimulated cells compared with the other workflows. The discovery power of the optimized column configuration was illustrated by identification of significantly altered phosphopeptides harboring novel sites from proteins previously established as important in T cell signaling including A-Raf, B-Raf, c-Myc, CARMA1, Fyn, ITK, LAT, NFAT1/2/3, PKCα, PLCγ1/2, RAF1, and SOS1. Taken together, our results revealed a simple column fabrication methodology that provides an inexpensive improvement for single-run LC-MS/MS analysis to optimize peptide sequencing depth, dynamic range, sensitivity, and label free quantitative reproducibility.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat clone E6-1 was obtained from American Tissue Culture Collection (Manassas, VA) were cultured and maintained according to the standard protocols. For the CD3/4 stimulation, after harvest, Jurkat cells were treated with anti-CD3 and anti-CD4 antibody in PBS (clone OKT3 and OKT4; eBioscience, San Diego, CA) for 3 min at 37°C. Cell lysis, protein extraction and trypsin digestion followed by a Sep-Pack C18 column purification was performed as previously described, with the exception that TFA was used instead of acetic acid. Eluents containing peptides were lyophilized for 48 hours to dryness. Phosphopeptides were enriched with Titansphere Phos-TiO tips (GL Sciences, Tokyo Japan) following the manufacturer’s protocol.  Analytical columns 50 and/or 15 cm long were packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 and/or 3 µm particles (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germany). Equal amount of tryptic peptides were analyzed by a fully automated phosphoproteomic technology platform. The nanoLC-MS/MS experiments were performed with an Agilent 1200 Series Quaternary HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA) connected to a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA).

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectrum matching of MS/MS spectra from whole cell lysate Jurkat tryptic digest samples was performed against a human-specific database (UniProt; downloaded 2/1/2013) using MASCOT v. 2.4 (Matrix Science, Ltd, London W1U 7GB UK). A concatenated database containing 144,156 “target” and “decoy reversed” sequences was employed to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Peptide assignments from the database search were filtered down to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) by a logistic spectral score, as previously described. To validate the position of the phosphorylation sites, the Ascore algorithm was applied to all data, and the reported phosphorylation site position reflected the top Ascore prediction.  Relative quantification of phosphopeptide abundance was performed via calculation of selected ion chromatograms (SIC) peak areas. Retention time alignment of individual replicate analyses was performed as previously described. A minimum SIC peak area equivalent to the typical spectral noise level of 1000 was required of all data reported for label-free quantitation. Individual SIC peak areas were normalized to the peak area of the exogenously spiked phosphopeptide FQpSEEQQQTEDELQDK added prior to phosphopeptide enrichment and reversed-phase elution into the mass spectrometer. Quantitative analysis was applied to five biological replicate experiments. To select phosphopeptides that show a statistically significant change in abundance between CD3/4 stimulated and unstimulated cells, q-values for multiple hypothesis tests were calculated based on p-values from two-tailed unpaired Student’s t tests using the R package QVALUE as previously described.

### Publication Abstract
Expanding the sequencing depth of the peptides with a statistically significant quantitative change derived from a biological stimulation is critical. Here we demonstrate that optimization of LC gradient and analytical column construction can reveal over 30,000 unique peptides and 23,000 phosphopeptides at high confidence. The quantitative reproducibility of different analytical workflows was evaluated by comparing the phosphoproteome of CD3/4 stimulated and unstimulated T-cells as a model system. A fritless, 50cm-long column packed with 1.9&#x3bc;m particles operated with a standard pressure HPLC significantly improved the sequencing depth 51% and decreased the selected ion chromatogram peak spreading. Most importantly, under the optimal workflow we observed an improvement of over 300% in detection of significantly changed phosphopeptides in the stimulated cells compared with the other workflows. The discovery power of the optimized column configuration was illustrated by identification of significantly altered phosphopeptides harboring novel sites from proteins previously established as important in T cell signaling including A-Raf, B-Raf, c-Myc, CARMA1, Fyn, ITK, LAT, NFAT1/2/3, PKC&#x3b1;, PLC&#x3b3;1/2, RAF1, and SOS1. Taken together, our results reveal the analytical power of optimized chromatography using sub 2&#x3bc;m particles for the analysis of the T cell phosphoproteome to reveal a vast landscape of significantly altered phosphorylation changes in response to T cell receptor stimulation.

### Keywords
Human, Q exactive, Phosphoproteomics, T cell, Acute leukemia, Label free

### Affiliations
Brown University
Brown University, Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Biochemistry

### Submitter
Arthur Salomon

### Lab Head
Dr Arthur Robert Salomon
Brown University, Molecular Biology, Cell Biology, Biochemistry


