### Accession
PXD010712

### Title
The GFZF protein interactome in Drosophila melanogaster 0-12h old embryos

### Description
The gfzf gene is essential for viability and it has been identified in several genetic screenings pointed out its importance in different cellular processes. However, its molecular function has not been extensively studied so far. Here we analyse the GFZF protein interactome in Drosophila melanogaster embryos. The GFZF protein was subjected to immunoprecipitation with an antibody against the endogenous protein and the interactome was analysed by mass spectrometry. The samples are named as follows:  antibody used _ batch _ MS ID _ date of MS run

### Sample Protocol
All immunoprecipitations were performed by pre-coupling either an anti-GFZF or an unspecific IgG (control) to protein A/G beads and then incubating it with nuclear extracts from 0-12h old embryos. The GFZF immunoprecipitations and its relative control were done in parallel on four biological replicates. After the washes, the beads containing the immunoprecipitated proteins were directly digested with trypsin and desalted with C18 stage tips before being injected into the mass spectrometer. Peptide mixtures were subjected to nanoRP-LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 nano chromatography system coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fisher Scientific)

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and quantified using Maxquant 1.6.0.16 (FlyBase Database Drosophila melanogaster duel-all-translation-r6.12.fasta), with default settings except: Variable modifications = Oxidation (M); Unique and razor, Min. peptides = 1; Match between windows = 0.8 min.  For any information refer to the mqpar.xml file.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding the molecular basis of hybrid incompatibilities is a fundamental pursuit in evolutionary genetics. In crosses between Drosophila melanogaster females and Drosophila simulans males, an interaction between at least three genes is necessary for hybrid male lethality: Hmr&#x200a;mel, Lhr&#x200a;sim, and gfzf&#x200a;sim. Although HMR and LHR physically bind each other and function together in a single complex, the connection between gfzf and either of these proteins remains mysterious. Here, we show that GFZF localizes to many regions of the genome in both D. melanogaster and D. simulans, including at telomeric retrotransposon repeats. We find that GFZF localization at telomeres is significantly different between these two species, reflecting the rapid evolution of telomeric retrotransposon copy number composition between the two species. Next, we show that GFZF and HMR normally do not colocalize in D. melanogaster. In interspecies hybrids, however, HMR shows extensive mis-localization to GFZF sites, thus uncovering a new molecular interaction between these hybrid incompatibility factors. We find that spreading of HMR to GFZF sites requires gfzf&#x200a;sim but not Lhr&#x200a;sim, suggesting distinct roles for these factors in the hybrid incompatibility. Finally, we find that overexpression of HMR and LHR within species is sufficient to mis-localize HMR to GFZF binding sites, indicating that HMR has a natural low affinity for GFZF sites. Together, these studies provide the first insights into the different properties of gfzf between D. melanogaster and D. simulans, and uncover a molecular interaction between gfzf and Hmr in the form of altered protein localization.

### Keywords
Drosophila melanogaster / embryos / gfzf / interactome

### Affiliations
Biomedical Center-LMU
Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY  Tel.:  --49 89 2180 75420 Fax.: --49 89 2180 75440 e-mail: imhof@lmu.de  http://www.molekularbiologie.abi.med.uni-muenchen.de/ueber_uns/imhof/index.html http://www.proteinanalytik.abi.med.uni-muenchen.de/index.html

### Submitter
Ignasi Forne

### Lab Head
Dr Axel Imhof
Prof. Dr. Axel Imhof Histone Modifications Group Zentrallabor für Proteinanalytik BioMedical Center Faculty of Medicine Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich Großhadernerstr. 9 82152 Planegg-Martinsried  GERMANY  Tel.:  --49 89 2180 75420 Fax.: --49 89 2180 75440 e-mail: imhof@lmu.de  http://www.molekularbiologie.abi.med.uni-muenchen.de/ueber_uns/imhof/index.html http://www.proteinanalytik.abi.med.uni-muenchen.de/index.html


