### Accession
PXD036188

### Title
Thermal proteome profiling of ticagrelor in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
We performed two dimensional thermal proteome profiling (2D-TPP) of ticagrelor to study its impact in Staphylococcus aureus.

### Sample Protocol
After heating, lysing and extraction of remaining soluble protein fraction (with a modified thermal proteome profiling protocol - Savitski et al., Science (2014), samples were processed with a modified SP3 protocol, digested using trypsin and labeled with TMT. Shotgun proteomics using a Q-Exactive Orbitrap was then performed.

### Data Protocol
TMT quantification was used, by using the isobarquant python package (Franken et al., Nat Protoc (2015)), and Mascot 2.4 was used for protein identification. Search parameters: trypsin, missed cleavages 3, peptide tolerance 10ppm, 0.02Da for MS/MS tolerance. Fixed modifications were carbamidomethyl on cysteines and TMT10plex on lysine. Variable modifications included acetylation on protein N-terminus, oxidation of methionine and TMT10plex on peptide N-termini. The R programming language was used to analyze the output data.

### Publication Abstract
Drug combinations can expand options for antibacterial therapies but have not been systematically tested in Gram-positive species. We profiled ~8,000 combinations of 65 antibacterial drugs against the model species Bacillus subtilis and two prominent pathogens, Staphylococcus aureus and Streptococcus pneumoniae. Thereby, we recapitulated previously known drug interactions, but also identified ten times more novel interactions in the pathogen S. aureus, including 150 synergies. We showed that two synergies were equally effective against multidrug-resistant S. aureus clinical isolates in vitro and in vivo. Interactions were largely species-specific and synergies were distinct from those of Gram-negative species, owing to cell surface and drug uptake differences. We also tested 2,728 combinations of 44 commonly prescribed non-antibiotic drugs with 62 drugs with antibacterial activity against S. aureus and identified numerous antagonisms that might compromise the efficacy of antimicrobial therapies. We identified even more synergies and showed that the anti-aggregant ticagrelor synergized with cationic antibiotics by modifying the surface charge of S. aureus. All data can be browsed in an interactive interface ( https://apps.embl.de/combact/ ).

### Keywords
Drugs, Thermal proteome profiling, Target engagement, Ticagrelor, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Umeå University
European Molecular Biology Laboratory

### Submitter
André Mateus

### Lab Head
Dr Athanasios Typas
European Molecular Biology Laboratory


