### Accession
PXD021663

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis reveals Rio1 regulated protein metabolism in response to UV irradiation and multiple cellular processes in Sulfolobus islandicus REY15A

### Description
In this study, we performed quantitative phosphoproteomic analysis on S. islandicus REY15A either treated with UV or in the absence of Rio1.

### Sample Protocol
A volume of 250 mL of the wild-type strain E233S or Δrio1 (Δsire_0171) was cultivated to OD600 ~ 0.28 for UV treatment. A 50 mL aliquot of each culture was then transferred to petri dishes (15 cm in diameter), which were subsequently put into the CL-1000 Ultraviolet crosslinker. The cells were irradiated with UV at 200 J/m2 or mock-treated and then transferred back to a culture flask. The flasks were then incubated in a shaker with a speed ofshaking at 110 rpm at 75°C for 30 min in the dark. The cells were collected by centrifugation at 6,245 g for 10 min and washed with PBS (phosphate-buffered saline) buffer three times. Samples were first ground in liquid nitrogen to a powder and then transferred to a 5 mL centrifuge tube. After that, four volumes (500 μL) of lysis buffer (10 mM dithiothreitol, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany), and 1% phosphatase inhibitor) was added to the cell powder, followed by sonication three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz, Ningbo Xinzhi Ultra-Sonic Technology Co., LTD., Zhejiang, China). An equal volume of Tris-saturated phenol (pH 8.0) was then added, and the mixture was further vortexed for 5 min. After centrifugation (4°C, 5,500 g ×, 10 min), the upper layer of theproteins were extracted with phenol phase was transferred to a new centrifuge tube. Proteins wereand precipitated by adding five volumes (2 mL) of ammonium acetate-saturated methanol, and samples were then incubated at -20°C overnight. The next day, after centrifugation at 55005,500 g for 10 min at 4°C, the supernatant was discarded. The remaining precipitate was washed with ice-cold methanol once, followed by ice-cold acetone three times. The proteins were re-dissolved in 8M urea, and the protein concentration was determined with a BCA (Bicinchoninic acid) Protein Assay kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. For digestion, the protein solutions were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min at 56°C and then alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin to protein mass ratio for the first digestion at 37°C overnight and a 1:100 trypsin to protein mass ratio for a second 4 h digestion.After trypsin digestion, peptides were desalted using a Strata X C18 SPE column (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA) and vacuum dried. Peptides were then reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB and processed according to the manufacturer’s protocol for the TMT kit. Briefly, one unit of TMT reagent was thawed and reconstituted in 100% acetonitrile. The peptide mixtures were then incubated for 2 h at room temperature and pooled, desalted, and dried by vacuum centrifugation using a Eppendorf Concentrator plus. The tryptic peptides were then fractionated using high pH reverse-phase HPLC on a Thermo Agilent 300Extend C18 column (5 μm particles, 4.6 mm inner diameter, 250 mm length).  Tryptic peptide mixtures were incubated with an IMAC (immobilized metal affinity chromatography) microsphere were desalted according to the instruction of the C18 ZipTips column for LC-MS/MS analysis. These peptides were subjected to an NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on a Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) coupled inline to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. The m/z scan range was 3501800 for the full scan, and intact peptides were detected by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. The fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using an NCE setting of 28, and the fragments were detected on the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 10 MS/MS scans with 30.0 s dynamic exclusion was then applied. The automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1E5. The signal threshold was set as 20,000 ions/s, and the maximal injection time was set as 100 ms. The resulting MS/MS data were processed using the Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were then searched against the Sulfolobus uniprot database (Uniprot_Sulfolobus_islandicus_REY15A, 3993 sequences). A reverse decoy database was concatenated for calculation of the false positive rate (FPR). Trypsin/P was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. The minimum length of peptides was set to 7 aa, and the maximum number of modification sites was set to 5. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 20 ppm in the first search and 5 ppm in the main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cystine was specified as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation on Ser/Thr/Tyr was specified as variable modifications. The quantitative method was set as TMT-10plex. Protein identification and the FDR of the identified peptide spectrum match (PSM) were adjusted to < 1%.

### Data Protocol
The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). First, the identified protein IDs were converted to UniProt IDs and then mapped to GO IDs. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, InterProScan software was used to annotate the protein’s GO function based on the protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. Functional descriptions of the identified protein domains were annotated by InterProScan v.5.14-53.0 (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) based on the protein sequence alignment method, and the InterPro domain database was used. The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathways in this dataset. The KEGG online service tool KAAS was used to annotate each protein’s KEGG database description. Then the annotation results were mapped on the KEGG pathway database using the KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. Soft MoMo (motif-x algorithm) was used to search for a motif of sequences derived from amino acids in specific positions of modified-13-mers (6 amino acids upstream and downstream of a site) in all protein sequences. All the database protein sequences were used as the background database parameter. The minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. The emulate original motif-x option was set, and all other parameters were set to the default. To perform enrichment analysis of GO, KEGG, and protein domain for each category, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of each differentially modified protein against all identified proteins. The GO/pathway/protein domains with a corrected p-value < 0.05 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sulfolobus islandicus, Archaea, Rio, Phosphoproteome, Uv irradiation, Protein phosphorylation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbial Technology Institute, Shandong University, R. R. China
Shandong University

### Submitter
Qihong Huang

### Lab Head
Dr Yulong Shen
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Microbial Technology Institute, Shandong University, R. R. China


