### Accession
PXD011495

### Title
Localisation of outer membrane proteins in Treponema denticola by quantitative proteome analyses of outer membrane vesicles and cellular fractions

### Description
The identification and localisation of outer membrane proteins (Omps) and lipoproteins in pathogenic treponemes such as T. denticola (periodontitis) and T. pallidum (syphilis) has been challenging largely due to the structural uniqueness of their outer membranes (OM), the high abundance of inner membrane (IM) lipoproteins and the low abundance of Omps. In this study, label-free quantitative proteomics using MaxQuant was applied to naturally produced outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) and cellular fractions to identify 1448 T. denticola proteins. Of these, 90 proteins were localised to the OM comprising 59 lipoproteins, 25 β-barrel proteins and six other putative OM-associated proteins. 28 lipoproteins were localised to the IM and 43 proteins were assigned to the periplasm. The signal cleavage regions of the OM and IM lipoprotein sequences were different and may reveal the signal for their differential localisation to the OM and IM. Proteins significantly enriched in OMVs included dentilisin, proteins containing leucine-rich repeats and several lipoproteins containing FGE-sulfatase domains. Blue native PAGE analysis enabled the native size of the dentilisin complex and Msp to be determined and revealed that the abundant β-barrel Omps TDE2508 and TDE1717 formed large complexes. Several Omps were identified to have homologs in T. pallidum that have not yet been identified.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on SDS-PAGE for 6 min and the whole samples were in-gel digested with trypsin and analysed by Orbitrap LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analysed by MaxQuant (Ver 1.5.3.30) using label-free quantification (LFQ) searching against the whole T. denticola protein database. Three MaxQuant experiments were conducted. The first compared OMVs with cell membrane and cell soluble fractions. The second compared soluble pellet and soluble supernatant fractions. The third compared whole cells and lysed cells with and without proteinase K treatment. The default recommended parameters were used for LFQ except LFQ min. ratio count was set to 1 and the match between runs setting was selected. Also, oxidation (Met) was the only optional modification used. The false discovery rate was the default setting of 0.01 (1%). Raw MS files were also converted by RawConverter into mgf files for Mascot searches.

### Publication Abstract
The identification and localization of outer membrane proteins (Omps) and lipoproteins in pathogenic treponemes such as T.&#xa0;denticola (periodontitis) and T.&#xa0;pallidum (syphilis) has been challenging. In this study, label-free quantitative proteomics using MaxQuant was applied to naturally produced outer membrane vesicles (OMVs) and cellular fractions to identify 1448 T.&#xa0;denticola proteins. Of these, 90 proteins were localized to the outer membrane (OM) comprising 59 lipoproteins, 25 &#x3b2;-barrel proteins, and six other putative OM-associated proteins. Twenty-eight lipoproteins were localized to the inner membrane (IM), and 43 proteins were assigned to the periplasm. The signal cleavage regions of the OM and IM lipoprotein sequences were different and may reveal the signals for their differential localization. Proteins significantly enriched in OMVs included dentilisin, proteins containing leucine-rich repeats, and several lipoproteins containing FGE-sulfatase domains. Blue native PAGE analysis enabled the native size of the dentilisin complex and Msp to be determined and revealed that the abundant &#x3b2;-barrel Omps TDE2508 and TDE1717 formed large complexes. In addition to the large number of integral Omps and potentially surface-located lipoproteins identified in T.&#xa0;denticola, many such proteins were also newly identified in T.&#xa0;pallidum through homology, generating new targets for vaccine development in both species.

### Keywords
Treponema denticola, Maxquant, Outer membrane proteins, Outer membrane vesicles, Orbitrap, Localization, Bacterial lipoproteins

### Affiliations
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
Melbourne Dental School

### Submitter
Paul Veith

### Lab Head
Dr Eric C Reynolds
Melbourne Dental School, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia


