### Accession
PXD019247

### Title
Optimization of a Top-Down Proteomics Platform for Closely-Related Pathogenic Bacteria Discrimination

### Description
The current technique used for microbial identification in hospitals is MALDI-TOF MS. However, it suffers from important limitations, in particular for closely-related species or when the database used for the identification lacks the appropriate reference. In this work, we set up a high throughput LC-MS/MS top-down proteomics platform dedicated to intact bacterial protein analysis. Using Escherichia coli as a model, all steps of the workflow were optimized: protein extraction, on-line liquid chromatographic separation, MS/MS fragmentation and data analysis. Using the optimized parameters, about 220 proteins, corresponding to more than 500 proteoforms, could be identified in a single run. We then demonstrated the suitability of the developed platform for the characterization and discrimination of enterobacterial pathogens rather undistinguishable by MALDI-TOF although leading to very different clinical outcomes. For each pathogen, we identified specific proteoforms that could potentially be used as biomarkers. We also improved the characterization of poorly described bacterial strains. Our results highlight the advantage of targeting proteoforms vs peptides for accurate bacterial characterization, and qualify top-down proteomics as a promising tool in clinical microbiology.

### Sample Protocol
For Top-Down: Four Salmonella enterica enterica strains (serotype Enteritidis, Typhimurium, Newport and Muenchen), one Shigella sonnei strain, two Shigella flexneri strains (serotypes 2a and 3), and five E. coli strains (O157:H7, O157:H7 with Shiga-toxin 1 (stx1) and Shiga-toxin-2 genes, O26:H11 with stx1 and eae genes, O26:H11 with eae gene and MG155 K12) were used. Bacteria were cultured overnight at 37 °C in LB medium. Bacteria were inactivated with 70% ethanol and washed tree times with PBS. After centrifugation, cell pellets were recovered in lysis buffer. Eight lysis buffers were screened: B1: PBS (1X), B2: AB 100 mM, B3: H2O/ACN/FA 80:10:10 (v/v/v), B4: H2O/ACN/FA 15:50:35 (v/v/v), B5: RapiGest 0.05% (w/w), B6: Urea 8M, B7: Urea 4M and B8: Urea 2M. Cell lysis was performed by mechanical disruption with the FastPrep®-24-5G instrument. Microtubes were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 10 min at 4°C and the supernatant was kept. Bacterial lysates were then transferred into new tubes, samples aliquoted and stored at -80°C.  Liquid chromatography was performed with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 equipped with a trap column coupled to an analytical column. Solvent A (98% H2O, 2% ACN, 0.1% FA) and solvent B (20% H2O, 80% ACN, 0.1% FA). The following gradient was used: 2.5% B from 0–4 min.; 15% B at 5.6 min.; 50% B at 124 min.; 99% B from 126–131 min.; and 2.5% B from 132 to 150 min. In this work, six different chromatographic conditions were evaluated: LC1: EASY-Spray PepSwift™ Monolithic PS-DVB column (200 m x 25 cm), 1 µL.min-1; LC2: ProSwift™ Monolithic RP-4H column (100 m x 50 cm), 1 µL.min-1; LC3: ProSwift™ Monolithic RP-4H column (100 m x 50 cm), 1 µL.min-1; LC4: In-house packed PLRP-S column (75 m x 25 cm), 0.3 µL.min-1; LC5: In-house packed C4 (5 µm porous spherical particles of 300 Å pore size) column (75 m x 60 cm), 0.5 µL.min-1 and LC6: In-house packed C4 (3.6 µm porous spherical particles of 200 Å pore size) column (75 m x 60 cm), 0.5 µL.min-1. For LC2, the gradient was then slightly adjusted (10% B at 5.6 min. and 40% B at 124 min). The same stationary phase was used for the trap and the analytical columns when possible.  An Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific) fitted with a nano-Electrospray ionization source was used for all experiments. All experiments were performed using the Intact Protein Mode at 2 mTorr as ion routing multipole pressure. All spectra were acquired in profile mode. Several MS parameters were tested for optimization: MS and MS/MS resolution set at 15K, 30K, 60K and 120K resolving power (at m/z 400); type of fragmentation: Higher-energy Collision Dissociation (HCD) with Normalized Collision Energy (NCE) of 15%, 20% and 25%, Electron-Transfer Dissociation (ETD) with reaction times of 5 ms, 10 ms and 15 ms, and Electron-Transfer/higher-energy Collision Dissociation (EThCD) with 10 ms of reaction time combined with NCE of 5%, 10% or 15% for supplemental activation; number of microscans (3, 6, 12 and 24 in MS and adjusted corresponding number in MS/MS), Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target, and data dependant acquisition parameters (Top N or Top Speed).  For Bottom-up: Digestion was performed on 20 µg protein of each sample. Dried samples were re-suspended in 200 µL 100 mM Tris HCl pH 8.5 containing 8M urea. Briefly, samples were reduced (5 mM TCEP, 30 minutes at room temperature) and alkylated (10 mM iodoacetamide, 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark). Then, the protein was firstly incubated for 5 hours at 37°C with 500 ng rLys-C Mass Spec Grade and then re-incubated overnight at 37°C with 500 ng Sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin. A second incubation with the same amount of trypsin (5 hours at 37°C) was performed to ensure a complete digestion. Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 5 % final concentration and peptides were desalted and concentrated on Sep-Pak C18 SPE cartridge.  Tryptic peptides were analyzed on a Q Exactive Plus instrument coupled with an EASY nLC 1000 chromatography system. Sample was loaded on an in-house packed 50 cm nano-HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter) with C18 resin (1.9 μm particles, 100 Å pore size) and equilibrated in 97 % solvent A (H2O, 0.1 % FA) and 3 % solvent B (ACN, 0.1 % FA). Peptides were first eluted using a 3 to 22 % gradient of solvent B during 112 min, then a 22 to 38 % gradient of solvent B during 35 min and finally a 38 to 56 % gradient of solvent B during 15 min all at 250 nL.min-1 flow rate. The instrument method for the Q Exactive Plus was set up in the data dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan in the Orbitrap (R=70K), the 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy set up to 27. Charge state screening was enabled, and precursors with unknown charge state or a charge state of 1 and >7 were excluded. Dynamic exclusion was enabled for 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For Top-down: All data were processed with ProSightPC v4.1 (Thermo-Scientific) and Proteome Discoverer v2.4 (Thermo-Scientific) using the ProSightPD 3.0 node. Spectral data were first deconvoluted and deisotoped using the cRAWler algorithm. Spectra were then searched using a three-tier search tree with searches against the appropriate Uniprot XML database (detailed in Table S4 in SI). The proteoform databases were created using the database manager application within ProSightPC v4.1. Potential initial methionine cleavage and N-terminal acetylation, as well as known single-nucleotide polymorphisms (cSNPs) and PTMs were included, resulting in databases in a ProSight Warehouse File (.pwf) format. The search 1 consists of a ProSight Absolute Mass search with MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. The search 2 is a ProSight Biomarker search with MS1 tolerance of 10 ppm and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. The search 3 is a ProSight Absolute Mass search performed with MS1 tolerance of 10,000 Da and MS2 tolerance of 5 ppm. Identifications with E-values better than 1e-10 (-log (E-value) = 10) and between 1e-10 and 1e-5 were respectively considered confident and medium hits. A 1% proteoform spectrum match (PrSM)-level FDR was employed. Full chromatogram deconvolution was also performed using the Sliding Window Deconvolution method and Xtract deconvolution algorithm in BioPharma Finder v3.2 (Thermo-Scientific). Briefly, an intact protein analysis method was used, with chromatograms scanned from 10 to 150 min, sliding windows merge tolerance for components set at 10 ppm, charge state ranges defined from +5 to +50, and the minimum number of detected charge states to produce a component designated as 3. For Bottom-up: All data were searched using Andromeda with MaxQuant software version 1.5.3.8 against a Escherichia coli strain K12 Uniprot database (taxonomy 83333, 6082 entries) concatenated with usual known contaminants and reversed sequences of all entries. Andromeda searches were performed choosing trypsin as specific enzyme with a maximum number of two missed cleavages. Possible modifications included carbamidomethylation (Cys, fixed), oxidation (Met, variable) and Nter acetylation (variable). The mass tolerance in MS was set to 20 ppm for the first search then 6 ppm for the main search and 10 ppm for the MS/MS. Maximum peptide charge was set to seven and five amino acids were required as minimum peptide length. The “match between runs” feature was used between all replicates with a maximal retention time window of 2 minutes. One unique peptide to the protein group was required for the protein identification. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1 % was applied at the peptide and protein levels. MaxLFQ, Maxquant’s label-free quantification (LFQ) algorithm was used to calculate protein intensity profiles across samples. Data were filtered by requiring a minimum peptide ratio count of 2 in MaxLFQ. For the statistical analysis, proteins identifying by the MaxQuant software as “Reverse”, “Potential contaminants” and/or “Only identified by site” are deleted. Then, a protein is referred as quantified in a condition when values have been quantified in all samples. Missing values can therefore be counted. After log2 transformation of the leftover quantified values of proteins, they were normalized by median centering within conditions (normalizeD function of the R package DAPAR). Remaining proteins without any quantified value in one condition have been considered as proteins quantitatively present in a condition and absent in another. They have therefore been set aside and considered as differentially abundant proteins. Next, missing values were imputed using the impute.mle function of the R package imp4p. Proteins with a log2 (fold-change) inferior to 1 have been considered as proteins with no significant difference in abundance. Statistical testing of the remaining proteins (having a log2 (fold-change) superior to 1) was conducted using a limma t-test thanks to the R package limma. An adaptive Benjamini-Hochberg procedure was applied on the resulting p-values thanks to the function adjust.p of R package cp4p. The robust method of Pounds and Cheng was used to estimate the proportion of true null hypotheses among the set of statistical tests. The proteins associated to an adjusted p-value inferior to a FDR level of 1% have been considered as significantly differentially abundant proteins. Finally, the proteins of interest are therefore the ones that emerge from this statistical analysis supplemented by those being quantitatively absent from one condition and present in another.

### Publication Abstract
The current technique used for microbial identification in hospitals is matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). However, it suffers from important limitations, in particular, for closely related species or when the database used for the identification lacks the appropriate reference. In this work, we set up a liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS top-down proteomics platform, which aims at discriminating closely related pathogenic bacteria through the identification of specific proteoforms. Using <i>Escherichia coli</i> as a model, all steps of the workflow were optimized: protein extraction, on-line LC separation, MS method, and data analysis. Using optimized parameters, about 220 proteins, corresponding to more than 500 proteoforms, could be identified in a single run. We then used this platform for the discrimination of enterobacterial pathogens undistinguishable by MALDI-TOF, although leading to very different clinical outcomes. For each pathogen, we identified specific proteoforms that could potentially be used as biomarkers. We also improved the characterization of poorly described bacterial strains. Our results highlight the advantage of addressing proteoforms rather than peptides for accurate bacterial characterization and qualify top-down proteomics as a promising tool in clinical microbiology. Data are available <i>via</i> ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD019247.

### Keywords
Top-down proteomics, Bacteria, Mass spectrometry, Optimization

### Affiliations
Institut Pasteur - CNRS USR 2000 Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit 28, rue du Dr. Roux 75 015 Paris
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
Magalie Duchateau

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Institut Pasteur - CNRS USR 2000 Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit 28, rue du Dr. Roux 75 015 Paris


