### Accession
PXD036669

### Title
Phosphoproteomics of primary acute myeloid leukemia cells with rearranged KMT2A

### Description
Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a disease with poor outcome but patients harbouring certain chromosomal rearrangements or complex karyotypes have particularly adverse prognosis. For these patients, targeted therapies have not yet made a significant clinical impact. To understand the molecular landscape of poor risk AML we profiled 55 poor risk AML patients using a multiomics approach that included transcriptomics (n=39), proteomics (n=55), phosphoproteomics (n=55) and an ex vivo drug sensitivity screening (482 compounds tested in at least 30 patients). We identified a phosphoproteomics signature that define two biologically distinct groups of KMT2A rearranged leukaemia, which we term MLLGA and MLLGB. MLLGA presented increased DOT1L phosphorylation, HOXA gene expression, CDK1 activity and phosphorylation of proteins involved in RNA metabolism, replication and DNA damage when compared to MLLGB and no KMT2A rearranged samples. MLLGA was particularly sensitive to 15 compounds including genotoxic drugs and inhibitors of mitotic kinases and IMPDH relative to other cases. The expression of IMPDH2 and multiple nucleolar proteins was higher in MLLGA and correlated with the response to IMPDH inhibition in KMT2A rearranged leukaemia, suggesting a role of the nucleolar activity in sensitivity to IMPDH inhibition. In summary, our multilayer molecular profiling of poor risk AML matched to the response to hundreds of compounds identified a phosphoproteomics signature that define two biologically and phenotypically distinct groups of KMT2A rearranged leukaemia. These data provide a rationale for the development of specific therapies for KMT2A subgroups characterised by the MLLGA phosphoproteomics signature identified in this study.

### Sample Protocol
AML cell pellets were lysed in 200 µL of urea buffer (8 M urea in 20 mM HEPES, pH: 8.0, supplemented with 1 mM Na3VO4, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM β-glycerophosphate). AML cell lysates were homogenised by sonication for 90 cycles (30 s on 30 s off) in a Diagenode Bioruptor® Plus and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation.   Proteins were quantified using BCA protein assay. Then, 100 μg of protein were subjected to cysteine reduction and alkylation using sequential incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DDT) and 16.6 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) for 1 h and 30 min, respectively, at 25°C with agitation. Trypsin beads (50% slurry of TLCK-trypsin) were equilibrated with 3 washes with 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), the urea concentration in the protein suspensions was reduced to 2 M by the addition of 900 µL of 20 mM HEPES (pH 8.0), 100 μL of equilibrated trypsin beads were added and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Trypsin beads were removed by centrifugation (2000 xg at 5°C for 5 min). Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters) following the manufacturer’s indications. Briefly, cartridges were set in a vacuum manifold device and the pressure was adjusted to 5 mmHg. Then, cartridges were conditioned with 1 mL acetonitrile (ACN) and equilibrated with 1.5 mL of wash solution (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), 2% ACN). Peptides were loaded in the cartridges and washed twice with 1 mL of wash solution. Finally, peptides were eluted with 500 µL of glycolic acid buffer 1 (1 M glycolic acid, 5% TFA, 50% ACN). Enrichment of phosphorylated peptides was performed with TiO2 Beads. Desalting eluents were normalized to 1 mL with glycolic acid buffer 2 (1 M glycolic acid, 5% TFA, 80% ACN) and incubated with 50 µl of TiO2 buffer (500 mg TiO2 beads in 1 mL of 1% TFA) for 5 min at room temperature. TiO2 beads were packed by centrifugation into empty spin columns previously washed with ACN. TiO2 beads were sequentially washed by centrifugation (1500 xg for 3 min) with 100 µL of glycolic acid buffer 2, ammonium acetate solution (100 mM ammonium acetate in 25% ACN) and twice with neutral solution (10% ACN). For phosphopeptide elution, spin tips were transferred to fresh tubes, 50 µL of elution solution 1 (5% NH4OH, 7.5% ACN) were added and tips were centrifuged at 1500 xg for 3 min. The elution step was repeated a total of 4 times. Finally, samples were snap frozen in dry ice, dried in a SpeedVac vacuum concentrator and phosphopeptide pellets were stored at −80°C.  Mass spectrometry Mass spectrometry for identification and quantification of phosphopeptides was carried out by LC-MS/MS. Peptide pellets were reconstituted in 8 µL of reconstitution buffer (20 fmol/µL enolase in 3% ACN, 0.1% TFA) and 5 µL were loaded onto an LC-MS/MS system.  The LC-MS/MS platform consisted of a Dionex UltiMate 3000 RSLC coupled to Q Exactive™ Plus Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) through an EASY-Spray source. Mobile phases for the chromatographic separation of the peptides consisted of Solvent A (3% ACN; 0.1% FA) and Solvent B (99.9% ACN; 0.1% FA). Peptides were loaded in a μ-pre-column and separated in an analytical column using a gradient running from 3% to 23% B over 60 min (for phosphoproteomics) or 120 min (for proteomics). The UPLC system delivered a flow of 2 µL/min (loading) and 250 nL/min (gradient elution). The Q Exactive Plus operated a duty cycle of 2.1s. Thus, it acquired full scan survey spectra (m/z 375–1500) with a 70,000 FWHM resolution followed by data-dependent acquisition in which the 15 most intense ions were selected for HCD (higher energy collisional dissociation) and MS/MS scanning (200–2000 m/z) with a resolution of 17,500 FWHM. A dynamic exclusion period of 30s was enabled with m/z window of ±10 ppm.

### Data Protocol
Identification phosphorylated peptides Peptide identification from MS data was automated using Mascot Daemon 2.6.0 workflow in which Mascot Distiller v2.6.1.0 generated peak list files (MGFs) from RAW data and the Mascot search engine (v2.6) matched the MS/MS data stored in the MGF files to peptides using the SwissProt Database restricted to the Homo sapiens taxon (SwissProt_Latest_2018_09.fasta; 20411 sequencesSwissProt_2016Oct.fasta). Searches had a FDR of ~1% and allowed 2 trypsin missed cleavages, mass tolerance of ±10 ppm for the MS scans and ±25 mmu for the MS/MS scans, carbamidomethyl Cys as a fixed modification and PyroGlu on N-terminal Gln, oxidation of Met and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr as variable modifications.  Phosphopeptide  Identified peptides were quantified using a label free procedure based on extracted ion chromatograms (XICs). Missing data points were minimized by constructing XICs across all LC-MS/MS runs for all the peptides identified in at least one of the LC-MS/MS runs 27. XIC mass and retention time windows were ±7 ppm and ±2 min, respectively. Quantification of peptides was achieved by measuring the area under the peak of the XICs. Individual peptide intensity values in each sample were normalized to the sum of the intensity values of all the peptides quantified in that sample. Data points not quantified for a particular peptide were given a peptide intensity value equal to the minimum intensity value quantified in the sample divided by 10. We obtained a phosphorylation index (ppIndex) by summing the signals of all peptide ions containing the same modification site.

### Publication Abstract
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients harbouring certain chromosome abnormalities have particularly adverse prognosis. For these patients, targeted therapies have not yet made a significant clinical impact. To understand the molecular landscape of poor prognosis AML we profiled 74 patients from two different centres (in UK and Finland) at the proteomic, phosphoproteomic and drug response phenotypic levels. These data were complemented with transcriptomics analysis for 39 cases. Data integration highlighted a phosphoproteomics signature that define two biologically distinct groups of KMT2A rearranged leukaemia, which we term MLLGA and MLLGB. MLLGA presented increased DOT1L phosphorylation, HOXA gene expression, CDK1 activity and phosphorylation of proteins involved in RNA metabolism, replication and DNA damage when compared to MLLGB and no KMT2A rearranged samples. MLLGA was particularly sensitive to 15 compounds including genotoxic drugs and inhibitors of mitotic kinases and inosine-5-monosphosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) relative to other cases. Intermediate-risk KMT2A-MLLT3 cases were mainly represented in a third group closer to MLLGA than to MLLGB. The expression of IMPDH2 and multiple nucleolar proteins was higher in MLLGA and correlated with the response to IMPDH inhibition in KMT2A rearranged leukaemia, suggesting a role of the nucleolar activity in sensitivity to treatment. In summary, our multilayer molecular profiling of AML with poor prognosis and KMT2A-MLLT3 karyotypes identified a phosphoproteomics signature that defines two biologically and phenotypically distinct groups of KMT2A rearranged leukaemia. These data provide a rationale for the potential development of specific therapies for AML patients characterised by the MLLGA phosphoproteomics signature identified in this study.

### Keywords
Aml, Phosphoproteomics, Kmt2a, Genomics, Impdh, Proteomics, Nucleolus, Drug screen

### Affiliations
Cell Signalling
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Centre for Genomics & Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, UK

### Submitter
Pedro Casado-Izquierdo

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro R. Cutillas
Cell Signalling & Proteomics Group, Centre for Genomics & Computational Biology, Barts Cancer Institute, Queen Mary University of London, Charterhouse Square, London, UK


