### Accession
PXD000233

### Title
Mouse kidney mitochondria LC-MS/MS

### Description
ApoE KO mice were treated with Mas receptor agonist AVE 0991 fo 16 weeks. At the age of 6 months mice were killed, the kidneys were dissected and the mitochondria were isolated by differential centrifugation. Next, 2DE electrophoresis was conduced. Healthy control (C57BL/6J mice), apoE KO and apoE KO treated with AVE 0991 were compared. Gel pieces containing protein spots of interest were destained, reduced, alkylated, digested with modified trypsin and analysed by LC-MS/MS method.

### Sample Protocol
The kidney mitochondrial fraction was obtained by subcellular fractionation. Prior to 2DE-LC-MS/MS analysis the mitochondrial pellet was solubilized in buffer containing 9.5 M urea, 4% CHAPS, 2% DTT, 0.5% Bio-Lyte 3-10 (Bio-Rad, USA) and mixture of protease inhibitors . Before loading, samples were purified by precipitation with 2-DE Clean-up kit (GE Healthcare, USA) and suspended in 300 μl of rehydration buffer (8 M urea, 0.5% CHAPS, 0.2% DTT and 0.2% Bio-Lyte 3-10). Then, samples were loaded on linear 3-10 immobilized pH gradient 17-cm strips (Bio-Rad, USA) for total 66 kVh. After the second dimension (SDS-PAGE in 12% gel) protein profiles were visualized by silver staining, using the Plus One silver staining kit (GE Healthcare, USA).Gel pieces containing protein spots of interest were destained, reduced, alkylated and digested with modified trypsin. Each sample was resuspended in 0.1% TFA and injected on Acclaim PepMap100 RP C18 300 μm i.d. × 15 cm column (Dionex, USA) via trap column (PepMap100 RP C18 300 μm i.d. × 5 mm column, Dionex, USA). Peptides were separated in acetonitrile gradient (buffer A — 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid; buffer B — 95% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) with a flow rate of 5 μl/min by Switchos/UltiMate 3000 HPLC system (Dionex, USA) and applied on-line to a LCQ (Thermo Scientific, USA) ion-trap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
For analysis, silver-stained gels images were taken using a Gel Doc XR scanner (Bio-Rad, USA). PDQuest™ 8.0.1 (Bio-Rad, USA) was used for gel image analysis, quantification and statistical validation.Student's T-test with the level of significance set at p < 0.05 was used to reveal statistically significant differences in protein expression.Collected LC/MS data were analyzed by X!Tandem search engine (The GPM Organization) and statistically validated with Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP) software (Institute for Systems Biology). Search parameters were set as follows: taxonomy: mouse (SwissProt), enzyme: trypsin, missed cleavage sites allowed: 1, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modifications: oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, peptide fragment mass tolerance: 0.4 Da and selected device and parent δm: ion trap (4 Da).

### Publication Abstract
Excessive action of angiotensin II on mitochondria has been shown to play an important role in mitochondrial dysfunction, a common feature of atherogenesis and kidney injury. Angiotensin-(1-7)/Mas receptor axis constitutes a countermeasure to the detrimental effects of angiotensin II on AT1 receptors. The aim of the study was to assess the effects of angiotensin-(1-7) peptidomimetic AVE0991 on the kidney mitochondrial proteome in widely used animal model of atherosclerosis (apoE(-/-) mice). Proteins changed in apoE(-/-) mice belonged to the groups of antioxidant enzymes, apoptosis regulators, inflammatory factors and metabolic enzymes. Importantly, AVE0991 partially reversed atherosclerosis-related changes in apoE(-/-) mice.

### Keywords
Mitochondrion, Apolipoprotein e, Proteomics, Angiotensin (1–7), Kidney

### Affiliations
Jagiellonian University Medical College
Chair of Pharmacology

### Submitter
Maciej Suski

### Lab Head
Dr Ryszard Korbut
Jagiellonian University Medical College


