### Accession
PXD019987

### Title
MULocDeep: An Interpretable Deep Learning Model for Protein Localization Prediction with Sub-organelle Resolution

### Description
Prediction of protein localization plays an important role in understanding protein function and mechanism. A deep learning-based localization prediction tool (“MULocDeep”) assessing each amino acid’s contribution to the localization process provides insights into the mechanism of protein sorting and localization motifs. A dataset with 45 sub-organellar localization annotations under 10 major sub-cellular compartments was produced and the tool was tested on an independent dataset of mitochondrial proteins that were extracted from Arabidopsis thaliana cell cultures, Solanum tuberosum tubers, and Vicia faba roots, and analyzed by shotgun mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana cell culture mitochondria, Solanum tuberosum tuber mitochondria, and Vicia faba root mitochondria were isolated as described by Werhahn et al., (Werhahn et al. 2001; Plant Physiology 125: 943–954), Havelund et al., (Havelund et al. 2014; bio-protocol 4: 1–7) Bultema et al., (Bultema et al. 2009; Biochim. Biophy. Acta - Bioenergetics 1787: 60–67), with only minor modifications. Fifty µg of protein were solubilized in SDS-containing buffer and loaded on a SDS-gel consisting of a 4% [w/v] acrylamide top phase (pH 6.8) and a 14% [w/v] acrylamide (pH 8.8) bottom phase, respectively. The gel run was stopped when the samples formed a focused line at the transition between top and bottom phase. Proteins were fixated to the gel matrix by incubation in 15% [v/v] ethanol and 10% [v/v] acetic acid, followed by staining with Coomassie Brilliant Blue G250 (Neuhoff et al., 1985). The stained gel bands were excised and digested in-gel according to Fromm et al., (2016). Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel matrix and separated by liquid chromatography in an Ultimate 3000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) UPLC to be subsequently analyzed using a Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientifix, Dreieich, Germany) as described in Fromm et al. (2016). In addition, mitochondria isolated from Solanum tuberosum tubers (five replicates) were subjected to a range of different treatments and subsequently opened in lysis buffer (4% [w/v] SDS; 20 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate; pH 8.5; 0.1 M DTT). Proteins were separated on a 1D SDS-PAGE, which was cut into 11 or 12 fractions, each of which were on-filter digested according to Leon et al., (2013), and iTRAQ-labelled according to the manufacturer’s instructions (AB Sciex). iTRAQ labelled peptides were lyophilized and quantified via liquid-tandem mass spectrometry according to Havelund, PhD-thesis (Havelund, J. F. 2014; PhD Thesis, Aarhus University Denmark). Sample key iTRAQ potato samples Rep. 1: 00273 – 00284 Rep. 2: 00285 – 00296 Rep. 3: 00297 – 00308 Rep. 4: 00309 – 00320 Rep. 5: 00240 – 00250  Rep. 2: 00285 – 00296 Rep. 3: 00297 – 00308 Rep. 4: 00309 – 00320 Rep. 5: 00240 – 00250

### Data Protocol
Raw files were analyzed with the Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) using the Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK) search engine and a peptide database depending on the analyzed species: Arabidopsis, Solanum and Vicia peptides were queried against the TAIR 10 database, an in-house Solanum protein database and the Medicago protein database 4.0, respectively. Settings for the selection of spectra were as follows: Precursor selection, Use MS1 Precursor; Use new Precursor Reevaluation, True; Lower and upper RT limit, 0; First and last scan, 0; Lowest and highest charge state, 0; Min. precursor mass, 350 Da; Max. precursor mass, 5000 Da; Total intensity threshold, 0; Minimum peak count, 1; Mass analyzer, Is FTMS; MS order, Is MS2; Activation type, Is HCD; Min. collision energy, 0; Max. collision energy, 1000; Scan type, Is full; S/N threshold, 1.5; Unrecognized charge replacements, Automatic; Unrecognized mass analyzer replacements, FTMS; Unrecognized MS order replacements,  MS2; Unrecognized activation type replacements, HCD; Unrecognized polarity replacements, +. The settings for the Mascot algorithm were: Enzyme name, Trypsin; Maximum missed cleavage sites, 2; Instrument, Default; Taxonomy, All entries; Peptide cut off score, 10; Peptide without protein cut off score, 5; Use MudPIT scoring, automatic; Protein relevance threshold, 20; Protein relevance factor, 1; Precursor mass tolerance, 10 ppm; Fragment mass tolerance, 0.05 Da; Use average precursor mass, false; Dynamic modifications, acetyl (N-term), oxidation (M), deaminated (NQ); Static modifications, Carbamidomethyl (C). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. The settings for iTRAQ labelled samples were identical, except the detected modifications: Quantification method, iTRAQ 4plex (protein); Dynamic modifications, oxidation (M), deaminated (NQ).

### Publication Abstract
Prediction of protein localization plays an important role in understanding protein function and mechanisms. In this paper, we propose a general deep learning-based localization prediction framework, MULocDeep, which can predict multiple localizations of a protein at both subcellular and suborganellar levels. We collected a dataset with 44 suborganellar localization annotations in 10 major subcellular compartments-the most comprehensive suborganelle localization dataset to date. We also experimentally generated an independent dataset of mitochondrial proteins in <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> cell cultures, <i>Solanum tuberosum</i> tubers, and <i>Vicia faba</i> roots and made this dataset publicly available. Evaluations using the above datasets show that overall, MULocDeep outperforms other major methods at both subcellular and suborganellar levels. Furthermore, MULocDeep assesses each amino acid's contribution to localization, which provides insights into the mechanism of protein sorting and localization motifs. A web server can be accessed at http://mu-loc.org.

### Keywords
Deep learning, Plant mitochondria isolation, Protein targeting, Shotgun proteomics, Protein localization prediction

### Affiliations
Leibniz Universtät Hannover
Leibniz Universität Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics

### Submitter
Holger Eubel

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Eubel
Leibniz Universität Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics


