### Accession
PXD033915

### Title
Proteomic characterization and protective effect against brain ischemia produced by adult mouse neural progenitor cells-derived extracellular vesicles.

### Description
Hypoxia produced by stroke activates the proliferation of neural progenitor cells (NPC) in the subventricular zone of the adult mouse brain. Newly generated cells seem to participate in the protection of the ischemic brain through the release of extracellular vesicles (EVs) that might target different cell types and modify their function by delivering proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids. We investigated the possible communication route mediated by EVs between NPC and neurons under conditions of cerebral ischemia using an in vitro model of oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD). We collected OGD-activated NPC-derived EVs by differential centrifugation of the conditioned media in which NPC were grown for 12 h after OGD, and as a control, we harvested EVs released by cells cultured under normoxic conditions. EVs were characterized by shape and size with transmission electron microscopy and NanoTracking assays, and the presence of typical exosome markers was assessed by western blot. The proteomic profiling of NPC-derived EVs was carried out after resolving the proteins by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and performed in-gel digestion with trypsin, then the identity of the products was determined by tandem mass spectrometry (ESI-IMS-MS). Overrepresentation analyses of the proteomic data allowed us to identify executioners of signaling pathways involved in neuroprotection. (Supported by DGAPA-PAPIIT IN207020 and CONACYT A1-S-13219).

### Sample Protocol
16.69 µg of protein per condition were loaded and separated in a 12% 1D SDS-PAGE, the gel was stained using a Silver Staining kit. Each lane separated in the electrophoretic gel was sectioned into 10 pieces, which were enzymatically digested. Tryptic peptides were concentrated to approximated volume of 15 μL. 4.5 μL were loaded and separated on a HSS T3 C18 Column; 75 μm X 150 mm, 100 A° pore size, 1.8 μm particle size; using an UPLC ACQUITY M-Class. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid (FA) in H20 and, mobile phase B 0.1% FA in acetonitrile under the following gradient: 0 min 7% B, 30.37 min 40% B, 32.03–35.34 min 85% B, 37–47 min 7% B at a flow of 400 nl.min−1 and 45 °C as a column temperature. The spectra data were acquired in a mass spectrometer with electrospray ionization (ESI) and ion mobility separation (IMS) Synapt G2-Si using data-independent acquisition (DIA) approach through HDMSE mode. At the tune page, for the ionization source, parameters were set with the following values: 2.75 kV in the sampler capillary, 30 V in the sampling cone, 30 V in the source offset, 70 °C for the source temperature, 0.5 bar for the nano flow gas and 150 L·h−1 for the purge gas flow. Two chromatograms were acquired (low and high energy chromatograms) in positive mode in a range of m/z 50−2000 with a scan time of 500 ms. No collision energy was applied to obtain the low energy chromatogram while for the high energy chromatograms, the precursor ions were fragmented in the transfer using a collision energy ramp from 19 to 55 eV. All conditions were injected by triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Sixty generated *.raw files containing MS and MS/MS spectra from each piece of gel in both condition were analyzed and relatively quantified (label-free) using Progenesis QI for Proteomics v4.1 software using a target decoy strategy against Mus musculus *.fasta database (obtained from Uniprot, UP000000589,  55471 protein sequences), which was concatenated with the same *.fasta file in reverse sense.  The parameters used for protein identification were: trypsin as cut enzyme and one missed cleavage allowed; carbamidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M), amidation (C-terminal), deamidation (Q, N) or phosphorylation (S, T, Y) as variable modifications; peptide and fragment tolerance were set to automatic, minimum fragment ion matches per peptide: 2, minimum fragment ion matches per protein: 5, minimum peptide matches per protein: 1, and false discovery rate less than 4%. The average of the intensity of the three most abundant peptides per protein (Top3) were used for label-free quantitation.  All proteins considered differentially expressed (DEP´s) in this work displayed at least a Fold Change (FC) of ±1 (expressed as a base 2 logarithm); it means that these proteins had at least 2 absolute FC, which was calculated based on the Top3 signal response of each characterized protein in Oxygen Glucose Deprivation condition by the Top3 of each protein in the condition with normoxia.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stroke, Neurodegeneration, Extracellular vesicles, Neural progenitor cells

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Neuropathology, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico
Cinvestav-IPN

### Submitter
Emmanuel Rios-Castro

### Lab Head
Dr Luis B. Tovar y Romo
Department of Molecular Neuropathology, Instituto de Fisiología Celular, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico City, Mexico


