### Accession
PXD029894

### Title
Molecular mechanisms involved in Atlantic halibut egg quality

### Description
Egg quality is of pivotal importance in biomedicine, agriculture, ecology and environmental science because of its tremendous influence on reproductive success or failure in all animals. Despite species specific differences in physiological aspects of early development, the evolutionary conserved stereotypical procedure of cellular events, led us to investigate whether these findings are common with marine fish species of aquaculture interest. Atlantic halibut (Hippoglossus hippoglossus) is a highly prized species in global fish markets with increasing demand to its production. The objectives of this study were 1) to reveal the proteomic profiles of good versus poor quality halibut eggs, 2) to identify proteins that can serve as egg quality markers, and 3) to discover molecular mechanisms determining egg quality using a combination of quantitative proteomics workflows, tandem mass tags (TMT) labeling and parallel reaction monitoring (PRM).

### Sample Protocol
Egg samples from a total of 10 spawns (5 spawns for good quality and 5 spawns for poor quality) were lysed in 1 ml modified RIPA lysis buffer (pH 7.4) containing; 50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 1 % NP-40, 1 % SDS, 1 % CHAPS, 0.5 % SDC, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets). To improve sample homogenization and shearing of DNA, samples were sonicated in 6 cycles of 30 sec at 40 % amplitude and 30 sec rest on ice. Extracted proteins were treated with Dithiotreitol and iodoacetamide for cystein reduction and alkylation. Proteins were captured, cleaned and digested with trypsin using magnetic beads, the SP3 protocol (Single-Pot Solid-Phase-enhanced Sample Preparation), followed by desalting using C18 columns (SPE). The tryptic peptides dissolved in 100 mM Triethyl ammonium bicarbonate were labelled with the TMT 10plex kit (ThermoFisher Scientific), and the resulting mix of 10 samples were fractionated in 9 fractions using Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Fractions were analysed on LC-MSMS.

### Data Protocol
Obtained spectra searched against an in-house built proteome database originated from A. halibut egg transcriptome with additional peptide sequences for mitochondrial proteome and the vitellogenin proteins from this species. Data search was performed using the SequestHT search engine implemented in Proteome  Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Trypsin was selected as protease with a maximum of two missed cleavage sites and cysteine carbamidomethylation and TMT10plex mass tags both at peptide N-terminus and Lysine side chain as fixed modifications. Methionine oxidation was selected as variable modification with a maximum of three such modifications per peptide. The precursor mass tolerance threshold was 10 ppm and the maximum fragment mass error 0.02 Da. Filtering out the false positive peptide identifications were performed by means of a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% using the reversed database (Percolator). Common laboratory contaminants (keratin and albumin proteins) were removed. Differentially abundant proteins were determined based on p values resolved from Independent samples t-test (p < 0.05) followed by Benjamini Hochberg correction for multiple testing (p < 0.05) using the SPSS software. Functional annotation of proteins found to be differentially abundant between good and poor quality eggs was performed using the UNIPROT and KEGG functional annotation tools. Gene ontology overrepresentation analyses were conducted using the GESTALT (WEB-based GEne SeT AnaLysis Toolkit). Proteins which were differentially regulated between good and poor quality halibut eggs were additionally subjected to the analysis of protein-protein interaction networks separately using the STRING Network search tool.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Proteomics, Proteome, Egg quality, Hippoglossus hippoglossus, Atlantic halibut, Tanmdem mass tags (tmt)

### Affiliations
Institute of Marine Research, Norway
Institute of Marine Research, Austevoll Research Station, 5392, Storebo Norway

### Submitter
OZLEM YILMAZ

### Lab Head
Dr Birgitta Norberg
Institute of Marine Research, Austevoll Research Station, 5392, Storebo Norway


