### Accession
PXD028323

### Title
Proteome content of insoluble fraction of Httex1 transduced neurons

### Description
Investigate the protein content of the insoluble fraction of primary neurons transdusced with Httex1 (+/-GFP).The ultimate goal is to assess the protein contents of Httex1 transduced neurons depending on the polyQ length and the presence of a GFP tag.

### Sample Protocol
Seven days post-transduction, primary neurons were lysed in PBS supplemented by 0.5% NP40, 0.5% Triton x100, 1% protease cocktail inhibitor (Sigma PB340), and 1% Phenylmethanesulfonyl Fluoride (PMSF, Applichem). Cell lysates were incubated at 4°C for 20 min and then cleared by centrifugation at 4°C for 20 min at 20,000g. Supernatants were collected as non-ionic soluble protein fraction. Pellets were washed and resuspended in PBS supplemented by 2% N-Lauroylsarcosine sodium salt (Sarkosyl, Sigma) with protease inhibitors. The pellets were briefly sonicated with a fine probe [3 times, 3 sec at the amplitude of 60% (Sonic Vibra Cell, Blanc Labo, Switzerland)], incubated 5 min on ice, then centrifuged at 100,000g for 30 min at 4°C. Supernatants were collected as Sarkosyl soluble fraction. Pellets were washed with the previous buffer and resuspended in PBS supplemented by 2% Sarkosyl and 8M Urea and briefly sonicated as done previously. Laemli Buffer 4x was added to samples and then samples were boiled at 95°C. Samples were separated by SDS-PAGE on a 16% polyacrylamide gel, for Coomassie staining. For proteomic identification, the samples separated by SDS-PAGE were then stained with Coomassie blue. Each gel lane was entirely sliced and proteins were In-gel digested as previously described. Peptides were desalted on stagetips and dried under a vacuum concentrator. For LC-MS/MS analysis, resuspended peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano UPLC system connected in-line with an Orbitrap Lumos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with the search engine MaxQuant 1.6.2.10151. The mouse Uniprot database + Httex1 Sequence were used. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), phosphorylation (S, T, Y), acetylation (Protein N-term), and glutamine to pyroglutamate were considered as variable modifications. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed. “Match between runs” was enabled. A minimum of 2 peptides was allowed for protein identification and the false discovery rate (FDR) cut-off was set at 0.01 for both peptides and proteins. Label-free quantification and normalization were performed by Maxquant using the MaxLFQ algorithm, with the standard settings152. In Perseus153, reverse proteins, contaminants, and proteins identified only by sites were filtered out. Data from the Urea fraction were analyzed separately following the same workflow. Biological replicates were grouped together and protein groups containing a minimum of two LFQ values in at least one group were conserved. Missing values were imputed with random numbers using a gaussian distribution (width = 0.7, down-shift = 1.9 for Urea fraction). Differentially expressed proteins were highlighted by a two-sample t-test, followed by a permutation-based correction (False Discovery Rate). Significant hits were determined by a volcano plot-based strategy, combining t-test P-values with ratio information154. Significance curves in the volcano plot corresponded to a S0 value of 0.5 and a FDR cut-off of 0.05. Further graphical displays were generated using homemade programs written in R (version 3.6.1).

### Publication Abstract
Despite the strong evidence linking the aggregation of the Huntingtin protein (Htt) to the pathogenesis of Huntington's disease (HD), the mechanisms underlying Htt aggregation and neurodegeneration remain poorly understood. Herein, we investigated the ultrastructural properties and protein composition of Htt cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions in mammalian cells and primary neurons overexpressing mutant exon1 of the Htt protein. Our findings provide unique insight into the ultrastructural properties of cytoplasmic and nuclear Htt inclusions and their mechanisms of formation. We show that Htt inclusion formation and maturation are complex processes that, although initially driven by polyQ-dependent Htt aggregation, also involve the polyQ and PRD domain-dependent sequestration of lipids and cytoplasmic and cytoskeletal proteins related to HD dysregulated pathways; the recruitment and accumulation of remodeled or dysfunctional membranous organelles, and the impairment of the protein quality control and degradation machinery. We also show that nuclear and cytoplasmic Htt inclusions exhibit distinct biochemical compositions and ultrastructural properties, suggesting different mechanisms of aggregation and toxicity.

### Keywords
Httex1, Neurons, Huntington disease, Inclusions

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Molecular and Chemical Biology of Neurodegeneration, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Ecole Polytechnique Fédérle de Lausanne

### Submitter
Nathan Riguet

### Lab Head
Dr Hilal A. Lashuel
Laboratory of Molecular and Chemical Biology of Neurodegeneration, Brain Mind Institute, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.


