### Accession
PXD037923

### Title
In-vitro culture of single gut bacterial strains with added sugars

### Description
Gut commensal bacterial strains were cultured with or without added sugars (glucose, sucrose and kestose). The base culture medium without sugar added were modified based on the Yeast Casitone Fatty Acids (YCFA) broth. Samples were analyzed for proteomics using LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
Cultured microbial cells were purified by washing with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) buffer three times, and the resulting microbial pellets were stored at -80 ºC for proteomics analysis. Proteins were extracted with 4% SDS 8M urea buffer in 100 mM Tris-HCl buffer and precipitated overnight at -20 ºC, before being purified by washing with ice-cold acetone three times. Quantified proteins were then reduced and alkylated before being digested using trypsin (50:1 protein-to-trypsin ratio) for 24 hours at 37 ºC and were desalted using reverse phase beads.Proteomic samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific Inc.) coupled with an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano liquid chromatography system following a 1-hour gradient of 5 to 35% (v/v) acetonitrile (v/v) at the flow rate of 300 L/min. MS full scan was performed from 350 - 1400 m/z with a resolution of 60,000, followed by an MS/MS scan of 12 most intense ions, a dynamic exclusion repeat count of one, exclusion duration of 30 s, and resolution of 15,000.

### Data Protocol
Proteomics database searches were performed by combining FASTA databases of the individual strains downloaded from NCBI. The databases were combined for performing database search using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0.

### Publication Abstract
Functional redundancy is a key ecosystem property representing the fact that different taxa contribute to an ecosystem in similar ways through the expression of redundant functions. The redundancy of potential functions (or genome-level functional redundancy [Formula: see text]) of human microbiomes has been recently quantified using metagenomics data. Yet, the redundancy of expressed functions in the human microbiome has never been quantitatively explored. Here, we present an approach to quantify the proteome-level functional redundancy [Formula: see text] in the human gut microbiome using metaproteomics. Ultra-deep metaproteomics reveals high proteome-level functional redundancy and high nestedness in the human gut proteomic content networks (i.e., the bipartite graphs connecting taxa to functions). We find that the nested topology of proteomic content networks and relatively small functional distances between proteomes of certain pairs of taxa together contribute to high [Formula: see text] in the human gut microbiome. As a metric comprehensively incorporating the factors of presence/absence of each function, protein abundances of each function and biomass of each taxon, [Formula: see text] outcompetes diversity indices in detecting significant microbiome responses to environmental factors, including individuality, biogeography, xenobiotics, and disease. We show that gut inflammation and exposure to specific xenobiotics can significantly diminish the [Formula: see text] with no significant change in taxonomic diversity.

### Keywords
Culturing, Single strains, Proteomics

### Affiliations
research associate
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Canada

### Submitter
Zhibin Ning

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel Figeys
Faculty of Medicine, University of Ottawa, Canada


