### Accession
PXD029374

### Title
Proteomic profiling and alteration in Tuta absoluta upon infection with entomopathogenic fungi, Beauveria bassiana and Purpureocillium lilacinum

### Description
Tomato leafminer (Tuta absoluta) is a major pest of solanaceous plant species and causes heavy economic losses to the tomato crop. T. absoluta have been developed resistance to many chemical insecticides and have serious impacts on human health as well as environment. To overcome the ill effects of insecticides, ecofriendly approachis needed and among various biological microbes, entomopathogenic fungi is reliable and cost effective.  The entomopathogenic fungi, like Beauveria bassiana and Purpureocillium lilacinum have ability to control pest population. The present study was conducted to study the interaction of B. bassiana and P. lilacinum at proteomic level to understand post infection effects. The analysis showed that in fourth instar larvae of T. absoluta, and the 442 and 423 proteins were significantly dysregulated upon infection with P. lilacinum and B. bassiana respectively. The present study concluded entomopathogenic fungal infection decline the immune system of T. absoluta larvae and can be adopted in for control of T. absoluta insect pest.

### Sample Protocol
The fourth instar larvae of both infected and control were collected after 48 hrs and were grounded to liquid nitrogen to fine powder. To this, 500µl extraction buffer was added and vortexed for 10 min. Further, equal amount of water saturated phenol was added, vortexed well for 10 min. The phenol-phase was retracted and after 24 h, the precipitate was centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatant was discarded. To the pellet, 200µl of 0.1M ammonium acetate was added, vortexed and again centrifuged at 10,000 rpm for 5 mins. This process was repeated twice. Then the obtained pellets were washed with 200µl of 100% acetone, air dried, suspended in 8M urea. The entire process of centrifugation and precipitation was carried out at 4ºC. The protein was concentrated in speed-vac vacuum and supernatant was concentrated by 50% volume at room temperature for 20 min. Preparation of sample for spectrometry The protein concentration of the samples was measured by Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit. The protein concentration (~100µg) from each sample was taken. The samples were reduced by using the final concentration of 5mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) at 60⁰ C for 30 min followed by alkylation by 10mM Iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes in dark at room temperature. Promega sequencing Grade Modified Trypsin in the ratio of 1:20 (enzyme: protein) at 37⁰ C overnight for digestion of samples. The samples were acidified by 1 % formic acid (FA) and then cleaned by Sep-Pak C18 Cartridge.   LC-MS/MS analysis The data acquisition of the samples was carried out on Thermo Scientific™ Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) interfaced with Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). Peptides were resolved on an analytical column (Thermo Scientific™ Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 LC Column, 75 µm x 50 cm, 2µm) at a flow rate of 300nl/min using an optimized linear gradient. The MS data acquisition was carried out from 350-1600 m/z range using Orbitrap mass analyzer. AGC target was set to 400,000 with ion injection time of 50 ms and dynamic exclusion of 30 sec. Precursor ions were fragmented using HCD (NCE 32%) and analyzed using Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 15000.  For MS/MS scans AGC target was set to 100,000 with ion injection time of 100ms. Samples were analyzed in technical triplicates.

### Data Protocol
The raw data MS/MS were carried out using SEQUEST search algorithms using Proteome Discoverer      2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) against RefSeq protein databases of Manduca sexta and Plutella xylostella. The search parameters involved carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues (+57.021 Da) as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.995 Da) as dynamic modification. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Trypsin was specified as protease and a maximum of two missed cleavage were allowed. FDR of 1% was applied as a cut-off value for reporting identified peptides. Normalization across the mass spec runs was done using total peptide intensity in each run. For statistical analysis we used Perseus proteomics software (version 1.6.2.2) where student’s T-test was performed to calculate p-values. The fold change cutoff of 1.5 was applied to determine significantly dysregulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
T. absoluta, Immune response, Proteomics, Entomopathogenic fungi

### Affiliations
Department of Zoology, Savitribai Phule Pune University, Pune
Department of Zoology, Savitribai Phule University, Pune, Maharashtra, India

### Submitter
Gurmeet Kour Bali

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Radhakrisknan S Pandit
Department of Zoology, Savitribai Phule University, Pune, Maharashtra, India


