### Accession
PXD028954

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of proteins bound to rs452384-T or rs452384-C

### Description
This project focuses on the functional characterization of a risk variant (SNP) implicated in the predisposition to uveal melanoma, rs452384. We sought to determine whether some nuclear factors could bind with allele-specificity a DNA sequence centered around rs452384 to regulate gene expression. We sought to identify by quantitative mass spectrometry the nuclear proteins bound to double-stranded DNA probes with identical DNA sequences except for rs452384-C or T alleles in the center of the probe. The goal was to quantify the binding of transcription factors to the DNA probes, and to select those enriched (or specific) to the C or T allele of rs452384. To identify proteins specifically bound to rs452384, we compared binding partners to those obtained with a negative control probe known not to recognize any transcription factor.

### Sample Protocol
Biotinylated-DNA pulldown assays were carried out using Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin (11205D Invitrogen) following the manufacturer’s instructions. The same 25bp biotin-labeled forward primers (12bp on either side of rs452384-C or rs452384-T) were annealed to complementary unlabeled reverse primers, creating double stranded probes biotinylated on one end. A 3’biotin-labeled negative control probe that does not contain any known DNA binding motif was also included as a nonspecific binding probe. 150μg of streptavidin-coated beads were incubated with 2.25μg of double stranded DNA-biotin probes prior to adding freshly prepared nuclear extracts from MP41 uveal melanoma cell line (1mg per reaction). DNA-protein complexes on beads were incubated for 45 minutes at room temperature in EMSA binding buffer supplemented with salt and spiked with poly(dI/dC) (50mM KCl, 10mM Tris, 0.1% NP-40, 1mM DTT, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitors, 50mM NaCl, 10ng/uL poly(dI/dC). Complexes on beads were washed 3 times in EMSA buffer followed by 3 times in 25mM Ammonium Bicarbonate (NH4HCO3), pulling down beads on a DynaMag Magnet each time. Beads were resuspended in 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and digested by adding 0.2 μg of trypsin-LysC (Promega) for 1 h at 37 °C. Samples were then loaded into custom-made C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using a ratio of 40:60 CH3CN:H2O + 0.1% formic acid, vacuum concentrated to dryness and reconstituted in injection buffer (0.3% TFA) before LC-MS/MS analysis. Each of the 3 conditions (negative control probe NEG, rs452384-T probe, rs452384-C probe) was performed in 5 biological replicates.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Homo sapiens UP000005640 database (downloaded 12/2019 containing 20364 entries) using Sequest HT through Proteome Discoverer (version 2.4). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, methionine loss and methionine acetylation loss were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks. The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v.3.9.2 (PMID: 17610305). FDR calculation used Percolator (PMID: 27572102)  and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label-free quantification was performed by peptide extracted ion chromatograms (XICs), computed with MassChroQ v.2.2.21 (PMID: 21751374). XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate (N=5). To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed, and p-values were adjusted using the Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure.

### Publication Abstract
The TERT/CLPTM1L risk locus on chromosome 5p15.33 is a pleiotropic cancer risk locus in which multiple independent risk alleles have been identified, across well over ten cancer types. We previously conducted a genome-wide association study in uveal melanoma (UM), which uncovered a role for the TERT/CLPTM1L risk locus in this intraocular tumor and identified multiple highly correlated risk alleles. Aiming to unravel the biological mechanisms in UM of this locus, which contains a domain enriched in active chromatin marks and enhancer elements, we demonstrated the allele-specific enhancer activity of this risk region using reporter assays. In UM, we identified the functional variant rs452384, of which the C risk allele is associated with higher gene expression, increased CLPTM1L expression in UM tumors, and a longer telomere length in peripheral blood mononuclear cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays and quantitative mass spectrometry identified NKX2.4 as an rs452384-T-specific binding protein, whereas GATA4 preferentially interacted with rs452384-C. Knockdown of NKX2.4 but not GATA4 resulted in increased TERT and CLPTM1L expression. In summary, the UM risk conferred by the 5p locus is at least partly due to rs452384, for which NKX2.4 presents strong differential binding activity and regulates CLPTM1L and TERT expression. Altogether, our work unraveled some of the complex regulatory mechanisms at the 5p15.33 susceptibility region in UM, and this might also shed light on shared mechanisms with other tumor types affected by this susceptibility region.

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Allele-specific binding, Rs452384, Dna-protein interaction

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Facility (LSMP) - Institut Curie
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform

### Submitter
Victor Laigle

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Head of the Curie Institute Mass Spectrometry Platform


