### Accession
PXD017828

### Title
Proteome cold-shock response in the extremely acidophilic archaeon, Cuniculiplasma divulgatum

### Description
The archaea Cuniculiplasma divulgatum are abundant in acidic environments with low to moderate temperatures. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying its ability to thrive at low temperatures remain unexplored. Using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, we analysed the effect of short-term (3 h) exposure to cold shock. The C. divulgatum genome encodes 2,016 protein-coding genes, from which 819 proteins were identified in the cells grown under optimal conditions. In line with the peptidolytic lifestyle of C. divulgatum, its intracellular proteome revealed the abundance of proteases, ABC transporters and cytochrome C oxidase. From 747 quantifiable polypeptides, the levels of 582 proteins showed no change after the cold shock (the core proteome), whereas 104 proteins were upregulated suggesting that they might be contributing to cold adaptation. The highest increase in protein levels was found for the metal-dependent hydrolase, FAD-dependent oxidoreductase, aspartate carbamoyltransferase regulatory chain proteins, 2-oxoacid ferredoxin oxidoreductase and ATPase-V type ATP synthase. Furthermore, the cold shock induced a substantial increase (3.5 % and 9.0 %) in the levels of two most abundant intracellular proteins, chaperonin and glutamate dehydrogenase. This study has outlined potential mechanisms of environmental fitness of Cuniculiplasma spp. allowing them to colonise and survive in acidic settings at low/ moderate temperatures.

### Sample Protocol
Triplicate cultures (200 ml) of C. divulgatum S5 (=JCM 30642T =VKM B-2941T) were grown under optimal conditions (37 ºC, modified medium 88 DSMZ, on an orbital shaker at 100 rpm [1]. for 90 h to reach the exponential growth phase. After that, half of each culture (100 ml) was transferred into other Erlenmeyer flasks and subjected to the cold shock introduced by placing of cultures in an ice-water bath (0 ºC) for 3 h. During that incubation time, the remaining halves of the cultures were maintained under optimal conditions, as above. All variants were harvested by centrifugation (8.000 g for 15 min) and washed twice in the same sterile growth medium without beef extract.  Protein extraction and digestion were carried out as previously described [11]. In brief, proteins were extracted by resuspending the biomass in 300 – 500 µL of breakage buffer [25mM ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic), containing one tablet of Roche complete-mini protease inhibitors (without EDTA) (Roche Diagnostics Ltd., West Sussex, UK) per 7mL of AmBic.] Acid washed glass beads (150-212 µm; 70-100 US sieve) were added to the cell pellet (200 µL). The pellet was subjected to repeated rounds of bead-beating (15 bursts of 30 s with 1 min cool-down periods on wet ice in between individual bursts.) The biomass was centrifuged (10 min at 4 °C, 12,000 rcf) and the supernatant was transferred to a new Eppendorf tube. 250 µL of fresh breakage buffer were added to the pellet, which was then resuspended by vortexing. The bottom of the extraction vial was pierced with a heated syringe needle (gauge 21G or narrower) and placed on top of a fresh Eppendorf tube. The device was inserted into a 50 mL Falcon tube, and the supernatant spun through at low speed (4,000 rpm) for 5 min at 4 °C) to separate the beads from the resulting supernatant. The protein content of the combined supernatant and flow-through was assessed using a standard Bradford assay [12]. The protein extracts were stored at - 80 °C prior to subsequent digestion.  100 µg protein aliquots were transferred into a 0.5 mL low-bind Eppendorf tube, and the volume adjusted to a total of 160 µL with fresh AmBic. Proteins were denatured by adding 10 µL of 1% (w/v) of RapiGest™ (Waters, Elstree, UK) in 25 mM AmBic, followed by 10 min incubation (80 °C; 400 rpm.) The samples were reduced by adding 10 uL freshly prepared 60 mM Dithiothreitol (DTT) in 25 mM AmBic, followed by incubation at 60 °C (10 min; 400 rpm.) The samples were cooled to room temperature before alkylation was initiated by adding 10 µL freshly prepared 180 mM iodoacetamide (IAM). Samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. After the addition of 4.5 µL fresh AmBic to each tube, mass spectrometry grade trypsin (Promega, UK) was reconstituted in 50 mM acetic acid. 10 µL of a 0.2 mg/mL trypsin solution was added to the reaction. Samples were incubated for 4.5 h (37 °C; 400 rpm). Another 10 µL aliquot of trypsin was added to each digestion tube, and complete digestion was carried out overnight (37 °C; 400 rpm). 5.5 µL of acetonitrile were added to each tube and RapiGest™ was precipitated by adding of 1.5 µL of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and incubation for a minimum 45 min (37 °C; 400 rpm). The digest was then incubated at 4 °C for a minimum of 2 h prior to a 15 min of centrifugation step (14,000 rpm at 4 °C). The final volume of the digest was 221.5 µL. 180 µL of the resulting supernatant were transferred into a fresh LoBind Eppendorf tube. Digests were diluted 1:1 with glycophosphorylase B (Uniprot Accession P00489) MassPREP™ digestion-standard (Waters, UK) to give a final concentration 50 fmol/uL glycophosphorylase B. 1 µL per injection of the so prepared sample was used for analysis.

### Data Protocol
The resulting spiked digests were analysed by nanoLC-HDMSe using an M-Class nano-Acquity system (Waters MS Technologies) with a trap valve manager, coupled to a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer (Waters MS Technologies).  The sample (1.0μl) was loaded onto the trapping column (Waters MS Technologies; NanoEaseTM M/Z Symmetry C18 100A, 5um, 180um x 20mm trap column), using partial loop injection with a sample loading time of 3min at a flow rate of 0.3μl/min.  The sample was resolved on an analytical column (nanoEaseTM M/Z Peptide BEH C18 130Å, 1.7μm, 75μm x 100mm column) using a gradient of 99% A (Optima® Water with 0.1% formic acid) 1% B (99.9% ACN with 0.1% formic acid) to 60% A, 40% B over 90min at a flow rate of 0.3μl/min and then to 15% A, 85% B over 90 min. At 95min the conditions returned to the initial state and held for 15min in preparation for the next injection. The mass spectrometry (MS) data was acquired in HDMSe mode, e.g. ion mobility was enabled and all ions within a specified m/z range were observed and fragmented. A mass range of 50 to 2000 Da was selected in resolution mode (ToF W mode) using a positive polarity continuum acquisition. The scan time was set at 0.5 sec and a ramp transfer collision energy of 15–45 eV was used for the high energy signal. The time-of-flight analyser was calibrated before running batches against the fragment ions of glufibrinopeptide and throughout the analytical run at 6 min intervals using the Waters ZSprayTM NanoLockSprayTM source with leucine enkephaline.  HDMSe data was processed with Progenesis QI for proteomics version 4.1 (Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). Label-free analysis and quantification was performed using an integrated Hi3 workflow [13], applying standard settings for HDMSe peptide/protein identification. The Progenesis Ion Accounting workflow was used, and the data was searched against the C. divulgatum, strain S5T proteome (Uniprot proteome ID: UP000195607) including the protein sequence of glycophosphorylase B (P00489). Peptides were identified assuming standard trypsin degradation rules with one missed cleavage allowed. The following modifications were also included: fixed carbamidomethyl (C), and variable oxidation (M), deamidation (Q), deamidation (N). The peptide mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were set to auto with a 4% FDR, and ion matching requirements were set to: 3, 7, 1 for fragments/peptide, fragments/protein, and peptides/protein respectively. Fold-change data and quantities were determined using the absolute quantification workflow within the proteomics software Progenesis QIP, which is based on the Hi3 algorithm. Amounts of proteins quantified in this manner are expressed in “fmol” amounts and refer to the total amount quantified in 1L of digest.  Sequences for all identified proteins were fetch from Uniprot database using the url-based API. Functional annotation and classification have been developed against eggNOG Archaea database using emapper v1.0.3 and KEGG database using BlastKOALA. All figures have been developed using R programming language.

### Publication Abstract
The archaeon <i>Cuniculiplasma divulgatum</i> is ubiquitous in acidic environments with low-to-moderate temperatures. However, molecular mechanisms underlying its ability to thrive at lower temperatures remain unexplored. Using mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics, we analysed the effect of short-term (3 h) exposure to cold. The <i>C. divulgatum</i> genome encodes 2016 protein-coding genes, from which 819 proteins were identified in the cells grown under optimal conditions. In line with the peptidolytic lifestyle of <i>C. divulgatum</i>, its intracellular proteome revealed the abundance of proteases, ABC transporters and cytochrome C oxidase. From 747 quantifiable polypeptides, the levels of 582 proteins showed no change after the cold shock, whereas 104 proteins were upregulated suggesting that they might be contributing to cold adaptation. The highest increase in expression appeared in low-abundance (0.001-0.005 fmol%) proteins for polypeptides' hydrolysis (metal-dependent hydrolase), oxidation of amino acids (FAD-dependent oxidoreductase), pyrimidine biosynthesis (aspartate carbamoyltransferase regulatory chain proteins), citrate cycle (2-oxoacid ferredoxin oxidoreductase) and ATP production (V type ATP synthase). Importantly, the cold shock induced a substantial increase (6% and 9%) in expression of the most-abundant proteins, thermosome beta subunit and glutamate dehydrogenase. This study has outlined potential mechanisms of environmental fitness of <i>Cuniculiplasma</i> spp. allowing them to colonise acidic settings at low/moderate temperatures.

### Keywords
Acidic environments, Cold shock, Cuniculiplasma, Thermoplasmatales, Acidophilic archaea, Proteome, Acid mine drainage systems

### Affiliations
Center for Environmental Biotechnology,
School of Natural Sciences,
Bangor University,
Bangor

Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, Bangor University, Deiniol Rd, Bangor, LL57 2UW, UK School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Deiniol Rd, Bangor, LL57 2UW, UK

### Submitter
Rafael Bargiela

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Golyshin
Centre for Environmental Biotechnology, Bangor University, Deiniol Rd, Bangor, LL57 2UW, UK School of Natural Sciences, Bangor University, Deiniol Rd, Bangor, LL57 2UW, UK


