### Accession
PXD044714

### Title
Spatial Proteomics of a Human Brain Tumour at 40 µm resolution

### Description
The spatial organisation of Cellular protein expression profiles within tissues determines cellular function and are key to understanding disease pathology. To define molecular phenotypes in the spatial context of tissue, there is a need for unbiased, quantitative technology capable of mapping proteomes within tissue structures. Here, we present a workflow for spatially resolved, quantitative proteomics of tissue that generates maps of protein expression across a tissue slice derived from a human atypical teratoid-rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT). We employ spatially-aware statistical methods that do not require prior knowledge of the fine tissue structure to detect proteins and pathways with varying spatial abundance patterns. We identified PYGL, ASPH and CD45 as spatial markers for tumour boundary and reveal immune response driven, spatially organized protein networks of the extracellular tumour matrix. Overall, this work informs on methods for spatially resolved deep proteo-phenotyping of tissue heterogeneity, which will push the boundaries of understanding tissue biology and pathology at the molecular level.

### Sample Protocol
For the 40 µm resolution data, tissue areas were microdissected using a Leica LMD7 laser capture microscope. The region of interest was imaged using a 20x Objective lens with a 10 % tile overlap using the LASX software (Leica). Image tiles were stitched, then imported into QuPath version 0.4.380. Voxel annotations were created manually in a 9-by-9 grid with each voxel having a side-length of 40 µm, and three reference points for image to stage location registration were selected. Microdissection coordinates were then exported from QuPath via a custom plug-in and imported into the LMD7 software81. The following settings were used: Power 50, aperture 2, speed 10, middle pulse count 1, head current 90 %, pulse frequency 500. Tissue areas were cut into wells of a 96-well PCR plate. To ensure the collected tissue was located at the bottom of the wells, 100 µL of acetonitrile was added to each well, the plate was then sealed, centrifuged at 1000 x g for 5 minutes, then dried in a vacuum centrifuge at 40 °C until dryness. The plate was then stored at -20 °C until further processing. For the 40 µm resolution data, a single step digestion was performed. To the dried samples, 4 µL of digestion buffer was added, the plate sealed and incubated at 50 °C for 90 minutes in a thermocycler84. The digestion buffer contained: 0.2 % n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside (DDM), 1 ng/µL Trypsin/LysC Mix (Promega), 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate. After incubation, the plate was cooled to 20 °C then removed from the thermocycler. The resulting peptides were loaded onto Evotip Pure C18 tips (EvoSep) following the manufacturer’s protocol for analysis by LC-MS/MS. Peptides from 40 µm resolution samples were analysed using an Evosep One LC system (EvoSep) coupled to a timsTOF SCP mass spectrometer (Bruker) using the Whisper 40 samples per day method and a 75 µm x 150 mm C18 column with 1.7 µm particles  and an integrated Captive Spray Emitter (IonOpticks). Buffer A was 0.1 % formic acid in water, Buffer B was 0.1 % formic acid in acetonitrile. Data was collected using diaPASEF45 with 1 MS frame and 9 diaPASEF frames per cycle with an accumulation and ramp time of 100 ms, for a total cycle time of 1.07 seconds. The diaPASEF frames were separated into 3 ion mobility windows, in total covering the 400 – 1000 m/z mass range with 25 m/z-wide windows between an ion mobility range of 0.64 – 1.4 Vs/cm2. The collision energy was ramped linearly over the ion mobility range, with 20 eV applied at 0.6 Vs/cm2 to 59 eV at 1.6 Vs/cm2.

### Data Protocol
For the 40 µm resolution data, raw files were analysed in DIA-NN88 version 1.8.1 using an in-silico¬ spectral library generated by DIA-NN with default settings (1 missed cleavage, N-terminal methionine excision was allowed) using a Uniprot human FASTA file containing 20383 reviewed sequences. MS1 and MS2 accuracies were set to 15 ppm, all other settings were left as default.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Roteomics, Spatial proteomics, Laser capture microdissection

### Affiliations
Discovery Proteomics Lab, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Simon Davis

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Lab, University of Oxford


