### Accession
PXD015834

### Title
The phase separation-dependent FUS interactome reveals nuclear and cytoplasmic function of liquid-liquid phase separation

### Description
Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of proteins and RNAs has emerged as the driving force underlying the formation of membrane-less organelles. Such biomolecular condensates have various biological functions and have been linked to disease. One of the best studied proteins undergoing LLPS is Fused in Sarcoma (FUS), a predominantly nuclear RNA-binding protein. Mutations in FUS have been causally linked to Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), an adult-onset motor neuron disease, and LLPS followed by aggregation of cytoplasmic FUS has been proposed to be a crucial disease mechanism. In spite of this, it is currently unclear how LLPS impacts the behaviour of FUS in cells, e.g. its interactome. In order to study the consequences of LLPS on FUS and its interaction partners, we developed a method that allows for the purification of phase separated FUS-containing droplets from cell lysates. We observe substantial alterations in the interactome of FUS, depending on its biophysical state. While non-phase separated FUS interacts mainly with its well-known interaction partners involved in pre-mRNA processing, phase-separated FUS predominantly binds to proteins involved in chromatin remodelling and DNA damage repair. Interestingly, factors with function in mitochondria are strongly enriched with phase-separated FUS, providing a potential explanation for early changes in mitochondrial gene expression observed in mouse models of ALS-FUS. In summary, we present a methodology that allows to investigate the interactome of phase-separating proteins and provide evidence that LLPS strongly shapes the FUS interactome with important implications for function and disease.

### Sample Protocol
The formaldehyde crosslink was reversed / eGFP-fusion proteins were eluted from the beads by boiling the samples for 15 min at 95 °C in LDS-loading buffer. Cell lysates mixed with equal volumes of 2X LDS-loading buffer and boiled for 15 min at 95 °C served as input samples.  To prepare the samples (each experimental condition in biological triplicates) for mass spectrometry, samples were run 1 cm into a 12 % Bis-Tris Plus gel (Invitrogen). 150’000 droplets (sorted events) and 3/5 of the eGFP co-IP, respectively were loaded. The gel was subsequently washed 5 x 5 min in ulatapure water, 10 min in 0.1 M HCl and Coomassie stained for 2 h (0.12 % (w/v) Coomassie G-250, 10 % H3PO4 (v/v), 10 % (w/v) NH4OAc, 20 % MeOH (v/v)) to visualize proteins. The gel was de-stained for 8 x 30 min in ultrapure water. To prepare gel pieces for mass spectrometry, the gel was cut, using a clean scalpel, into approx. 0.25 cm horizontal bands. The bands were further cut into cubes of approx. 1-3 mm3 and transferred to a 1.5 ml Eppendorf tube. Samples were stored at 4 °C in 20 % EtOH before reduction and alkylation. Samples were analyzed in a random order to avoid chromatographic batch effects. The gel pieces were reduced, alkylated and digested by trypsin as described elsewhere (Gunasekera et al., 2012). The digests were analyzed by nano-liquid chromatography tandem masspectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) (EasyLC 1000 nanoflow-UPLC coupled to a QExactive HF mass spectrometer, ThermoFisher Scientific) with one injection of 5 μl digests. Peptides were trapped on a Precolumn (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100 Å, 300 μm × 5 mm, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Reinach, Switzerland) and separated by backflush on a C18 column (3 μm, 100 Å, 75 μm × 15 cm, C18, Nikkyo Technos, Tokyo, Japan) by applying a 40-minute gradient of 5 % acetonitrile to 40 % in water, 0.1 % formic acid, at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The Full Scan method was set with resolution at 60,000 with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1E06 and maximum ion injection time of 50 ms. The data-dependent method for precursor ion fragmentation was applied with the following settings: resolution 15,000, AGC of 1E05, maximum ion time of 110 milliseconds, isolation width of 1.6 m/z, collision energy 27, under fill ratio 1 %, charge exclusion of unassigned and 1+ ions, and peptide match preferred, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Spectra interpretation was performed with MaxQuant/Andromeda version 1.5.4.1 searching against the forward and reversed SwissProt Homo Sapiens protein database (Release 2017_12) using fixed modification of carbamidomethylation on Cys, and variable modifications of oxidation on Met, deamidation on Asn /Gln, and acetylation on protein N-term. Mass error tolerance for parent ions was set to 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance to 20 ppm, and full trypsin cleavage specificity with 3 missed cleavages were allowed. Based on reversed database matches a 1 % false discovery rate (FDR) was set for acceptance of peptide spectrum matches (PSM), peptides, and proteins. Relative protein abundance was calculated as described elsewhere (Krey et al., 2014). In brief, contaminant proteins such as keratins and trypsin were removed and the remaining protein’s iBAQ values were each divided by the sum of all non-contaminant iBAQ values. Relative iBAQ values were used to determine fold changes and p-values using student’s t-test and adjusted p-values (FDR) between experimental conditions. To be assigned to the LLPS interactome of FUS, proteins purified from FUS droplets had to be enriched > 2-fold compared to the input with a FDR < 0.05. To be assigned to the non-LLPS interactome, proteins co-IPed with FUS had to be enriched > 2-fold compared to the input as well as to the control IP (FLAG-eGFP), with a FDR < 0.05 for both.

### Publication Abstract
Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) of proteins and RNAs has emerged as the driving force underlying the formation of membrane-less organelles. Such biomolecular condensates have various biological functions and have been linked to disease. The protein Fused in Sarcoma (FUS) undergoes LLPS and mutations in FUS have been causally linked to the motor neuron disease Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS-FUS). LLPS followed by aggregation of cytoplasmic FUS has been proposed to be a crucial disease mechanism. However, it is currently unclear how LLPS impacts the behaviour of FUS in cells, e.g. its interactome. Hence, we developed a method allowing for the purification of LLPS FUS-containing droplets from cell lysates. We observe substantial alterations in the interactome, depending on its biophysical state. While non-LLPS FUS interacts mainly with factors involved in pre-mRNA processing, LLPS FUS predominantly binds to proteins involved in chromatin remodelling and DNA damage repair. Interestingly, also mitochondrial factors are strongly enriched with LLPS FUS, providing a potential explanation for the observed changes in mitochondrial gene expression in mouse models of ALS-FUS. In summary, we present a methodology to investigate the interactomes of phase separating proteins and provide evidence that LLPS shapes the FUS interactome with implications for function and disease.

### Keywords
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Fused in sarcoma, Liquid-liquid phase separation

### Affiliations
University of Bern
Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King’s College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, U.K

### Submitter
Manfred Heller

### Lab Head
Dr Marc-David Ruepp
Department of Basic and Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, Maurice Wohl Clinical Neuroscience Institute, King’s College London, 125 Coldharbour Lane, London SE5 9NU, U.K


