### Accession
PXD009093

### Title
Brain-derived and circulating EVs from hypoperfused mice, early AD and mixed dementias

### Description
In this project we provide profiling of brain-derived and circulating EVs LC-MS/MS data from mice subjected to bilateral common carotid stenosis (BCAS) and Sham controls. Furthermore, data from brain-derived EVs of early AD and mixed dementias (AD+CVD) is also provided.

### Sample Protocol
Brain tissues obtained from mice or human subjects were homogenized in detergent-free conditions and EVs were enriched from detergent-free brain homogenates or mouse blood serum using PROSPR. PROSPR-isolated EVs derived from brain tissues or serum samples were dissolved in a sodium deoxycholate buffer. EVs constituent proteins were then subjected to reduction dithiothreitol followed by alkylation with iodoacetamide. Samples were next diluted 10-fold. Overnight digestion was performed using a sequencing-grade-modified trypsin. Tryptic digested peptides were fractionated by HPLC. Pooled fractions were analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were de-isotoped and converted into Mascot Generic Format files using Thermo Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.1.14, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.). Database (DB) searching was performed using an in-house Mascot server (Mascot version 2.6.1, Matrix Science, MA, USA) with a precursor ion tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment ion tolerance of 20 ppm. Trypsin was set as enzyme for DB searching. Carbamidomethylation at Cys residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of Met and deamidation of Asn and Gln residues were set as variable modifications. The mouse Uniprot DB (downloaded on 16th March 2017; containing a total of 91089 sequences and a total of 38788886 residues) was used for searching murine data. The human Uniprot DB (downloaded on 06th February 2017; containing a total of 178750 sequences and a total of 61972042 residues) was used for searching human samples.

### Publication Abstract
Vascular factors that reduce blood flow to the brain are involved in apparition and progression of dementia. We hypothesized that cerebral hypoperfusion (CH) might alter the molecular compositions of brain intercellular communication mechanisms while affecting the neurovascular unit in preclinical and clinical human dementias. To test that hypothesis, mice were subjected to bilateral common carotid stenosis (BCAS) and the molecular compositions of brain-derived and circulating extracellular vesicles (EVs) were assessed. Murine brain vesicle profiles were then analyzed in parallel with brain EVs from post-mortem subjects affected by preclinical Alzheimer's Disease (AD) and mixed dementias. Brain EVs were identified with molecular mediators of hypoxia responses, neuroprotection and neurotoxicity in BCAS mice, patterns also partially resembled by subjects with preclinical AD and mixed dementias. Together these findings indicate that brain EVs represent a promising source of therapeutic targets and circulating markers of neurovascular insult in idiopathic dementias. Furthermore, the results obtained generate novel and compelling hypotheses about the molecular involvement of the vascular component in the etiology of human dementias.

### Keywords
Brain, Extracellular vesicles

### Affiliations
Reasearch Associate
School of Biological Sciences Division of Chemical Biology & BioTechnology Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551

### Submitter
Xavier Gallart Palau

### Lab Head
Dr Siu Kwan Sze
School of Biological Sciences Division of Chemical Biology & BioTechnology Nanyang Technological University, 60 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637551


