### Accession
PXD023729

### Title
Escherichia coli proteome during outgrowth from stationary phase

### Description
We studied the proteomic dynamics of Escherichia coli cells exiting stationary phase and identified unique dynamics for the proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Overnight cultures were diluted 1:200 into LB and grown at 37 °C. During outgrowth from stationary phase, ~10^9 cells were harvested and washed in cold PBS, then flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen. Two biological replicate samples were collected at 0, 15, 30, 45, 60, and 90 min during outgrowth. All samples were then thawed and resuspended in 500 µL lysis buffer (6 M urea, 50 mM Tris-base buffer, and 5% SDS) and subjected to 10 min of bead beating. After centrifugation, the supernatants were reduced with 10 µL of 500 mM DTT (Millipore Sigma) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Millipore Sigma). The peptides were washed, digested, and eluted using S-trap tubes (Protifi) following the manufacturer’s protocols, desalted by C18 solid-phase extraction (Sep-Pak Waters), and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Peptide concentration was quantified for normalization using a Nanodrop ND-1000.  Peptides were resuspended in 0.2% formic acid to a final concentration of 0.5 µg/µL. Subsequently, 1 µL was loaded onto an in-house laser-pulled 100-µm inner diameter nanospray column packed to ~22 cm with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3.0 m resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated by reversed-phase chromatography on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 HPLC. Buffer A of the mobile phase contained 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water, and buffer B contained 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile. The HPLC used a two-step linear gradient with 4-25% buffer B for 135 min followed by 25-45% buffer B for 15 min at 0.400 µL/min. Peptides were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) in data-dependent mode, with full MS scans acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer with a resolution of 60,000 and m/z range of 340-1,600. The top 20 most abundant ions with intensity threshold above 500 counts and charge states 2 and above were selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID) with an isolation window of 2 m/z, normalized collision energy of 35%, activation Q of 0.25, and activation time of 5 ms. The CID fragments were analyzed in the ion trap with rapid scan rate. Dynamic exclusion was enabled with repeat count of 1 and exclusion duration of 20 s. The AGC target was set to 1,000,000 and 50,000 for full FTMS scans and ITMSn scans, respectively. The maximum injection time was set to 250 ms and 100 ms for full FTMS scans and ITMSn scans, respectively.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0.388 using the built-in SEQUEST search algorithm. The Uniprot canonical E. coli FASTA database (4350 protein sequences downloaded on 2/9/2020) was used in this search, along with a database containing common preparatory contaminants. The precursor mass range was set to 350-3000 Da, the mass error tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.6 Da.  Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin, carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.021) was set as variable modifications, oxidation of methionines (+15.995) and acetylation of protein N-terminus (+42.011) was considered as variable modifications. Percolator was used to filter peptides and proteins to a false discovery rate of 1%.  Abundance quantification was based on precursor ion peak areas.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Escherichia coli, Outgrowth, Stationary phase

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158

### Submitter
Handuo Shi

### Lab Head
Dr Kerwyn Casey Huang
Department of Bioengineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA Chan Zuckerberg Biohub, San Francisco, CA 94158


