### Accession
PXD012977

### Title
Proteomic profiling of the oncogenic septin 9 reveals isoform-specific interactions in breast cancer cells

### Description
Septins are a family of multimeric GTP-binding proteins, which are abnormally expressed in cancer. Septin 9 (SEPT9) is an essential and ubiquitously expressed septin with multiple isoforms, which have differential expression patterns and effects in breast cancer cells. It is unknown, however, if SEPT9 isoforms associate with different molecular networks and functions. Here, we performed a proteomic screen in MCF-7 breast cancer cells to identify the interactome of GFP-SEPT9 isoforms 1, 4 and 5, which vary in the length of their N-terminus. While all three isoforms associated with SEPT2 and SEPT7, the truncated SEPT9_i4 and SEPT9_i5 interacted with septins of the SEPT6 group more promiscuously than SEPT9_i1, which bound predominately SEPT8. Spatial mapping and functional clustering of non-septin partners showed isoform-specific differences in interactions with proteins of distinct subcellular organelles (nuclei, centrosomes, cilia) and functions (signaling, degradation). Notably, the interactome of the full length SEPT9_i1 was more enriched in cytoskeletal regulators, while the truncated SEPT9_i4 and SEPT9_i5 exhibited preferential and isoform-specific interactions with nuclear and signaling factors as well as ubiquitinating enzymes. These data provide evidence for isoform-specific interactions, which arise from truncations in the N-terminal extensions of SEPT9, and point to novel roles in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

### Sample Protocol
To identify the interactome of each SEPT9 isoform, MCF-7 cells were lysed and immunoprecipitations were performed with an antibody against GFP coupled to an amine-reactive resin (Figure 1D). Lysates from untransfected MCF-7 cells were used as a negative control for identifying proteins that were precipitated non-specifically by the anti-GFP-coupled resin. Five independent immunoprecipitations were performed with lysates from each MCF-7 SEPT9 isoform specific clone. Protein-complexes were eluted from the antibody-bound resin and digested with trypsin prior to injecting into an ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) unit coupled to an electrospray ionization mass spectrometer (ESI-MS). Mass spectra were extracted and deconvoluted with the PEAKS Studio software, and protein identities were derived by searches against the UniprotKB database for Homo sapiens.   Each sample was analyzed using online liquid chromatography (Accela pump and autosampler, Thermo, Inc.) coupled to an LTQ-XL linear ion trap mass spectrometer. Samples were loaded onto an UPLC Peptide CSH C18 Column, 130 Å, 1.7 µm, 1 mm x 100 mm (Waters) maintained at 40°C. Solvent A and B were 0.1% formic acid in water and 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile, respectively (gradient: 98%A/2%B for 59.5 minutes, 50%A/50%B for 0.5 minutes, 98%A/2%B for 10 minutes). The flow rate was set to 100 µL/min and the injection volumes were 10 µL/sample. The samples were ionized using ESI and fragmented using CID. Data were acquired in DDA mode. The mass spectrometer was run in positive ion mode using a source voltage of 3.50 kV, a capillary voltage of 40 V and a capillary temperature of 325°C.  Mass spectra extraction and deconvolution were performed using PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. v8.5). Mass spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens database (UniprotKB) using a precursor mass 1.0 Da (monoisotopic mass) and a fragment ion mass 0.5 Da. Non-specific cleavages were allowed at both ends of the peptide and the number of allowed missed cleavages was set to 5. Specified variable modifications included: carbamidomethylation, deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M). False positives were eliminated through a systematic four-tier process, which excluded proteins based on the following criteria: i) proteins identified in IPs from non-transfected cells (negative control); ii) proteins that did not satisfy -10lgP greater than or equal to 15 in peptide-to-protein sequence matching by the PEAKS Bioinformatics software; iii) proteins that were not identified in at least two out of five independent IPs; iv) proteins with a score of >150  in the contaminant repository for affinity purification  (CRAPome; www.crapome.org) (51). Based on known caveats of the “two peptide” rule which often results in increased false discovery rates (52), protein hits with single peptide matches were retained if they met a peptide-to-spectrum score of -10lgP ≥ 15 and peptide-to-protein matches were unique to a protein group, which was further verified by manual blasting of peptide sequences against the UniProt database.  The retention times, number of spectral matches, -10lgP of peptide-to-spectral matches and uniqueness of single peptide hits are all provided.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra extraction and deconvolution were performed using PEAKS Studio (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc. v8.5). Mass spectra were searched against the Homo sapiens database (UniprotKB) using a precursor mass 1.0 Da (monoisotopic mass) and a fragment ion mass 0.5 Da. Non-specific cleavages were allowed at both ends of the peptide and the number of allowed missed cleavages was set to 5. Specified variable modifications included: carbamidomethylation, deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M). False positives were eliminated through a systematic four-tier process, which excluded proteins based on the following criteria:  i) proteins that did not satisfy a P-value (probability of false identification) score of -10lgP ≥ 15 in peptide-to-spectrum and peptide-to-protein matching by the PEAKS Bioinformatics software (see Supplementary Information, Table S1 for all protein hits with -10lgP ≥ 15);  ii) proteins identified in IPs from non-transfected (control) cells;  iii) proteins that were not identified in at least two out of five independent IPs; iv) proteins with a score of >150 in the contaminant repository for affinity purification  (CRAPome; www.crapome.org).

### Publication Abstract
Septins are a family of multimeric GTP-binding proteins, which are abnormally expressed in cancer. Septin 9 (SEPT9) is an essential and ubiquitously expressed septin with multiple isoforms, which have differential expression patterns and effects in breast cancer cells. It is unknown, however, if SEPT9 isoforms associate with different molecular networks and functions. Here, we performed a proteomic screen in MCF-7 breast cancer cells to identify the interactome of GFP-SEPT9 isoforms 1, 4 and 5, which vary significantly in their N-terminal extensions. While all three isoforms associated with SEPT2 and SEPT7, the truncated SEPT9_i4 and SEPT9_i5 interacted with septins of the SEPT6 group more promiscuously than SEPT9_i1, which bound predominately SEPT8. Spatial mapping and functional clustering of non-septin partners showed isoform-specific differences in interactions with proteins of distinct subcellular organelles (e.g., nuclei, centrosomes, cilia) and functions such as cell signalling and ubiquitination. The interactome of the full length SEPT9_i1 was more enriched in cytoskeletal regulators, while the truncated SEPT9_i4 and SEPT9_i5 exhibited preferential and isoform-specific interactions with nuclear, signalling, and ubiquitinating proteins. These data provide evidence for isoform-specific interactions, which arise from truncations in the N-terminal extensions of SEPT9, and point to novel roles in the pathogenesis of breast cancer.

### Keywords
Sept9, Septins, Breast cancer, Septin interactome

### Affiliations
Drexel University College of Arts and Sciences, Departmentof Biology, United States
Drexel University

### Submitter
Louis Devlin

### Lab Head
Dr ELIAS T SPILIOTIS, PHD
Drexel University College of Arts and Sciences, Departmentof Biology, United States


