### Accession
PXD023601

### Title
Nitric Oxide Is Associated with Heterosis of Salinity Tolerance in Brassica napus L.

### Description
Heterosis is most frequently manifested as the superior performance of a hybrid than either parent, especially under stress conditions. Nitric oxide (NO) is a well-known gaseous signaling molecule that acts as a functional component during plant growth, development, and defense responses. In this study, the Brassica napus L. hybrid (F1, NJ4375 × MB1942) showed significant heterosis under salt stress, during both the germination and post-germination periods. These were in parallel with the changes in redox and ion homeostasis. The stimulation of endogenous NO was more pronounced in hybrid plants, compared to parental lines, which might be mediated by nitrate reductase. Proteomic and biochemical analysis further revealed that protein abundance related to several metabolic processes, including the chlorophyll biosynthesis, the proline metabolism, and the tricarboxylic acid cycle metabolism pathway, were greatly suppressed by salt stress in the two parental lines, respect to those in hybrid. Above responses in hybrid plants were intensified by a NO-releasing compound, but abolished by a NO scavenger, both of which were matched with the changes in chlorophyll and proline contents. Taken together, we proposed that heterosis derived from F1 hybridization in salt stress tolerance might be mediated by NO-dependent activation of defense responses and metabolic processes.

### Sample Protocol
For LC-MS/MS conditions, the label-free quantitative method was used to detect peptides (Duan et al., 2016). Three biological replicates for each of the different treatment groups were analyzed. A LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano system (Dionex Thermo Fisher Scientific, Wilmington, USA) was used for peptides analysis. The resulting peptides (2 μg each) were trapped on the trap column (Acclaim PepMap100 C18, 75 μm × 2 cm, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA) at a flow rate of 4 μL min-1 in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in HPLC-grade water) for 15 min, followed by separation on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C18, 75 μm × 15 cm, 3 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific, Wilmington, USA) in a linear gradient from 3-45% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 0.25 μL min-1 over 112 min. The mass spectrometer was operated with an electrospray voltage of 2.3 kV. From the 60,000 resolution MS1 full scan in the range 350-1800 m/z, the top 5 most prominent ions were selected for MS/MS analysis if they exceeded intensity greater than 5000 counts and if they were at least doubly charged. The normalized collision energy for HCD was set to a value of 40%, and the resulting fragments were detected with 7500 resolution in the Orbitrap. Every selected ion was dynamically excluded from further MS/MS fragmentation for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using Proteome Discover Software (version: 1.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) against UniprotKB (http://www.uniprot.org), which contained a database of accessible Arabidopsis and Brassica protein sequences. Searching parameters were as follows: at most two missed trypsin cleavage allowed, MS tolerance of 10 ppm, cysteine treated by iodoacetamide, oxidation of methionine. A false discovery rate (FDR) based on q-value was estimated, and only peptides at the 99% confidence interval were counted as the identified protein. Relative quantitation for proteins between the control and treated groups was obtained and analyzed. Proteins with a | Fold Change (FC) | ≥ 1.5 are considered to be a differential abundance protein (DAP) in this study.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Brassica napus l., Salt stress, Nitric oxide, Proteomics, Heterosis

### Affiliations
Nanjing Agricultural University

### Submitter
Yihua Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yihua Zhang
Nanjing Agricultural University


