### Accession
PXD008633

### Title
Multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling of HSP90 inhibitor 17-AAG

### Description
Investigation of proteostatic effects of HSP90 inhibition by 17-AAG and differentiation of maturation state dependent HSP90 requirements of proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Treatment of Jurkat cells with Vehicle or 17-AAG for 6, 8, 16 or 24h. Lysis of cells with SDS assisted by Benzonase or using 0.8 % IGEPAL CA-630 for subsequent Kinobeads affinity enrichment. Labelling of the SILAC light to heavy experiments with TMT 126 – 128H and heavy to light with TMT 129L-131 and subsequent mass spectrometric analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house pipeline and searched with Mascot 2.5

### Publication Abstract
Protein degradation plays important roles in biological processes and is tightly regulated. Further, targeted proteolysis is an emerging research tool and&#xa0;therapeutic strategy. However, proteome-wide technologies to investigate the causes and consequences of protein degradation in biological systems are lacking. We developed "multiplexed proteome dynamics profiling" (mPDP), a mass-spectrometry-based approach combining dynamic-SILAC labeling with isobaric mass tagging for multiplexed analysis of protein degradation and synthesis. In three proof-of-concept studies, we uncover different responses induced by the bromodomain inhibitor JQ1 versus a JQ1 proteolysis targeting chimera; we&#xa0;elucidate distinct modes of action of estrogen receptor modulators; and we comprehensively classify HSP90 clients based on their requirement for HSP90 constitutively or during synthesis, demonstrating that constitutive HSP90 clients have lower thermal stability than non-clients, have higher affinity&#xa0;for the chaperone, vary between cell types, and change upon external stimuli. These findings highlight the potential of mPDP to identify dynamically controlled degradation mechanisms in cellular systems.

### Keywords
Hsp90, 17-aag, Mpdp

### Affiliations
Cellzome

### Submitter
Maria Faelth Savitski

### Lab Head
Dr Marcus Bantscheff
Cellzome


