### Accession
PXD028152

### Title
Serum proteomics analysis of CCA

### Description
Differential plasma proteomes of the patients with Opisthorchiasis viverrini and cholangiocarcinoma identifies polymeric immunoglobulin receptor as potential biomarker

### Sample Protocol
Subjects This study was approved by Human Ethic Committee of Udon Thani Cancer Hospital, Udon Thani, Ministry of Public Health, Thailand. Briefly, 50 subjects of each group were divided into three groups based on their health statuses including non-O. viverrini infected and non-cholangiocarcinoma as a control group (non-OVCCA), O. viverrini infected subject (OV), and cholangiocarcinoma subject (CCA).   Sample preparation The 5 pooled plasma of each group were used in this study. The protein concentrations of plasma were measured by Lowry’s method (DC Protein Assay, Bio-Rad, USA). The pooled plasma was prepared by pooling with an equal protein amount (100 g gram each). For each group, 5 pooled plasma were prepared by pooling 10 individual plasma each. Finally, 5 pooled plasma/group of 3 groups was prepared (15 samples in total). The pooled plasma proteins were extracted in 1:1 v/v fresh lysis buffer (0.2% SDS, 20 mM DTT, 10 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 8.0). The solution was precipitated by using 1:5 (v/v) cold-acetone precipitation. After precipitation, the protein pellet was reconstituted by 0.2% RapidGest SF (Waters, UK) in 10 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. The protein concentration was measured again by Lowry’s method. The 25 µg of protein were subjected to gel-free based digestion. Reduction sulfhydryl bonds was done by using 5 mM DTT and incubated at 60 ⁰C for 20 minutes. Alkylation of sulfhydryl groups was done by using 20 mM IAA at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. The solution was cleaned-up by 7 kDa molecular weight cut-off membrane filter (Zeba™ Spin Desalting Columns, ThermoFisher, USA). Proteolytic digestion was done by using 500 ng of sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Germany) and incubated at 37 ⁰C for 3 hours. The peptides were dried and resolubilized in 0.1 % formic acid/LC-MS water and transferred to a TruView LCMS vial (Waters).

### Data Protocol
The peptide mixtures were analyzed in data-dependent mode on tandem mass spectrometers, Orbitrap HF hybrid mass spectrometer combined with an UltiMate 3000 LC system. Briefly, the peptides were first desalted on-line on a reverse-phase C18 PepMap 100 trapping column and resolved onto a C18 PepMapTM 100 capillary column (LC Packings) with a 70-min gradient of CH3CN, 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Peptides were analyzed by applying data-dependent Top15 method consisting in a scan cycle initiated by a full scan of peptide ions in the Orbitrap analyser and followed by high-energy collisional dissociation and MS/MS scans on the 15 most abundant precursor ions. Full scan mass spectra were acquired from m/z 400 to 1600 with an AGC target set at 3 × 106 ions and a resolution of 60,000. MS/MS scan was initiated when the ACG target reached 105 ions. Ion selection was performed by applying a dynamic exclusion window of 12 seconds. Raw files were analyzed by Proteome Discoverer software version. 2.4 (Thermo Scientific) using the SEQUEST, Percolator and Minora algorithms. LC-MS spectrum was matched against the Human UniProtKB reviewed database (20,394 sequences on 12/02/2020). For protein identification and quantification, the setting parameters were as follows: a maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were allowed with a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance of 0.1 Da. Carbamidomethylation +57.021 Da (Cysteine) and oxidation +15.995 Da (Methionine) were selected as static modifications and dynamic modifications, respectively. The False discovery rate (FDR) of peptide and protein identification were both set to 0.01. The normalization of relative protein abundances ratio was performed by total peptide amount for each LC-runs (across all runs; n=45) by normalization algorithm of Proteome discoverer software. To assembly differential expressed protein list, multiple consensus workflows were used within the Proteome Discoverer software to assemble the PSMs into peptide groups, protein database matches, and finally non-redundant proteins groups using the principle of strict parsimony as defined by the software defaults.

### Publication Abstract
In Southeast Asian countries, nitrosamine compounds and the liver fluke <i>Opisthorchis viverrini</i> have long been identified as carcinogens for cholangiocarcinoma (CHCA). In order to effectively treat <i>O.&#xa0;viverrini</i> infections and prevent the development of CHCA, methods for disease detection are needed. This study aims to identify biomarkers for <i>O.&#xa0;viverrini</i> infection and CHCA. In the discovery phase, technical triplicates of five pooled plasma pools (10 plasma each) of healthy control subjects (noOVCCA), <i>O.&#xa0;viverrini</i> subjects (OV), and cholangiocarcinoma subjects (CCA), underwent solution-based digestion, with the label-free method, using a Thermo Scientific&#x2122; Q Exactive&#x2122; HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer and UltiMate 300 LC systems. The noOVCCA, OV, and CCA groups demonstrated different profiles and were clustered, as illustrated by PCA and heat map analysis. The STRING and reactome analysis showed that both OV and CCA groups up-regulated proteins targeting immune system-related proteins. Differential proteomic profiles, S100A9, and polymeric immunoglobulin receptor (PIGR) were specifically expressed in the CCA group. During the validation phase, another 50 plasma samples were validated via the PIGR sandwich ELISA. Using PIGR &gt;1.559 ng/ml as a cut-off point, 78.00% sensitivity, 71.00% specificity, and AUC = 0.8216, were obtained. It is sufficient to differentially diagnose cholangiocarcinoma patients from healthy patients and those with <i>Opisthorchiasis viverrini</i>. Hence, in this study, PIGR was identified and validated as a potential biomarker for CHCA. Plasma PIGR is suggested for screening CHCA, especially in an endemic region of <i>O.&#xa0;viverrini</i> infection.

### Keywords
Cca, Plasma, Lc-ms/ms, Serum, Orbitrap

### Affiliations
Proteomics Research Team, National Omics Center, NSTDA, Pathum Thani, Thailand
National Omics Center, NSTDA, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand

### Submitter
yodying yingchutrakul

### Lab Head
Dr Yodying Yingchutrakul
National Omics Center, NSTDA, Pathum Thani, 12120, Thailand


