### Accession
PXD008306

### Title
ran asters proteomics -  Proteomic profiling of microtubule self-organization in M-phase

### Description
The main proteomics events driving the self-organization of MTs in M-phase cytoplasms are determined by obtaining the full proteomes of the RanGTP induced MT structures at different time points in Xenopus egg extracts.

### Sample Protocol
Gels band were destained with 40%ACN/100mM ABC, reduced with dithiothreitol (2 μM, 30min, 56°C), alkylated in the dark with iodoacetamide (10 μM mM, 30 min, 25 ºC), dehydrate with ACN and digested with 0.7 g of trypsin (Promega, cat # V5113) overnight at 37˚C. After digestion, peptide were extracted and cleaned up on a homemade Empore C18 column (3M, St. Paul, MN, USA).  Samples were analyzed using a LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA) coupled to an EasyLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific (Proxeon), Odense, Denmark) with a gradient of 90 minutes.

### Data Protocol
The MaxQuant software suite (v1.5.5.1) was used for peptide identification and label-free protein quantitation [2]. The data was searched against an in-house generated database containing all proteins corresponding to phrog (http://kirschner.med.harvard.edu/tools/mz_ref_db.html) database and the corresponding decoy entries (release January 2016, 79214 entries). Identified peptides have been filtered respectively using a 1%FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Microtubules (MTs) and associated proteins can self-organize into complex structures such as the bipolar spindle, a process in which RanGTP plays a major role. Addition of RanGTP to M-phase <i>Xenopus</i> egg extracts promotes the nucleation and self-organization of MTs into asters and bipolar-like structures in the absence of centrosomes or chromosomes. We show here that the complex proteome of these RanGTP-induced MT assemblies is similar to that of mitotic spindles. Using proteomic profiling we show that MT self-organization in the M-phase cytoplasm involves the non-linear and non-stoichiometric recruitment of proteins from specific functional groups. Our study provides for the first time a temporal understanding of the protein dynamics driving MT self-organization in M-phase.

### Keywords
Ran asters proteomics

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, Barcelona Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, Barcelona
crg

### Submitter
guadalupe espadas

### Lab Head
Dr Eduard Sabidó
Proteomics Unit, Centre de Regulació Genòmica (CRG), Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology (BIST), Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, Barcelona Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Dr. Aiguader 88, Barcelona, Barcelona


