### Accession
PXD004587

### Title
Pea drought tolerance analysis by LC-MSMS

### Description
Abiotic stresses caused by adverse environmental conditions are responsible for heavy economic losses on pea crop, being drought one of the most important abiotic constraints. Development of pea cultivars well adapted to dry conditions has been one of the major tasks in breeding programs. The increasing food requirements drive the necessity to broaden the molecular basis of tolerance to drought to develop pea cultivars well adapted to dry conditions. We have used a shotgun proteomic approach (nLC-MSMS) to study the tolerance to drought in three pea genotypes which were selected based on differences in the level of water deficit tolerance. Multivariate statistical analysis of data unraveled 367 significant differences of 700 identified when genotypes and/or treatment were compared. More than half of the significantly changed proteins belong to primary metabolism and protein regulation categories. We propose different mechanisms to cope drought in the genotypes studied. Maintenance of the primary metabolism and protein protection seems a strategy for drought tolerance. On the other hand susceptibility might be related to maintenance of the homeostatic equilibrium, a very energy consuming process.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS protein analysis Peptide digests (3 μg each) were randomly applied to a Peptide ES-18 column (15 cm x 0.1 mm, 2.7 μm; Sigma-Aldrich) coupled to a one-dimensional nano-flow LC system (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Austria), separated during a 90 min gradient ranging from 98% solvent A (0.1% FA, 2% ACN in water) to 80% solvent B (90% ACN, 0.1% FA in water) and a flow rate of 0.4 μL per minute. For each treatment three replicates were randomly analysed. MS analyses were performed on a LTQ-Orbitrap XL (Thermo FisherScientific, Bremen, Germany). For the database dependent spectral count analysis a top 7 MS analysis setting was used with the full scan range from 350 to 1,800 m/z. Dynamic exclusion settings are described in Hoehenwarter and Wienkoop (2010). Briefly, repeat count was set to 1, repeat duration 20 s, exclusion list size 500, exclusion duration 60 s and exclusion mass width 10 ppm. Charge state screening was enabled with rejection of unassigned and 1+ charge states. Minimum signal threshold counts were set to 1,000.

### Data Protocol
The SEQUEST algorithm and the Proteome Discoverer (v 1.3, Thermo Scientific) were used to search MS data against the protein-fasta files created by a combination of Uniprot-UniRef100 (Pisum sativum and Medicago truncatula), LegProt and Pisum sativum unigene v2. In-silico peptide lists were generated with the following settings: trypsin as the digestion enzyme, a maximum of three missed cleavages and methionine oxidation as dynamic modification. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 5 ppm and 0.8 Da for fragment ions. Additionally, a decoy database containing reversed sequences was used to estimate the false discovery rate (FDR). Only high confidence peptide identifications (FDR≤1%) with a minimum XCorr of 2 and proteins with at least two distinct peptides were considered. For relative quantification the spectral count (SC) of identified peptides was used.

### Publication Abstract
Abiotic stresses caused by adverse environmental conditions are responsible for heavy economic losses on pea crop, being drought one of the most important abiotic constraints. Development of pea cultivars well adapted to dry conditions has been one of the major tasks in breeding programs. The increasing food requirements drive the necessity to broaden the molecular basis of tolerance to drought to develop pea cultivars well adapted to dry conditions. We have used a shotgun proteomic approach (nLC-MSMS) to study the tolerance to drought in three pea genotypes that were selected based on differences in the level of water deficit tolerance. Multivariate statistical analysis of data unraveled 367 significant differences of 700 identified when genotypes and/or treatment were compared. More than half of the significantly changed proteins belong to primary metabolism and protein regulation categories. We propose different mechanisms to cope drought in the genotypes studied. Maintenance of the primary metabolism and protein protection seems a strategy for drought tolerance. On the other hand susceptibility might be related to maintenance of the homeostatic equilibrium, a very energy consuming process. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD004587.

### Keywords
Drought tolerance, Shotgun, Pea

### Affiliations
CSIC
Institute for sustainable agricultures (CSIC-Spain)

### Submitter
M.ANGELES CASTILLEJO

### Lab Head
Dr M.Angeles Castillejo
Institute for sustainable agricultures (CSIC-Spain)


