### Accession
PXD007168

### Title
Proteomic analysis of [PSI+] yeast strain

### Description
The yeast Sup35 protein is a subunit of the translation termination factor, and its conversion to the [PSI+] prion state leads to more translational read-through. Although extensive studies have been done on [PSI+], changes at the proteomic level have not been performed exhaustively. We therefore used a SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry approach and identified 4187 proteins from both [psi-] and [PSI+] strains. Surprisingly, there was very little difference between the two proteomes under standard growth conditions.

### Sample Protocol
[psi-]SILAC and [PSI+]SILAC cells (three biological replicates) were grown in YNB media (ThermoFisher Scientific) containing 0.5% (w/v) dextrose and 0.002% (w/v) adenine, tryptophan, methionine, uracil and leucine and supplemented with either light amino acid (Lys0, Arg0) for [PSI+]SILAC or heavy amino acid (Lys4, Arg6) for [psi-]SILAC (Cambridge Isotopes) (30 mg/L for Lys and 20 mg/L for Arg). The cells at log phase were harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 rpm for 5 minutes at 4°C and were washed twice with ice-cold TBS (50 mM Tris-HCl, 150 mM NaCl, pH 7.5). Light and heavy labelled cells were combined in 1:1 ratio according to the O.D.600. For total crude cell lysate samples, a portion of the combined cells were collected separately, flash-frozen in N2(l), and stored at -80°C before further processing. The rest of the cells were resuspended in the same volume of 2× Lysis Buffer (200 mM HEPES, 600 mM NaCl, 2 mM PMSF, 2× PIC, pH 7.5) and added drop-by-drop into N2(l) to form “cell beads” that were then stored at -80 °C. For total crude lysate sample, 200 µL of HU-SDS buffer (100 mM HEPES, 8 M urea, 0.1% SDS, pH 8.0) was used to resuspend the frozen cells. Cells were lysed by glass bead beating with the Precellys®24 device (Bertin Corp) at 4°C. Cell lysates were collected in a clean tube. Additional 200 µL of HU buffer (100 mM HEPES, 8 M urea, pH 8.0) was used to rinse the glass beads and combined with the sample. The collected cell lysates were mixed by pipetting up and down and centrifuged at 16,000 ×g at 4°C for 15 min. The supernatant containing the cleared crude cell lysates was collected for further processing. Soluble and pellet fractions were generated as Albu, R.F.et al. (2015).  Frozen “cell beads” were placed onto a N2(l) pre-cold mortar and lyzed by cryo-grinding. After thawing lysates on ice, Triton X-100 was gently added to the cell lysates to a final concentration of 1%. The cell lysates were first precleared by centrifuging at 300 ×g at 4°C for 15 min, and then centrifuged at 16,000 ×g at 4°C for 15 min to separate the soluble and “sedimentable” (pellet) fractions. The supernatants were collected and the pellets were washed twice with Lysis Buffer (100 mM HEPES, 300 mM NaCl, 1 mM PMSF, 1× PIC, pH 7.5), and then resuspended in HU-SDS buffer and vortexed at room temperature for one hour. The mixture was centrifuged at 16,000 ×g for 15 min and supernatant containing dissolved proteins was collected. Total crude lysate and soluble samples were subjected to a methanol-chloroform protein precipitation (Wessel, D. et al. 1984) to remove detergent and were resuspended in HU buffer. Pellet samples were subjected to a Detergent Removal Spin Column (Pierce; ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein concentrations were determined by the DC Protein Assay (BioRad).  The samples were reduced using 5 mM TCEP for 20 min, and alkylated by 50 mM chloroacetamide for 30 min in the dark at room temperature. The proteins were first digested with endo-proteinase LysC (Roche, 11047825001, 1:100 w/w) at 35 °C for an hour. The mixture was then diluted to 2 M urea with tryptic digestion buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM CaCl2, pH 8.5) and the proteins were further digested by trypsin (Thermo, PRV5113, 1:20 w/w) for 20 hours at 35 °C. The resulting peptides from total crude lysate and soluble fractions were purified by STop-And-Go Extraction (STAGE) high-capacity tips using C18 resin (Phenomenex) (Rappsilber, J. et al. 2007).

### Data Protocol
The spectra files were processed using MaxQuant (v1.5.3.17). The derived peak list was searched against the reference yeast proteome downloaded from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org/) on 04-09-2015 (6674 sequences) and the false discovery rate was set to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
The yeast Sup35 protein is a subunit of the translation termination factor, and its conversion to the [PSI <sup>+</sup>] prion state leads to more translational read-through. Although extensive studies have been done on [PSI <sup>+</sup>], changes at the proteomic level have not been performed exhaustively. We therefore used a SILAC-based quantitative mass spectrometry approach and identified 4187 proteins from both [psi <sup>-</sup>] and [PSI <sup>+</sup>] strains. Surprisingly, there was very little difference between the two proteomes under standard growth conditions. We found however that several [PSI <sup>+</sup>] strains harbored an additional chromosome, such as chromosome I. Albeit, we found no evidence to support that [PSI <sup>+</sup>] induces chromosomal instability (CIN). Instead we hypothesized that the selective pressure applied during the establishment of [PSI <sup>+</sup>]-containing strains could lead to a supernumerary chromosome due to the presence of the ade1-14 selective marker for translational read-through. We therefore verified that there was no prevalence of disomy among newly generated [PSI <sup>+</sup>] strains in absence of strong selection pressure. We also noticed that low amounts of adenine in media could lead to higher levels of mitochondrial DNA in [PSI <sup>+</sup>] in ade1-14 cells. Our study has important significance for the establishment and manipulation of yeast strains with the Sup35 prion.

### Keywords
Yeast prion, Proteomics, Sup35, Aneuploidy, Silac, Amyloids, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
University of British Columbia

### Submitter
Patrick Hau Wing Chan

### Lab Head
Dr Thibault Mayor
Associate Professor


