### Accession
PXD024144

### Title
Waves of sumoylation support transcription dynamics during adipocyte differentiation

### Description
Tight control of gene expression networks involved in adipose tissue formation and plasticity is required to adapt to energy needs and environmental cues. However, little is known about the mechanisms that orchestrate the dramatic transcriptional changes leading to adipocyte differentiation. We investigated the regulation of nascent transcription by SUMO during adipocyte differentiation using SLAMseq and ChIPseq. We discovered that SUMO has a dual function in differentiation; it supports the initial downregulation of pre-adipocyte-specific genes, while it promotes the establishment of the mature adipocyte transcriptional program. By characterizing SUMOylome dynamics in differentiating adipocytes by mass spectrometry, we found that SUMOylation of specific transcription factors like PPARG/RXR and chromatin modifiers promotes the transcription of adipogenic genes. Our data demonstrate that the sumoylation pathway helps coordinates the rewiring of transcriptional networks required for formation of functional adipocytes.

### Sample Protocol
3T3-L1 preadipocytes were maintained in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) supplemented with 10% bovine calf serum and 1 % Penicillin/Streptavidin (P/S) at 37°C in a humidified incubator in a 5% CO2 in air atmosphere. Differentiation of 3T3-L1 cells was induced with differentiation medium (DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum, 1mM dexamethasone, 0.5 mM 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, 10 µg/mL insulin and 1% P/S). Cells were harvested at 2 days before adipogenic induction, as well as 1, 3, and 7 days after adipogenic induction. Four biological replicates were collected for each condition. Cells were washed with PBS supplemented with 20 mM NEM (E3876, Merck Life Science). Cells were vigorously lysed in guanidine lysis buffer (6M guanidine-HCl, 50 mM Tris pH 8.5, 20 mM NEM), after which they were immediately snap frozen. Lysates were stored at −80°C until further processing.  Sample preparation and SUMO-IP for native and endogenous mass spectrometry (MS) analysis was performed as described previously (Hendriks et al., Nature Communications, 2018). Briefly, lysates were digested with Lys-C, peptides were purified on C8 SepPak and lyophilized, after which they were dissolved in IAP buffer and immunoprecipitated using the 8A2 anti-SUMO2/3 antibody. To shorten the SUMO C-terminus to DVFQQQTGG, and to shorten the target peptides to a length feasible for MS analysis, second-stage digestion of SUMOylated peptides was performed with Endoproteinase Asp-N. High-pH fractionation of SUMOylated peptides was performed on StageTip, with quad-layer StageTips were prepared using four punch-outs of C18 material (Sigma-Aldrich, Empore™ SPE Disks, C18, 47 mm). StageTips were equilibrated using 100 μL of 100 μL of methanol, 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 200 mM ammonium, and two times 75 μL 50 mM ammonium. Samples were thawed out, and supplemented with 1/10th volume of 200 mM ammonium, just prior to loading them on StageTip. The StageTips were subsequently washed twice with 150 μL 50 mM ammonium, and afterwards eluted as six fractions (F1-6) using 40 μL of 4, 7, 10, 13, 17, and 25% ACN in 50 mM ammonium. All fractions were dried to completion in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac for 2 h at 60°C, after which the dried peptides were dissolved using 10.5 μL of 0.1% formic acid.  All samples were analyzed on EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo) coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). For each run, 5 μL of sample was injected. Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nl/min. Gradient length was 80 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, and an analytical gradient of 50 min. The buffer B ramp for the analytical gradient was as follows: F1: 13-24%, F2: 14-27%, F3-5: 15-30%, F6: 17-32%. The columns were heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo) with the spray voltage set at 2 kV, an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C, and an RF funnel level of 40%. Full scan range was set to 400-1,600 m/z, MS1 resolution to 60,000, MS1 AGC target to 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time to 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) with normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 s. MS2 resolution was set to 60,000, MS2 AGC target to 200,000, minimum MS2 GC target to 20,000, MS2 maximum injection time to 120 ms, and loop count to 7.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software, version 1.5.3.0. Note that MS RAW files were mislabeled during setup, and files with -2, 0, 3, and 9 day timestamps correspond to samples generated at -2, 1, 3, and 7 days in relation to adipogenic induction, respectively. All data was processed in a single computational run, and default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the mouse FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 14th of February, 2020. The mature sequence of SUMO2 was inserted in the database to allow for detection of free SUMO. In silico digestion of theoretical peptides was performed with Lys-C, Asp-N, and Glu-N, allowing up to 8 missed cleavages. Variable modifications used were protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, peptide N-terminal pyroglutamate, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation (STY), and Lys SUMOylation, with a maximum of 3 modifications per peptide. The SUMO mass remnant was defined as described previously (Hendriks et al., Nature Communications, 2018); DVFQQQTGG, H60C41N12O15, monoisotopic mass 960.4301, neutral loss b7-DVFQQQT, diagnostic mass remnants [b2-DV, b3-DVF, b4-DVFQ, b5-DVFQQ, b6-DVFQQQ, b7-DVFQQQT, b9-DVFQQQTGG, QQ, FQ, FQQ]. Label-free quantification was enabled, with “Fast LFQ” disabled. Maximum peptide mass was set to 6,000 Da. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR filtering was applied (default), and additional automatic filtering was ensured by setting the minimum delta score for modified peptides to 20, with a site decoy fraction of 2%. Second peptide search was enabled (default). Matching between runs was enabled, with a match time window of 1 min and an alignment window of 20 min. For protein quantification, the same variable modifications were included as for the peptide search. Additional stringent manual filtering was performed for the processed data associated with the manuscript, which is not reflected in the raw MaxQuant output included here.

### Publication Abstract
Tight control of gene expression networks required for adipose tissue formation and plasticity is essential for adaptation to energy needs and environmental cues. However, the mechanisms that orchestrate the global and dramatic transcriptional changes leading to adipocyte differentiation remain to be fully unraveled. We investigated the regulation of nascent transcription by the sumoylation pathway during adipocyte differentiation using SLAMseq and ChIPseq. We discovered that the sumoylation pathway has a dual function in differentiation; it supports the initial downregulation of pre-adipocyte-specific genes, while it promotes the establishment of the mature adipocyte transcriptional program. By characterizing endogenous sumoylome dynamics in differentiating adipocytes by mass spectrometry, we found that sumoylation of specific transcription factors like PPAR&#x3b3;/RXR and their co-factors are associated with the transcription of adipogenic genes. Finally, using RXR as a model, we found that sumoylation may regulate adipogenic transcription by supporting the chromatin occurrence of transcription factors. Our data demonstrate that the sumoylation pathway supports the rewiring of transcriptional networks required for formation of functional adipocytes. This study also provides the scientists in the field of cellular differentiation and development with an in-depth resource of the dynamics of the SUMO-chromatin landscape, SUMO-regulated transcription and endogenous sumoylation sites during adipocyte differentiation.

### Keywords
Native, Adipocyte, Chromatin, Sumo, Endogenous, Adipose tissue, Transcription, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


