### Accession
PXD020254

### Title
Optimized Workflow for In-depth N-glycosylation Analysis of 2D and 3D Breast Cancer Cell Cultures and Xenografted Tumors

### Description
Native intact N-glycopeptides analysis can access to a lot of useful information including N-glycosites, N-glycans and N-glycoproteins of original complex samples. The traditional sample preprocessing method is to analyze the tryptic intact N-glycopeptides enriched using hydrophilic materials or some new materials by LC-MS/MS. However, the number of identified intact N-glycopeptides was very limited using existing methods. Herein, we systematically compared the different analytical methods, including the use of different sources of trypsin, combinations of different proteases and different enrichment materials.

### Sample Protocol
At 80% confluence, 2D and 3D cells were harvested and aspirated from the medium with ice-cold phosphate buffer saline (PBS) three times. The cells were resuspended in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) and sonicated for 5 min using an ultrasonics processor (24 kMHz). The lysate was centrifuged at 13,000 g for 20 min at 4 °C. The xenografted tumors in mice were put in a 2 mL of lysing matrix tube and soaked in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 8.5, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail), homogenized using a tissue lyser (speed=6.5 m/s; time=60 s; cycle=3) and sonicated for 5 min using an ultrasonics processor (24 kMHz). The homogenate was centrifuged at 13,000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was then collected and stored as a soluble fraction at −80 °C until use. Protein concentration was determined by Bradford protein assay kit. Bovine serum albumin was used as a protein standard. The extracted proteins were proteolyzed using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol. Briefly, 200 μg of proteins were diluted with UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5) and added to a 30-kDa filter. After centrifuging at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 °C, 200 μl of UA solution with 20 mM DTT was added, and the reduction reaction was carried out for 4 h at 37 °C. The solution was removed by centrifugation, and 200 μl of UA solution with 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated in the dark for 1 h at 25 °C. After washing with 200 μl of UA two times and 200 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 °C, 5 μg of trypsin (A), trypsin (B), or trypsin (B)/Lys-C were added to each filter tube, respectively. After reacting 24 h at 37 °C, the filter tubes were washed twice with 100 μl of water by centrifugation at 13,000 g for 15 min at 25 °C. The flow-through fractions were collected. The peptide concentration was measured using a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay kit at an absorbance of 480 nm. The peptide mixtures were freeze-dried and then stored at −80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
All samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher, USA). The parameters were set as described previously. Briefly, peptides were dissolved in 0.1% FA and separated on a 75-μm-inner-diameter column with a length of 20 cm (ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ, 1.9 μm; Dr Maisch) over a 78-min gradient (buffer A, 0.1% FA in water; buffer B, 0.1% FA in 80 % ACN) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The MS1 was analyzed with a scan range (m/z) of 800-2000 at an Orbitrap resolution of 120,000. The RF lens, AGC target, maximum injection time and exclusion duration is 30%, 2.0 e5, 100 ms and 15 s, respectively. The MS2 was analyzed with a isolation window (m/z) of 2 at an Orbitrap resolution of 15,000. The AGC target, maximum injection time and HCD collision type is 5.0 e5, 250 ms and 30%, respectively. Turn on the stepped collision mode with energy difference of ±10%.

### Publication Abstract
Native intact N-glycopeptide analysis can provide access to the comprehensive characteristics of N-glycan occupancy, including N-glycosites, N-glycan compositions, and N-glycoproteins for complex samples. The sample pre-processing method used for the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides usually depends on the enrichment of low abundance N-glycopeptides from a tryptic peptide mixture using hydrophilic substances before LC-MS/MS detection. However, the number of identified intact N-glycopeptides remains inadequate to achieve an in-depth profile of the N-glycosylation landscape. Here, we optimized the sample preparation workflow prior to LC-MS/MS analysis by systematically comparing different analytical methods, including the use of different sources of trypsin, combinations of different proteases, and different enrichment materials. Finally, we found that the combination of Trypsin (B)/Lys-C digestion and zwitterionic HILIC (Zic-HILIC) enrichment significantly improved the mass spectrometric characterization of intact N-glycopeptides, increasing the number of identified intact N-glycopeptides and offering better analytical reproducibility. Furthermore, the optimized workflow was applied to the analysis of intact N-glycopeptides in two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D)-cultured breast cancer cells in vitro and xenografted tumors in mice. These results indicated that the same breast cancer cells, when cultured in different microenvironments, can show different N-glycosylation patterns. This study also provides an interesting comparison of the N-glycoproteome of breast cancer cells cultured in different growth conditions, indicating the important role of N-glycosylated proteins in cancer cell growth and the choice of the cell culture model for studies in tumor biology and drug evaluation.

### Keywords
Zwitterionic hydrophilic interaction chromatography, Intact n-glycopeptides, Breast cancer, N-glycoproteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
West China Hospital, Sichuan University
Sichuan University

### Submitter
Yong Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Yong Zhang
West China Hospital, Sichuan University


