### Accession
PXD039386

### Title
YBX1-IP in mouse bone marrw myeloma cells

### Description
The total protein of bone marrw myeloma cells was extracted with cell lysis buffer for  IP. YBX1 antibody was used to perform Immunoprecipitation.

### Sample Protocol
For in-gel tryptic digestion, gel pieces were destained in 50 mM NH4HCO3 in 50% acetonitrile(v/v) until clear. Gel pieces were dehydrated with 100 μl of 100% acetonitrile for 5 min, the liquid removed, and the gel pieces rehydrated in 10 mM dithiothreitol and incubated at 56 °C for 60 min. Gel pieces were again dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile, liquid was removed and gel pieces were rehydrated with 55 mM iodoacetamide. Samples were incubated at room temperature, in the dark for 45 min. Gel pieces were washed with 50 mM NH4HCO3 and dehydrated with 100% acetonitrile. Gel pieces were rehydrated with 10 ng/μl trypsin resuspended in 50 mM NH4HCO3 on ice for 1 h. Excess liquid was removed and gel pieces were digested with trypsin at 37 °C overnight. Peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile/5% formic acid, followed by 100% acetonitrile. Peptides were dried to completion and resuspended in 2% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Proteome Discoverer 1.3. Tandem mass  spectra were searched against XXX database. Trypsin/P (or other enzymes if any) was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 2 missing cleavages. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethyl on Cys were specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met was specified as variable modification. Peptide confidence was set at high, and peptide ion score was set > 20.

### Publication Abstract
Senescence and altered differentiation potential of bone marrow stromal cells (BMSCs) lead to age-related bone loss. As an important posttranscriptional regulatory pathway, alternative splicing (AS) regulates the diversity of gene expression and has been linked to induction of cellular senescence. However, the role of splicing factors in BMSCs during aging remains poorly defined. Herein, we found that the expression of the splicing factor Y-box binding protein 1 (YBX1) in BMSCs decreased with aging in mice and humans. YBX1 deficiency resulted in mis-splicing in genes linked to BMSC osteogenic differentiation and senescence, such as Fn1, Nrp2, Sirt2, Sp7, and Spp1, thus contributing to BMSC senescence and differentiation shift during aging. Deletion of Ybx1 in BMSCs accelerated bone loss in mice, while its overexpression stimulated bone formation. Finally, we identified a small compound, sciadopitysin, which attenuated the degradation of YBX1 and bone loss in old mice. Our study demonstrated that YBX1 governs cell fate of BMSCs via fine control of RNA splicing and provides a potential therapeutic target for age-related osteoporosis.

### Keywords
Ybx1-ip, Bmscs

### Affiliations
xiangya
xiangya hospital

### Submitter
Ye Xiao

### Lab Head
Dr YBX1-IP in bone marrw myeloma cells
xiangya hospital


