### Accession
PXD026668

### Title
UV induced changes in proteome of rats plasma are reversed by dermally applied cannabidiol

### Description
The aim of this study was to analyze the changes in the proteomic profile of plasma from chronically UVA or UVB irradiated rats and define the effect on these changes of skin topically applied CBD.

### Sample Protocol
Samples preparation, electrophoretic separation and protein digestion: The total protein concentration of the plasma samples was measured by Bradford assay. The volume of plasma containing 30 µg of protein were mixed 1:1 (v:v) with a sample denaturing buffer (Laemmli buffer containing 5% 2-mercaptoethanol) and boiled for 7 min. Next samples were separated using 10% Tris-Glycine SDS-PAGE gels. The gels with separated proteins were fixed in methanol: acetic acid: water (4:1:5; v:v) for 1 h and stained overnight with Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250. Following washing off, detected bands were cut from the gels, sliced and pulled into 3 sections. The proteins in each section were reduced with 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol, alkylated by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide, and in-gel digested overnight with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA). The isolated peptide mixture was extracted from the gel, dried, and dissolved in 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid.  Proteomic analysis: The final peptide mixture was separated using high-performance liquid chromatography system (Ultimate 3000; Dionex, Idstein, Germany) on a 150 mm×0.075 mm PepMap RSLC capillary analytical C18 column with 2 µm particle size at a flow rate of 0.300 µL/min. The solvents gradient started at 3 min and increased to 60% eluent B (90% acetonitrile + 0.03% formic acid) for 40 min. Eluent A contained 5% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Eluated peptides were analysed using a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer with an electrospray ionization source (ESI) (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Bremen, Germany). The conditions of the analysis by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) for peptide identification have been described in detail previously.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and label-free quantification: The data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Fisher Scientiﬁc, Seattle, WA, USA). Protein label-free quantification was performed according to the signal intensities of the precursor ions. For the identification of proteins, the following search parameters were used; peptide mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, MS/MS mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, up to two missed cleavages allowed, cysteine carbamidomethylation and carboxymethylation, methionine oxidation, as well as 4-HNE – cysteine/lysine/histidine, MDA – lysine, CBD - cysteine set as a dynamic modiﬁcations. The levels of 4-HNE/MDA/CBD-protein adducts were estimated based on the peak intensity of peptides modified by 4-HNE. Input data were searched against the UniProtKB-SwissProt database (taxonomy: Rattus norvegicus, release 2021-02).  Statistical analysis: Samples from each experimental group were analyzed in six independent replicates. The results from individual protein label-free quantification were log-transformed and auto-scaled (mean-centered and divided by the standard deviation of each variable) using open-source software MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (http://www.metaboanalyst.ca). The same software was used for biostatistical analysis, including univariate analysis (one-way ANOVA, Fisher’s LSD) and principal component analysis (PCA), heat maps with dendrogram creation and clustering.

### Publication Abstract
UV radiation is known to induce a multiple changes in the metabolism of skin-building cells, what can affect the functioning not only neighboring cells, but also, following signal transduction releasing into the blood vessels, the entire body. Therefore, the aim of this study was to analyze the proteomic disturbances occurred in plasma of chronically UVA/UVB irradiated rats and define the effect on these changes of skin topically applied cannabidiol (CBD). Obtained results showed significant changes in the expression of numerous anti-inflammatory and signaling proteins including: NF&#x3ba;B inhibitor, 14-3-3 protein, protein kinase C, keratin, and protein S100 after UV irradiation and CBD treatment. Moreover, the effects of UVA and UVB were manifested by increased level of lipid peroxidation products-protein adducts formation. CBD partially prevented all of these changes, but in a various degree depending on the UV radiation type. Moreover, topical treatment with CBD resulted in the penetration of CBD into the blood and, as a consequence, in direct modifications to the plasma protein structure by creating CBD adducts with molecules, such as proline-rich protein 30, transcription factor 19, or N-acetylglucosamine-6-sulfatase, what significantly changed the activity of these proteins. In conclusion, it may be suggested that CBD applied topically may be an effective compound against systemic UV-induced oxidative stress, but its effectiveness requires careful analysis of CBD's effects on other tissues of the living organism.

### Keywords
Uv radiation; dermal application of cannabidiol; nude rats; plasma proteome; protein modifications; lipid peroxidation product-protein adducts;

### Affiliations
Medical University of Białystok
Department of Analytical Chemistry,  Medical University of Bialystok;  Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland;

### Submitter
Agnieszka Gęgotek

### Lab Head
Dr Gegotek Agnieszka
Department of Analytical Chemistry,  Medical University of Bialystok;  Mickiewicza 2D, 15-222 Bialystok, Poland;


