### Accession
PXD005935

### Title
HLA DR1 and DR15 ligands isolated from transgenic mice

### Description
Dominant protection from HLA-associated autoimmune disease is conferred by antigen specific regulatory T cells. Susceptibility and protection against human T cell mediated autoimmune diseases, including type I diabetes, multiple sclerosis and Goodpasture’s disease, is associated with particular Human Leukocyte Antigen (HLA) alleles. However, the mechanisms underpinning such HLA-mediated effects on self-tolerance, and the interplay with the responding autoreactive T cell repertoires, remain unclear. To address this central question, we investigated the molecular mechanism of Goodpasture’s disease, an HLA-linked autoimmune renal disorder characterized by an immunodominant CD4+ T cell self-epitope derived from the alpha3 chain of Type IV collagen (alpha3135-145). While HLA-DR15 confers a markedly increased disease risk (odds ratio 8.5), the protective HLA-DR1 allele (odds ratio 0.3) is dominantly protective in trans with HLA-DR15 (odds ratio 1.4). This dataset contains RAW data and database search results identifying the HLA-bound peptides from transgenic mice expressing either human HLA-DR1 or -DR15.

### Sample Protocol
Lymph nodes and spleens from transgenic mice expressing either human HLA-DR1 or -DR15 were harvested and subjected to cryogenic milling and subsequently lysed using CA-640 (IGEPAL). HLA-DR complexes were affinity purified using LB3.1 antibody followed by fractionation of peptides by offline reversed phase chromatography. The fractions were pooled, subjected to centrifugal evaporation, and analysed on Thermo Q-Exactive+ mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was converted to mgf using msconvert and searched using ProteinPilot (Sciex) software with following parameters: digestion: none; Cys alkylation: none; Instrument: OrbiMS (sub-ppm), OrbiMS/MS, Biological modifications: on; database: mouse SwissProt Reviewed v2016_11

### Publication Abstract
Susceptibility and protection against human autoimmune diseases, including type I diabetes, multiple sclerosis, and Goodpasture disease, is associated with particular human leukocyte antigen (HLA) alleles. However, the mechanisms underpinning such HLA-mediated effects on self-tolerance remain unclear. Here we investigate the molecular mechanism of Goodpasture disease, an HLA-linked autoimmune renal disorder characterized by an immunodominant CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell self-epitope derived from the &#x3b1;3 chain of type IV collagen (&#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>). While HLA-DR15 confers a markedly increased disease risk, the protective HLA-DR1 allele is dominantly protective in trans with HLA-DR15 (ref. 2). We show that autoreactive &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>-specific T cells expand in patients with Goodpasture disease and, in &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>-immunized HLA-DR15 transgenic mice, &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>-specific T cells infiltrate the kidney and mice develop Goodpasture disease. HLA-DR15 and HLA-DR1 exhibit distinct peptide repertoires and binding preferences and present the &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub> epitope in different binding registers. HLA-DR15-&#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub> tetramer<sup>+</sup> T cells in HLA-DR15 transgenic mice exhibit a conventional T-cell phenotype (T<sub>conv</sub>) that secretes pro-inflammatory cytokines. In contrast, HLA-DR1-&#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub> tetramer<sup>+</sup> T cells in HLA-DR1 and HLA-DR15/DR1 transgenic mice are predominantly CD4<sup>+</sup>Foxp3<sup>+</sup> regulatory T cells (T<sub>reg</sub> cells) expressing tolerogenic cytokines. HLA-DR1-induced T<sub>reg</sub> cells confer resistance to disease in HLA-DR15/DR1 transgenic mice. HLA-DR15<sup>+</sup> and HLA-DR1<sup>+</sup> healthy human donors display altered &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>-specific T-cell antigen receptor usage, HLA-DR15-&#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub> tetramer<sup>+</sup> Foxp3<sup>-</sup> T<sub>conv</sub> and HLA-DR1-&#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub> tetramer<sup>+</sup> Foxp3<sup>+</sup>CD25<sup>hi</sup>CD127<sup>lo</sup> T<sub>reg</sub> dominant phenotypes. Moreover, patients with Goodpasture disease display a clonally expanded &#x3b1;3<sub>135-145</sub>-specific CD4<sup>+</sup> T-cell repertoire. Accordingly, we provide a mechanistic basis for the dominantly protective effect of HLA in autoimmune disease, whereby HLA polymorphism shapes the relative abundance of self-epitope specific T<sub>reg</sub> cells that leads to protection or causation of autoimmunity.

### Keywords
Dr15, Dr1, Hla class ii, Mouse, Goodpasture’s disease

### Affiliations
Monash University
Professor Anthony W Purcell Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia

### Submitter
Sri Ramarathinam

### Lab Head
Dr Anthony W Purcell
Professor Anthony W Purcell Deputy Head (Research), Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Head Immunoproteomics Laboratory Monash University, Clayton Campus Clayton 3800 Victoria Australia


