### Accession
PXD031261

### Title
Isoleucyl-tRNA synthetase interactome analysis

### Description
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (aaRSs) catalyze the ligation of each amino acid to the 3’ hydroxyl group of the cognate tRNA and thereby establish the genetic code for protein synthesis. AaRSs form a complicated network through assembly into a multi-synthetase complex (MSC), which is comprised of nine aaRSs (ArgRS, AspRS, GlnRS, GluProRS, IleRS, LeuRS, LysRS, and MetRS) and three auxiliary proteins (aaRS-interacting multifunctional proteins, p43, p38, and p18 or AIMP1, 2, and 3) in vertebrates. IleRS is one of the least characterized aaRSs in the MSC. It is a class 1a aaRS and has an UNE-I domain at its C-terminal end that is formed by tandem ~90 residue repeats. Systematic depletion and yeast two-hybrid (Y2H) analyses suggest that IleRS binds to the WHEP domain of GluProRS through its UNE-I domain. However, crosslinking and mass spectrometry (XL-MS) analyses revealed that IleRS interacts with ArgRS, LeuRS, and MetRS in the MSC. While such difference may be due to the different dynamic states of the MSC under various cellular environments, it remains to be resolved how IleRS associates with other components of the MSC. Therefore, we performed mass spectrometry analysis to study IleRS interactome using cells expressing wild-type IleRS, C-terminal-deleted IleRS, and the IleRS UNE-I domain alone.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells transiently expressing Flag-tagged IleRS were lysed with buffer X, and the crude lysates were incubated with Flag-M2 beads. Bead-bound proteins were washed and eluted with 0.4 mg/mL Flag peptide in buffer X (100 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA and 1% Nonidet P-40). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by Coomassie Blue staining. For liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry analyses, gel lanes were sliced into bands and processed as follows. Briefly, the protein bands were divided into 10-mm sections and in-gel digestion was performed with trypsin. Trypsin digest products were separated by online reversed-phase chromatography using a Thermo Scientific EASY-nLC 1200 ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system equipped with an autosampler, an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 reversed-phase peptide trap (75 μm inner diameter and 2 cm length), and a PepMapTM RSLC C18 reversed-phase analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 15 cm length, and 3 μm particle size). Samples were then subjected to electrospray ionization at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The chromatography system was coupled in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer

### Data Protocol
DATABASE SEARCHING-- Tandem mass spectra were extracted by [unknown] version [unknown]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.4.1.15). Sequest was set up to search Uniprot-human.fasta (unknown version, 42230 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine was specified in Sequest as a fixed modification. Met-loss of methionine, met-loss+Acetyl of methionine, deamidated of asparagine, oxidation of methionine, acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus, phospho of serine and GG of lysine were specified in Sequest as variable modifications.   CRITERIA FOR PROTEIN IDENTIFICATION-- Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.11.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, A et al Anal. Chem. 2002;74(20):5383-92) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Al et al Anal. Chem. 2003;75(17):4646-58). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
Aminoacyl-tRNA synthetases (ARSs) have evolved to acquire various additional domains. These domains allow ARSs to communicate with other cellular proteins in order to promote non-translational functions. Vertebrate cytoplasmic&#xa0;isoleucyl-tRNA synthetases (IARS1s) have an uncharacterized unique domain, UNE-I. Here, we present the crystal structure of the chicken IARS1 UNE-I complexed with glutamyl-tRNA synthetase 1&#xa0;(EARS1). UNE-I consists of tandem ubiquitin regulatory X (UBX) domains that interact with a distinct hairpin loop on EARS1 and protect its neighboring proteins in the multi-synthetase complex from degradation. Phosphomimetic mutation of the two serine residues in the hairpin loop releases IARS1 from the complex. IARS1 interacts with BRCA1 in the nucleus, regulates its stability by inhibiting ubiquitylation via the UBX domains, and controls DNA repair function.

### Keywords
Interactome, Lc-ms/ms, Trna synthetase, Structure

### Affiliations
Center for genomic integrity (CGI), Institute of basic science (IBS), UNIST, Ulsan, 44919, Republic of Korea
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea

### Submitter
Byung-gyu kim

### Lab Head
Dr Yunje Cho
Department of Life Sciences, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Pohang, South Korea


