### Accession
PXD011758

### Title
Arhgef11 high and low salt kidney proteomic analysis

### Description
Arhgef11 is a Rho guanine nucleotide exchange factor previously implicated in kidney injury in the Dahl salt-sensitive rat (SS-WT). Through exchange of GDP for GTP, Arhgef11 regulates cytoskeletal structure, function, and cell-cell contacts through a variety of stimuli (e.g., G-protein coupled receptors, growth factors, and shear stress). We studied the SS-Arhgef11-/- rat model at 4-12 weeks of age under low and high salt (0.3% or 2% NaCl). To better understand the molecular mechanisms associated with renal protection from loss of Arhgef11, MS/MS proteomics was performed on kidney from SS-Arhgef11-/- and SS-WT at week 12 (low-salt). At week 12, 1017 genes and 363 proteins were observed. In summary, in vivo phenotyping provides strong evidence that increased Arhgef11 expression in the Dahl S rat leads to actin cytoskeleton mediated changes in cell morphology and cell function (impaired reuptake filtered protein) that promote kidney injury, hypertension, and decline in kidney function.

### Sample Protocol
Tissue peptides were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin-digested into peptides for proteomic analysis. The trypsinized peptide mixture was cleaned using Sep-Pak Vac C18 cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using a Q Exactive (ThermoFisher, Waltham, MA) coupled with a 15 cm × 75 μm C18 column (5 μm particles with 100 Å pore size). Target values in MS were 1e6 ions at a resolution setting of 70,000 and in MS2 1e5 ions at a resolution setting of 17,500.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched with SEQUEST using Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1; Thermo Fisher) against the human RefSeq database (November 3, 2013 version) containing 53,918 sequences and Swiss Prot database (January 18, 2017 version). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set at 0.05 to eliminate low-probability protein identifications. Peptides were quantified using spectral counting and total spectral counts of each sample were used for normalization. Missing values were replaced with a small value (0.01) in order to calculate the ratio and p-value.

### Publication Abstract
<i>Arhgef11</i> is a Rho-guanine nucleotide exchange factor that was previously implicated in kidney injury in the Dahl salt-sensitive (SS) rat, a model of hypertension-related chronic kidney disease. Reduced <i>Arhgef11</i> expression in an SS-<i>Arhgef11</i><sup>SHR</sup>-minimal congenic strain (spontaneously hypertensive rat allele substituted for S allele) significantly decreased proteinuria, fibrosis, and improved renal hemodynamics, without impacting blood pressure compared with the control SS (SS-wild type). Here, SS-<i>Arhgef11</i><sup>-/-</sup> and SS-wild type rats were placed on either low or elevated salt (0.3% or 2% NaCl) from 4 to 12 weeks of age. On low salt, starting at week 6 and through week 12, SS-<i>Arhgef11</i><sup>-/-</sup> animals demonstrated a 3-fold decrease in proteinuria compared with SS-wild type. On high salt, beginning at week 6, SS-<i>Arhgef11</i><sup>-/-</sup> animals demonstrated &gt;2-fold lower proteinuria from weeks 8 to 12 and 30 mm&#x2009;Hg lower BP compared with SS-wild type. To better understand the molecular mechanisms of the renal protection from loss of <i>Arhgef11</i>, both RNA sequencing and discovery proteomics were performed on kidneys from week 4 (before onset of renal injury/proteinuria between groups) and at week 12 (low salt). The omics data sets revealed loss of <i>Arhgef11</i> (SS-<i>Arhgef11</i><sup>-/-</sup>) initiates early transcriptome/protein changes in the cytoskeleton starting as early as week 4 that impact a number of cellular functions, including actin cytoskeletal regulation, mitochondrial metabolism, and solute carrier transporters. In summary, in vivo phenotyping coupled with a multi-omics approach provides strong evidence that increased <i>Arhgef11</i> expression in the Dahl SS rat leads to actin cytoskeleton-mediated changes in cell morphology and cell function that promote kidney injury, hypertension, and decline in kidney function.

### Keywords
High and low salt, Arhgef11, Kidney function

### Affiliations
University of Mississippi Medical Center
University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, G378  Jackson MS 39216-4505

### Submitter
Elizabeth Flynn

### Lab Head
Dr Elizabeth Flynn
University of Mississippi Medical Center 2500 North State Street, G378  Jackson MS 39216-4505


