### Accession
PXD015491

### Title
G3BP1-linked mRNA partitioning supports selective protein synthesis in response to oxidative stress

### Description
Cells limit energy-consuming mRNA translation during stress to maintain metabolic homeostasis. Sequestration of mRNAs by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) into stress granules (SGs) reduces translation, but it remains unclear whether SGs also function in partitioning of specific transcripts to polysomes (PSs) to guide selective translation and stress-adaptation in cancer. Transcripts enriched in PSs, defined by polysome fractionation and RNAseq, were compared with mRNAs complexed with the SG-nucleator protein, G3BP1, defined by spatially-restricted enzymatic tagging. Short-term oxidative stress profoundly altered mRNA translation by promoting selective enrichment of transcripts within SGs or PSs. G3BP1 participates in this compartmentalisation by sequestering transcripts in SGs. Under stress, G3BP1-bound transcripts are PS-depleted and encode proteins involved in mRNA translation, pro-apoptosis, and mitochondrial function. In contrast, specific PS-enriched transcripts disassociate from G3BP1 under stress to encode proteins involved in diverse cellular cytoprotective pathways. Therefore, G3BP1 partitioning guides selective translation to support stress adaptation and cell survival.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of G3BP1 bound proteins were conducted using an APEX-based proximity tagging. APEX soybean peroxidase was fused in-frame to G3BP1 to generate APEX-G3BP1. Then the empty vector or APEX-G3BP1 were transiently expressed in PC-3 cells. Cells growing in light amino acid containing media (L) were transfected with empty vector (APEX-CTRL) and cells growing in heavy amino acid containing media (H) were transfected with APEX-G3BP1.  Cells were then exposed for 1 h to -/+ ARS (200 uM) stress. The cells were then pulsed with biotin-tyramide (500 uM for 30 min) and H2O2 (1 mM for 1 min) to transiently activate the APEX enzyme to link biotin to proteins in close proximity (within 10-20 nm) of the APEX-G3BP1 fusion. The cells were immediately washed with 2 times with quencher solution (PBS supplemented with 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide and 10 mM sodium ascorbate).  The cells were then lysed in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM Trolox, 10 mM sodium azide, 10 mM sodium ascorbate, 0.1% SDS, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1% Triton X-100 (1%) and Protease + phosphatase inhibitors). Clarified the lysate by centrifugation at 13,000 rpm for 10 minutes at 4°C. Saved small volume of lysate for Western. The lysates were then incubated with Dynabeads M-280 Streptavidin to pulldown the biotinylated proteins. Extracted proteins from untreated or arsenite treated APEX-CTRL and APEX- G3BP1 conditions were mixed together, processed the samples and subjected to mass spec analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using Proteome Discoverer™ Software - Thermo Fisher Scientific.

### Publication Abstract
Cells limit energy-consuming mRNA translation during stress to maintain metabolic homeostasis. Sequestration of mRNAs by RNA binding proteins (RBPs) into RNA granules reduces their translation, but it remains unclear whether RBPs also function in partitioning of specific transcripts to polysomes (PSs) to guide selective translation and stress adaptation in cancer. To study transcript partitioning under cell stress, we catalogued mRNAs enriched in prostate carcinoma PC-3 cell PSs, as defined by polysome fractionation and RNA sequencing (RNAseq), and compared them to mRNAs complexed with the known SG-nucleator protein, G3BP1, as defined by spatially-restricted enzymatic tagging and RNAseq. By comparing these compartments before and after short-term arsenite-induced oxidative stress, we identified three major categories of transcripts, namely those that were G3BP1-associated and PS-depleted, G3BP1-dissociated and PS-enriched, and G3BP1-associated but also PS-enriched. Oxidative stress profoundly altered the partitioning of transcripts between these compartments. Under arsenite stress, G3BP1-associated and PS-depleted transcripts correlated with reduced expression of encoded mitochondrial proteins, PS-enriched transcripts that disassociated from G3BP1 encoded cell cycle and cytoprotective proteins whose expression increased, while transcripts that were both G3BP1-associated and PS-enriched encoded proteins involved in diverse stress response pathways. Therefore, G3BP1 guides transcript partitioning to reprogram mRNA translation and support stress adaptation.

### Keywords
G3bp1, Prostate cancer, Apex, Stress granules

### Affiliations
Vancouver Prostate Centre Vancouver, BC, Canada
Vancouver Prostate Centre

### Submitter
Syam Prakash Somasekharan

### Lab Head
Dr Syam Prakash Somasekharan
Vancouver Prostate Centre Vancouver, BC, Canada


