### Accession
PXD000445

### Title
Proteomic profiling of colorectal adenomas

### Description
Colorectal adenomas are cancer precursor lesions of the large bowel. In these preinvasive lesions, a vast array of genomic and epigenomic changes have been detailed, but the consequence of these molecular alterations on the effectors of biological function (proteins) has not been comprehensively explored.

### Sample Protocol
We applied shotgun, quantitative mass spectrometry to exhaustively investigate the proteome of colorectal adenomas. To this aim, total protein extracts were prepared from 30 paired samples of colorectal adenomas and normal mucosa prospectively collected during colonoscopy, and five cancerous (SW480, SW620, CACO2, HT29, CX1) and one non-cancerous (HCEC) colon epithelial cell lines. Peptides were labeled with isobaric tags (iTRAQ 8-plex), separated by OFFGEL electrophoresis, and analyzed by liquid chromatography-coupled tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Non-redundant protein families (4325 in tissues, 2017 in cell lines) were identified and quantified across four orders of magnitude. Principal component analysis clearly distinguished adenomas from normal mucosal samples, and cancer cell lines from HCEC cells. Two hundred twelve (212) proteins displayed significant expression changes in adenomatous tissues in comparison with normal mucosa samples (q-value < 0.02, mean fold change vs. normal mucosa  +/-1.4). These proteomic data showed correlation (r=0.7) with transcriptomic data from our previous studies. One-fourth of these proteins (51) had similar expression changes in colorectal cancer cells (vs. HCEC cells) and were therefore confidently attributed to the epithelial component of adenomas. Although benign, adenomas already displayed cancer-associated proteomic changes since the vast majority (91%) of the 76 upregulated proteins in these lesions have been previously reported in cancer. Validation studies were performed on one of the most significantly upregulated proteins, sorbitol dehydrogenase (SORD), a key enzyme in the polyol pathway. SORD concentrations and activity were dramatically increased in adenomas and cancer cell lines, where important changes were also noted in the expression of other enzymes in the same (AKR1B1) and related (KHK) pathways. Dysregulation of the polyol pathway may represent a novel aspect/facet of the metabolome remodelling associated with tumorigenesis.

### Publication Abstract
Colorectal adenomas are cancer precursor lesions of the large bowel. A multitude of genomic and epigenomic changes have been documented in these preinvasive lesions, but their impact on the protein effectors of biological function has not been comprehensively explored. Using shotgun quantitative MS, we exhaustively investigated the proteome of 30 colorectal adenomas and paired samples of normal mucosa. Total protein extracts were prepared from these tissues (prospectively collected during colonoscopy) and from normal (HCEC) and cancerous (SW480, SW620, Caco2, HT29, CX1) colon epithelial cell lines. Peptides were labeled with isobaric tags (iTRAQ 8-plex), separated via OFFGEL electrophoresis, and analyzed by means of LC-MS/MS. Nonredundant protein families (4325 in tissues, 2017 in cell lines) were identified and quantified. Principal component analysis of the results clearly distinguished adenomas from normal mucosal samples and cancer cell lines from HCEC cells. Two hundred and twelve proteins displayed significant adenoma-related expression changes (q-value &lt; 0.02, mean fold change versus normal mucosa &#xb1;1.4), which correlated (r = 0.74) with similar changes previously identified by our group at the transcriptome level. Fifty-one (&#x223c;25%) proteins displayed directionally similar expression changes in colorectal cancer cells (versus HCEC cells) and were therefore attributed to the epithelial component of adenomas. Although benign, adenomas already exhibited cancer-associated proteomic changes: 69 (91%) of the 76 protein up-regulations identified in these lesions have already been reported in cancers. One of the most striking changes involved sorbitol dehydrogenase, a key enzyme in the polyol pathway. Validation studies revealed dramatically increased sorbitol dehydrogenase concentrations and activity in adenomas and cancer cell lines, along with important changes in the expression of other enzymes in the same (AKR1B1) and related (KHK) pathways. Dysregulated polyol metabolism might represent a novel facet of metabolome remodeling associated with tumorigenesis.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Itraq 8-plex, Adenoma

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland
University of Zurich

### Submitter
Anuli Uzozie

### Lab Head
Dr PD Dr. Giancarlo Marra
Institute of Molecular Cancer Research, University of Zurich, Switzerland


