### Accession
PXD021097

### Title
The Ubiquitin-modified Proteome of SARS-CoV-2-infected Host Cells Reveals Insights into Virus-Host Interaction and Pathogenesis

### Description
The outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has posed a serious threat to global public health. The mechanism of pathogenesis and host immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection are largely unknown. In the present study, we applied a quantitative proteomic technology to identify and quantify the ubiquitination changes that occur in both the virus and Vero cells during SARS-CoV-2 infection. By applying label-free, quantitative LC-MS/MS proteomics, 8,943 lysine ubiquitination sites on 3,086 proteins were identified, of which 138 sites on 104 proteins were quantified as significantly upregulated, while 828 sites on 447 proteins were downregulated at 72 h post-infection. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that SARS-CoV-2 infection might modulate host immune responses through the ubiquitination of important proteins, including USP5, IQGAP1, TRIM28, and Hsp90. Ubiquitination modification was also observed on 11 SAR-CoV-2 proteins, including proteins involved in virus replication and inhibition of the host innate immune response. Our study provides new insights into the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and the host as well as potential targets for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental procedures We used non-standard quantification and ubiquitination enrichment technology and high-resolution liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry combined with quantitative proteomics research strategy to analyze the intracellular protein and viral protein after SAR-CoV-2 infects the hosts. In each experiment, three samples of SARS-CoV-2 were analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively to verify the biological reliability of the measurement.  Virus and cells The SARS-CoV-2 virus isolate used in this study, GD01, was isolated by the Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Vero cells were grown in RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum in a humidified atmosphere containing 5% CO2 at 37°C.  Virus inoculation Monolayers of Vero cells were grown to 80% confluence in 10 cm2 cell culture dishes. After removing the medium, cells were gently washed with serum-free DMEM prior to inoculation. Then, the monolayers were inoculated with SARS-CoV-2 at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 5.0. Uninfected cells were used as the mock-infected group. Cells were collected from three independent experiments at 72 h post-infection (hpi). Viral propagation in Vero cells was confirmed by the appearance of a virus-induced cytopathic effect (CPE) and the one-step growth curve of SARS-CoV-2.  Protein extraction and trypsin digestion Uninfected cells and cells infected with SARS-CoV-2 were collected with cell scrapers. The cells were then lysed with lysis buffer containing inhibitors and sonicated three times on ice. After removal of debris, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined using a BCA kit. The samples were reduced and digested as previously described (17). Briefly, the samples were sequentially treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol and 11 mM iodoacetamide in the dark. For trypsin digestion, the protein sample was treated with trypsin overnight (at a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:50, w/w) and then for another 4 h (at 1:100, w/w).  Affinity enrichment of ubiquitinated peptides Anti-lysine ubiquitin (Kub) antibody beads were washed with cold PBS. Then, to enrich the Kub peptides, 5 mg of Kub trypsin peptides was dissolved in NETN buffer and then gently shaken with pre-washed antibody beads (15 μL beads/mg protein) at 4 °C overnight. Then, the antibody beads were washed with NETN buffer and ddH2O in sequence. The peptides were eluted from the beads, and eluted fractions were vacuum dried and cleaned with a C18 ZipTip (Millipore, Billerica, MA).  LC–MS/MS Analysis The peptides were dissolved in 0.1% formic acid (v/v) and loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column with an increased gradient of 6%–23% solvent (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) for 26 min, 23%–35% for 8 min, increasing to 80% within 3 min, and then maintained at 80% solvent for 3 min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system at a constant flow rate of 400 nl/min. The peptides were subjected to nanospray ionization and subsequently analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM Plus (Thermo) coupled inline to the UPLC. The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV, and the scan range was set at 350–1800 m/z. Intact peptides and fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at resolutions of 70,000 and 17,500, respectively. Data were collected using a data-dependent procedure that alternated between a single MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans with 15.0 s dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Database search The resulting data were analyzed using the MaxQuant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human UniProt database concatenated with a reverse decoy database. For trypsin, a maximum of three missed cleavages were allowed. The mass deviation was set to 20 ppm and 5 ppm for precursor ions in the first and main searches, respectively, and the maximum allowed mass deviation was 7 ppm for fragment ions. The false positive rate was adjusted to less than 1%, and the minimum score for modified peptides was set to more than 40.  Bioinformatics methods Motif analysis Soft MoMo (a motif-x algorithm) was used to analyze the model sequences in which amino acids constituted at specific positions with modify-21-mers (spanning 10 amino acids upstream and downstream) but phosphorylation with modify-13-mers. All the database protein sequences were chosen as the background database parameter. The minimum number of occurrences was set to 20. Emulate original motif-x was ticked, and all other parameters were the defaults.  Functional enrichment Enrichment of gene ontology analysis The retrieved protein information was classified by Gene Ontology (GO) annotation according to three categories: biological process, cellular compartment, and molecular function. A two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was used to identify differentially modified proteins, and a p value less than 0.05 was considered significant. Enrichment of pathway analysis The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to identify enriched pathways by two-tailed Fisher’s exact test, and p values less than 0.05 were considered significant. Pathways were hierarchically organized into categories according to the KEGG website. Enrichment of protein domain analysis For each protein category, the InterPro database was used to classify the differentially modified proteins, which were the proteins with a corrected p value less than 0.05, using a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test. Enrichment-based clustering Following the above functional classifications of differentially modified proteins, we performed a hierarchical clustering analysis. The filtered p value matrix was transformed by using the function x = −log10 (p value). Then, the x values for each functional category were z-transformed, and the z-scores were clustered by one-way hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average linkage clustering) in Genesis. A heat map for cluster membership was generated with the heatmap.2 function of the “gplots” package in the R software package. Protein-protein interaction networks Protein interactions between differentially expressed proteins were analyzed using STRING database version 10.1. Only both proteins in the searched data set were included in the analysis of interactions. The confidence score was used to define interaction confidence, and interactions with a confidence score ≥0.7, which were considered to have high confidence, were fetched. The interaction network form STRING was visualized in the R package “networkD3.”

### Publication Abstract
The outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), which is caused by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2), has posed a serious threat to global public health. The mechanism of pathogenesis and the host immune response to SARS-CoV-2 infection are largely unknown. In the present study, we applied a quantitative proteomic technology to identify and quantify the ubiquitination changes that occur in both the virus and the Vero E6 cells during SARS-CoV-2 infection. By applying label-free, quantitative liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry proteomics, 8943 lysine ubiquitination sites on 3086 proteins were identified, of which 138 sites on 104 proteins were quantified as significantly upregulated, while 828 sites on 447 proteins were downregulated at 72 h post-infection. Bioinformatics analysis suggested that SARS-CoV-2 infection might modulate host immune responses through the ubiquitination of important proteins, including USP5, IQGAP1, TRIM28, and Hsp90. Ubiquitination modification was also observed on 11 SAR-CoV-2 proteins, including proteins involved in virus replication and inhibition of the host innate immune response. Our study provides new insights into the interaction between SARS-CoV-2 and the host as well as potential targets for the prevention and treatment of COVID-19.

### Keywords
Coronavirus disease 2019; severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2; lc-ms; ubiquitome

### Affiliations
Shenyang Agricultural University
Key Laboratory of Zoonotic of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Liaoning Province, Shenyang 110866, P. R. China Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, 511430, P. R. China Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology,100029, P. R. China

### Submitter
Jinying Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Zeliang Chen
Key Laboratory of Zoonotic of Liaoning Province, College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Shenyang Agricultural University, Liaoning Province, Shenyang 110866, P. R. China Guangdong Provincial Center for Disease Control and Prevention, Guangzhou, 511430, P. R. China Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology,100029, P. R. China


