### Accession
PXD003872

### Title
Response of podocytes to PAN -  YAP-mediated mechanotransduction determines the podocyte's response to damage

### Description
Podocytes are terminally differentiated cells at the kidney filtration barrier and exposed to considerable mechanical strain. Podocyte injury causes morphological changes as a result of cytoskeletal reorganizations and failure of the filtration barrier. The transcriptional co-activators YAP/TAZ are tightly controlled through hippo signaling and responsive to mechanical cues. Here, we show that YAP is upregulated upon podocyte injury to activate YAP-dependent target genes. This activation preceded the development of proteinuria. In contrast, similar perturbations of cells in culture did not reveal increased YAP activity but showed a downregulation of YAP/TAZ activity when cells were grown on stiff surface. However, culture of cells on soft matrix or inhibition of stress fiber formation allowed recapitulation of the damage-induced YAP upregulation indicating a mechanotransduction-dependent mechanism of YAP over-activity. Interestingly, increased expression of YAP targets was confirmed in renal biopsies from patients with glomerular disease. Consistently, pharmacological inhibition of YAP/TEAD activity ameliorated glomerular disease in vivo. These data suggest that perturbation of the mechanosensitive hippo signaling pathway may be a therapeutic principle in podocyte disease.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were solubilized in a buffer containing 8M urea and 100mM Ammoniumbicarbonate. Then, protein lysate was vortexed and sonificated, and subjected to reduction (DTT), alkylation (Iodoacetamide). Urea was diluted to a concentration of 2M using 100mM Ammoniumbicarbonate, and tryptic digestion of 25-50 µg of protein was performed overnight (w/w ratio 1:100). Samples were cleaned up using Stage tips and subjected to nLC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data generated by the mass spectrometer (.RAW file) was analyzed using MaxQuant 1.5.0.1 with default settings. The LFQ option was enabled. Match between run option was enabled. Variable modifications were methionine oxidation and the K-E-Gly-Gly residue for ubiquitylation detection (in experiments corresponding to Fig. S5). FDR for peptide and protein identification was by default 0.01. Processed data (proteingroups.txt file) was analyzed using Perseus 1.5.1.4.

### Publication Abstract
Podocytes are terminally differentiated cells of the kidney filtration barrier. They are subjected to physiological filtration pressure and considerable mechanical strain, which can be further increased in various kidney diseases. When injury causes cytoskeletal reorganization and morphological alterations of these cells, the filtration barrier may become compromised and allow proteins to leak into the urine (a condition called proteinuria). Using time-resolved proteomics, we showed that podocyte injury stimulated the activity of the transcriptional coactivator YAP and the expression of YAP target genes in a rat model of glomerular disease before the development of proteinuria. Although the activities of YAP and its ortholog TAZ are activated by mechanical stress in most cell types, injury reduced YAP and TAZ activity in cultured human and mouse podocyte cell lines grown on stiff substrates. Culturing these cells on soft matrix or inhibiting stress fiber formation recapitulated the damage-induced YAP up-regulation observed in vivo, indicating a mechanotransduction-dependent mechanism of YAP activation in podocytes. YAP overexpression in cultured podocytes increased the abundance of extracellular matrix-related proteins that can contribute to fibrosis. YAP activity was increased in mouse models of diabetic nephropathy, and the YAP target <i>CTGF</i> was highly expressed in renal biopsies from glomerular disease patients. Although overexpression of human YAP in mice induced mild proteinuria, pharmacological inhibition of the interaction between YAP and its partner TEAD in rats ameliorated glomerular disease and reduced damage-induced mechanosignaling in the glomeruli. Thus, perturbation of YAP-dependent mechanosignaling is a potential therapeutic target for treating some glomerular diseases.

### Keywords
Human podocytes pan

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne, CECAD

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer, Markus Rinschen
University Hospital Cologne, CECAD


