### Accession
PXD033178

### Title
WW domain activated extracellular vesicles (WAEV) proteome

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs), spherical nano-sized lipid-bilayer vesicular structure, is produced from host cells, and widely studied in microbiology, neurobiology, and bioengineering as drug delivery. Here, we report the new vaccine platform using a novel type of EVs, WW domain activated extracellular vesicles (WAEV). Our proteomics result showed that WAEV was activated by the WW domain independently, and distinct from the existing exosome.

### Sample Protocol
The protein sequence analysis of EVs was carried out by the Taplin Biological Mass Spectrometry Facility at the Harvard Medical School. All EVs samples were stained with Coomassie blue-stain after gel-running. Each lane of Coomassie blue-stained SDS-PAGE was cut into approximately 1 mm3 pieces and all samples were subjected to a modified in-gel trypsin digestion procedure. Briefly, the gel pieces were dehydrated with acetonitrile for 10 min and were completely dried in speed-vac. 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate solution containing 12.5 ng/µl modified sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was used for rehydration of the gel pieces. Digestion were proceeded in 37ºC for 16h. Peptides were reconstituted in 5 - 10 µl of HPLC solvent A (2.5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). Each sample was loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (100 μm × 30 cm) packed with with 2.6 µm C18 spherical silica beads after pre-equilibration. Eluted peptides were subjected to electrospray ionization and were entered into an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro ion-trap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). A tandem mass spectrum of specific fragment ions for each peptide was produced by the fragment of peptides. Identification of peptide sequences was performed by matching UniProt Human database with the acquired fragmentation pattern by the software program, Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). All databases include reversed sequences of peptides and the both maximum peptide and protein false discovery rates (FDR) were limited to 1%.

### Data Protocol
Protein quantification was performed by intensity, which was based on at least two unique peptides to quantify the different protein profiling in the EVs. Only those proteins that can be detected in all three biological replicates were retained. Quantile normalization was performed to ensure that each sample had the same distribution, the 2-fold change and p < 0.05 cut-off was set for the screening of differentially expressed proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Membrane proteins expressed on the surface of enveloped viruses are conformational antigens readily recognized by B cells of the immune system. An effective vaccine would require the synthesis and delivery of these native conformational antigens in lipid membranes that preserve specific epitope structures. We have created an extracellular vesicle-based technology that allows viral membrane antigens to be selectively recruited onto the surface of WW domain-activated extracellular vesicles (WAEVs). Budding of WAEVs requires secretory carrier-associated membrane protein 3, which through its proline-proline-alanine-tyrosine motif interacts with WW domains to recruit fused viral membrane antigens onto WAEVs. Immunization with influenza and HIV viral membrane proteins displayed on WAEVs elicits production of virus-specific neutralizing antibodies and, in the case of influenza antigens, protects mice from the lethal viral infection. WAEVs thus represent a versatile platform for presenting and delivering membrane antigens as vaccines against influenza, HIV, and potentially many other viral pathogens.

### Keywords
Extracellular vesicles, Vaccine, Ww domain

### Affiliations
Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health
Harvard T.H. Chan school of public health

### Submitter
Sengjin Choi

### Lab Head
Dr Quan Lu
Harvard T.H. Chan school of public health


