### Accession
PXD009812

### Title
Proteomic analysis in Arabidopsis tissues reveals hydrogen cyanide regulation of intracellular processes through posttranslational modification of proteins by S-cyanylation

### Description
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is co-produced with ethylene in plant cell and enzymatically detoxified mainly by the mitochondrial ß-cyanoalanine synthase (CAS-C1).  Permanent or transient depletion of CAS-C1 activity in Arabidopsis results in physiological alteration in the plant that point to the function of HCN as a gasotransmitter molecule. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of enriched mitochondrial samples isolated from wild type and cas-c1 mutant reveled significant changes in protein content, identifying 451 proteins that are absent or less abundant in cas-c1 and 353 proteins only present or more abundant in the mutant background. Gene onthology classification of these proteins highlights proteomic changes that explains the root hairless phenotype and the altered inmune response observed in cas-c1 mutant. The mechanism of action of cyanide as signaling molecule has been addressed by two proteomic approaches focused on identifying S-cyanylation of cysteine as a posttranslational modification of proteins. Both the 2-imino-thiazolidine chemical method and direct untargeted analysis of proteins by LC-MS/MS identified a set of 163 proteins susceptibles to be S-cyanylated that include sedoheptulose 1, 7 biphosphatase (SBPase), the peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans isomerase (CYP20-3) and enolase 2 (ENO2). In vitro analysis of these proteins identified this modification in SBPase Cys74, CYP20-3 Cys259 and ENO2 Cys346 residues that affected the enzymatic activity of the enzymes. GO classification and protein-protein interaction cluster analysis revealed the function of S-cyanylation in the regulation of primary metabolic pathways as glycolysis, and the Calvin and S-adenosylmethionine cicles.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) wild type ecotype Col-0 and the cas-c1 T-DNA insertion mutant (cas-c1; SALK_103855) (Garcia et al., 2010) were grown in soil under a photoperiod of 16 h of white light (120 E m-2 s-1) at 20 ºC and 8 h of dark at 18 ºC or in hydroponic cultures in a photoperiod of 16 h of white light (120 µE m-2 s-1) at 20ºC/8 h dark at 18ºC in hydroponic culture in a photoperiod of 8 h of white light (120 E m-2 s-1) at 20 ºC and 16 h of dark at 18 ºC (Bermudez et al., 2010). For the hydroponic cultures, seeds were surface-sterilized, incubated for 4 days at 4º C and germinated for one week in rockwool. Seedlings were introduced in wells of hydroponic boxes containing 5 L of nutrient solution. The composition of nutrient solution was as follows: 1mM KH2PO4, 1mM MgSO4 · 7H2O, 15µM MnSO4 · H2O, 1µM CuSO4 · 5H2O, 1µM ZnSO4 · 7H2O, 30µM H3BO3, 28nM ‎(NH4)6Mo7O24 · 4 H2O, 100nM CoSO4 · 7H2O, 10mM Ca(NO3)2 · 4H2O and 40mg/l Sequestrene 138 Fe. All nutrient solutions were changed twice per month. Mitochondria was isolated from Arabidopsis roots by differential and density-gradient centrifugation as described (Struglics et al., 1993) but with some minor modifications. A total of 30 mg of Arabidopsis hydroponic root tissue was homogenized using a mortar and pestle with liquid nitrogen into an extraction buffer containing 15 mM MOPS (pH 7.4), 1.5 mM EDTA, 0.25M sucrose, 0.4% (w/v) BSA and 0.6% (w/v) PVP-40, using 3 ml of buffer g-1 fresh weight, and the homogenates were filtered through two layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem). The chloroplasts were sedimented by four centrifugations at 2200, 3200, 4500 and 18000 g, for 5 min each, and the supernatant obtained was considered the cytosolic fraction. The pellet was resuspended in 1 ml of gradient buffer (20 mM Mops, pH 7.2, 0.6 M sucrose). Separation of cell organelles was achieved by a self-generated 45 and 27% Percoll gradient. The gradient was centrifuged at 20000 g for 20 min in an ultracentrifuge, using a SW28.1 Ti rotor (Beckman) at 4°C. The mitochondrial fraction was diluted 10 times with the wash buffer (0.3 M sucrose, 1mM EDTA, 10mM Mops and pH 7.2), and spun down at 20000 g four times for 15 min each. Mitochondrial samples were disrupted by osmotic shock with lysis buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate buffer, pH 7.0, and 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100), by repeating freeze-thaw cycles and by ultrasonic lysis for 1.5 min. Mitochondrial proteins were precipitatated with 10% (v/v) acid trichlroroacetic and ice-cold acetone, and resuspended in 20mM Tris buffer. A 1-µg aliquot of each sample was subjected to 1D-nano LC ESI-MSMS analysis using a nano liquid chromatography system (Eksigent Technologies nanoLC Ultra 1D plus, AB SCIEX) coupled to a high-speed Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (AB SCIEX) with a Nanospray III source. The analytical column was a silica-based reversed phase column C18 ChromXP, 75 µm × 15 cm, 3-µm particle size and 120-Å pore size (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX). The trap column was a C18 ChromXP (Eksigent Technologies, AB SCIEX). Peptides were separated using a 250-min gradient ranging from 2% to 90% mobile phase B (mobile phase A: 2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; mobile phase B: 100% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid). The injection volume was 5 µL.  Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX). For IDA parameters, a 0.25-s MS survey scan in the mass range of 350–1250 m/z followed by 35 MS/MS scans of 100 ms in the mass range of 100–1800 (total cycle time: 4 s) were performed. Switching criteria were set to ions greater than a mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) of 350 and smaller than m/z 1250 with a charge state of 2–5 and an abundance threshold of more than 90 counts (cps). Former target ions were excluded for 20 s. The IDA rolling collision energy (CE) parameters script was used to automatically control for the CE. MS and MS/MS data obtained for individual samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.5.1 Software (AB SCIEX). Searches were done with an Arabidopsis thaliana protein database from TAIR10, using ProteinPilot. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment masses, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. False discovery rates (FDR ≤ 1% at the PSM level) for peptide identification were manually calculated.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data obtained for individual samples were processed using Analyst® TF 1.5.1 Software (AB SCIEX). Searches were done with an Arabidopsis thaliana protein database from TAIR10, using ProteinPilot. The peptide mass tolerance was set to 25 ppm and 0.05 Da for fragment masses, and 2 missed cleavages were allowed. False discovery rates (FDR ≤ 1% at the PSM level) for peptide identification were manually calculated.

### Publication Abstract
Hydrogen cyanide (HCN) is coproduced with ethylene in plant cells and is primarily enzymatically detoxified by the mitochondrial &#x3b2;-CYANOALANINE SYNTHASE (CAS-C1). Permanent or transient depletion of CAS-C1 activity in Arabidopsis (<i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i>) results in physiological alterations in the plant that suggest that HCN acts as a gasotransmitter molecule. Label-free quantitative proteomic analysis of mitochondrially enriched samples isolated from the wild type and <i>cas-c1</i> mutant revealed significant changes in protein content, identifying 451 proteins that are absent or less abundant in <i>cas-c1</i> and 353 proteins that are only present or more abundant in <i>cas-c1</i> Gene ontology classification of these proteins identified proteomic changes that explain the root hairless phenotype and the altered immune response observed in the <i>cas-c1</i> mutant. The mechanism of action of cyanide as a signaling molecule was addressed using two proteomic approaches aimed at identifying the <i>S-</i>cyanylation of Cys as a posttranslational modification of proteins. Both the 2-imino-thiazolidine chemical method and the direct untargeted analysis of proteins using liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry identified a set of 163 proteins susceptible to <i>S-</i>cyanylation that included SEDOHEPTULOSE 1,7-BISPHOSPHATASE (SBPase), the PEPTIDYL-PROLYL CIS-TRANS ISOMERASE 20-3 (CYP20-3), and ENOLASE2 (ENO2). In vitro analysis of these enzymes showed that <i>S-</i>cyanylation of SBPase Cys<sup>74</sup>, CYP20-3 Cys<sup>259</sup>, and ENO2 Cys<sup>346</sup> residues affected their enzymatic activity. Gene Ontology classification and protein-protein interaction cluster analysis showed that <i>S-</i>cyanylation is involved in the regulation of primary metabolic pathways, such as glycolysis, and the Calvin and <i>S</i>-adenosyl-Met cycles.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis root cyanylation cyanoalanine synthase

### Affiliations
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis. CSIC
Instituto Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis-CSIC

### Submitter
Luis C. Romero

### Lab Head
Dr Luis C Romero
Instituto de Bioquimica Vegetal y Fotosintesis. CSIC


