### Accession
PXD025842

### Title
Comparison of extracellular matrix enrichment protocols for the improved characterization of the skin matrisome by mass spectrometry

### Description
Four protocols were adapted and compared to enrich extracellular matrix proteins from mouse skin: 1. compartmental enrichment; 2. chemical decellularization; 3. enzymatic decellularization using phospholipase A2; 4. quantitative detergent solubility profiling (QDSP). All four protocols were started the same day, each using 35 mg of frozen back skin taken from the same initial back skin piece. The experiment was repeated three times starting from three different mice. Compartmental enrichment: skin samples were processed using the CNMCS commercial kit. Briefly, the skin tissue was homogenized in buffer C and successively incubated under agitation in buffers W, N, M and CS supplemented with the protease inhibitors from the kit. Extraction buffer C and insoluble pellet were kept aside, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately. Chemical decellularization: skin samples were cut into small pieces and successively incubated in buffers containing NaCl, SDS/sodium deoxycholate, Triton X-100 and GuHCl. Extractions buffers as well as the final insoluble pellet were kept aside, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately. Enzymatic decellularization: skin samples were cut into small pieces and successively incubated in buffers containing NaCl, phosopholipase A2/sodium deoxycholate. Extraction buffers as well as the insoluble pellet were kept aside, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately. QDSP: skin samples were homogenized in sterile PBS and successively incubated in 3 buffers containing increasing concentrations in detergents (including SDS, sodium deoxycholate, NP-40) as previously described. Extraction buffers as well as the insoluble pellet were kept aside, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately. For comparison with the four protocols described above, total skin lysates were also prepared for two of the mice. In this case, 20 mg of mouse skin were homogenized and incubated in a lysis buffer containing SDS, β-mercaptoethanol. Samples were centrifuged and the supernatant was kept aside, flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen immediately.

### Sample Protocol
10 µg of proteins of the liquid fractions or 5 mg of each insoluble pellet were further processed for LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, deglycosylated with PNGase-F and digested into peptides by successive treatments with Lys-C and trypsin overnight. Samples were desalted on C18 columns and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Data were processed by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) against the Uniprot mouse database (TrEMBL, 101 412 entries, December 2020). Precursor and fragment mass tolerance were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Trypsin was set as enzyme, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Acetylation (protein N-terminus, +42.011 Da), Methionine loss (protein N-terminus, -131.040 Da), Carbamidomethylation (Cysteine, +57.021 Da) and Oxidation (Methionine, Proline, +15.995 Da) were set as variable modifications. Peptides were filtered with a false discovery rate of 1 %. Matrisome proteins were annotated using the mouse matrisome lists (available on-line: http://matrisomeproject.mit.edu/; last update: August 2014) and the tools of the on-line platform ProteoRE (http://www.proteore.org/). Proteins identified by MS/MS were searched against matrisome lists using Uniprot IDs. To confirm the results of this first screening and include new protein variants identified since 2014 and not referenced in the mouse matrisome database, a second search was performed using Gene IDs and then followed by a final manual checking.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ecm enrichment protocols comparison, Mouse skin matrisome

### Affiliations
CNRS UMS3444 Protein Science Facility
University of Lyon, CNRS, Tissue Biology and Therapeutic Engineering Laboratory, LBTI, UMR5305, F-69367 Lyon, France

### Submitter
Frederic DELOLME

### Lab Head
Dr Catherine Moali
University of Lyon, CNRS, Tissue Biology and Therapeutic Engineering Laboratory, LBTI, UMR5305, F-69367 Lyon, France


