### Accession
PXD021312

### Title
Comparative Proteomic Analysis Highlights Metabolic Dysfunction in α-synucleinopathy

### Description
The synaptic protein α-synuclein is linked through genetics and neuropathology to the pathogenesis of Parkinson’s disease and related disorders. However, the mechanisms by which α-synuclein influences disease onset and progression are incompletely understood. To identify novel pathways and potential therapeutic targets we performed proteomic analysis in a highly penetrant new Drosophila model of α-synucleinopathy. We identified 476 significantly upregulated and 563 significantly downregulated proteins in heads from α-synucleinopathy model flies compared to controls. We then used multiple complementary analyses to identify and prioritize genes and pathways within the large set of differentially expressed proteins for functional studies. We performed Gene Ontology enrichment analysis, integrated our proteomic changes with human Parkinson’s disease genetic studies, and compared the α-synucleinopathy proteome with that of tauopathy model flies, which are relevant to Alzheimer’s disease and related disorders. These approaches identified GTP cyclohydrolase (GCH1) and folate metabolism as candidate mediators of α-synuclein neurotoxicity. In functional validation studies we found that knockdown of Drosophila Gch1 enhanced locomotor deficits in α-synuclein transgenic flies, while folate supplementation protected from α-synuclein toxicity. Our integrative analysis suggested that mitochondrial dysfunction was a common downstream mediator of neurodegeneration. Accordingly, Gch1 knockdown enhanced metabolic dysfunction in α-synuclein transgenic fly brains while folate supplementation partially normalized whole brain bioenergetics. Here we outline and implement an integrative approach to identify and validate potential therapeutic pathways using comparative proteomics and genetics and capitalizing on the facile genetic and pharmacological tools available in Drosophila.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were prepared as previously described (Paulo et al; Proteomics. 2018 Jun; 18(11) e1700475) with the following modifications. All solutions are reported as final concentrations. Drosophila heads were lysed by sonication and passage through a 21 gauge needle in 8 M Urea, 200 mM EPPS pH 8 with protease and phosphatase inhibitors from Roche. Ten fly heads were pooled per sample for either 10-day old controls or α-synuclein files. Protein concentration was determined by a micro-BCA assay (Pierce). Proteins were reduced with 5mM TCEP at room temperature for 15 minutes and alkylated with 15 mM Iodoacetamide at room temperature for one hour in the dark. The alkylation reaction was quenched with DTT. Proteins were precipitated using the methanol/chloroform method. In brief, four volumes of methanol, one volume of chloroform, and three volumes of water were added to the lysate, which was then vortexed and centrifuged to separate the chloroform phase from the aqueous phase. The precipitated protein was washed with one volume of ice cold methanol. The protein pellet was allowed to air dry. Precipitated protein was resuspended in 200mM EPPS, pH 8. Proteins were digested with LysC (1:50; enzyme:protein) overnight at 25 oC followed by trypsin (1:100; enzyme:protein) for 6 hours at 37 oC. Peptide quantification was performed using the micro-BCA assay (Pierce). Equal amounts of peptide from each sample was labeled with tandem mass tag (TMT10) reagents (1:4; peptide:TMT label) (Pierce). The 10-plex labeling reactions were performed for 2 hours at 25 oC. Modification of tyrosine residues with TMT was reversed by the addition of 5% hydroxyl amine for 15 minutes at 25 oC. The reaction was quenched with 0.5% TFA and samples were combined at a 1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1:1 ratio. Combined samples were desalted and offline fractionated into 24 fractions as previously described.  12 of the 24 peptide fraction from the basic reverse phase step (every other fraction) were analyzed with an LC-MS3 data collection strategy (McAlister GC et al. (2014) Anal. Chem. 86:7150-8) on an Orbitrap Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a Proxeon Easy nLC 1000 for online sample handling and peptide separations. Approximately 5 µg of peptide resuspended in 5% formic acid + 5% acetonitrile was loaded onto a 100 µm inner diameter fused-silica micro capillary with a needle tip pulled to an internal diameter less than 5 µm. The column was packed in-house to a length of 35 cm with a C18 reverse phase resin (GP118 resin 1.8 μm, 120 Å, Sepax Technologies). The peptides were separated using a 180 min linear gradient from 3% to 25% buffer B (100% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) equilibrated with buffer A (3% ACN + 0.125% formic acid) at a flow rate of 600 nL/min across the column. The scan sequence began  with an MS1 spectrum (Orbitrap analysis, resolution 120,000, 350−1350 m/z scan range, AGC target 1 × 106, maximum injection time 100 ms, dynamic exclusion of 75 seconds). The “Top10” precursors were selected for MS2 analysis, which consisted of CID (quadrupole isolation set at 0.5 Da and ion trap analysis, AGC 1.5 × 104, NCE 35, maximum injection time 150 ms). The top ten precursors from each MS2 scan were selected for MS3 analysis (synchronous precursor selection), in which precursors were fragmented by HCD prior to Orbitrap analysis (NCE 55, max AGC 1.5 × 105, maximum injection time 150 ms, isolation window 2 Da, resolution 50,000).

### Data Protocol
A suite of in-house software tools were used to for .RAW file processing and controlling peptide and protein level false discovery rates, assembling proteins from peptides, and protein quantification from peptides as previously described. MS/MS spectra were searched against a Uniprot Drosophila reference database appended with common protein contaminants and reverse sequences. Database search criteria were as follows: tryptic with two missed cleavages, a precursor mass tolerance of 50 ppm, fragment ion mass tolerance of 1.0 Da, static alkylation of cysteine (57.02146 Da), static TMT labeling of lysine residues and N-termini of peptides (229.162932 Da), and variable oxidation of methionine (15.99491 Da). TMT reporter ion intensities were measured using a 0.003 Da window around the theoretical m/z for each reporter ion in the MS3 scan. Peptide spectral matches with poor quality MS3 spectra were excluded from quantitation (<200 summed signal-to-noise across 10 channels and <0.7 precursor isolation specificity).

### Publication Abstract
The synaptic protein &#x3b1;-synuclein is linked through genetics and neuropathology to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and related disorders. However, the mechanisms by which &#x3b1;-synuclein influences disease onset and progression are incompletely understood. To identify pathogenic pathways and therapeutic targets we performed proteomic analysis in a highly penetrant new Drosophila model of &#x3b1;-synucleinopathy. We identified 476 significantly upregulated and 563 significantly downregulated proteins in heads from &#x3b1;-synucleinopathy model flies compared to controls. We then used multiple complementary analyses to identify and prioritize genes and pathways within the large set of differentially expressed proteins for functional studies. We performed Gene Ontology enrichment analysis, integrated our proteomic changes with human Parkinson's disease genetic studies, and compared the &#x3b1;-synucleinopathy proteome with that of tauopathy model flies, which are relevant to Alzheimer's disease and related disorders. These approaches identified GTP cyclohydrolase (GCH1) and folate metabolism as candidate mediators of &#x3b1;-synuclein neurotoxicity. In functional validation studies, we found that the knockdown of Drosophila Gch1 enhanced locomotor deficits in &#x3b1;-synuclein transgenic flies, while folate supplementation protected from &#x3b1;-synuclein toxicity. Our integrative analysis suggested that mitochondrial dysfunction was a common downstream mediator of neurodegeneration. Accordingly, Gch1 knockdown enhanced metabolic dysfunction in &#x3b1;-synuclein transgenic fly brains while folate supplementation partially normalized brain bioenergetics. Here we outline and implement an integrative approach to identify and validate potential therapeutic pathways using comparative proteomics and genetics and capitalizing on the facile genetic and pharmacological tools available in Drosophila.

### Keywords
Fly, Parkinsons disease, Metabolism, Snca, Alpha synuclein aggregates

### Affiliations
Emory University
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Mel B. Feany, M.D. Ph.D
Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA


