### Accession
PXD027626

### Title
Extracellular Matrix Protein 1 as a critical mediator of inflammation-to-fibrosis crosstalk in wound healing after myocardial infarction

### Description
Aims and introduction: Cardiac fibrosis is the hallmark of cardiac disease, particularly myocardial infarction (MI), and is one of the most prevalent causes of heart failure. MI is intricately linked to inflammation, extracellular matrix (ECM) remodelling, and cardiac fibrosis, however the mechanisms underpinning these events remain poorly understood. We recently identified that ECM1 has potential to play a key role in cardiac wound healing but the cellular origins in the heart and specific mechanisms of ECM1 in fibrosis remain elusive. Therefore, we investigated the spatiotemporal, cell specific, expression profile of ECM1 in the healthy and diseased mouse and human heart and investigate ECM1 dependent human cardiac fibroblast (HuCFb) cell signalling mechanisms.  Methods and results: Western blotting, immunohistochemistry (IHC) and mRNA in-situ hybridisation revealed that ECM1 protein expression was significantly upregulated in human ischaemic and dilated heart failure patients, and predominantly localised interstitially to fibrotic, inflammatory, and peri-vascular areas. ECM1 specific analysis of the Litviňuková et al. (2020) single-cell and -nuclei RNA sequencing (sc/snRNAseq) dataset of healthy human hearts, and the Farbehi et al. (2019) scRNAseq dataset of mouse hearts post-MI demonstrated that ECM1 expression originates from fibroblasts, macrophages, and pericytes/vascular mural cells in the heart. Further, we identify that post-MI ECM1 is expressed in a temporal dynamic flux from unactivated fibroblasts in sham-operated mice, to M1 macrophages (M1MΦ) at day-3, and myofibroblasts and M2MΦ at day-7. Phosphoproteomics of ECM1 treated human cardiac fibroblast cells (HuCFb) alongside ECM1 to HuCFb cell surface protein binding pull-down and mass spectrometry, revealed that ECM1 signalling goes via proteins associated with Rho protein signal transduction, cell-cell adhesion, microtubule dynamics, and cell chemotaxis pathways, potentially initiated by ECM1 to CTNND1 binding on the cell surface. Further mechanistic analyses identified that ECM1 inhibits HuCFb cell migration and stimulates inflammatory (IL-6 and IL-1β mRNA expression), fibrotic (TGF-β1, TGF-β2 and Col1a2 mRNA expression), and non-canonical Wnt signalling pathways (Wnt5a mRNA expression and JNK1/2/3 and MYPT1 phosphorylation). Conclusions: This study demonstrates that ECM1 expression originates from macrophages and fibroblasts in the mouse and human heart. ECM1 has significant effects on HuCFb migration, inflammatory, fibrotic, Rho protein, and Wnt5a/non-canonical Wnt signalling pathways. Together, ECM1 plays an important role in cardiac wound healing and may represent a novel mechanism of inflammation-fibrosis crosstalk and progression post-MI.

### Sample Protocol
Phospho-proteomics Cells were lysed in lysis buffer using a sonication probe, reduced, alkylated and centrifuged to remove cell debris. Protein was precipitated with acetone, resuspended in 4 % sodium deoxycholate (w/vol) in 100mM Tris-HCl (pH=8.5) and estimated by PierceTM BCA Protein Assay. 1 mg protein was digested with Promega modified trypsin, followed by phosphopeptide enrichment according to (Humphrey et al., 2018) using Venator Sachtopore NP TiO2 beads (SNX 010S003, 3µm - 100Å). One half of each sample was measured in duplicate by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora Series Emitter nanocolumn with CSI fitting (C18, 1.6 µm, 120 Å, 250 x 0.075 mm; IonOpticks, Melbourne, Australia). Separation was carried out at 50 °C at a flow rate of 300 nL/min using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid: 0-18 min: 2% B;  18-160 min: 2-25% B; 160-167 min: 25-35% B, 167-168 min: 35-95% B;  168-178 min: 95% B, 178-178 min: 95-2% B; 178-193 min: 2% B. Peptides were detected on a Thermo Orbitrap velos pro mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode by alternating full scan MS (m/z 300 to 2000, 60000 resolution) and MS/MS by HCD of the 10 most intense peaks in the ICR cell with dynamic exclusion enabled.  His-tag dependent pull-down of ECM1 protein-protein binding partners A purified HuCFb membrane/membrane associated protein lysate was prepared using a Mem-PER™ Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit (ThermoFisher), as per manufacturer protocol. 20ug of purified HuCFb lysate were used per sample, diluted to a total volume of 200µl with either Mem-PER™ Plus Membrane Protein Extraction Kit “solubilisation buffer” (1x detergent samples), or solubilisation buffer diluted 1 in 4 (1/4x detergent samples) with a salt buffer (300mM NaCl, 50mM Na3PO4, pH 7.4). 1mg (25ul) of Dynabeads™ His-Tag Isolation and Pulldown (ThermoFisher) were used per sample and prepared by first washing once with “His-IP lysis buffer” by pipetting up and down, followed by placing tubes on a magnetic rack for 1 minute to pellet Dynabeads™ and allow aspiration of wash supernatant. All wash steps were conducted in this manner; similar to Dynabeads™ His-Tag Isolation and Pulldown manufacturer protocol. Washed Dynabeads™ were then incubation with His-IP lysis buffer containing 500ng recombinant human ECM1 protein (“ECM1” samples; R&D Systems), or buffer without recombinant ECM1 protein (control/“CT” samples) for 10 minutes at RT on constant rotation/inversion. “ECM1” and “control” bound beads were then washed 3 times with His-IP wash buffer and then incubated in either our previously prepared “1x detergent sample” or “1/4x detergent sample” HuCFb purified membrane/membrane associated protein lysate for 45 minutes at RT on constant rotation/inversion. Protein-protein interactions were then covalently crosslinked by adding with 2.88µl of a 12.5mM BS3 (ThermoFisher) solution in milli-q H2O to the bead/HuCFb our protein solution achieve an ~20x molar excess relative to HuCFb protein. The BS3 crosslinking reaction was allowed to incubate for 30 minutes at RT on constant rotation/inversion. BS3 crosslinking reaction was then quenched and beads were washed 3 times in His-IP wash buffer. Purified crosslinked protein-protein complexes were eluted from Dynabeads™ by resuspending beads in 30µl of electrophoresis sample buffer, followed by reducing at 90 °C for 10 min. Eluted samples were then aspirated off Dynabeads™ and directly loaded into Precast Bolt™ 4-12% Bis-Tris Plus Gels (ThermoFisher Scientific). 150V was applied until the blue Coomassie dye front had migrated into the tip 1-2cm of the gel. Gel bands containing gel filtered crosslinked protein-protein binding complexes were then cut out (below the foot of the loading well but above the Coomassie dye front) and stored in 20% ethanol in milli-q H2O (w/v) at -20 until in-gel digestion for proteomics. Gel bands were reduced, alkylated and digested with Promega modified trypsin according to the method of (Shevchenko et al., 1996). Resulting Peptides were acidified with formic acid (final concentration of 0.1 %) and analyzed by nano-HPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000) equipped with an Aurora (Ionoptics) nanocolumn. Separation was carried out at 50 °C at a flow rate of 300 nl/min using the following gradient, where solvent A is 0.1 % formic acid in water and solvent B is acetonitrile containing 0.1 % formic acid: 0-18 min: 2% B;  18-100 min: 2-25% B; 100-107 min: 25-35% B, 107-108 min: 35-95% B;  108-118 min: 95% B, 118-118 min: 95-2% B; 118-133 min: 2% B. The maXis II ETD mass spectrometer (Bruker) was operated with the captive source in positive mode with following settings: mass range: 200 - 2000 m/z, 4 Hz, capillary 1600V, dry gas flow 3 L/min with 150 °C, nanoBooster 0.2 bar, precursor acquisition control top20 (CID).

### Data Protocol
Phospho-proteomics The MS/MS data were analyzed for protein identification and label free quantification using MaxQuant 1.6.2.10 against the public database Swissprot with taxonomy Homo sapiens and common contaminants (downloaded on 16.04.2019, 20482 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on Met and phosphorylation on Ser/Thr as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 4.5 ppm; product mass tolerance +/- 20 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1 % PSM FDR; 1 % protein FDR and 1 % site decoy fraction. In addition, a label free quantitation including the match between runs feature of MaxQuant was performed (Cox et al., 2014), requiring a minimum of 2 ratio counts of quantified razor and unique peptides. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.5.0, following the proposed workflow for label-free phosphoproteomic data (Tyanova et al., 2016); http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=perseus:user:use_cases:modifications . Contaminants and reverse phosphorylation sites created during database search were removed. Intensities were log2 transformed to lower the effect of the outlier values, filtered for a localization probability of > 75 % and 6 valid values in at least one group, respectively. Missing intensities were replaced with random values taken from the Gaussian distribution of values using default parameters (width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8), to simulate an intensity value for those low abundant phosphosites. Two-sample t-test with subsequent multiple testing correction by Permutation-based FDR method were used to identify altered phosphorylation sites (FDR = 0.01, s0 = 2, q-value <= 0.05). For the calculation of signaling scores of averaged group ratios, PHOTON (Rudolph et al., 2016) implemented in Perseus version 1.6.5.0 was used, on our ECM1 treated HuCFb phosphoproteomics data as a ratio of ECM1/Control with a two-sided PHOTON test, following tutorial data on GitHub (https://github.com/jdrudolph/photon). Protein network data for Homo sapiens (v11.0) was downloaded from string database (Szklarczyk et al., 2019). For all additional gene ontology (GO) enrichment analysis, “GOnet”/”DICE” online tool was used (GOBP, GOCC or GOMF; q-value threshold <= 0.05), developed and described by (Pomaznoy et al., 2018).   His-tag dependent pull-down of ECM1 protein-protein binding partners The LC-MS/MS data were analysed by the Data analysis software (Bruker), using the Sum Peak algorithm, and by MaxQuant 1.6.1.0 by searching the public Swissprot database with taxonomy Homo sapiens and common contaminants (downloaded on 16.04.2019, 20482 sequences). Carbamidomethylation on Cys was entered as fixed modification, oxidation on methionine as variable modification. Detailed search criteria were used as follows: trypsin, max. missed cleavage sites: 2; search mode: MS/MS ion search with decoy database search included; precursor mass tolerance +/- 0.006 Da; product mass tolerance +/- 80 ppm; acceptance parameters for identification: 1% PSM FDR; 1% protein FDR. Data processing was performed using Perseus software version 1.6.6.0. Contaminants and reverse protein sequences created during database search were removed. Intensities were log2 transformed to lower the effect of the outlier values, filtered for 3 valid values in at least one condition and normalized on the median of each column (by subtraction). For protein groups missing values an imputation step was performed. Briefly missing values were replaced with random values taken from a shifted Gaussian distribution of all valid values (width of 0.3 and downshift of 1.8 separately for each column), to simulate an intensity value for those low abundant protein groups. For statistical analysis, a Two-sample t-test was performed to identify significantly enriched proteins in the ECM1 bound samples (p-value <= 0.05); the p-value was not adjusted by multi-testing correction (since otherwise no significant results are left). Following this, significantly bound ECM1 proteins from 1x detergent sample and 1/4x detergent sample lists were compared by Venn diagram, and common proteins taken as our final higher confidence list of ECM1-HuCFb binding partners.

### Publication Abstract
Irreversible fibrosis is a hallmark of myocardial infarction (MI) and heart failure. Extracellular matrix protein-1 (ECM-1) is up-regulated in these hearts, localized to fibrotic, inflammatory, and perivascular areas. ECM-1 originates predominantly from fibroblasts, macrophages, and pericytes/vascular cells in uninjured human and mouse hearts, and from M1 and M2 macrophages and myofibroblasts after MI. ECM-1 stimulates fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, up-regulates key fibrotic and inflammatory pathways, and inhibits cardiac fibroblast migration. ECM-1 binds HuCFb cell surface receptor LRP1, and LRP1 inhibition blocks ECM-1 from stimulating fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transition, confirming a novel ECM-1-LRP1 fibrotic signaling axis. ECM-1 may represent a novel mechanism facilitating inflammation-fibrosis crosstalk.

### Keywords
Human, Cardiac wound healing, Ecm1, Adult human cardiac fibroblast (hucfb) cell line, Heart failure (hf), Extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
Omics Center Graz
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria

### Submitter
Barbara Darnhofer

### Lab Head
Dr Ruth Birner-Gruenberger
Research and Diagnostic Institute of Pathology, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstrasse 6, 8010 Graz, Austria; Faculty of Technical Chemistry, Institute of Chemical Technologies and Analytics, Technische Universität Wien, Getreidemarkt 9/164, 1060 Vienna, Austria


