### Accession
PXD013627

### Title
De novo Classification of Mouse B Cell Types using Surfaceome Proteotype Maps

### Description
System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when sample is limiting. We miniaturized and automated the previously described Cell Surface Capture technology increasing sensitivity, reproducibility, and throughput. We used this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and used targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations.

### Sample Protocol
System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when sample is limiting. We miniaturized and automated the previously described Cell Surface Capture technology increasing sensitivity, reproducibility, and throughput. We used this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and used targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations. System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when sample is limiting. We miniaturized and automated the previously described Cell Surface Capture technology increasing sensitivity, reproducibility, and throughput. We used this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and used targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations. System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when sample is limiting. We miniaturized and automated the previously described Cell Surface Capture technology increasing sensitivity, reproducibility, and throughput. We used this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and used targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations. System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when sample is limiting. We miniaturized and automated the previously described Cell Surface Capture technology increasing sensitivity, reproducibility, and throughput. We used this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and used targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations.

### Data Protocol
The peptides resulting from the comparison between automated and manual processing were analysed in DDA mode. RAW data were converted to mzML using MSconvert. Fragment ion spectra were searched with COMET (v27.0) against UniprotKB (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens, retrieved April 2018) containing common contaminants and MS standards. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of arginine were set as variable modifications. Probability scoring was done with PeptideProphet of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v4.6.2). Peptide identifications were filtered for a FDR of ≤1% and presence of consensus NXS/T sequence and deamidation (+0.98 Da) at asparagines. Non-conflicting peptide feature intensities were extracted with Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) for label-free quantification and determination of CVs. The peptides resulting from the comparison between automated and manual processing were analysed in DDA mode. RAW data were converted to mzML using MSconvert. Fragment ion spectra were searched with COMET (v27.0) against UniprotKB (Swiss-Prot, Homo sapiens, retrieved April 2018) containing common contaminants and MS standards. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification for cysteine, oxidation of methionine and deamidation of arginine were set as variable modifications. Probability scoring was done with PeptideProphet of the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (v4.6.2). Peptide identifications were filtered for a FDR of ≤1% and presence of consensus NXS/T sequence and deamidation (+0.98 Da) at asparagines. Non-conflicting peptide feature intensities were extracted with Progenesis QI (Nonlinear Dynamics) for label-free quantification and determination of CVs.

### Publication Abstract
System-wide quantification of the cell surface proteotype and identification of extracellular glycosylation sites is challenging when samples are limited. Here, we miniaturize and automate the previously described Cell Surface Capture&#xa0;(CSC) technology, increasing sensitivity, reproducibility and throughput. We use this technology, which we call autoCSC, to create population-specific surfaceome maps of developing mouse B cells and use targeted flow cytometry to uncover developmental cell subpopulations.

### Keywords
Dda, Lc-ms, Flow cytometry, Hrm, Cell surface capture, Cell surface proteome, Proteotype, Affinity purification, B-cell development, Csc, Autocsc, Classification, Mouse model, Surfaceome, Dia

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology & Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Maik Müller

### Lab Head
Dr Bernd Wollscheid
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology & Department of Health Sciences and Technology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland


