### Accession
PXD037906

### Title
Human Tim8a, Tim8b and Tim13 are auxiliary assembly factors of mature Complex IV

### Description
Human Tim8a and Tim8b are paralogous intermembrane space proteins of the small TIM chaperone family. Yeast small TIMs function in the trafficking of proteins to the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes. This putative import function for hTim8a and hTim8b has been challenged in human models, but their true molecular function in cells has not been defined. Likewise, why human cells possess two Tim8 proteins and any potential redundancy is not clear. We demonstrate that hTim8a and hTim8b function in the assembly of cytochrome c oxidase (Complex IV). Using affinity enrichment mass spectrometry, we catalogue the interaction network of hTim8a, hTim8b and hTim13, identifying subunits and assembly factors of the Complex IV COX2 module. hTim8-deficient cells have a COX2/COX3 module defect, albeit less severe than a COX17KO cell line, and exhibit an accumulation of the S2 subcomplex. This suggests that hTim8a and hTim8b are required for assembly of Complex IV via interactions with intermembrane-space exposed subunits. We propose hTim8-hTim13 complexes act as chaperones to stabilise the intermediate S3 subcomplex, promoting assembly of monomeric Complex IV.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated mitochondria were solubilised, reduced, and alkylated in SDC buffer (1% [w/v] sodium deoxycholate, 100 mM Tris-Cl pH 8.1, 40 mM chloroacetamide, 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP)) by first boiling at 99°C for 5 min with 1500 RPM shaking, then sonication (Powersonic 603 Ultrasonic Cleaner, 40 KHz on high power) for 15 min at room temperature. Proteins were digested with 1:50 [w/w; trypsin:protein] trypsin for 4-6 h at 37°C, then clarified by centrifugation. Peptides were loaded into stage-tips [76] with x3 plugs of SDB-RPS substrate (3MTMEmporeTM) in the presence of isopropanol with 1% [v/v] trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Sample binding and subsequent washing was achieved by centrifugation at 2,500 g. Peptides were washed first in isopropanol, 1% TFA, then 0.2% [v/v] TFA, before being eluted in 80% [v/v] acetonitrile (ACN), 1% [v/v] ammonium hydroxide. Eluates were lyophilised by SpeedVac concentrator or freeze-dryer and reconstituted in 0.1% [v/v] TFA, 2% [v/v] ACN for analysis. Immunoprecipitation eluates and MG132 or sodium carbonate treated fractions were acetone-precipitated and then solubilised in 8 M urea, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0, by vortex and sonication for 15 min. Reduction and alkylation was achieved with 5 mM TCEP, 50 mM chloroacetamide and incubation at 37°C with 700 RPM shaking for 30 min. Urea content was diluted to 1 M by addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and 1 µg of trypsin was added to incubate overnight at 37°C. Stage-tips were created with SDB-XC substrate (x2 plugs for eluates, x6 plugs for fractions; 3MTMEmporeTM) and activated with 100% ACN, then equilibrated with 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN. The addition of TFA (1% [v/v] final concentration) acidified the peptides prior to their loading on stage-tips. Stage-tips were washed twice with 0.1% TFA, 2% ACN and peptides eluted in 0.1% [v/v] TFA, 80% [v/v] ACN. Eluates were lyophilised by SpeedVac concentrator or freeze-dryer and reconstituted in 0.1% [v/v] TFA, 2% [v/v] ACN for analysis. Proteins for complexome analysis were subject to in-gel digestion as described previously [77]. Succinctly, the minced samples were centrifuged at 1,500 g for 3 min at RT and destained in 60% [v/v] carbonyl-free methanol, 50 mM ABC for 1 h at RT with 500 RPM shaking. Destaining was repeated twice, with 15 min incubations. Samples were washed in 50% [v/v] ACN, 50 mM ABC, reduced by incubation in 10 mM DTT, 50 mM ABC at 56 °C for 1 h, and then alkylated in 40 mM chloroacetamide, 50 mM ABC for 45 min at RT. Samples were washed twice in 50% ACN, 50 mM ABC and left to air-dry in the plate. Once dry, 20 µL of digestion solution (10 ng/µL MS-grade trypsin, 10 % [v/v] ACN, 0.01% [w/v] ProteaseMAX surfactant (Promega), 1 mM CaCl2, 50 mM ABC) was added to each well and allowed to swell for 10 min at 4 °C. An additional 80 µL of 50 mM ABC was added, followed by overnight incubation at 37 °C in a pre-humidified incubator. Peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 1,500 g for 3 min at RT and subsequent addition of 30% ACN, 3% FA and centrifugation. Peptide elutions were lyophilised in CentriVap SpeedVac concentrator then reconstituted in 2% ACN, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were then desalted using SDB-XC staged-tips and prepared for analysis as described for immunoprecipitation samples.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectra were searched against the UniProt reviewed human proteome database (canonical and isoform, downloaded March 2021) and the Andromeda common contaminants database using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.10.43) [2]. Default label-free quantitation (LFQ) search parameters were applied with minor adjustments. Trypsin/P cleavage specificity (cleaved after lysine or arginine, even when followed by proline) was applied with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. N-terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine set as variable modifications. Mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm was used for MS1 and 20 ppm for MS2 matching. A  target-decoy search false-discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was set for both peptide spectrum matching and protein identification, from which a minimum LFQ ratio count of 2 unique and/or razor peptides was used for quantitation by peptide ion intensity. ‘Match between runs’ was applied (0.7 min match time window) to spectra acquired in the same run, except for the fractionated samples from MG132 treated cells. For sodium carbonate analysis, pellet, supernatant and total samples were designated as separate parameter groups for relative quantification and LFQ normalisation not applied across groups. Statistical treatments were performed in Perseus software (version 1.6.10.43) [3]. The LFQ intensities of protein groups were log2-transformed and those identified from a site modification only, a reversed decoy sequence or <2 unique peptides, and contaminants were removed. Mitochondrial proteins were annotated by the IMPI mitochondrial proteome (http://www.mrc-mbu.cam.ac.uk/impi; version 2020 Q3) and MitoCarta3.0 [4] databases. For isolated mitochondria experiments, the ‘known mitochondrial’ proteins were used for global row normalisation and only protein groups identified in ≥2 replicates of each sample group (eg. wild-type, knock-out) were submitted to statistical hypothesis testing. For affinity enrichment experiments, only protein groups identified in ≥2 replicates of the experimental group (eg. +DSP) were retained, LFQ intensity values were imputed for non-valid values in the control group (imputed from normal distribution; downshift 1.8 σ, width 0.3 σ), and common non-specific interactors from similar protocols were filtered using the CRAPome database [5]. Comparative immunoprecipitation experiments, however, did not impute values. A two-sided unpaired Student’s t-test was applied with permutation-based FDR statistics to account for multiple hypothesis testing. The s0 minimal difference factor was set to 0.5 for cell and mitochondrial proteomics. Topographical heatmaps plotted the log2 fold changes for individual subunits onto the Complex IV stucture (PDB 5Z62) using a custom python script described previously [6].  For immunoprecipitation analysis, s0 was set to 2 or higher, to the exclusion of ‘negatively enriched’ proteins from statistical significance, except for comparative immunoprecipitation experiments in which s0 was set to 0.1. The log2-transformed ratio between the mean LFQ intensity of the two groups was plotted against the negative log10 p-value and annotations added manually. The protein interaction network of common interacting partners was generated using the STRING database webtool (www.string-db.org; accessed August 2021). Only ‘experimentally determined’ or ‘curated database’ evidence was used, the minimum interaction score threshold set to 0.500, and annotations added manually. For complexome analyis, the intensity based absolute quantitation (iBAQ) data was imported to NOVA software (version 0.8.0.0), in which the selected Complex IV proteins and hTim13 were analysed by hierarchical clustering using a Pearson correlation distance function, optimised leaf ordering, centroid linkage, and without normalisation. The clustered heatmaps were exported from NOVA, and profile plots of maximum iBAQ intensity were generated in GraphPad Prism (version 9).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Protein assembly, Mitochondria, Complex iv, Small tims, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Alex Anderson

### Lab Head
Dr Diana Stojanovski
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Melbourne, Australia


