### Accession
PXD002665

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of ERBB3/ERBB4 signaling

### Description
The four members of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ERBB) family form homo- and heterodimers which mediate ligand-specific regulation of many key cellular processes in normal and cancer tissues. While signaling through the EGFR has been extensively studied on the molecular level, signal transduction through ERBB3/ERBB4 heterodimers is less well understood. Here, we generated isogenic mouse Ba/F3 cells that express full-length and functional membrane-integrated ERBB3 and ERBB4 or ERBB4 alone, to serve as a defined cellular model for biological and phosphoproteomics analysis of ERBB3/ERBB4 signaling. ERBB3 co-expression significantly enhanced Ba/F3 cell proliferation upon neuregulin-1 (NRG1) treatment. For comprehensive signaling studies we performed quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) experiments to compare the basal ERBB3/ERBB4 cell phosphoproteome to NRG1 treatment of ERBB3/ERBB4 and ERBB4 cells. We employed a workflow comprising differential isotope labeling with mTRAQ reagents followed by chromatographic peptide separation and final phosphopeptide enrichment prior to MS analysis. Overall, we identified 9686 phosphorylation sites which could be confidently localized to specific residues. Statistical analysis of three replicate experiments revealed 492 phosphorylation sites which were significantly changed in NRG1-treated ERBB3/ERBB4 cells. Bioinformatics data analysis recapitulated regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt pathways, but also indicated signaling links to cytoskeletal functions and nuclear biology. Comparative assessment of NRG1-stimulated ERBB4 Ba/F3 cells indicated that ERBB3 did not trigger defined signaling pathways but more broadly enhanced phosphoproteome regulation in cells expressing both receptors. In conclusion, our data provide the first global picture of ERBB3/ERBB4 signaling and provide numerous potential starting points for further mechanistic studies

### Sample Protocol
Prior to stimulation, Ba/F3 cells were washed twice with medium without IL3 and seeded at 1 x 105 cells/mL in fresh medium without IL3. 1 h later, cells were treated with either 100 ng/mL NRG1 in PBS or vehicle control for 30 min. Cells were then put on ice, harvested by centrifugation, washed twice with PBS and lysed in ice-cold lysis buffer (8 M urea, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2, 75 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 5 mM EGTA, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM glycerol phosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 2.5 mM sodium orthovanadate, protease inhibitor cocktail Complete Mini (Roche), phosphatase inhibitor cocktails 2 and 3 (Sigma)). Cell extracts were sonicated three times for 1 minute on ice and cleared by centrifugation. Protein concentrations were determined (Bradford assay, Biorad).  For each treatment sample 2 mg of total lysate protein were reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 30 min then alkylated in the presence of 55 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) was added at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:200 and incubated for 4 h at room temperature. Samples were thereafter diluted 1:4 with 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.2 before adding trypsin (Promega) at an enzyme-to-substrate ratio of 1:200 followed by overnight incubation. The resulting peptide mixtures were acidified by the addition of TFA to a final concentration of 0.5% and subsequently desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns (50 mg sorbent weight, Waters). Peptides were eluted with 50% acetonitrile (ACN), 0.5% acetic acid, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and lyophilized. All samples were then chemically labeled with the respective mTRAQ isotopic variants (ABSciex) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Equal amounts of differentially mTRAQ-labeled peptides were then combined, frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized and desalted via C18 Sep-Pak columns (500 mg sorbent weight, Waters). Peptide samples peptides were fractionated by high pH reversed phase chromatography as described by Wang et al. Briefly, peptides were reconstituted in 20 mM ammonium formate (pH 10, buffer A), loaded onto an XBridge C18, 250 × 4.6 mm analytical column (Waters) operated with the ÄKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare), and separated by applying a segmented gradient increasing the ACN concentration from 7% to 30% buffer B (buffer A with 80% ACN) over 15 min followed by a 5 min gradient to 55%. Collected peptide fractions were then combined in a non-linear way as described to generate 12 samples with similar peptide amounts. Peptide samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen, lyophilized, reconstituted in 0.1 % TFA and desalted using C18 Sep-Pak columns. Enrichment of phosphopeptides was performed according to a protocol by Mertins et al. Phosphopeptides were eluted onto the C18 material by washing twice with a 500 mM K2HPO4 solution. The C18-bound phosphopeptides were washed with 0.1% formic acid, eluted with 50 % ACN, 0.1% FA, concentrated in a VacufugeTM (Eppendorf) and reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid before LC-MS analysis. All LC-MS analyses were performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The samples were loaded by an Easy nano LC II system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) on a 20 cm fused silica column (New Objective) packed in-house with reversed phase material (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a maximum pressure of 275 bar. The bound peptides were eluted by a gradient from 10% to 60% of solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO, 0.5% acetic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min and sprayed directly into the mass spectrometer by applying a spray voltage of 2.2 kV using a nanoelectrospray ion source (ProxeonBiosystems). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS acquisition. To improve mass accuracy in the MS mode, the lock-mass option was enabled as described. Full scans were acquired in the orbitrap mass analyzer at a resolution R = 60,000 and a target value of 1,000,000 ions. The fifteen most intense ions detected in the MS scan were selected for collision induced dissociation in the LTQ at a target value of 5000 ion counts. The resulting fragmentation spectra were also recorded in the linear ion trap. To improve complete dissociation of phosphopeptides, the multi-stage activation option was enabled  for all MS-analyses of phosphopeptide-enriched samples by applying additional dissociation energy on potential neutral loss fragments (precursor ion minus 98, 49 and 32.7 m/z). Ions that were once selected for data-dependent acquisition were dynamically excluded for 90 sec for further fragmentation.  General used mass spectrometric settings were: no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 240°C; normalized collision energy, 35% and an activation q = 0.25.

### Data Protocol
All raw files acquired in this study were collectively processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.4.3.2) for peptide and protein identification and quantification using a murine Uniprot database (version 01 2014) including human ErbB3 and ErbB4. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation and phosphorylation on serine, threonine and tyrosine were allowed as variable modifications. Moreover, mTRAQ ∆0, ∆4 and ∆8 were set as modifications.  The minimum required peptide length was seven amino acids and up to two missed cleavages and three labeled amino acids were allowed. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 was selected for both protein and peptide identifications. The match between runs option for a time window of 0.5 min was enabled for corresponding fractions in replicate experiments. All MS raw data and MaxQuant output files will be made available upon request.

### Publication Abstract
The four members of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR/ERBB) family form homo- and heterodimers which mediate ligand-specific regulation of many key cellular processes in normal and cancer tissues. While signaling through the EGFR has been extensively studied on the molecular level, signal transduction through ERBB3/ERBB4 heterodimers is less well understood. Here, we generated isogenic mouse Ba/F3 cells that express full-length and functional membrane-integrated ERBB3 and ERBB4 or ERBB4 alone, to serve as a defined cellular model for biological and phosphoproteomics analysis of ERBB3/ERBB4 signaling. ERBB3 co-expression significantly enhanced Ba/F3 cell proliferation upon neuregulin-1 (NRG1) treatment. For comprehensive signaling studies we performed quantitative mass spectrometry (MS) experiments to compare the basal ERBB3/ERBB4 cell phosphoproteome to NRG1 treatment of ERBB3/ERBB4 and ERBB4 cells. We employed a workflow comprising differential isotope labeling with mTRAQ reagents followed by chromatographic peptide separation and final phosphopeptide enrichment prior to MS analysis. Overall, we identified 9686 phosphorylation sites which could be confidently localized to specific residues. Statistical analysis of three replicate experiments revealed 492 phosphorylation sites which were significantly changed in NRG1-treated ERBB3/ERBB4 cells. Bioinformatics data analysis recapitulated regulation of mitogen-activated protein kinase and Akt pathways, but also indicated signaling links to cytoskeletal functions and nuclear biology. Comparative assessment of NRG1-stimulated ERBB4 Ba/F3 cells revealed that ERBB3 did not trigger defined signaling pathways but more broadly enhanced phosphoproteome regulation in cells expressing both receptors. In conclusion, our data provide the first global picture of ERBB3/ERBB4 signaling and provide numerous potential starting points for further mechanistic studies.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Erbb4, Erbb3

### Affiliations
Evotec 
Evotec (München) GmbH

### Submitter
Sebastian Wandinger

### Lab Head
Dr Henrik Daub
Evotec (München) GmbH


