### Accession
PXD012658

### Title
Proteomic Characterization of Human Dermal Interstitial Fluid

### Description
Proteomic characterization of human dermal interstitial fluid compared to matching serum and plasma.

### Sample Protocol
Protein concentrations were estimated using Pierce BCA assay.  Equal amounts of protein from each sample were denatured, alkylated (iodoacetamide),in-solution digested with trypsin/LysC, and labeled with TMT tags (10 plex).  Labeled samples were pooled together and subjected to basic reverse phase fractionation prior to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed using Sequest in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 SP1.  Percolator (FDR < or = 0.01) was used to obtain high confidence peptide matches.

### Publication Abstract
As wearable fitness devices have gained commercial acceptance, interest in real-time monitoring of an individual's physiological status using noninvasive techniques has grown. Microneedles have been proposed as a minimally invasive technique for sampling the dermal interstitial fluid (ISF) for clinical monitoring and diagnosis, but little is known about its composition. In this study, a novel microneedle array was used to collect dermal ISF from three healthy human donors and compared with matching serum and plasma samples. Using a shotgun quantitative proteomic approach, 407 proteins were quantified with at least one unique peptide, and of those, 135 proteins were differently expressed at least 2-fold. Collectively, these proteins tended to originate from the cytoplasm, membrane bound vesicles, and extracellular vesicular exosomes. Proteomic analysis confirmed previously published work that indicates that ISF is highly similar to both plasma and serum. In this study, less than one percent of proteins were uniquely identified in ISF. Taken together, ISF could serve as a minimally invasive alternative for blood-derived fluids with potential for real-time monitoring applications.

### Keywords
Interstitial fluid, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Isf

### Affiliations
Principal Investigator
Edgewood Chemical Biological Center

### Submitter
Trevor Glaros

### Lab Head
Dr Trevor Glaros
Edgewood Chemical Biological Center


