### Accession
PXD013533

### Title
Identification of a collagen marker in urine improves the detection of colorectal liver metastases

### Description
Previously, we reported that a combination of a collagen alpha-1(I) natural occurring peptide (NOP) AGPP(-OH)GEAGKP(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (AGP) and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) has the potential to detect colorectal liver metastases (CRLM). The combined method needs to be adapted to increase the sensitivity and specificity before it can be implemented in the clinic. This mass spectrometry study aimed to identify additional collagen NOPs in urine to further increase the sensitivity and specificity of our previously published method and search for the most discriminating NOP panel. The new assay was developed based on urine samples from 100 healthy controls and 100 patients suffering from CRLM. Two additional NOPs were identified: GPPGEAGK(-OH)P(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (GPP) originating from collagen alpha-1(I) and GNDGARGSDGQPGPP(-OH)GP(-OH)P(-OH)GTAGFP(-OH)GSP(-OH)GAK(-OH)GEVGP (GND) originating from collagen alpha-1(III). A molecular model combining NOPs (AGP, GPP, and GND) and CEA was generated. Molecules that did not contribute to the diagnostic power of the model were removed, resulting in a model only consisting of GND and CEA. In this model, 86% sensitivity and 84% specificity in the discovery set, and 92% sensitivity and 90% specificity in the validation set were reached. These percentages are significantly higher than the current model based on AGP and CEA (p=0.032). The performance of the new model is better than the currently used techniques in the clinic (e.g. CT-scan, ultrasound, serum CEA), which have a sensitivity between 57-70% and a specificity between 90-96%.

### Sample Protocol
NOPs for bottom-up and targeted mass spectrometry were isolated from urine in the same way as described by Lalmahomed et al. [8]. In short, the NOPs were separated from small molecules, salts, and proteins with a mRP C-18 Hi-Recovery Protein Column (4.6 × 50 mm) (Agilent, Amstelveen, the Netherlands) installed in a Ultimate 300 LC (Dionex, Amsterdam, the Netherlands) that was equipped with an online-fractionator. After separation, the NOP fraction was collected, dried, reconstituted, and analyzed with mass spectrometry. For the identification of NOPs we applied a standard bottom-up LC-MS/MS method as described by van Huizen et al.[9]. In short, an Ultimate 3000 nano RSLC system (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Germering, Germany) was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Injected samples were trapped and washed on a trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID x 5 mm, 2 µm particles size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, The Netherlands). After washing, the trap column was switched in line with an analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID x 250 mm, 2 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Thermo Fisher Scientific, The Netherlands) for peptide separation prior to mass spectrometry analysis. A deviation from the protocol described by van Huizen et al. is that, prior to mass spectrometry analysis, neither the samples were analyzed on a test HPLC-system, nor the injection volume was normalized. For every sample, a volume of 2 µL was injected.  [8] Lalmahomed ZS, Broker MEE, van Huizen NA, van den Braak R, Dekker LJM, Rizopoulos D, et al. Hydroxylated collagen peptide in urine as biomarker for detecting colorectal liver metastases. Am J Cancer Res. 2016;6:321-30. [9] van Huizen NA, Coebergh van den Braak R, Doukas M, Dekker LJ, IJzermans JNM, Luider TM. Up-regulation of collagen proteins in colorectal liver metastasis compared with normal liver tissue. J Biol Chem. 2018;294:281-9.

### Data Protocol
MGF peaklists files were extracted from raw files by ProteoWizard (v3.0.9166). MGF peaklist files were searched using the Mascot search engine (v2.3.2, Matrix Science Inc., London, UK) and the UniProt/SwissProt database (20194 entries). The following settings were used for the database search settings: enzyme was set to open because we analyzed NOPs, the mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm for peptide mass, and 0.5 Da for fragment mass. As variable modification hydroxylation of proline, lysine, and oxidation of methionine was selected (+16 Da), no fixed modifications were added. MASCOT identifications were imported into Scaffold (v4.6.2, Portland, OR, USA). In Scaffold, protein confidence levels were set to 1% false discovery rate (FDR), at least 2 peptides per protein, and a 1% FDR at peptide level. FDRs were estimated by inclusion of a decoy database search generated by MASCOT. Raw files were aligned and combined with the identification list exported from Scaffold (supporting information S-1) in Progenesis QI (v4, Nonlinear Dynamics, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom) followed by exporting the normalized abundance to Excel 2010 (Microsoft, Redmon, WA, USA). Duplicate feature intensities were summed. Data was further processed with Excel, GraphPad Prism (v5.01, La Jolla, CA, USA), and R (v3.3.1, Vienna, Austria). Prior to 10log-transformation, a value of “10” was added, this to include missing values for further data analysis. The 10log-transformed data was used for statistical analysis, thereby the data was assumed to be normally distributed after log-transformation. NOP significance between control and CRLM was tested by using an unequal variance independent samples t-test. P-values below 0.05 were considered significant. Only collagen alpha chains were taken into account which also showed to be different in CRLM tissue compared to collagen in normal liver tissue [9]. A NOP molecular panel was constructed by choosing the three most significant NOPs from the top three most abundant collagen alpha chains. In addition to these nine NOPs, the NOP, which is called AGP, reported in ref [8, 10] was added to the targeted mass spectrometry method.  To test if there are more significantly different NOPs than expected between the control and CRLM groups by chance we performed permutation testing (1000 iterations per test). The R-script published as supplemental file by van Huizen et al. [9] was used to perform the permutation test. In short, the data was randomly divided in two groups at the peptide level; significant differences between the two groups were determined using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Significant p-values (p-value < 0.05) were summed per permutation and the 10log was taken. It was assumed that the distribution of the 10log summed significant p-values were normally distributed. If the true dataset value was greater than the average value of the permutation test plus twice the SD (p<0.05), then the difference was assumed to be significant. [8] Lalmahomed ZS, Broker MEE, van Huizen NA, van den Braak R, Dekker LJM, Rizopoulos D, et al. Hydroxylated collagen peptide in urine as biomarker for detecting colorectal liver metastases. Am J Cancer Res. 2016;6:321-30. [9] van Huizen NA, Coebergh van den Braak R, Doukas M, Dekker LJ, IJzermans JNM, Luider TM. Up-regulation of collagen proteins in colorectal liver metastasis compared with normal liver tissue. J Biol Chem. 2018;294:281-9. [10] Broker MEE, Lalmahomed ZS, Roest HP, van Huizen NA, Dekker LJM, Calame W, et al. Collagen Peptides in Urine: A New Promising Biomarker for the Detection of Colorectal Liver Metastases. Plos One. 2013;8:e70918.

### Publication Abstract
Previously, we reported a combination of an urine collagen alpha-1(I) natural occurring peptide (NOP) AGPP(-OH)GEAGKP(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (AGP) and serum carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) to have the potential to detect colorectal liver metastasis (CRLM). The combined method requires further adaption for better sensitivity and specificity prior to clinical implementation. This mass spectrometry study aimed to identify additional collagen NOPs in urine and determine the most discriminating NOP panel. We improved the combined method on the basis of analysis of urine samples from 100 healthy controls and 100 CRLM patients. Two additional NOPs were identified: <b>GPP</b>GEAGK(-OH)P(-OH)GEQGVP(-OH)GDLGAP(-OH)GP (<b>GPP</b>), collagen alpha-1(I), and <b>GND</b>GARGSDGQPGPP(-OH)GP(-OH)P(-OH)GTAGFP(-OH)GSP(-OH)GAK(-OH)GEVGP (<b>GND</b>), collagen alpha-1(III). A molecular model combining NOPs (AGP, GPP, and GND) and CEA was generated. Molecules that did not contribute significantly were removed, resulting in a model consisting of GND and CEA. With this model, 88% sensitivity and 88% specificity were reached in the discovery set and 75% sensitivity and 100% specificity in the validation set (control, <i>n</i> = 12; CRLM, <i>n</i> = 10). The AUC of the ROC curve is significantly higher than the current model based on AGP and CEA (<i>p</i> = 3.3 &#xd7; 10<sup>-4</sup>). The new model performs better than the currently used techniques in the clinic that have a 57-70% sensitivity and a 90-96% specificity.

### Keywords
Urine, Natural occurring peptides, Colon cancer, Collagen, Colorectal cancer, Prm, Logistic regression model, Colorectal liver metastases, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands
Erasmus MC

### Submitter
Nick van Huizen

### Lab Head
Dr Theo M. Luider
Lab. Neuro-Oncology and Clinical Cancer Proteomics, Erasmus Medical Center, the Netherlands


