### Accession
PXD003063

### Title
Effects of the antibacterial compund Allicin from garlic on Escherichia coli

### Description
Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate) from garlic is a highly potent natural antimicrobial substance. It inhibits growth of a variety of microorganisms, among them antibiotic resistant strains. Here, we show that upon exposure to allicin, growth of Escherichia coli is strongly inhibited. Growth inhibition coincides with a significant drop of total sulfhydryl concentrations and induction of the heat shock and oxidative stress response. In contrast to diamide, a potent inducer of disulfide stress, allicin does not induce cystine bond formation in proteins such as cytoplasmically expressed alkaline phosphatase PhoA. We identified and quantified the allicin-induced modification S-allylmercapto-cysteine for a set of cytoplasmic proteins by using a combination of label-free mass spectrometry and differential OxICAT labeling. Activity of isocitrate lyase AceA, an S-allylmercapto-modified candidate protein, is largely inhibited by allicin treatment in vivo. Our results indicate that the mode of action of allicin is a combination of disturbance of the redox balance and inactivation of crucial metabolic enzymes.

### Sample Protocol
1. Label-free mass spectrometric analysis of the E. coli proteome after allicin exposure − An E. coli overnight culture was used to inoculate MOPS Minimal Medium (1:100). The culture was grown aerobically until an OD600 of 0.4 was reached. The culture was split into 15 mL cultures for stress treatment. An untreated culture served as negative control. 0.79 mM allicin (128 µg mL-1) were added to 15 ml subculture. Cultures were incubated for 15 min. 5 mL of each culture were harvested by centrifugation (8,525 g, 4 °C, 10 min). Cells were washed twice with 1 mL PBS (137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, pH 7.4, stored anaerobically prior to use) and centrifuged (13,000 g, 4 °C, 10 min). Cells were resuspended in PBS prior to disruption at 4 °C by ultrasonication (VialTweeter ultrasonicator, Hielscher GmbH, Germany) (3x 1 min). Cell debris was pelleted by centrifugation (13,000 g, 4 °C, 15 min). The supernatant was precipitated with five volumes of acetone over night at -20°C. After centrifugation (30 min, 4°C, 13,000 g) and washing with five volumes of acetone, the pellet was resuspended in ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin over night (37°C). Two individual replicates were analyzed for allicin treatment and one sample was analyzed for control conditions and after diamide exposure. The LC-MS/MS consisted of an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer  (Thermo Scientific). A total of 300 ng (in 15 µL) was preconcentrated on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100, 100 µm x 2 cm nanoViper, 5 µm, 30 µL min-1) prior to separation on an analytical column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC, C18, 2 µm, 100 Å, 5 µm i.d. x 50 cm, nanoViper) using a gradient from 5-40 % solvent B within 98 min (solvent A: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid; solvent B: 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid, 84 % (v/v) acetonitrile). The flow rate was set to 400 nL min-1 with a column oven temperature of 60°C. Full scan data were acquired in the data-dependent mode. MS/MS analysis of the 20 most intense peaks was performed by collision-induced dissociation using the linear ion trap.  2. OxICAT labeling, tryptic digest, peptide enrichment − MOPS Minimal Medium was inoculated with 500 µL of an E. coli overnight culture and cultivated until OD600 of 0.4 was reached. The main culture was split and stressed as described above. After 15 min of stress, 1.7 mL (corresponding to 100 µg protein) of each culture were harvested and centrifuged (13.000 g, 4 °C, 10 min). The supernatant was removed carefully and pellets washed twice with 1 mL TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.5). Pellets were resuspended in 80 µL of DAB (6 M Urea, 200 mM Tris (tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane) pH 8.5, 10 mM EDTA (Ethylenediamine-tetraacetic acid), 0.5 % (w/v) Sodium Dodecyl Sulfate (SDS), freshly prepared and stored anaerobically prior to use). ICAT labeling was performed as described previously (Leichert, L. I. et al. (2008) Quantifying changes in the thiol redox proteome upon oxidative stress in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 8197–8202). Briefly, each sample was mixed with the content of one vial of light ICAT. Samples were incubated, protected from light, for 2 h at 35 °C with 300 rpm on a shaker. Samples were precipitated with 5 volumes of chilled acetone for 4 h or overnight. After washing and drying, the pellets were resuspended in 75 µL DAB supplemented with 5 µL 0.5 M TCEP and incubated for 10 min. Subsequently, samples were mixed with the content of one vial heavy ICAT and incubated for 2 h at 37°C with 300 rpm on a shaker. For each two ICAT samples, one vial of lyophilized trypsin from the ICAT kit was restored in 200 µL A. dest. Samples were resuspended in 80 µL denaturing buffer from the ICAT kit and 20 µL ACN. 100 µL of the trypsin solution was added to each sample. Digests were performed for 16 h at 37°C. Peptide purification by cation exchange and enrichment by affinity purification was carried out as described previously. For each condition (untreated, allicin-treated, and diamide-treated), three biological replicates were analyzed. LC-MS/MS analysis was performed as described above.

### Data Protocol
1. Data analysis of S-allylmercapto-modified peptides − Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant Software Version  1.5.3.12 (Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2008) MaxQuant enables high peptide identification rates, individualized p.p.b.-range mass accuracies and proteome-wide protein quantification. Nat. Biotechnol. 26, 1367–1372). For the identification, the S-allylmercapto modification of cysteines was added via the Andromeda configuration tab to the MaxQuant modification list (C3H4S; addition of 72.00337 Da). Raw data files of both replicates were loaded into MaxQuant in parallel. Oxidation (M) and S-allylmercapto were set as variable modifications. Label-free quantification was selected. After data processing, the table evidence.txt was used for further analysis. Peptides that were found modified by S-allylmercapto (“S-allylmercapto”, "Oxidation (M), S-allylmercapto”, "2 S-allylmercapto”) were copied to a new excel sheet. The peptide list was further edited in order to display only those peptides that were found in both replicates with a PEP (equivalent to p-value) above 0.01. In case a peptide appeared in various modification states, the peptide with the lowest PEP was selected. 2. Data analysis of OxICAT samples − Raw data files of allicin-treated and control samples (three replicates each; parameter group 1 to 6) were loaded to MaxQuant in parallel. ICAT-0 and ICAT-9 labels were selected in the group-specific parameters tab. Oxidation (M) was set as variable modification. After data processing, the table peptides.txt was used for further data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Allicin (diallyl thiosulfinate) from garlic is a highly potent natural antimicrobial substance. It inhibits growth of a variety of microorganisms, among them antibiotic-resistant strains. However, the precise mode of action of allicin is unknown. Here, we show that growth inhibition of Escherichia coli during allicin exposure coincides with a depletion of the glutathione pool and S-allylmercapto modification of proteins, resulting in overall decreased total sulfhydryl levels. This is accompanied by the induction of the oxidative and heat stress response. We identified and quantified the allicin-induced modification S-allylmercaptocysteine for a set of cytoplasmic proteins by using a combination of label-free mass spectrometry and differential isotope-coded affinity tag labeling of reduced and oxidized thiol residues. Activity of isocitrate lyase AceA, an S-allylmercapto-modified candidate protein, is largely inhibited by allicin treatment in vivo Allicin-induced protein modifications trigger protein aggregation, which largely stabilizes RpoH and thereby induces the heat stress response. At sublethal concentrations, the heat stress response is crucial to overcome allicin stress. Our results indicate that the mode of action of allicin is a combination of a decrease of glutathione levels, unfolding stress, and inactivation of crucial metabolic enzymes through S-allylmercapto modification of cysteines.

### Keywords
Thiol, Allicin, Escherichia coli, S-allylmercapto

### Affiliations
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute of Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum, Germany
Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Lars Leichert

### Lab Head
Dr Lars Ingo Ole Leichert
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Institute of Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry Microbial Biochemistry Universitätsstrasse 150 44780 Bochum, Germany


