### Accession
PXD018033

### Title
System-wide profiling of protein-complexes via size exclusion chromatography– mass spectrometry (SEC-MS)

### Description
In living cells most proteins are organized in stable or transient functional assemblies known as protein complexes, which control a multitude of vital cellular processes such as cell cycle progression, metabolism, and signal transduction. System-wide workflows for analysis of protein complexes using mass spectrometry based proteomics  consists of a biochemical fractionation methods which take advantage of biophysical features such as charge or mass of protein complexes. In this project, we apply size exclusion chromatography to investigate protein assemblies from a Jurkat whole cell lysate. We introduced a fast and robust in-plate sample preparation workflow which allows for replicates to be performed with fewer technical hurdles and with a high degree of reproducibility) We acquired the data in SWATH-mode in combination with a high-throughput LC-system (EVOSEP one). The bioinformatics pipeline builds on the OpenSWATH workflow combined with CCprofiler, a tool for statistical scoring of protein co-elution profiles. This method enabled us to identify more than 100 protein complexes from mammalian cells within one day of measurement.

### Sample Protocol
Jurkat cells were lysed in under mild conditions (50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, pH 7.4, supplemented with protease inhibitors, PMSF, Vanadate and 0.5 % NP-40). The lysate was clarified by ultracentrifugation at 100’000xg for 15 minutes at 4°C.We assessed protein content using a BCA assay and used 1 mg of proteins for the SEC separation. Prior to fractionation, the detergent was removed by by buffer exchange and we concentrated the sample up to 10 mg/mL. The resulting 100 uL were injected on a Yarra-SEC4000 (cooled to 4°C) and protein complexes were separated at a flow rate of 500 ul/min with 50 mM HEPES, 150 mM NaCl as mobile phase. From 11 to 26 min 60 equal fractions of 125 uL were collected and further processed employing a Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol in a 96 well format. Briefly, samples were loaded on an wetted 96 well plate format membrane, by centrifugation. After sample loading, the proteins were denatured in 8M urea 20 mM Ambic. Cysteines were reduced with 5 mM  for 30 min and alkylated  with 10 mM IAA in 20 mM Ambic in the dark for 1 hr. The membrane was washed three times with 200 uL of 20 mM Ambic to remove remaining salt from the SEC running buffer and to remove the residual urea. Digestion of proteins  was performed with 1 ug of Trypsin and 0.1 ug of Lys-C in 50 uL of Ambic per fraction over night at 37 °C . Fractions were collected by centrifugation. Loading, washing and sample collection were performed in 30 min up to 1 hour of centrifugation at 1800xg. Resulting peptides were dried by vacuum-drying. For MS-analysis peptides were loaded on C18 tips (Evotips) following the manufacturers protocol. Fractions were measured in DIA-mode following a 64-variable window scheme with a 20 minutes gradient on an Triple TOF 6600 (Sciex) interfaced with the EVOSEP one system.

### Data Protocol
Resulting *wiff and *wiff scan files were converted to non-centroided *mzXML files (Proteo Wizard). The resulting files were analyzed with OpenSWATH (Open MS 2.4) employing as an assay library a subset of the PanHuman library. Identified peaks were scored with PyProphet (version 2.1.4. dev2) and filtered on peptide level (run-specific) and protein level (global). Filtered peaks were aligned with TRIC (v.1) allowing to re-align files along the SEC-gradient. The resulting output was loaded to CCprofiler (v.1). An additional filtering steps on peptide-level allowed to control the FDR below 1 %. Protein quantification was performed by summing the TOP3 intense peptides per protein. Identified proteins were analyzed with the R-package CCprofiler to identify co-eluting proteins and identify protein complexes.

### Publication Abstract
In living cells, most proteins are organized in stable or transient functional assemblies, protein complexes, which control a multitude of vital cellular processes such as cell cycle progression, metabolism, and signal transduction. Over several decades, specific protein complexes have been analyzed by structural biology methods, initially X-ray crystallography and more recently single particle cryoEM. In parallel, mass spectrometry (MS)-based methods including in vitro affinity-purification coupled to MS or in vivo protein proximity-dependent labeling methods have proven particularly effective to detect complexes, thus nominating new assemblies for structural analysis. Those approaches, however, are either of limited in throughput or require specifically engineered protein systems.In this chapter, we present protocols for a workflow that supports the parallel analysis of multiple complexes from the same biological sample with respect to abundance, subunit composition, and stoichiometry. It consists of the separation of native complexes by size-exclusion chromatography (SEC) and the subsequent mass spectrometric analysis of the proteins in consecutive SEC fractions. In particular, we describe (1) optimized conditions to achieve native protein complex separation by SEC, (2) the preparation of the SEC fractions for MS analysis, (3) the acquisition of the MS data at high throughput via SWATH/DIA (data-independent analysis) mass spectrometry and short chromatographic gradients, and (4) a set of bioinformatic tools for the targeted analysis of protein complexes. Altogether, the parallel measurement of a high number of complexes from a single biological sample results in unprecedented system-level insights into the remodeling of cellular protein complexes in response to perturbations of a broad range of cellular systems.

### Keywords
Protein complex analysis, Protein co-elution profiling, Sec-ms

### Affiliations
ETH Zurich
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.

### Submitter
Fabian Frommelt

### Lab Head
Dr , Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland.


