### Accession
PXD013429

### Title
Human urinary extracellular vesicles protein LC-MS/MS

### Description
Urinary extracellular vesicles (uEV) are a precious new source of biomarkers reflecting the physiological state of the upstream parent cells and organ systems. However, urinary Tamm-Horsfall Protein (THP; uromodulin) interferes heavily with all vesicle isolation attempts, precipitates with normal urinary proteins thus representing an unwanted “contaminant” in urinary assays. Here we developed a simple method to manage THP efficiently. Accordingly, uEV were isolated by hydrostatic filtration dialysis (HFD) and treated with a solution of urea to release most uEV. Presence of uEV was then confirmed by transmission electron microscopy, Western blot and proteomic profiling in MS, all showing that urea treatment did not affect integrity of uEV.

### Sample Protocol
First morning void urine samples were collected from healthy laboratory staff during three consecutive days, aged 20-44 (N=4). First morning void urine was processed within 3h without adding protease inhibitors. Urine was anonymously labeled and pooled together. uEV were enriched by HFD according to our previous protocol (Musante et al. 2014) with minor modifications (Tataruch-Weinert et al. 2016). One hundred μg as dry pellet of HFDa U (Figure 1B) was resolubilised and reduced in100μl of 10mM Tris (carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), 8M Urea, 0.1mM Ethyldiaminotetracetic acid (EDTA) and 0.2M Tris buffer PH8.8 in dark for 1h at room temperature (RT), followed by alkylation with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in dark for 2h. Finally, 40mM N-acetyl cysteine (NAC) was used to quench the excess of IAA. The sample was then precipitated by TCA-Acetone to eliminate the excess of salts. Samples were digested by sequencing grade trypsin in presence of 1%  (w/v) sodium deoxychlate (DOC) in 50mM Tris-HCl pH7.8 in a ratio of 1μg of trypsin for 50μg of total protein, at +37oC overnight. After the digestion samples were acidified with 1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) to precipitate DOC and then the supernatant, along with the external proteome, was cleaned up by Sep-Pak C18 cartridge (Waters Associates, Milford, Ma) according to manufacturer’s instructions.  Cleaned up samples were dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 2% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) solution, directly loaded onto a reversed-phase analytical column (300µm i.d.×5mm, packed with Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18, 5µm, 100A, nanoViper). The gradient was comprised of an increase from 5% to 50% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) over 65 min, and climbing to 90% in 4min, then holding at 90% for 6min. All was done at a constant flow rate of 300nl/min. The MS analysis was performed on Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were subjected to NSI source followed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) in Q ExactiveTM (Thermo Fisher) coupled online to the UPLC. Intact peptides were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 70,000. Peptides were selected for MS/MS using NCE setting as 27; ion fragments were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 17,500. A data-dependent procedure that alternated between one MS scan followed by 20 MS/MS scans was applied for the top 20 precursor ions above a threshold ion count of 1E4 in the MS survey scan with 30.0s dynamic exclusion. The electrospray voltage applied was 2.0 kV. Automatic gain control (AGC) was used to prevent overfilling of the ion trap; 1E5 ions were accumulated for generation of MS/MS spectra. For MS scans, the m/z scan range was 350 to 1800 m/z. Fixed first mass was set as 100 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry original data file was processed and converted by MM file conversion software to obtain the MGF format file. The MGF file was submitted to ProteinPilot Software 5.0.1.0, for data analysis. Within ProteinPilot software, the Paragon algorithm was employed to search against Uniprot-Human database (70615 items,  June 2016). The parameters were set as follows:  The instrument was Orbi MS (1-3ppm), Orbi MS/MS, sample type: identification, cysteine alkylation with lodoacetic acid; biological modifications were selected as ID focus, trypsin digestion, bias correction was used while no background correction was used. For FDR threshold levels of 1, 5, and 10 % were assessed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Urea, Biomarker, Urinary extracellular vesicle, Tamm-horsfall protein, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
The 3rd Affiliated Hospital Of Southern Medical University
Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Finland

### Submitter
Xiaomeng Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Harry Holthofer
Institute for Molecular Medicine Finland (FIMM), University of Helsinki, Finland


