### Accession
PXD038693

### Title
The central nervous system’s proteogenomic and spatial imprint upon systemic viral infection, like SARS-CoV-2

### Description
During severe systemic infections with and without sepsis neurological changes are common and range from sickness behavior to septic associated encephalopathy. Encephalopathy is due to a system-wide inflammatory response leading to an often fatal increase in the permeability of the blood-brain barrier. To elucidate the cytotoxic impact and brain-specific host response during coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), we profiled the olfactory mucosa, olfactory bulb, brainstem and cerebellum from deceased COVID-19 patients who underwent rapid autopsy.

### Sample Protocol
We analyzed autopsy tissue samples from COVID-19 and control patients. The study was approved by the local ethics committees at Charité (approval numbers: EA1/144/13, EA2/066/20, EA1/075/19) and the Charité-BIH COVID-19 research board and was in compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki.   Sample preparation for proteomics 75 µl of tissue lysis buffer (Covaris 520284) were added to approximately 5 mg of different tissue types in AFA-TUBE TPX 8-strips (Covaris 520292). Proteins were extracted on a Covaris LE220Rsc (3 cycles of 375 PIP, 25% DF, 50CPB, 20 repeats, 10 s pulse duration, 10 s delay, 12°C, 3 mm dither @ 20 mm/s). Strips were shortly centrifuged and proteins quantified (Pierce Protein Assay Kit, 23225). 25 µg of protein was transferred to a 96 well plate and filled to 50 µl with water. The lysates were processed on a Biomek i7 workstation using the SP3 protocol as previously described with single-step reduction and alkylation (PMID: 32129943). Briefly, 16.6 μl reduction and alkylation buffer (40 mM TCEP, 160 mM CAA, 200mM ABC) were added, the samples were incubated for 5 min at 95°C. To bind the proteins, 200 μg paramagnetic beads (1:1 ratio of hydrophilic/hydrophobic beads) were added and proteins precipitated with 50 % ACN. The samples were washed 3 times with EtOH and once with ACN, before reconstitution in 35 μl 100 mM ABC, addition of 2 μl trypsin/LysC (1 μg/ 0,01ug) overnight digestion at 37 °C. The reaction was stopped by adding formic acid up to a final concentration of 0.5 %. Samples were then transferred to a new plate and used for LC-MS/MS analysis without additional conditioning or clean-up.   Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry Analysis (LC-MS) 1.25 µg peptides were concentrated for 3 min on a trap column (PepMap C18, 5 mm x 300 μm x 5 μm, 100Ǻ, Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a buffer containing 2:98 (v/v) acetonitrile/water containing 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid at a flow rate of 20 μl/min. They were separated by a 250 mm LC column (Acclaim PepMap C18, 2 μm; 100 Å; 75μm, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The mobile phase (A) was 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid in water, and (B) 80 % acetonitrile in 0.1 % (v/v) formic acid. In 128 min total acquisition, time gradient B increased in 90 min to 25 %, and in 20 min to 50 % with a flow rate of 300 nl/ min. For the tissue samples, the Orbitrap worked in centroid mode with 12 m/z DIA spectra (12 m/z precursor isolation windows at 17,500 resolution, AGC target 1e6, maximum inject time 60 ms, 27 NCE) using an overlapping window pattern. Precursor MS spectra (m/z 400-1000) were analyzed with 35,000 resolution after 60 ms accumulation of ions to a 1e6 target value in centroid mode.Typical mass spectrometric conditions were as follows: spray voltage, 2.1 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature, 275 °C; normalized HCD collision energy 27%. Additionally, the background ions m/z 445.1200 acted as lock mass.

### Data Protocol
For every tissue, a tissue specific library was constructed using standard settings in library free mode with DIA-NN (version 1.7.16) (PMID: 31768060). The libraries were automatically refined based on the project dataset at 0.01 global q-value (using the “Generate spectral library” option in DIA-NN). The output was filtered at 0.01 false discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide level. For gas phase fractionation (GPF), 6 single 1.25 μg injections of pooled tissue samples were analyzed by online nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry as described above. For GPF, an overlapping window pattern from narrow mass ranges using window placements (i.e., 395-505, 495-605,595-705, 695-805,795-805,895-905 m/z) was set. Two precursor spectra, a wide spectrum (395-505 m/z at 35,000 resolution) and a narrow spectrum matching the range using an AGC target of 1e6 and a maximum inject time of 60 ms were analyzed every 25 MS/MS with 4m/z precursor isolation windows at resolution of 17,500.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Covid-19, Encephalopathy

### Affiliations
Core  Facility -High-Throughput  Mass  Spectrometry,  Charité -Universitätsmedizin Berlin,  corporate  member  of  Freie  Universität  Berlin,  Humboldt-Universität  zu  Berlin and Berlin Institute of Health (BIH), Berlin, Germany
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Neuropathology, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Michael Mülleder

### Lab Head
Dr Helena Radbruch
Universitätsmedizin Berlin, corporate member of Freie Universität Berlin and Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin, Department of Neuropathology, Charitéplatz 1, 10117 Berlin, Germany


