### Accession
PXD002181

### Title
Metabolic pathways affected by Anaplasma in tick cells

### Description
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is an emerging zoonotic pathogen that causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis. These intracellular bacteria establish infection by affecting cell function in both the vertebrate host and the tick vector, Ixodes scapularis. Previous studies have characterized the tick transcriptome and proteome in response to A. phagocytophilum infection. However, in the post-genomic era, the integration of omics datasets through a systems biology approach allows network-based analyses to describe the complexity and functionality of biological systems such as host-pathogen interactions and the discovery of new targets for prevention and control of infectious diseases. This study reports for the first time a systems biology integration of metabolomics, transcriptomics and proteomics data to characterize essential metabolic pathways involved in the response of tick cells to A. phagocytophilum infection. The results showed that infection affected protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum and glucose metabolic pathways in tick cells. These results supported tick-Anaplasma co-evolution by providing new evidence of how tick cells limit pathogen infection, while the pathogen benefits from the tick cell response to establish infection. The results suggested that A. phagocytophilum induces protein misfolding to limit the tick cell response and facilitate infection, but requires protein degradation to prevent ER stress and cell apoptosis to survive in infected cells. Additionally, A. phagocytophilum may benefit from the tick cell’s ability to limit bacterial infection through PEPCK inhibition leading to decreased glucose metabolism, which also results in the inhibition of cell apoptosis that increases infection of tick cells. These results support the use of this experimental approach to systematically identify tick cell pathways and molecular mechanisms involved in tick-pathogen interactions.

### Sample Protocol
I. scapularis tick cells and sample preparation The I. scapularis embryo-derived tick cell line ISE6, provided by Ulrike Munderloh, University of Minnesota, USA, was cultured in L-15B300 medium as described previously (Blouin et al., 2003), except that the osmotic pressure was lowered by the addition of one-fourth sterile water by volume. Tick cells were inoculated with A. phagocytophilum (NY18 isolate)-infected HL-60 cells as described previously (Munderloh et al., 1999; de la Fuente et al., 2005). Uninfected and infected cultures (N=3 independent cultures with approximately 107 cells each) were sampled at 7 days post-infection (dpi) (percent infected cells 71-77% (Ave±SD, 74±3). The percentage of cells infected with A. phagocytophilum was calculated by examining at least 200 cells using a 100x oil immersion objective. The cells were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 3 min, and cell pellets were lyophilized for 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) or frozen in liquid nitrogen until used for protein and RNA extraction. Cells from the three replicates of each condition were pooled in 500 μl lysis buffer (phosphate buffered saline (PBS), 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with Complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche, Basel, Switzerland) and homogenized by passing through a needle (27G). Samples were sonicated for 1 min in an ultrasonic cooled bath followed by vortexin for 10 sec. After 3 cycles of sonication-vortex, total cell extracts were centrifuged at 200 x g for 5 min to remove cell debris. The supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined using the BCA Protein Assay (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with BSA as standard. Total RNA was extracted from aliquotes of the same cell cultures using TriReagent (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA) following the manufacturer’s recommendations. Proteomics data collection and analysis The protein extracts (150 µg) from control and infected tick cells were precipitated following the methanol/chloroform procedure (Wessel and Flügge, 1984), resuspended in 100 µl Laemmli sample buffer and loaded into 1.2-cm wide wells of a conventional SDS-PAGE gel (0.5 mm-thick, 4% stacking, 10% resolving). The electrophoretic run was stopped as soon as the front entered 3 mm into the resolving gel, so that the whole proteome became concentrated in the stacking/resolving gel interface. The unseparated protein band was visualized by staining with GelCode Blue Stain Reagent (Thermo Scientific), excised, cut into cubes (2 × 2 mm) and submitted to water and acetonitrile-washes prior to in-gel reduction with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1 h. The gel pieces were then acetonitrile-washed and treated for 1 h in the dark with 50 mM iodoacetamide. Protein samples were digested overnight at 37 °C with 60 ng/µl sequencing grade trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) at a 5:1 protein:trypsin (w/w) ratio in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.8 containing 10% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN). The resulting tryptic peptides from each proteome were extracted by incubation (30 min) in 12 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.8. Trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% and the peptides were finally desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA), dried down and stored at -20 ºC until reverse phase-high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC)-LIT analysis. The desalted protein digests were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid and analyzed by liquid chromatography-tandem MS (LC-MS/MS) using an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an linear ion trap mass spectrometer model LTQ (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1x20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075x100 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 300 nl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 180-min gradient from 5 to 40% solvent B in solvent A (Solvent A: 0.1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0.1% formic acid in ACN). ESI ionization was done using a Fused-silica PicoTip Emitter ID 10 mm (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) interface. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 µscan), followed by fifteen data dependent MS/MS scans (Top 15), using an isolation width of 2 mass-to-charge ratio units, normalized collision energy of 35%, and dynamic exclusion applied during 30 sec periods.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS raw files generated with Xcalibur (version 2.1, Thermo Scientific) were searched against a compiled database containing all sequences from Ixodida (77,195 Uniprot entries in March 2015) and Anaplasmataceae (64,677 Uniprot entries in March 2015) (http://www.uniprot.org) supplemented with the sequence of porcine trypsin and human keratins using the SEQUEST algorithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.4, Thermo Scientific). The following constraints were used for the searches: tryptic cleavage after Arg and Lys, up to two missed cleavage sites and tolerances of 1 Da for precursor ions and 0.8 Da for MS/MS fragment ions and the searches were performed allowing optional Met oxidation and Cys carbamidomethylation. Searches were also performed against a decoy database in an integrated decoy approach. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.05 was considered as condition for successful peptide assignments and at least 2 peptides per protein were the necessary condition for protein identification. Three biological replicates were used for each of uninfected and infected tick cells and after discarding Anaplasma proteins, the total number of peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) for each tick protein were normalized against the total number of PSMs in tick cells and compared between control and infected cells by Chi2-test (p≤0.05). GO analysis for BP was done by Blast2GO software (version 3.0; www.blast2go.com) (Villar et al., 2014).

### Publication Abstract
Anaplasma phagocytophilum is an emerging zoonotic pathogen that causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis. These intracellular bacteria establish infection by affecting cell function in both the vertebrate host and the tick vector, Ixodes scapularis. Previous studies have characterized the tick transcriptome and proteome in response to A. phagocytophilum infection. However, in the postgenomic era, the integration of omics datasets through a systems biology approach allows network-based analyses to describe the complexity and functionality of biological systems such as host-pathogen interactions and the discovery of new targets for prevention and control of infectious diseases. This study reports the first systems biology integration of metabolomics, transcriptomics, and proteomics data to characterize essential metabolic pathways involved in the tick response to A. phagocytophilum infection. The ISE6 tick cells used in this study constitute a model for hemocytes involved in pathogen infection and immune response. The results showed that infection affected protein processing in endoplasmic reticulum and glucose metabolic pathways in tick cells. These results supported tick-Anaplasma co-evolution by providing new evidence of how tick cells limit pathogen infection, while the pathogen benefits from the tick cell response to establish infection. Additionally, ticks benefit from A. phagocytophilum infection by increasing survival while pathogens guarantee transmission. The results suggested that A. phagocytophilum induces protein misfolding to limit the tick cell response and facilitate infection but requires protein degradation to prevent ER stress and cell apoptosis to survive in infected cells. Additionally, A. phagocytophilum may benefit from the tick cell's ability to limit bacterial infection through PEPCK inhibition leading to decreased glucose metabolism, which also results in the inhibition of cell apoptosis that increases infection of tick cells. These results support the use of this experimental approach to systematically identify cell pathways and molecular mechanisms involved in tick-pathogen interactions. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD002181.

### Keywords
Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Rp-lc-lit-ms, Ixodes scapularis ise6 cells

### Affiliations
University of Castilla- La Mancha
Proteomics Lab. SaBio research group. Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos, IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM)

### Submitter
Margarita Villar

### Lab Head
Dr Margarita Villar
Proteomics Lab. SaBio research group. Instituto de Investigación en Recursos Cinegéticos, IREC (CSIC-UCLM-JCCM)


