### Accession
PXD038042

### Title
IFNγ protects motor neurons from oxidative stress via enhanced global protein synthesis in FUS-associated Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis

### Description
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 (ALS6) is a familial subtype of ALS linked to Fused in Sarcoma (FUS) gene mutation. FUS mutations lead to decreased global protein synthesis, but the mechanism that drives this has not been established. Here, we used ALS6 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs) to study the effect of the ALS6 FUSR521H mutation on the translation machinery in motor neurons (MNs). We find, in agreement with findings of others, that protein synthesis is decreased in ALS6 MNs. Furthermore, ALS6 MNs are more sensitive to oxidative stress and display reduced expression of TGF-β and mTORC gene pathways  when stressed. Finally, we show that IFNγ treatment reduces apoptosis of ALS6 MNs exposed to oxidative stress and partially restores the translation rates in ALS6 MNs. Overall, these findings suggest that a functional IFNγ response is important for FUS-mediated protein synthesis, possibly by FUS nuclear translocation in ALS6.

### Sample Protocol
Co-Immunoprecipitation Co-Ips for FUS were performed using a Immunoprecipitation Kit Dynabeads Protein A/G (ThermoFisher) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Briefly, protein A/G beads were incubated with 10μL of the relevant antibody or mouse IgG as a control. Cells were washed once with PBS and lysed in 500 μL/well lysis buffer containing 20 mM Tris pH 8.0, 10% glycerol, 135 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, and protease inhibitors (Complete, EDTA-free, Roche) for 15 min on ice. After harvesting, cells were centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 5 minutes at 4°C to remove cell debris. The supernatant was incubated with antibody-conjugated beads for 1 hour at 4°C. Following 3 washing steps with wash buffer, beads were taken up in RapiGest (Waters) for 10 minutes at 65°C.  Liquid Chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry Samples were digested using RapiGest (Waters) as a surfactant agent. Proteins were reduced with DTT (Sigma) and alkylated with iodoacetamide (Sigma). Samples were further digested with trypsin proteomic level (Promega) in enzyme:protein ratio of 1:50. Samples were processed by nanoACQUITY system with a binary pump, an auxiliary pump and a sampler. Desalted and concentrated peptides were captured in a Symmetry C18 column (2nm x 180mm, 5 um) in a mobile phase (composed of water with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) at 15uL/ min flow rate for 5 minutes. Further, peptides were separated in a analytical HSSC18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, 1.7 μm) by elution with a linear gradient of 2% DMSO (Sigma)  in water with 0.1% formic acid (Sigma) and 5% DMSO in acetonitrile(LiChrosolv) with 0.1% formic acid. The proportion of the organic solution was increased from 0% to 60% in 80 minutes.    The chromatographic system was directly coupled to a hybrid quadrupole orbitrap tandem mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Scientific), equipped with a Nano Flex source. Acquisition of spectral data was obtained by a data dependent top-15 method in which the spectrometer chooses dynamically the most abundant not-yet sequenced precursor ions from a survey scan from 390 to 1650 m/z (except for the monocharged and those with charges exceeding 7) at 70,000 (at m/z 200) of resolution and AGC target 5 e 6. Sequencing was achieved dissociating the precursor ion with normalized collision energy of 35, resolution equal to 17,500 and AGC target of 5 e 4.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were processed using MaxQuant 1.4.0.8 proteomics data analysis workflow 27. Protein identification was performed by the Andromeda search tool using the database of the human proteome UniProtKB (SWISSPROT November 2017). The following criteria were applied for protein identification: 1) a maximum of two incomplete cleavages by trypsin, 2) fixed modification by carbamidomethylation of cysteines, and 3) variable modification by acetylation of the N-terminal portion and methionine oxidation. Quantification was based on the LFQ 28 label-free method.

### Publication Abstract
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis type 6 (ALS6) is a familial subtype of ALS linked to Fused in Sarcoma (FUS) gene mutation. FUS mutations lead to decreased global protein synthesis, but the mechanism that drives this has not been established. Here, we used ALS6 patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells (hIPSCs) to study the effect of the ALS6 FUS<sup>R521H</sup> mutation on the translation machinery in motor neurons (MNs). We find, in agreement with findings of others, that protein synthesis is decreased in FUS<sup>R521H</sup> MNs. Furthermore, FUS<sup>R521H</sup> MNs are more sensitive to oxidative stress and display reduced expression of TGF-&#x3b2; and mTORC gene pathways when stressed. Finally, we show that IFN&#x3b3; treatment reduces apoptosis of FUS<sup>R521H</sup> MNs exposed to oxidative stress and partially restores the translation rates in FUS<sup>R521H</sup> MNs. Overall, these findings suggest that a functional IFN&#x3b3; response is important for FUS-mediated protein synthesis, possibly by FUS nuclear translocation in ALS6.

### Keywords
Als; als6; fus; protein synthesis; ifny

### Affiliations
European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University of Groningen, Groningen, 9713 AV, the Netherlands.
University of São Paulo

### Submitter
AMANDA ASSONI

### Lab Head
Dr Floris Foijer
European Research Institute for the Biology of Ageing, University of Groningen, Groningen, 9713 AV, the Netherlands.


