### Accession
PXD009856

### Title
Proteomics of Ca. Riegeria standrea – the chemosynthetic symbionts of the marine flatworm Paracatenula from the Bay of Sant´Andrea (Elba, Italy)

### Description
Paracatenula are marine catenulid flatworms occuring in shallow water sediments. Adult Paracatenula lack a mouth and a digestive system. Instead, a trophosome containing intracellular alphaproteobacterial symbionts, namely Ca. Riegeria fill most of the worm´s body (Gruber-Vodicka et al., 2011). Paracatenula sp. ‘standrea’ that harbor Ca. Riegeria sp. 812A (standrea) were sampled in Elba, Italy in April 2016. Based on the genome of Ca. Riegeria sp. 812A (standrea) we discovered a versatile combination of storage and biosynthesis and a convergence with unrelated intracellular thiotrophic symbionts. Proteomic analyses were performed to investigate which symbiont genes related to the host nutrition were expressed.

### Sample Protocol
We prepared tryptic digests from eight samples (4x one specimen, 4x three specimens) following the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol described by Wisniewski et al.  (2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). In brief, 35 µl of SDT-lysis buffer (4% (w/v) SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 0.1 M DTT) was added to each sample. Samples were heated for lysis to 95 ° C for 10 minutes and the entire lysate (without pelleting)was mixed with 200 µl of UA solution (8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl pH 8.5) in a 10 kDa MWCO 500 µl centrifugal filter unit (VWR International) and centrifuged at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 200 µl of UA solution were added again and centrifugal filter spun at 14,000 x g for 40 min. 100 µl of IAA solution (0.05 M iodoacetamide in UA solution) were added to the filter and incubated at 22 ° C for 20 min. The IAA solution was removed by centrifugation and the filter was washed three times by adding 100 µl of UA solution and then centrifuging. The buffer on the filter was then changed to ABC (50 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate), by washing the filter three times with 100 µl of ABC. 2 µg of MS grade trypsin (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) in 40 µl of ABC were added to the filter and filters incubated over night in a wet chamber at 37 °C. The next day, peptides were eluted by centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 20 min, followed by addition of 50 µl of 0.5 M NaCl and again centrifugation. Peptides were not desalted. Approximate peptide concentrations were determined using the Pierce Micro BCA assay (Thermo Scientific Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Peptide concentrations in all samples were below the detection limit of the assay. Samples were analyzed by 1D-LC-MS/MS. Two wash runs and one blank run were done between samples to reduce carry over. For each run, 20 µl of peptide solution were loaded onto a 5 mm, 300 µm ID C18 Acclaim® PepMap100 pre-column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and desalted on the pre-column. After desalting the peptides the pre-column was switched in line with a 50 cm x 75 µm analytical EASY-Spray column packed with PepMap RSLC C18, 2 µm material (Thermo Fisher Scientific), which was heated to 45 °C. The analytical column was connected via an Easy-Spray source to a Q Exactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were separated on the analytical column using a 260 min. gradient as described by Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)) and mass spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap as described by Petersen et al. (2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Roughly 110,000 MS/MS spectra were acquired per sample.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification a database was created using all protein sequences predicted from the Ca. Riegeria standrea genome. The cRAP protein sequence database (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/) containing protein sequences of common laboratory contaminants was appended to the database. The final database contained 1460 protein sequences. For protein identification MS/MS spectra were searched against the database using the Sequest HT node in Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described previously (Petersen et al. 2016, Nat. Microb. 2(16195)). Only proteins identified with medium or high confidence were retained resulting in an overall false discovery rate of < 5%. False discovery rate was controlled using the FidoCT node in Proteome Discoverer. A total of 407 different symbionts proteins were identified.

### Publication Abstract
Hosts of chemoautotrophic bacteria typically have much higher biomass than their symbionts and consume symbiont cells for nutrition. In contrast to this, chemoautotrophic <i>Candidatus</i> Riegeria symbionts in mouthless <i>Paracatenula</i> flatworms comprise up to half of the biomass of the consortium. Each species of <i>Paracatenula</i> harbors a specific <i>Ca</i> Riegeria, and the endosymbionts have been vertically transmitted for at least 500 million years. Such prolonged strict vertical transmission leads to streamlining of symbiont genomes, and the retained physiological capacities reveal the functions the symbionts provide to their hosts. Here, we studied a species of <i>Paracatenula</i> from Sant'Andrea, Elba, Italy, using genomics, gene expression, imaging analyses, as well as targeted and untargeted MS. We show that its symbiont, <i>Ca</i> R. santandreae has a drastically smaller genome (1.34 Mb) than the symbiont&#xb4;s free-living relatives (4.29-4.97 Mb) but retains a versatile and energy-efficient metabolism. It encodes and expresses a complete intermediary carbon metabolism and enhanced carbon fixation through anaplerosis and accumulates massive intracellular inclusions such as sulfur, polyhydroxyalkanoates, and carbohydrates. Compared with symbiotic and free-living chemoautotrophs, <i>Ca</i> R. santandreae's versatility in energy storage is unparalleled in chemoautotrophs with such compact genomes. Transmission EM as well as host and symbiont expression data suggest that <i>Ca</i> R. santandreae largely provisions its host via outer-membrane vesicle secretion. With its high share of biomass in the symbiosis and large standing stocks of carbon and energy reserves, it has a unique role for bacterial symbionts-serving as the primary energy storage for its animal host.

### Keywords
Alphaproteobacteria, 1d-lc, Metaproteomics, Chemosynthetic symbiosis, Genome reduction, Comparative genomics, Vertical transmission, Metaproteome, Thiotrophic endosymbionts, Convergent evolution, Ecophysiology

### Affiliations
North Carolina State University
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany

### Submitter
Manuel Kleiner

### Lab Head
Dr Harald Gruber-Vodicka
Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology, Bremen, Germany


