### Accession
PXD004173

### Title
N2 versus octr-1 shotgun proteomics nano MS/MS

### Description
by using a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics approach, we discovered that OCTR-1 regulates innate immunity by suppressing translation and the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways at the protein level.

### Sample Protocol
The worm pellet was ground into fine powder using a single 2.8 mm i.d. steel ball with a TissueLyser II (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) at a frequency of 30 Hz for 30 sec, followed by the addition of 100 μl extraction solvent of PBS buffer, pH 7.5, with protease inhibitor and vortexing. Supernatants were collected after centrifugation at 16,000 x g (10 min, 4 °C). Protein was then quantified with a Qubit Protein Assay Kit (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) in compliance with the manufacturer’s protocol. Disulfide bonds were reduced using 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at a ratio of 1:10 DTT/sample volume and incubated at 50 °C for 45 min. Cysteine bonds were then alkylated with 200 mM iodoacetamide at the same volume ratio for 20 min at room temperature. Finally, protein was digested with trypsin (G-Biosciences, St. Louis, MO) at a 1:50 ratio of trypsin/protein, and incubated at 37 °C for 12 hr.  The peptide samples were subjected to Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid with an Easy-nLC 1000 ultra-high pressure LC on a Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18 column (2 μm, 50 μm x 15 cm). The peptides were separated over 115 min gradient eluted at 400 nL/min with 0.1% formic acid (FA) in water (solvent A) and 0.1% FA in acetonitrile (solvent B) (5-30% B in 85 min, followed by 30-50% B over 10 min and 50-97% B over 10 min). The run was completed by holding a 97% B for 10 min.

### Data Protocol
MS1 data was acquired on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometry using a full scan method according to the following parameters: scan range 400-1500 m/z, Orbitrap resolution 120,000; AGC target 400,000; and maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 data were collected using the following parameters: rapid scan rate, HCD collision energy 35%, 1.6 m/z isolation window, AGC 2,000 and maximum injection time of 50 ms. MS2 precursors were selected for a 3 s cycle. The precursors with an assigned monoisotopic m/z and a charge state of 2-7 were interrogated. The precursors were filtered using a 60 s dynamic exclusion window. MS/MS spectra were searched using Thermo Scientific Proteome Discoverer software version 2.0 with SEQUEST® against uniprot Caenorhabditis elegans database (TaxID=6239). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.8 Da respectively and allowing up to two missed cleavages. Static modification used was carbamidomethylation (C). The high confidence level filter with false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to the peptides. Protein relative quantitation was achieved by extracting peptide areas with the Proteome Discoverer 2.0 (Thermo Scientific, San Jose, CA) and 3 unique peptides per protein were used for the protein quantitation analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Upon pathogen infection, microbial killing pathways and cellular stress pathways are rapidly activated by the host innate immune system. These pathways must be tightly regulated because insufficient or excessive immune responses have deleterious consequences. Increasing evidence indicates that the nervous system regulates the immune system to confer coordinated protection to the host. However, the precise mechanisms of neural-immune communication remain unclear. Previously we have demonstrated that OCTR-1, a neuronal G protein-coupled receptor, functions in the sensory neurons ASH and ASI to suppress innate immune responses in non-neural tissues against Pseudomonas aeruginosa in Caenorhabditis elegans. In the current study, by using a mass spectrometry-based quantitative proteomics approach, we discovered that OCTR-1 regulates innate immunity by suppressing translation and the unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways at the protein level. Functional assays revealed that OCTR-1 inhibits specific protein synthesis factors such as ribosomal protein RPS-1 and translation initiation factor EIF-3.J to reduce infection-triggered protein synthesis and UPR. Translational inhibition by chemicals abolishes the OCTR-1-controlled innate immune responses, indicating that activation of the OCTR-1 pathway is dependent on translation upregulation such as that induced by pathogen infection. Because OCTR-1 downregulates protein translation activities, the OCTR-1 pathway could function to suppress excessive responses to infection or to restore protein homeostasis after infection.

### Keywords
C. elegans, Proteomics, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Ms/ms, Octr-1

### Affiliations
Department of Biomedical Sciences Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine Washington State University Spokane, WA 99202, USA
Washington State University

### Submitter
DURAI SELLEGOUNDER

### Lab Head
Dr Jingru Sun
Department of Biomedical Sciences Elson S. Floyd College of Medicine Washington State University Spokane, WA 99202, USA


