### Accession
PXD037268

### Title
Microbiome biomarkers for Improved  Screening of Anal Cance

### Description
Anal cancer is a leading neoplasia in people with immune impartments populations, and the lack of an accurate screening test challenges its prevention. Because the bacteria living in the anal epithelium the anal microbiota seems to influence and be influenced by cancer development, specific patterns of anal microbes could help in the diagnosis of precancerous anal lesions. We aimed to discover microbial biomarkers of anal precancer in high-risk populations. We discovered 12 proteins, previously reported to be associated with cancer progression, that were more abundant in the anal bacterial from subjects with precancerous lesions.

### Sample Protocol
Cryopreserved anal samples were thawed at 4ºC overnight (16 hours) and centrifuged the entire content in a 1.5 ml-Eppendorf for 30 min at 13000 rpm and 4 °C to separate the cellular pellet. After separating the supernatant, cells were dissolved on ice with 300 µl chaotropic lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 5% 3-[(3-cholamidopropyl) dimethylammonio]-1-propanesulfonate and 10 mM 1,4-dithiothreitol). After 15 incubation on ice, cells were further disrupted by sonicatoon using a pin Sonicator® 3000 (Misonix, New Highway Farmingdale, NY, USA) for a total time of 2 min (10 W) on ice (3 cycles × 20 sec with 1.0 min icecooling between each cycle). The extracts were then centrifuged for 20 min at 13000 rpm and 4 °C and the supernatants were then carefully aspirated (to avoid disturbing the pellet), transferred to new tubes, and stored at − 80 °C until use for the proteomic analysis and metabolite measurements. The proteomic analysis was performed at the Hohenheim University, Stuttgart, Germany. After peptide purification, an internal standard (peptide mixture of an enolase from yeast) was spiked before mass spectrometric analyses. The peptides were measured with a Thermo qExactive HF-X LC-MS instrument with a 90 min LC gradient.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using iMetaLab (v2.1) metaproteomics pipeline. Searches were  done using the human gut integrated non-redundant gene catalog (IGC), which contains ~9.9 million genes  (https://www.nature.com/articles/nbt.2942). Quantification was done by Maxquant implemented in the  iMetalab pipeline resulting in label-free quantification values (LFQ). LFQ data were normalized by using the  LFQ values of the enolase across all measurements.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Cancer, Microbiome

### Affiliations
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany
University of Hohenheim

### Submitter
Jana Seifert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Jana Seifert
University of Hohenheim, Institute of Animal Science, Stuttgart, Germany


