### Accession
PXD015872

### Title
Dose-dependent phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate mediated monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation induces unique proteomic signatures in THP1 cells

### Description
Macrophages are sentinels of the immune system and THP1 monocytic cells are one of the widely used models to study immune responses in macrophages. Several monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation protocols exist with phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) being widely used and accepted. However, the concentrations and durations of PMA treatment to induce differentiation varies widely in published literature. In this study, we determined the proteome expression dynamics of THP1 macrophages differentiated from monocytes by three commonly used PMA-based differentiation protocols using dimethyl labeling-based quantitative proteomics analysis.  Our analysis shows that variations in PMA concentration and varying periods of rest post-stimulation result in downstream differences in proteome expression and cellular processes. We demonstrate that these differences result in altered expression of cytokines upon stimulation with different TLR ligands. Together, these findings provide a valuable resource that significantly expands the knowledge of protein expression dynamics in in vitro models of macrophages which in turn has profound impact on the immune responses being studied.

### Sample Protocol
Human THP-1 monocytic leukemia cells (ATCC) were cultured in RPMI 1640 (Sigma-Aldrich) medium containing 10% heat-activated fetal calf serum (FCS), 2mM L-glutamine, 100 nM penicillin/streptomycin (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and 20 μM β-mercaptoethanol (Sigma-Aldrich). THP-1 cells were differentiated into resting macrophages by resuspending THP-1 cells in growth medium containing 5 or 50 ng/ml phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA; Sigma-Aldrich) and cultured for indicated time. The treatment conditions included: (i) 50ng/ml PMA for 72 hours followed by 48 hours rest (5 days), (ii) 50ng/ml PMA overnight (16hours) followed by 48 hours rest and (iii) 5 ng/ml PMA for 48 hours followed by 3 hours rest. After the indicated time points of PMA incubation, the cells were washed thrice with cold PBS, lysed using SDS lysis buffer (2% SDS in 50 mM TEABC), sonicated and heated. The protein amount was estimated, subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by dimethyl labeling of tryptic peptides and fractionation using SCX StageTips. LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using Q Exactive HF Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Easy-nLC1200 nano-flow UHPLC (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed using Proteome Discoverer Version 2.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and searched using SequestHT search algorithm against SwissProt Human database (v2017-10-25), including common contaminants. The search parameters included Carbamidomethyl (C) dimethyl labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine with tag masses of +28.03130 Da (light), + 32.05641 Da (medium), and +36.07567 Da (heavy) as static modifications, oxidation (M), deamidation (N and Q), acetylation and Met-loss+Acetyl  (protein N terminus), as variable modifications. Precursor ion mass tolerance and fragment ion mass tolerance were set to 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively. Percolator node was employed to calculate the FDR. Protein quantitation was performed using the Minora Feature Detector node with Dimethylation 3plex (C2H6, C2H2D4, 13C2D6) set as quantification method.

### Publication Abstract
Macrophages are sentinels of the innate immune system, and the human monocytic cell line THP-1 is one of the widely used <i>in vitro</i> models to study inflammatory processes and immune responses. Several monocyte-to-macrophage differentiation protocols exist, with phorbol 12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA) being the most commonly used and accepted method. However, the concentrations and duration of PMA treatment vary widely in the published literature and could affect the probed phenotype, however their effect on protein expression is not fully deciphered. In this study, we employed a dimethyl labeling-based quantitative proteomics approach to determine the changes in the protein repertoire of macrophage-like cells differentiated from THP-1 monocytes by three commonly used PMA-based differentiation protocols. Employing an integrated network analysis, we show that variations in PMA concentration and duration of rest post-stimulation result in downstream differences in the protein expression and cellular signaling processes. We demonstrate that these differences result in altered inflammatory responses, including variation in the expression of cytokines upon stimulation with various Toll-like receptor (TLR) agonists. Together, these findings provide a valuable resource that significantly expands the knowledge of protein expression dynamics with one of the most common <i>in&#xa0;vitro</i> models for macrophages, which in turn has a profound impact on the immune as well as inflammatory responses being studied.

### Keywords
Innate immune signaling, Macrophage differentiation, Cytokines and chemokines, Functional networks

### Affiliations
NTNU
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway

### Submitter
Richard K. Kandasamy

### Lab Head
Dr Richard K. Kandasamy
Systems Inflammation group, Centre of Molecular Inflammation Research (CEMIR), and Department of Clinical and Molecular Medicine (IKOM), Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway


