### Accession
PXD022484

### Title
Heterocellular OSM-OSMR signalling drives pancreatic tumour growth and metastasis through functional fibroblast reprogramming

### Description
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a lethal malignancy characterised by a pathologicalfibroinflammatorymicroenvironment. Dichotomous tumour-promoting and -restrictive roles have been ascribed to the tumour microenvironment, however thedisparate effect of individual stromal subsets remains incompletely characterised. Here, we describe how heterocellular OSM-OSMR signalling instructsfibroblast reprogramming,tumourgrowth and metastasis.Macrophage-secreted OSM stimulatesinflammatory gene expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which in turn induce a pro-tumorigenic environment and engage tumour cellsurvival and migratory signalling pathways. Tumour cells implanted in Osm-deficient (Osm-/-) mice display an epithelial-dominated morphology, reduced tumour growth and did notmetastasise. Moreover, the tumour microenvironment of Osm-/-animals exhibit increased abundance of αSMAposmyofibroblasts and a shift in myeloid and T cell phenotypes, consistent with a more immunogenic environment. Taken together, these data demonstrate how OSM-OSMR signalling coordinates heterocellular interactions to drive a pro-tumorigenic environment in PDA.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution protein digestion. The conditioned medium-stimulated PCC SILAC-labelled cells wereimmediatelywashed twice with ice-cold PBS,lysed in TEAB Lysis Buffer (0.5 M TEAB, 0.05 % SDS, phosphatase inhibitors) on ice and sonicated for 3 cycles(30 sec sonication and 30 sec incubation)on ice. Samples were centrifuged at 16,100 g for 15 min at 4 °C. Supernatants were collected and protein concentration was determined using Pierce BCA Assay Kit. 766.66 μg of “Light”-, “Medium”-and “Heavy”-labelled PCC lysates (a total of 2.3 mg) were combined in a 1:1:1 ratio. Subsequently, the pooled proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP (at RTfor30 min), alkylated with 50 mM iodoacetamide (ThermoFisher) (at RT for 15min in the dark), and digested with 46 μg of Trypsin (Promega, V5111) at 37 °C for 16 h. Next day, proteins were further digested with 46 μg of Trypsin at 37 °C for 4 h. Peptides were acidified in 5 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and dried down on Speedvac Concentrator (ThermoFisher) at 60 °C for 2 h prior to reverse-phase fractionation. Reverse phase off-line peptide fractionationPeptides were fractionated as previously described [21]. Peptides were separated on a Zorbax Extend-C18 column (4.6 x 150 mm, 3.5 um, Agilent Technologies) at 250 μL/min using the following gradient profile (minutes : % B); 5:0.5, 20:30, 24:40, 26:75, 29:75, 30:0.5, 55:0.5. The buffers used were Buffer A (LC-grade water supplemented with 0.1 X v/v NH4OH (pH 10.5)) and Buffer B (100 % Acetonitrile). The eluent was collectedinto96 round-bottom plates and fractions were collected into each well every 15 sec. Only fractions in the elution window with traces of high amounts of peptide material were used and all of the fractions were concatenated into 10 final fractions with each containing 200 μg peptides on average. Fractions were dried using Speedvac Concentrator (Thermo Fisher) at 60 °C for 2 h. Automated phosphopeptide enrichment Phosphopeptides were enriched using the automated phosphopeptide enrichment (APE) method as previously described [2]. TiO2magnetic beads (ReSyn Biosciences, MR-TID005) were prepared as per manufacturer’s recommendation. Fractions were resuspended in Wash Buffer 1 (80 % ACN, 5 % TFA, 1M glycolic acid) at 1 μg/uL, centrifuged at 16,100 x g for 10 min, and transferred into KingFisher Flex 96 deep well plate (Thermo Fisher, 733-3004). Phosphopeptides were enriched using KingFisher Flex (ThermoFisher) as previously described [2]. Subsequently, phosphopeptides were resuspendedin 0.1% formic acid (FA) and desalted using HLB Desalting cartridges (Waters, WAT094225) on SPE vacuum manifold according to manufacturer’s instructions.Desalted phosphopeptides were dried down on Speedvac Concentrator at 60 °C for 2 h and stored at -80°C until required for LC-MS/MS acquisition.Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) LC-MS/MSPhosphopeptides were analysed using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnanosystem (Thermo Scientific) coupled to a LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (ThermoScientific). Peptides were initially trapped on an Acclaim PepMap (C18, 100 μmx 2 cm) and then separated on Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 colum (75 μM x 50 cm) (Thermo Scientific)over a 156min gradient from 0-98 % Buffer B (80 % ACN in 0.08 % FA) against Buffer A (0.1 % FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/mL. Samples were transferred to mass spectrometer via an Easy-Spray source with temperature set at 50 °C and a source voltage of 2.0 kV. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with Multi Stage Activation for phosphorylation neutral loss detection. Survey full scan of MS spectra (335-1800 m/z) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 60,000 and FTMS Full AGF Target of 1,000,000. Top 15 method was selected for fragmentation using collision-induced dissociation (CID). The resulting raw fileswere searched against the SwissProt Mus musculusdatabase on Mascot server (Matrix Science; 2016) in Proteome Discoverer 2.1 (ThermoFisher Scientific). Search parameters included a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of 0.8 Da, peptide modifications ofcarbamidomethylation(C) as static modification and oxidation (M, P and K) as well as deamination (N, Q) as dynamic modification. A decoy database search was performed to determine the peptide FDR with the Percolator module. Phosphosite localisation probabilities were calculated with PhosphoRSnode. A 1 % peptide FDR threshold was applied, and peptides were filtered for medium peptide confidence, minimum peptide length of 6, and finally peptides without protein reference were removed. All peptides that exhibited a confidence of less than “high” and with less than two uniquely identified peptides were excluded from further analysis.

### Data Protocol
Quantified phosphopeptides used for downstream analysis were filtered by applying the following criteria: (1) peptide quantification in all three SILAC channels (light, medium and heavy), (2) presence of only one unique phosphorylation site per peptide, (3) phosphorylation-site localization probability of >75%, (4) detection and quantification of each unique phospho-peptide in at least two out of five biological replicates. Phosphopeptide abundances were normalised by the median abundance of the SILAC-channel before a SILAC-ratio was computed. Phosphorylation-motifs were obtained for each phospho-peptide by retrieving the flanking ±6 amino-acids around the detected phosphorylation locus by aligning the peptide-sequence to the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database (accessed: 10/08/2019). Kinase-recognition motifs were identified by using the PhosphoSitePlus (v6.5.9.3)[22]MotifAllalgorithm by applying a significance threshold of 1e-06 and a support threshold of 0.05 with against background set to automatically selected phosphorylation sites. Kinases were then identified using the MEME-suite CentriMO [23, 24]local motif-enrichment algorithm in pre-identified motifs by applying default options against the Eucaryotic Linear Motif (ELM 2018) motif database. Forphospho-network analysis and kinase-substrate network visualisation, the cytoscape software package [25]was utilised by incorporating the PhosphoPath app[26]with default settings by selecting the following databases: (1) PhosphoSitePlus for kinase-substrate (KS) interactions set to human KS interactions, (2) BIOGRID for protein-protein interactions and (3) WikiPathways for pathway information. Pathway-enrichment was conducted by selecting the whole proteome as background and only pathways with a significant enrichment ofp-value <0.05were incorporated into the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDA) is a lethal malignancy with a complex microenvironment. Dichotomous tumour-promoting and -restrictive roles have been ascribed to the tumour microenvironment, however the effects of individual stromal subsets remain incompletely characterised. Here, we describe how heterocellular Oncostatin M (OSM) - Oncostatin M Receptor (OSMR) signalling reprograms fibroblasts, regulates tumour growth and metastasis. Macrophage-secreted OSM stimulates inflammatory gene expression in cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which in turn induce a pro-tumourigenic environment and engage tumour cell survival and migratory signalling pathways. Tumour cells implanted in Osm-deficient (Osm<sup>-/-</sup>) mice display an epithelial-dominated morphology, reduced tumour growth and do not metastasise. Moreover, the tumour microenvironment of Osm<sup>-/-</sup> animals exhibit increased abundance of &#x3b1; smooth muscle actin positive myofibroblasts and a shift in myeloid and T cell phenotypes, consistent with a more immunogenic environment. Taken together, these data demonstrate how OSM-OSMR signalling coordinates heterocellular interactions to drive a pro-tumourigenic environment in PDA.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mouse, Pda

### Affiliations
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute Systems Oncology
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute

### Submitter
Brian Lee

### Lab Head
Dr Claus Jorgensen
Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute Systems Oncology


