### Accession
PXD004213

### Title
The innate immunity kinase TAK1 phosphorylates Rab1 on a hotspot for post-translational modifications by host and pathogen

### Description
TGF-β Activated Kinase 1 (TAK1) is a critical signaling hub responsible for translating antigen binding signals to immune receptors for the activation of the AP-1 and NF-κB master transcriptional programs. Despite its importance, known substrates of TAK1 are limited to kinases of the MAPK and IKK families and include no direct effectors of biochemical processes. Here, we identify over 200 novel substrates of TAK1 using a chemical genetic kinase strategy. We validate phosphorylation of the dynamic switch II region of GTPase Rab1 at T75 to be regulated by TAK1 in vivo. TAK1 preferentially phosphorylates the inactive (GDP-bound) state of Rab1. Phosphorylation of Rab1 disrupts interaction with GDP Dissociation Inhibitor 1 (GDI1), but not GEF or GAP proteins, and is exclusive to membrane localized Rab1, suggesting phosphorylation may stimulate Rab1 activation and membrane association. We found phosphorylation of Rab1 at T75 to be necessary for normal Rab1 mediated ER to Golgi vesicular transport. Previous studies established that the pathogen Legionella pneumophila is capable of hijacking Rab1 function through post-translational modifications of the switch II region. Here, we present the first evidence that Rab1 is regulated by the host in a similar fashion; and that the innate immunity kinase TAK1 and Legionella effectors compete directly to regulate Rab1 by switch II modifications during infection.

### Sample Protocol
This project describes the identification of substrates of TAK1 using the analog specific kinas and covalent capture of thiophosphorylated substrates. Detailed methods are available in the paper by R.S. Levin et al titled "The innate immunity kinase TAK1 phosphorylates Rab1 on a hotspot for post-translational modifications by host and pathogen"

### Data Protocol
Protein Prospector (http://prospector2.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm) was used for all protein/peptide identifications.

### Publication Abstract
TGF-&#x3b2; activated kinase 1 (TAK1) is a critical signaling hub responsible for translating antigen binding signals to immune receptors for the activation of the AP-1 and NF-&#x3ba;B master transcriptional programs. Despite its importance, known substrates of TAK1 are limited to kinases of the MAPK and IKK families and include no direct effectors of biochemical processes. Here, we identify over 200 substrates of TAK1 using a chemical genetic kinase strategy. We validate phosphorylation of the dynamic switch II region of GTPase Rab1, a mediator of endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi vesicular transport, at T75 to be regulated by TAK1 in vivo. TAK1 preferentially phosphorylates the inactive (GDP-bound) state of Rab1. Phosphorylation of Rab1 disrupts interaction with GDP dissociation inhibitor 1 (GDI1), but not guanine exchange factor (GEF) or GTPase-activating protein (GAP) enzymes, and is exclusive to membrane-localized Rab1, suggesting phosphorylation may stimulate Rab1 membrane association. Furthermore, we found phosphorylation of Rab1 at T75 to be essential for Rab1 function. Previous studies established that the pathogen Legionella pneumophila is capable of hijacking Rab1 function through posttranslational modifications of the switch II region. Here, we present evidence that Rab1 is regulated by the host in a similar fashion, and that the innate immunity kinase TAK1 and Legionella effectors compete to regulate Rab1 by switch II modifications during infection.

### Keywords
Analog specific kinase, Kinase substrates, Kinase, Covalent capture

### Affiliations
UCSF
University of California, San Francisco Howard Hughes Medical Institute

### Submitter
Rebecca Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Kevan Shokat
University of California, San Francisco Howard Hughes Medical Institute


