### Accession
PXD020170

### Title
Pol IV-RDR2 protein interaction study

### Description
Protein-protein interaction between DNA dependent RNA polymerase IV and RNA dependent RNA polymerase2. The coupled activities of the physically associated polymerases lead to the biogenesis of dsRNAs that serve as precursors of 24nt siRNAs.

### Sample Protocol
The crosslinked proteins were digested with trypsin at 12.5 ng/μL for 16 hr. Tryptic peptides were injected into an Easy-nLC 100 HPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide samples were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMapTM 100 C18 trap column (75 μm × 20 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å) in 0.1% formic acid.  The peptides were separated using an Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC C18 analytical column (75 μm × 150 mm, 2 μm, 100 Å) using an acetonitrile-based gradient (Solvent A: 0% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Solvent B: 80% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. A 30 min gradient was as follows: 0-0.5 min, 2-8% B; 0.5-24 min, 8-40% B; 24-26 min, 40-100% B; 26-30 min, 100% B, followed by re-equilibration to 2% B. The electrospray ionization was carried out with a nanoESI source at a 260 °C capillary temperature and 1.9 kV spray voltage. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a mass range of 400 to 2000 m/z. The precursor ions with charge state from 3 to 7 were selected for tandem mass (MS/MS) analysis in Orbitrap with 3 sec cycle time using HCD at 30% collision energy.  The intensity threshold was set at 2e5. The dynamic exclusion was set with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion duration of 30 s.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data was searched in Protein Prospector (http://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm) against truncated RDR2 and NRPD1 sequences. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, oxidation of methionine, protein N-terminal methionine loss, pyroglutamine formation were set as variable modifications. Crosslinking search type was set as DSS (water-insoluble analog of BS3 which has the same mass addition). A total of three variable modifications were allowed. Chymotrypsin digestion specificity with two missed cleavage was allowed. The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 5 and 10 ppm, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In plants, transcription of selfish genetic elements such as transposons and DNA viruses is suppressed by RNA-directed DNA methylation. This process is guided by 24-nt short-interfering RNAs (siRNAs) whose double-stranded precursors are synthesized by DNA-dependent NUCLEAR RNA POLYMERASE IV (Pol IV) and RNA-DEPENDENT RNA POLYMERASE 2 (RDR2). Pol IV and RDR2 coimmunoprecipitate, and their activities are tightly coupled, yet the basis for their association is unknown. Here, we show that an interval near the RDR2 active site contacts the Pol IV catalytic subunit, NRPD1, the largest of Pol IV's 12 subunits. Contacts between the catalytic regions of the two enzymes suggests that RDR2 is positioned to rapidly engage the free 3' ends of Pol IV transcripts and convert these single-stranded transcripts into double-stranded RNAs (dsRNAs).

### Keywords
Rna polymerase, Rna directed dna methylation, Dsrna, Sirna

### Affiliations
Indiana University
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA

### Submitter
Yixiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Craig S Pikaard
Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana, USA


