### Accession
PXD018253

### Title
Selective activation of PERK signaling mediates fibroblast education and tumor progression by a CRELD2-dependent mechanism

### Description
It is now well-accepted that cancers co-opt the microenvironment to support their growth. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying cancer-microenvironment interactions remain poorly defined. We have found that Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) activity in the epithelial component of mammary tumors selectively actuates Protein kinase R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (Perk), causing the recruitment and persistent education of tumor-promoting cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), a key component of the cancer microenvironment. Analysis of tumors from mice and human patients identified Cysteine-rich with EGF-like domains 2 (CRELD2), as the paracrine factor underlying PERK-mediated CAF-education downstream of ROCK. CRELD2 expression was found to be regulated by ATF4 downstream of the PERK pathway and knock-down of CRELD2 prevented tumor progression, demonstrating that the paracrine ROCK-PERK-ATF4-CRELD2 axis is a promoter of breast cancer progression and suggesting new therapeutic opportunities.

### Sample Protocol
Protein from conditioned medium was reduced and alkylated using 10 mM TCEP and 40 mM 2-chloroacetamide before precipitation using 80% acetone at -20°C overnight. Precipitate was collected by centrifugation for 15 minutes at 2000xg, 4°C. Proteins were resuspended in 100 mM Ammonium Bicarbonate and digested using trypsin gold (Promega). Peptides were acidified using 0.1% TFA and purified twice using two separate Oasis HLB columns (Waters). The extracted peptide solutions were then concentrated by centrifugal lyophilization using a SpeedVac AES 1010 (Savant, Thermo Fisher Scientific). Extracted peptides were resuspended in 2% acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and injected and separated by reversed-phase liquid chromatography on a M-class UPLC system (Waters) using a 250 mm X 75 μm column (1.6 μm C18, packed emitter tip; IonOpticks, Australia) with a linear 90-min gradient at a flow rate of 400 nl/min from 98% solvent A (0.1% Formic acid in de-ionized water) to 35% solvent B (0.1% Formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile). The nanoUPLC was coupled on-line to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Q-Exactive was operated in a data dependent mode, switching automatically between one full-scan and subsequent MS/MS scans of the ten most abundant peaks. The instrument was controlled using Exactive series version 2.6 and Xcalibur 3.0. Full-scans (m/z 350–1,850) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated with a target value of 10000 ions and an isolation width of 3 m/z and fragmented using HCD with normalized collision energy of 27 and stepped collision energy of 15%. Maximum ion accumulation times were set to 50ms for full MS scan and 150ms for MS/MS. Underfill ratio was set to 2% and dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were analyzed using the MaxQuant74,75 software (version 1.5.8.3) and the database search was performed using mouse protein sequences obtained from Uniprot including isoforms with strict trypsin specificity allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. The minimum required peptide length was set to 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification while N-acetylation of proteins N-termini and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. During the MaxQuant main search, precursor ion mass error tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and fragment ions were allowed a mass deviation of 20 ppm. PSM and protein identifications were filtered using a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%. Further analysis was performed using a custom pipeline developed in R, which utilizes the MaxQuant output files allPeptides.txt, peptides.txt and evidence.txt. A feature was defined as the combination of peptide sequence, charge and modification. Features not found in at least half the number of replicates in each group were removed. Proteins identified from hits to the reverse database and proteins with only one unique peptide were also removed. To correct for injection volume variability, feature intensities were normalized by converting to base 2 logarithms and then multiplying each value by the ratio of maximum median intensity of all replicates over median replicate intensity. Features assigned to the same protein differ in the range of intensity due to their chemico-physical properties and charge state. To further correct for these differences, each intensity value was multiplied by the ratio of the maximum of the median intensities of all features for a protein over the median intensity of the feature. Missing values where imputed using a random normal distribution of values with the mean set at mean of the real distribution of values minus 1.8 standard deviation (SD), and an SD of 0.3 times the SD of the distribution of the measured intensities. The probability of differential expression between groups was calculated using ANOVA excluding any non-unique sequences and any features with modifications other than oxidation and carbamidomethylation. Probability values were corrected for multiple testing using the Benjamini–Hochberg method. Cut-off colors with the function y = −log10(0.05) + c/(x − x0) were introduced to identify significantly enriched proteins (p-value < 0.05). c was set to 0.3 while x0 was set to 1 representing proteins with a with a 2-fold (log2 protein ratios of 1 or more, blue) or 2-fold (log2 protein ratio of 2, red) change in protein expression, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
It is well accepted that cancers co-opt the microenvironment for their growth. However, the molecular mechanisms that underlie cancer-microenvironment interactions are still poorly defined. Here, we show that Rho-associated kinase (ROCK) in the mammary tumour epithelium selectively actuates protein-kinase-R-like endoplasmic reticulum kinase (PERK), causing the recruitment and persistent education of tumour-promoting cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs), which are part of the cancer microenvironment. An analysis of tumours from patients and mice reveals that cysteine-rich with EGF-like domains 2 (CRELD2) is the paracrine factor that underlies PERK-mediated CAF education downstream of ROCK. We find that CRELD2 is regulated by PERK-regulated ATF4, and depleting CRELD2 suppressed tumour progression, demonstrating that the paracrine ROCK-PERK-ATF4-CRELD2 axis promotes the progression of breast cancer, with implications for cancer therapy.

### Keywords
Unfolded protein response 25 (upr), Endoplasmic reticulum (er)stress, Rock, Tumor microenvironment, Cancer progression, Cancer-associated fibroblasts (cafs), Breast cancer, Perk, Integrated stress response (isr), 26 extracellular matrix

### Affiliations
WEHI
Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia

### Submitter
Jarrod Sandow

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Samuel
Centre for Cancer Biology, SA Pathology and the University of South Australia, Adelaide SA 5000, Australia


