### Accession
PXD009537

### Title
Salmon fast growing muscle LC-MSMS

### Description
Fast growth is vital to the commercial production of fish and has been achieved gradually, through generations of selective breeding, and instantaneously, through growth hormone (GH) transgenesis (GHT). The proteomic basis for these differing routes towards a largely common higher phenotype is poorly characterized, as are associated implications for fish health parameters. We addressed this knowledge gap in coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) testing two hypotheses: i) that selective breeding and GHT are underpinned by both parallel and non-parallel changes in growth pathways compared to wild-type, and ii) that rapidly growing fish have less scope to allocate energetic resources into immune function. Skeletal muscle was studied, owing to its central role in growth and energetic storage. We compared the proteomes of GHT and growth-selected domesticated strains with wild-type animals following injections with PBS (control) and Poly I:C (to mimic viral infection). Hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass-spectrometry using a label-free analysis revealed large changes in the proteome of GHT and growth-selected strains that were strikingly non-overlapping, with surprisingly few parallel changes. GHT was characterized by a focal upregulation of translation systems, while growth-selected fish presented a larger and more diverse set of changes, consistent with genetic alterations influencing an array of metabolic and cellular pathways. Contrasting past studies examining mRNA levels, many proteomic changes distinguished the growth-selected strain from both GHT and wild fish. Contrasting our second hypothesis, Poly I:C had little detectable effect on the muscle proteome. This investigation reveals that highly distinct proteome profiles can explain outwardly similar growth phenotypes, improving our understanding of how fast growth is achieved in animal strains created by humans.

### Sample Protocol
Thirty skeletal muscle samples from the above design were used in proteomic analyses reported in this study. Samples came from animals either 30h post Poly I:C injection (200µg per 100g fish weight) to mimic a viral infection (n=5 biological replicates per WT, GHT and DF) or 30h post PBS injection (n=5 biological replicates per WT, GHT and DF) to provide an unstimulated control. Muscle samples were thawed on ice, weighed and lysis buffer (0.5M pH 6.8 Tris-HCl, 0.2M EDTA, 8M Urea, 0.5M DTT, 10% v/v Glycerol, 10% v/v NP40, pH 3-10 ampholytes) added to make a final concentration of ~2µl/mg. This solution was ground using a micropestle, before the same volume of lysis buffer was added and the tissue was sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator, Fisher Scientific) on ice. The resulting solution was centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 5 min, and the supernatant stored at -80oC until further analysis. After thawing on ice, 50 µl of supernatant was combined with 50 µl molecular grade water. Proteins were precipitated using the ReadyPrep 2-D clean up procedure (Bio-Rad Laboratories), following the manufacturer’s instructions. The resulting pellet was dissolved in 100µl of 3-10 pH Reswell buffer (Urea, Thiourea, CHAPS, DTT, MilliQ water, and IPG buffer). 10µl of the resulting solution was added to 5 µl 3X dissociation buffer (0.5M pH 6.8Tris-HCl, 25% SDS, 2-mercaptoethanol, Glycerol) and incubated for 5 min at 100oC. 3 µl of the extract was run a short distance (~0.05 cm) into a 10% acrylamide 1-D gel, which was stained with colloidal Coomassie Blue G250 (Fischer Scientific) and the proteins excised and used for in-gel tryptic (Promega, sequencing grade) digestion (Digilab ProGest robot). Peptide solutions were dried by centrifugal evaporation (Savant SpeedVac Plus), dissolved in 20 µL 0.1% formic acid, and spun at 14,000 RPM for 5 min. prior to liquid chromatography – mass spectrometry (LC-MS).The LC-MS system used was an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano (Dionex/Thermo Scientific) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus quadrupole-equipped Orbitrap MS (Thermo Scientific). 4 µl of tryptic peptide solution was injected for analysis per sample. Peptides were concentrated on a µ-precolumn (C18 PepMap; 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm) in a water/acetonitrile/formic acid (98:2:0.1) loading solvent at a flow rate of 10 µl/min. After 5 min, the µ-precolumn was switched to the analytical flow path, where peptides were separated at a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min on a C18 PepMap RSLC column (75 µm i.d. x 50 cm) fitted to an Easy-Spray nano ESI source. Two solvents were formed, solvent A was made from water/formic acid (100:0.1) and solvent B from water/acetonitrile/formic acid (20:80:0.1). An increasing proportion of solvent B was used to separate peptides along a gradient: 3-10% from 5-25 min; 10-45% from 25-185 min; 45-90% from 185-190 min; 90% from 190-205 min; 90-3% from 205-210 min, followed by re-equilibration of the column (3% Solvent B, 30 min). LC lasted 240 min; mass spectra were acquired using a “Top 10” data-dependent method starting at 5 min and lasting 200 min. The electrospray voltage was 1.9 kV, capillary temperature 270 °C and S-lens RF level 60. Full MS scans were conducted between 375-1750 m/z at resolution 70,000 (m/z 200), automatic gain control 3E+6 and maximum injection time 50 ms. Following each survey scan the 10 most intense ions of charge state 2-5 were sequentially selected (isolation window 1.6 m/z) and fragmented in the higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) cell at a normalised collision energy of 26%. MS/MS scans were conducted at resolution 17,500, automatic gain control 5E+4 and maximum injection time 100 ms. Other data-dependent settings were: peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes turned on, and a dynamic exclusion of 40 sec.

### Data Protocol
Q Exactive raw data were analysed using MaxQuant v1.5.3.30 with the label-free quantification (‘LFQ’) method. Most standard recommended settings were used (Tyanova et al., 2016), but to ensure maximal data discovery, the ‘Fast LFQ’ option was not applied. The trypsin digestion option was selected, along with a maximum of two missed cleavages, allowing oxidation of methionine and acetylation at the N-terminus end of the protein as variable modifications, and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The mass tolerance for first search precursor ions was set to 20 parts per million (ppm) followed by 4.5 ppm for the main search. A 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) was employed for peptide and protein identifications. The ‘Match between runs’ option was used to transfer identifications to other LC-MS runs and increase identifications across samples. Unmodified counterpart peptides were not discarded. Peptides and proteins were identified against a database of 57,592 RefSeq proteins from the coho salmon genome annotation (NCBI accession; GCA_002021735.1 ). The MaxQuant-generated ‘proteingroups.txt’ file was filtered for contaminants, reverse identifications, and proteins only identified by site. Only proteins that had LFQ values in at least five samples were retained. The remaining LFQ values were log-2 transformed, and imputed to increase quantitative comparisons and decrease the effect of highly abundant proteins. Imputation was done using missForest, a non-parametric, random forest approach. The protein-level probabilistic imputation used has been shown to outperform peptide-level imputation. The imputed data showed high reproducibility.  The MaxQuant output and log-transformed imputed LFQ data are provided within Table S1 and S2, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
In fish used for food production and scientific research, fast growth can be achieved via selective breeding or induced instantaneously via growth hormone (GH) transgenesis (GHT). The proteomic basis for these distinct routes towards a similar higher phenotype remains uncharacterized, as are associated implications for health parameters. We addressed this knowledge gap using skeletal muscle proteomics in coho salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch), hypothesising that i) selective breeding and GHT are underpinned by both parallel and unique changes in growth systems, and ii) rapidly-growing fish strains have lowered scope to allocate resources towards immune function. Quantitative profiling of GHT and growth-selected strains was done in comparison to wild-type after injection with PBS (control) or Poly I:C (to mimic infection). We identified remodelling of the muscle proteome in each growth-enhanced strain that was strikingly non-overlapping. GHT was characterized by focal upregulation of systems driving protein synthesis, while the growth-selected fish presented a larger and more diverse set of changes, consistent with complex alterations to many metabolic and cellular pathways. Poly I:C had little detectable effect on the muscle proteome. This study demonstrates that distinct proteome profiles can explain outwardly similar enhanced growth phenotypes, improving our understanding of growth mechanisms in anthropogenic animal strains. SIGNIFICANCE: This work provides the first proteomic insights into mechanisms underpinning different anthropogenic routes to rapid growth in salmon. High-throughput proteomic profiling was used to reveal changes supporting enhanced growth, comparing skeletal muscle of growth hormone transgenic (GHT) and selectively-bred salmon strains with their wild-type counterparts. Contrasting past mRNA-level comparisons of the same fish strains, our data reveals a surprisingly substantial proteomic divergence between the GHT and selectively bred strains. The findings demonstrate that many unique molecular mechanisms underlie growth-enhanced phenotypes in different types of fish strain used for food production and scientific research.

### Keywords
Teleost, Fast growth, Lc-msms, Salmon, Muscle

### Affiliations
University of Aberdeen
School of Biological Sciences University of Aberdeen United Kingdom

### Submitter
Dwight Causey

### Lab Head
Dr Daniel J. Macqueen
School of Biological Sciences University of Aberdeen United Kingdom


