### Accession
PXD041405

### Title
The functional and structural characterization of Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris core effector XopP revealed a new kinase activity

### Description
The exocyst complex subunit protein Exo70B1 plays a crucial role in a variety of cell mechanisms including immune responses against pathogens. The calcium dependent kinase 5 (CPK5) of Arabidopsis thaliana, phosphorylates AtExo70B1 upon functional disruption. We previously reported that, the Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris effector XopP, compromises AtExo70B1 and bypasses the host’s hypersensitive response (HR), in a way that is still unclear. Herein we designed an experimental approach based on biophysical, biochemical and molecular assays, based on structural and functional predictions, as well as, utilizing Aplhafold and DALI online servers respectively, in order to characterize the in vivo XccXopP function. The interaction between AtExo70B1 and XccXopP is very stable in high temperatures, while the AtExo70B1 appeared to be phosphorylated at XccXopP expressing transgenic Arabidopsis. XccXopP reveals similarities with known mammalian kinases, and phosphorylates AtExo70B1 at Ser107, Ser111, Ser248, Thr309 and Thr364. Moreover, XccXopP protects AtExo70B1 from AtCPK5 phosphorylation. Together these findings show that, XccXopP is an effector, which not only functions as a novel serine/threonine kinase upon its host’s protein target AtExo70B1, but also protects the latter from the innate AtCPK5 phosphorylation, to bypass the host’s immune responses.

### Sample Protocol
The SDS gel, on which the proteins had been previously separated, was treated with Blue Silver staining buffer. The gel was incubated for 1 hr in fixation buffer (Fixation Solution, 30% Methanol and 10% Acetic Acid) followed by washing with ultrapure water. The gel was then incubated for 16 hr in Staining Solution (0,12%Dye, 10% ammonium sulfate, 10% phosphoric acid and 20% methanol). Decolorization of the solution was performed with ultrapure water. Protein bands containing the proteins of interest were excised and treated with trypsin. More specifically, the gel pieces were adequately coated with acetonitrile (DestSol) and incubated for 15 min under stirring. The solution was then removed, followed by the addition of 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABS) and incubation for 15 min under stirring. The above steps were repeated two more times. The solution was then removed and the gel pieces were covered with 100 μl of 50 mM 50 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and incubated for 45 min at 56oC. After removal of the latter, 100 μl 55 mM 55 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was transferred to the gel pieces and incubated for 45 min at 20oC. The gel pieces were purified by DestSol/ABS as described above and 25 μl of trypsin (20 μg of trypsin solution, Promega, in 50 mM DestSol) was transferred to the gel pieces and incubated for 16 hr at 37oC. The supernatant solution was transferred to new collection microtubes, and 50 μl of ultrapure water was added. The supernatant was transferred to the new microtubes after stirring for 20 min at 20oC, and the gel pieces were coated with 50 μl DestSol. This was followed by incubation under stirring for 20 min at 20oC, transfer of DestSol to the new collection microtubes, and transfer of 50 μl of 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (dissolved in DestSol). The supernatant was transferred to the new collection microtubes, and the total solution was placed in liquid nitrogen. Production of protein product in the form of a dry powder under vacuum conditions.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data were loaded in Proteome Discoverer 2.2.0 (Thermo Scientific) and run using Mascot 2.3.02 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Sequest HT (Thermo Scientific) search algorithms against the AtEXO70B1 (NM_125229.4) sequence. A list of common contaminants was included in the database. For protein identification, the following search parameters were used: precursor error tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance = 0.8 Da, trypsin full specificity, maximum number of missed cleavages = 3, and cysteine alkylation as a fixed modification, Oxidation of Methionine, Acetylation of N-term, Phosphorylation (The node ptmRS was used) of Serine, Threonine and Tyrosine as Variable Modifications.  To calculate the protein false discovery rate, a decoy database search was performed simultaneously with strict criteria set to 0.01 and relaxed criteria to 0.05

### Publication Abstract
Exo70B1 is a protein subunit of the exocyst complex with a crucial role in a variety of cell mechanisms, including immune responses against pathogens. The calcium-dependent kinase 5 (CPK5) of Arabidopsis thaliana (hereafter Arabidopsis), phosphorylates AtExo70B1 upon functional disruption. We previously reported that, the Xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris effector XopP compromises AtExo70B1, while bypassing the host's hypersensitive response, in a way that is still unclear. Herein we designed an experimental approach, which includes biophysical, biochemical, and molecular assays and is based on structural and functional predictions, utilizing AplhaFold and DALI online servers, respectively, in order to characterize the in vivo XccXopP function. The interaction between AtExo70B1 and XccXopP was found very stable in high temperatures, while AtExo70B1 appeared to be phosphorylated at XccXopP-expressing transgenic Arabidopsis. XccXopP revealed similarities with known mammalian kinases and phosphorylated AtExo70B1 at Ser107, Ser111, Ser248, Thr309, and Thr364. Moreover, XccXopP protected AtExo70B1 from AtCPK5 phosphorylation. Together these findings show that XccXopP is an effector, which not only functions as a novel serine/threonine kinase upon its host target AtExo70B1 but also protects the latter from the innate AtCPK5 phosphorylation, in order to bypass the host's immune responses. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD041405.

### Keywords
Novel kinase function, Exocyst complex, Pathogen xopp effector, T3ss, Protein structure prediction, Plant defense, Exo70b1

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology
1 Department of Biology, University of Crete, 714 09 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 2 Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete, Greece

### Submitter
Nikos Kountourakis

### Lab Head
Dr Panagiotis F. Sarris
1 Department of Biology, University of Crete, 714 09 Heraklion, Crete, Greece 2 Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and Technology-Hellas, Heraklion, Crete, Greece


