### Accession
PXD030963

### Title
Off the shelf proximity biotinylation using ProtA-TurboID

### Description
Proximity biotinylation is a commonly used method to identify the in vivo proximal proteome for proteins of interest. This technology typically relies on fusing a bait protein to a biotin ligase using overexpression or CRISPR-based tagging, thus prohibiting such assays in (primary) cell types that are difficult to transfect. We recently developed an ‘off the shelf’ proximity biotinylation method, which makes use of a recombinant enzyme consisting of the biotin ligase TurboID fused to the antibody-recognizing moiety Protein A. In this method, a bait specific antibody and the ProteinA-Turbo enzyme are consecutively added to permeabilized fixed or unfixed cells. Following incubation, during which ProteinA-Turbo-antibody-antigen complexes are formed, unbound molecules are washed away, after which bait-proximal biotinylation is triggered by the addition of exogenous biotin. Finally, biotinylated proteins are enriched from crude lysates using streptavidin beads followed by mass spectrometry-based protein identification. Here, we present a detailed protocol for this method

### Sample Protocol
Cells were washed with PBS1x and scraped. Cell pellet was incubated with digitonin buffer (0.04% digitonin diluted in 20mM HEPES pH7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5 mM Spermidine) for 10 minutes in rotation. At this point, 80% of cell non viability was required to continue with the protocol, otherwise more digitonin was added to reach that level of non-viability. Then, cells were incubated with 2 g of antibody (INCENP (Abcam, 12183) and CENPC (MBL PD030)) diluted in 200 l digitonin buffer for 20 minutes in a shaker at 600 rpm. Afterwards, they were incubated with 1.4 g of protein A Turbo diluted in 500 l digitonin buffer for 30 minutes in rotation at 4C. The nuclei were incubated in a shaker at 37C during 10 minutes with biotin reaction buffer (5mM MgCl, 5 M Biotin, 1mM ATP in digitonin buffer). Cells were lysed with Rippa buffer (50Mm Tris pH7.8, 150mM NaCl, 0.5% Sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 1% NP40) and incubated overnight at 4 C on ice. Samples were sonicated in a Bioruptor sonicator until the mix became almost completely clear. Then, they were centrifuged at maximum speed at 4C for 10 minutes and supernant was incubated with 25 l slurry Streptavidin Sepharose High Performance beads (15511301, Cytiva) for two hours in rotation. Agarose beads were washed 5 times with Ripa buffer and 4 times with PBS1X buffer. In order to elute the proteins, 50 l elution buffer (2M Urea, 10 mM DTT, 100 mM Tris pH8) was added to the beads and incubated during 20 minutes in a shaker. Then, samples were incubated with iodoacetamide (50mM) in dark for 10 minutes. 2.5 l of 0.1 mg/ml trypsin was added to the samples and they were incubated in a shaker for 2 hours. Samples were centrifuged and the elutions were saved. Additional 50 l of elution buffer was added to the beads and elutions were combined. Peptides were incubated with additional 1 l trypsin overnight. Following day, peptides were acidified with 10 l of TFA 10% and cleaned using C18 Stagetips as described previously. Peptides in Stagetips were stored at 4C until the day they were measured by mass spectrometry. When H3K9me3 (Abcam, ab8898) was used, nuclei isolation was performed before permeabilization with digitonin buffer.

### Data Protocol
Every experiment was performed in triplicates for statistical analysis purpose. Raw files were analysed using standard settings of MaxQuant 1.5.1.0, options LFQ, iBAQ and Match between runs were selected and, as a search database, a human fasta database updated in 2017 from Uniprot was used. Perseus 1.5.1.0.15 was used for data filtering and ANOVA test was used for statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Proximity biotinylation is a commonly used method to identify the in vivo proximal proteome for proteins of interest. This technology typically relies on fusing a bait protein to a biotin ligase using overexpression or clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats (CRISPR)-based tagging, thus prohibiting the use of such assays in cell types that are difficult to transfect or transduce. We recently developed an 'off-the-shelf' proximity biotinylation method that makes use of a recombinant enzyme consisting of the biotin ligase TurboID fused to the antibody-recognizing moiety Protein A. In this method, a bait-specific antibody and the ProteinA-Turbo enzyme are consecutively added to permeabilized fixed or unfixed cells. Following incubation, during which ProteinA-Turbo antibody-antigen complexes are formed, unbound molecules are washed away, after which bait-proximal biotinylation is triggered by the addition of exogenous biotin. Finally, biotinylated proteins are enriched from crude lysates using streptavidin beads followed by mass spectrometry-based protein identification. In principle, any scientist can perform this protocol within 3 days, although generating the proteomics data requires access to a high-end liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry setup. Data analysis and data visualization are relatively straightforward and can be performed using any type of software that converts raw mass spectrometry spectra files into identified and quantified proteins. The protocol has been optimized for nuclear targets but may also be adapted to other subcellular regions of interest.

### Keywords
Histone ptms, Biotinylation, Cell lines, Centromeres, Protein-protein interactions

### Affiliations
Radboud Universiteit
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands (lab head) (lab head)

### Submitter
Irene Santos Barriopedro

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Radboud University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, 6525 GA, The Netherlands (lab head) (lab head)


