### Accession
PXD010987

### Title
Smell of Infection: a novel, non-invasive method for detection of fish excretory- secretory proteins

### Description
Chemical signals are produced by aquatic organisms following predatory attacks or perturbations such as parasitic infection. Ectoparasites feeding on host fish are likely to cause release of similar alarm cues into the environment due to the stress, wounding and immune response stimulated upon infection. Alarm cues are often released in the form of proteins and peptides and provide important insights into bodily function and infection status. Here we outline a non-invasive method to identify potential chemical cues associated with infection in fish by extracting, purifying and characterizing proteins from water samples from cultured fish. Gel free proteomic methods were deemed the most suitable for protein detection in saline water samples. It was confirmed that proteins could be characterized from teleost water samples and that variation in protein profiles could be detected between infected and uninfected individuals and fish and parasite only water samples. Our novel assay provides a non-invasive method for assessing the health condition of both wild and farmed aquatic organisms. Similar to environmental DNA monitoring methods, these proteomic techniques could provide an important tool in applied biology and aquaculture biology

### Sample Protocol
Amicon filtration of water samples Acetone precipitation 1D SDS page, fixation and silver stain Trypsin digestion and gel free mass spectrophotometry Mass spectrometer with Dual AJS ESI source coupled to a 1200 series HPLC-Chip system Liquid chromatography Peak lists were generated with Mass Hunter Qualitative Analysis software (V B.06, Agilent Technologies) and exported as Mascot Generic Files

### Data Protocol
Mass spectral data from all 15 samples were submitted for database searching using the MASCOT program. Search parameters allowed a maximum of one missed cleavage. Additionally, a fixed modification was set for cysteine at 161 Da and variable modifications tested for matches 0, 1, 2, or 3 oxidised methionine residues. Lastly, a set peptide tolerance of 1.2 Da and MS/MS tolerance of 0.6 Da were stipulated. Spectra were searched against the K. marmoratus transcriptome (33) as well as a recent version of the NCBI non-redundant protein database sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Chemical signals are produced by aquatic organisms following predatory attacks or perturbations such as parasitic infection. Ectoparasites feeding on fish hosts are likely to cause release of similar alarm cues into the environment due to the stress, wounding, and immune response stimulated upon infection. Alarm cues are often released in the form of proteins, antimicrobial peptides, and immunoglobulins that provide important insights into bodily function and infection status. Here we outline a noninvasive method to identify potential chemical cues associated with infection in fish by extracting, purifying, and characterizing proteins from water samples from cultured fish. Gel free proteomic methods were deemed the most suitable for protein detection in saline water samples. It was confirmed that teleost proteins can be characterized from water and that variation in protein profiles could be detected between infected and uninfected individuals and fish and parasite only water samples. Our novel assay provides a noninvasive method for assessing the health condition of both wild and farmed aquatic organisms. Similar to environmental DNA monitoring methods, these proteomic techniques could provide an important tool in applied ecology and aquatic biology.

### Keywords
Alarm cues, Gel free ms, Parasitic infection

### Affiliations
Professor in Parasitology at Aberystwyth University
Swansea Univeristy

### Submitter
Rebecca Pawluk

### Lab Head
Dr Prof Peter M Brophy
Professor in Parasitology at Aberystwyth University


