### Accession
PXD024494

### Title
LC-MS/MS analysis of p-Npl3 experiment

### Description
The purpose of this experiment is to analyze the variable modification of phospho (STY) in recombinant p-Npl3

### Sample Protocol
(1) Purified recombinant protein (1.2 g) of p-Npl3 was resolved by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie Blue stained, then the single band was retrieved and analyzed for phosphorylation position by MS analysis.  The phosphoryl peptide MS analysis presented was done from the same batch of phosphorylated Npl3 that was used in the ATP hydrolysis assay and in the in vitro co-affinity studies. (2) Samples were detected by LC-ESI-MS on an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) equipped with EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US) and EASY-spray source (Thermo, San Jose, CA, US). The digestion solution was injected (5μl) at 1 μl/min flow rate on to easy column (C18, 0.075 mm X 150 mm, ID 3 μm; Thermo Scientific) Chromatographic separation was using 0.1% formic acid in water as mobile phase A and 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile as mobile phase B operated at 300 nl/min flow rate. Briefly, the gradient employed was 2% buffer B at 2min to 40% buffer B at 40 min. Full-scan MS condition: mass range m/z 375-1800 (AGC target 5E5) with lock mass, resolution 60,000 at m/z 200, and maximum injection time of 50 ms. The MSMS was run in top speed mode with 3s cycles with HCD or ETD for phosphopeptide; while the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 60 s with a 10ppm tolerance around the selected precursor and its isotopes. Electrospray voltage was maintained at 1.8 kV and capillary temperature was set at 275 ˚C

### Data Protocol
Raw file processed by Maxquant (Version 1.6.14). MSMS spectra was search against the uniprot yeast database (6049 entries) and enzyme digest by trypsin with 2 miss cleavage. The parameter such as MS tolerance of 20ppm for first search and main search 4.5 ppm. Fragment tolerance was 0.5Da(IT) or 0.01 Da (FT). Variable modification of oxidation (M) and acetylation (protein N-terminal) and fixed modification of carbamidomethyl(C) as search parameters. In addation , variable modification of phospho (STY) for the phosphopeptide identification

### Publication Abstract
Splicing, a key step in the eukaryotic gene-expression pathway, converts precursor messenger RNA (pre-mRNA) into mRNA by excising introns and ligating exons. This task is accomplished by the spliceosome, a macromolecular machine that must undergo sequential conformational changes to establish its active site. Each of these major changes requires a dedicated DExD/H-box ATPase, but how these enzymes are activated remain obscure. Here we show that Prp28, a yeast DEAD-box ATPase, transiently interacts with the conserved 5' splice-site (5'SS) GU dinucleotide and makes splicing-dependent contacts with the U1 snRNP protein U1C, and U4/U6.U5 tri-snRNP proteins, Prp8, Brr2, and Snu114. We further show that Prp28's ATPase activity is potentiated by the phosphorylated Npl3, but not the unphosphorylated Npl3, thus suggesting a strategy for regulating DExD/H-box ATPases. We propose that Npl3 is a functional counterpart of the metazoan-specific Prp28 N-terminal region, which can be phosphorylated and serves as an anchor to human spliceosome.

### Keywords
Yeast, Lc-msms, Npl3

### Affiliations
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan
Academia Sinica, Genomic Research Center

### Submitter
Fu-lung Yeh

### Lab Head
Dr Tien-Hsien Chang
Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan


