### Accession
PXD011743

### Title
Molecular insights into an ancient form of Paget disease of bone

### Description
Paget disease of bone (PDB) is a chronic skeletal disorder with contemporary cases characterised by one or a few affected bones in individuals over 55 years of age. PDB-like changes have been noted in archaeological remains as old as Roman although accurate diagnoses and knowledge of the natural history of ancient forms of the disease are lacking. Previous macroscopic and radiographic analyses of six skeletons from a collection of 130 excavated at Norton Priory in Cheshire, UK, and dating to late Medieval times, noted unusually extensive pathological changes resembling PDB affecting up to 75% of individual skeletons. Here we report the prevalence of the disease in the collection is also remarkably high (at least 15.8% of the adult sample) with age-at-death estimations as low as 35 years. Despite these profound phenotypic differences paleoproteomic analyses identified SQSTM1/p62 (p62), a protein central to the pathological milieu of classical PDB, as one of the few non-collagenous human sequences preserved in skeletal samples, indicating that the disorder was likely an ancient precursor of contemporary PDB. Western blotting indicated abnormal migration of ancient p62 protein, with subsequent targeted proteomic analyses detecting more than 60% of the p62 primary sequence and directing sequencing analyses of ancient DNA that excluded contemporary PDB-associated SQSTM1 mutations. Together our observations indicate the ancient p62 protein is likely modified within its C-terminal ubiquitin-associated (UBA) domain. Ancient miRNAs were also remarkably well preserved in an osteosarcoma from a skeleton with extensive disease, with miR-16 expression changes consistent with that reported in contemporary PDB-associated bone tumours. Our work demonstrates the potential of proteomics to inform diagnoses of ancient disease and supports the proposal that Medieval Norton Priory was a ‘hotspot’ for an ancient form of PDB, with unusual features presumably potentiated by as yet unidentified environmental or genetic factors.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted using a modification of the method of [Schmidt-Schultz and Schultz, 2004]. The sampling preference was for the temporal portion of the temporal bone. Where this was not available teeth were sampled and, when teeth were not available then the most intact bone available was sampled (e.g. femur). Samples were cleaned and UV treated before subsampling was carried out for DNA extraction (see below) or protein extraction. Samples were finely ground with a chilled pestle and mortar. They were washed for 24h in 5 volumes (weight to volume) of extraction buffer A (4M guanidine-HCl, 20mM NaH2PO4, 30mM Na2HPO4, pH7.4, plus 1:1000 mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma)) under constant agitation, at 4oC. The bone was then pelleted by centrifugation at 4oC and the supernatant removed. This was followed by extraction with 5 volumes of buffer B (as buffer A plus 300mM EDTA) under constant agitation at 4oC for 24h. The supernatant was removed as for the previous step. The resultant pellet was washed with 5 volumes of autoclaved distilled water 3 times before storage at 20oC. 20mg of dried bone matrix extract (BME) was sonicated for 2 x 15s on ice in 100L neutral 50mM phosphate buffer, 10mM EDTA, containing 1:1000 mammalian protease inhibitor cocktail. The supernatant was then removed and the solubilised protein precipitated with TCA (8% w/v final concentration). The BME pellet was also retained.  Complete ancient protein extracts were subject to LC-MS/MS analysis by first electrophoresing the sample ~0.5cm in to the resolving gel. After staining (0.1% w/v Commassie Blue, 10% v/v methanol, 10% v/v glacial acetic acid) and destaining (10% w/v methanol, 10% v/v glacial acetic acid) gel slices containing the protein mixtures were excised. In some cases, gel slices limited to an area including both of the ancient p62 immunoreactivity bands were also analysed.  For analyses using the LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) samples were digested with trypsin according to a modified FASP strategy, with subsequent LC-MS/MS analysis carried out using an RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex, UK) essentially as detailed by [Scott et al. 2016]. The .raw data file obtained from the LC-MS/MS acquisition was processed using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Scientific), with the file searched using Mascot (version 2.2.04, Matrix Science Ltd.) [Perkins et al. 1999] against the UniprotHuman_2015_02 database (unknown version, 67911 entries) assuming semi-trypsin digestion. The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.02 Da. Fixed modifications were set as alkylation of cysteine, and variable modifications set as deamidation of asparagine and glutamine, and oxidation of methionine and proline residues. Scaffold Q+S [Searle 2010] (version 4.4.1.1, Proteome Software) was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications from Proteome Discoverer. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability, with a minimum of two peptides required for protein identification.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data was generated on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer following digest of the reduced (DTT) and alkylated (Iodoacetamide) sample using a standard in-gel digestion protocol (ref) and elastase to maximize sequence coverage (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28164708). Peptides were separated on a nEASY spray column (ES803, ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) and analysed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000/Orbitrap Fusion Lumos platform (both ThermoFisher Scientific, USA) using standard parameters as described earlier (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/28164708). MS data was analysed with PEAKS Studio 8.5 (Bioinformatic Solutions, Uniprot/Trembl human 10/2014). Mass tolerances were set to 10ppm/0.5Da (MS1/MS2) and no cleavage specificity was defined. Carbamidomethylation (C) was set as fixed modification and Deamidation (D, Q) and Oxidation (M) were variable. Peptide FDR was adjusted to 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Paget's disease of bone (PDB) is a chronic skeletal disorder that can affect one or several bones in individuals older than 55 y of age. PDB-like changes have been reported in archaeological remains as old as Roman, although accurate diagnosis and natural history of the disease is lacking. Six skeletons from a collection of 130 excavated at Norton Priory in the North West of England, which dates to medieval times, show atypical and extensive pathological changes resembling contemporary PDB affecting as many as 75% of individual skeletons. Disease prevalence in the remaining collection is high, at least 16% of adults, with age at death estimations as low as 35 y. Despite these atypical features, paleoproteomic analysis identified sequestosome 1 (SQSTM1) or p62, a protein central to the pathological milieu of PDB, as one of the few noncollagenous human sequences preserved in skeletal samples. Targeted proteomic analysis detected &gt;60% of the ancient p62 primary sequence, with Western blotting indicating p62 abnormalities, including in dentition. Direct sequencing of ancient DNA excluded contemporary PDB-associated <i>SQSTM1</i> mutations. Our observations indicate that the ancient p62 protein is likely modified within its C-terminal ubiquitin-associated domain. Ancient miRNAs were remarkably preserved in an osteosarcoma from a skeleton with extensive disease, with miR-16 expression consistent with that reported in contemporary PDB-associated bone tumors. Our work displays the use of proteomics to inform diagnosis of ancient diseases such as atypical PDB, which has unusual features presumably potentiated by yet-unidentified environmental or genetic factors.

### Keywords
Sqstm1, Osteosarcoma, Paget disease, Paleoproteomics, P62

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute Discovery Proteomics Facility
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Target Discovery Institute Discovery Proteomics Facility


