### Accession
PXD025892

### Title
Shotgun proteome analysis of Hemerocallis citrina floral and extrafloral nectar

### Description
Many angiosperms can secret at least two types of sugar-rich liquids, floral nectar (FN) and extrafloral nectar (EFN), by which plants can make use of the animal partner’s mobility for pollen transportation and attract predatory animals for indirect defense. Both FN and EFN contain considerable amount of proteins which play important roles in nectar biosynthesis process and protection. Hemerocallis citrina (HC) can secrete both FN and EFN on flower during the same developmental stage. Our objective was to compare the HC FN and EFN proteome to understand the difference between their biosynthesis and ecological function. FN was collected from adult HC flowers and concentrated by ultrafiltering. EFN was collected from young HC flower buds and concentrated by ultrafiltering. Proteins were digested with trypsin then analyzed by LC-MS/MS. HSPs are the main protein identified in HC FN but their function in floral nectar is still largely unknown. PR proteins are the main protein identified in HC EFN with antimicrobial activity. Our data provide a good characterization of a monocot nectar proteome. These data, may be useful in understanding the generation process and ecological function of floral and extrafloral nectar.

### Sample Protocol
Trypsin-digested protein samples were analysed using an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatograph that was connected in-line with an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ionization (nanoESI) source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). The peptides were loaded onto a trap column (C18, 5μm particles, 100μm ID, 2 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) and separated using an analytical column (C18, 3μm particles, 75μm ID, 15 cm length, Dr. Maisch GmbH) at a flow rate of 400 nL min-1 with a 60 min LC gradient composed of Solvent A (0.1% formic acid (v/v)) and Solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (v/v)). The gradient was 3-10% B for 2 min, 10-25% B for 38 min, 25-40% B for 15 min, 40-90% B for 3 min, and finally 90% B for 2 min. Full-scan mass spectra were acquired in the positive-ion mode over the m/z range from 350 to 1550 using the Orbitrap mass analyzer in profile format with a mass resolution setting of 120000. In the data-dependent mode, the top-speed mode were selected with the most intense ions exceeding an intensity threshold of 5000 counts from each full-scan mass spectrum for tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis using HCD activation type with 33% collision energy. MS/MS spectra were acquired in centroid forma using ion trap detector. Real-time charge state screening was enabled to exclude unassigned and +1 charge states from MS/MS analysis. The exclusion duration in dynamic exclusion was set as 40s.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometric data were analysed using the Mascot database search engine. Peptide sequences were interpreted from the MS/MS spectra by searching plant in NCBI protein database. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation was set as a variable modification. The peptide mass tolerance was set at 15 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance at 0.6 Da. Trypsin was specified as the proteolytic enzyme, and two missed cleavage was allowed.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Extrafloral nectar, Hemerocallis citrina, Floral, Nectarin

### Affiliations
Hangshan Univerisity
Huangshan University

### Submitter
Hong-Guang Zha

### Lab Head
Dr Hong-Guang Zha
Hangshan Univerisity


