### Accession
PXD030935

### Title
T cell activation decreases microRNA-15a/16 levels as a mechanism to promote MEK1-ERK1/2-Elk1 signaling for optimal proliferative capacity

### Description
While microRNAs (miRs) have been extensively studied in the context of malignancy and tumor progression, their functions in regulating T cell activation are less clear. We found reduced levels of miR-15a/16 at 3-18 h post-T cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, suggesting a role in shaping T cell activation. An inducible miR15a/16 transgenic mouse model was developed to determine how elevating miR-15a/16 levels during early stages of activation would affect T cell proliferation and to identify TCR signaling pathways regulated by this miR pair. Doxycyclin (DOX) induced expression of miR-15a/16 from 0-18 h post-TCR stimulation decreased ex vivo proliferation as well as in vivo antigen-specific proliferation. Bioinformatic and proteomic approaches were combined to identify MEK1 as a target of miR-15a/16. MEK1 targeting by miR-15a/16 was confirmed using miR mimics that decreased MEK1 containing the 3’-UTR target nucleotide sequence (UGCUGCUA) but did not decrease MEK1 containing a mutated control sequence (AAAAAAAA). Phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules ERK1/2 and Elk1 were decreased with DOX-induced miR-15a/16 expression. In addition to MEK1, ERK1 was subsequently found to be targeted by miR-15a/16, with DOX induced miR-15a/16 reducing total ERK1 levels in T cells. These findings show that TCR stimulation reduces miR-15a/16 levels at early stages of T cell activation to facilitate increased MEK1 and ERK1, and this promotes sustained MEK1-ERK1/2-Elk1 signaling required for optimal proliferation.

### Sample Protocol
Proteomics and Bioinformatics.  Frozen cell pellets (15 X 106) were submitted to the UAMS Bioinformatics Core for Tandem mass tags (TMT; Thermo Scientific) labeling of tryptic peptides for quantitative multiplexing. Peptides in samples were fractionated by reverse-phase chromatography under basic pH conditions using a stand-alone UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo Scientific) prior to LC-MS/MS analysis under acidic pH conditions. MS/MS was performed using a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid system (Thermo Scientific) and Data-Independent Analysis used to collect data for all peptides within defined mass-to-charge windows. Three PBS control cell pellets were compared to three DOX induced T cell pellets after 18 h TCR-stimulation, with data reported as the log2-fold change showing quantitative difference between PBS and DOX groups. For bioinformatics, DIANA-miRPath v.3 web server (www.microrna.gr) (31) was used to predict the miRNA targets for four miRNAs: mmu-miR-16-5p, mmu-miR-15a-5p, mmu-miR-16-1-3p and mmu-miR-15a-3p, based on DIANA-microT-CDS algorithm. The algorithm computed a miRNA-gene interaction score for predicted targets in CDS or 3’—UTR regions. The genes with significant interaction score of above 0.8 were selected and further used to identify significantly enriched KEGG pathways.  Proteins were reduced, alkylated, and purified by chloroform/methanol extraction prior to digestion with sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Tryptic peptides were labeled using tandem mass tag isobaric labeling reagents (Thermo) following the manufacturer’s instructions and combined into one 6-plex sample group. The labeled peptide multiplex was separated into 46 fractions on a 100 x 1.0 mm Acquity BEH C18 column (Waters) using an UltiMate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a 50 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio under basic pH conditions, and then consolidated into 18 super-fractions. Each super-fraction was then further separated by reverse phase XSelect CSH C18 2.5 um resin (Waters) on an in-line 150 x 0.075 mm column using an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo). Peptides were eluted using a 60 min gradient from 98:2 to 60:40 buffer A:B ratio.  Eluted peptides were ionized by electrospray (2.2 kV) followed by mass spectrometric analysis on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo) using multi-notch MS3 parameters with real-time search enabled. MS data were acquired using the FTMS analyzer in top-speed profile mode at a resolution of 120,000 over a range of 375 to 1500 m/z. Following CID activation with normalized collision energy of 35.0, MS/MS data were acquired using the ion trap analyzer in centroid mode and normal mass range. Using synchronous precursor selection, up to 10 MS/MS precursors were selected for HCD activation with normalized collision energy of 65.0, followed by acquisition of MS3 reporter ion data using the FTMS analyzer in profile mode at a resolution of 50,000 over a range of 100-500 m/z.  Buffer A = 0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetonitrile Buffer B = 0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile Both buffers adjusted to pH 10 with ammonium hydroxide for offline separation

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified and MS3 reporter ions quantified using MaxQuant (version 1.6.17.0, Max Planck Institute) against the UniprotKB Mus musculus (April 2020) database with a parent ion tolerance of 3 ppm, a fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da, and a reporter ion tolerance of 0.003 Da. Scaffold Q+S (Proteome Software) was used to verify MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications (protein identifications were accepted if they could be established with less than 1.0% false discovery and contained at least 2 identified peptides; protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm [Anal. Chem. 75: 4646-58 (2003)]) and to perform reporter ion-based statistical analysis.  Protein TMT MS3 reporter ion intensity values are assessed for quality using ProteiNorm, a tool for a systematic evaluation of normalization methods [https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33073088/]. The intensities were normalized using Cyclic Loess normalization since it had the highest intragroup correlation and the lowest variance. The normalized data was used to perform statistical analysis using Linear Models for Microarray Data (limma) with empirical Bayes (eBayes) smoothing to the standard errors (ref). Proteins with an FDR adjusted p-value < 0.05 and a fold change > 2 were considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
While miRs have been extensively studied in the context of malignancy and tumor progression, their functions in regulating T-cell activation are less clear. In initial studies, we found reduced levels of miR-15a/16 at 3 to 18&#xa0;h post-T-cell receptor (TCR) stimulation, suggesting a role for decreased levels of this miR pair in shaping T-cell activation. To further explore this, we developed an inducible miR15a/16 transgenic mouse model to determine how elevating miR-15a/16 levels during early stages of activation would affect T-cell proliferation and to identify TCR signaling pathways regulated by this miR pair. Doxycycline (DOX)-induced expression of miR-15a/16 from 0 to 18&#xa0;h post-TCR stimulation decreased ex&#xa0;vivo T-cell proliferation as well as in&#xa0;vivo antigen-specific T-cell proliferation. We also combined bioinformatics and proteomics approaches to identify the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MEK1) (Map2k1) as a target of miR-15a/16. MEK1 targeting by miR-15a/16 was confirmed using miR mimics that decreased Map2k1 mRNA containing the 3'-UTR target nucleotide sequence (UGCUGCUA) but did not decrease Map2k1 containing a mutated control sequence (AAAAAAAA). Phosphorylation of downstream signaling molecules, extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) and Elk1, was also decreased by DOX-induced miR-15a/16 expression. In addition to MEK1, ERK1 was subsequently found to be targeted by miR-15a/16, with DOX-induced miR-15a/16 reducing total ERK1 levels in T cells. These findings show that TCR stimulation reduces miR-15a/16 levels at early stages of T-cell activation to facilitate increased MEK1 and ERK1, which promotes the sustained MEK1-ERK1/2-Elk1 signaling required for optimal proliferation.

### Keywords
Cell growth, Mitogen‐activated protein kinase (mapk), Cell cycle, Microrna (mirna), Cell signaling

### Affiliations
UAMS
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Peter Hoffmann
Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, Hawaii 96822


