### Accession
PXD027998

### Title
Proximity labeling identifies LOTUS domain proteins that promote the formation of perinuclear germ granules in C. elegans

### Description
Using C. elegans germ granule, called P granule, as a model system, we employed a proximity-based labeling method in combination with mass spectrometry to comprehensively define its protein components. This set of experiments identified over 200 proteins, many of which contain intrinsically disordered regions. An RNAi-based screen identified factors that are essential for P granule assembly, notably EGGD-1 and EGGD-2, two previously uncharacterized LOTUS-domain proteins. Loss of eggd-1 and eggd-2 results in separation of P granules from nuclear envelope, germline atrophy and reduced fertility. We show that intrinsically disordered regions of EGGD-1 are required to anchor EGGD-1 to the nuclear periphery while its LOTUS domains are required to promote perinuclear localization of P granules. Together, our work expands the repertoire of P granule constituents and provides new insights into the role of LOTUS-domain proteins in germ granule organization.

### Sample Protocol
Beads containing biotinylated proteins were washed with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate three times. After the third wash, DTT (Thermo Fisher) was added and the sample is incubated at 4 oC for 15 min. After the incubation, Iodoacetamide was added and the sample is kept in dark at room temperature for 30 min.  250 ng of sequencing grade-modified trypsin (Promega) prepared in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate was mixed with sample at 37 oC overnight. The reaction was quenched the by adding acetic acid for acidification. Supernatant was taken out, concentrated for LC/MSMS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Capillary-liquid chromatography-nanospray tandem mass spectrometry of protein identification was performed on an orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer equipped with an EASY-Spray sources (Thermo Fisher). Sequence information from the MS/MS data was processed by converting the .raw files into a merged file (.mgf) using MSConvert (ProteoWizard).  Isotope distributions for the precursor ions of the MS/MS spectra were deconvoluted to obtain the charge states and monoisotopic m/z values of the precursor ions during the data conversion. The resulting mgf files were searched using Mascot Daemon by Matrix Science version 2.5.1 and the database searched against C. elegans Uniprot databases.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
C. elegans, Germ granules, Proximity labeling

### Affiliations
Ohio State University

### Submitter
WEN TANG

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Tang
Ohio State University


