### Accession
PXD003324

### Title
Multiplex selected reaction monitoring assay for quantification of 15 human tissue kallikreins in biological samples

### Description
Human tissue kallikreins (KLKs) are a group of 15 secreted serine proteases encoded by the largest contiguous cluster of protease genes in the human genome. KLKs are involved in coordination of numerous physiological functions including regulation of blood pressure, neuronal plasticity, skin desquamation and semen liquefaction, and thus represent promising diagnostic and therapeutic targets. Until now, quantification of KLKs in biological and clinical samples was accomplished only by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). In this work, we developed a multiplex selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assay for the simultaneous quantification of all 15 KLKs. Proteotypic peptides for each KLK were carefully selected based on experimental data and then multiplex in a single assay. Assay performance was evaluated using three different mass spectrometry platforms including triple quadrupole, quadrupole-ion trap and quadrupole-orbitrap instruments. Heavy isotope-labeled synthetic peptides with a quantifying tag were used for absolute quantification of KLKs in seminal plasma, sweat and cervico-vaginal fluid, with limits of detection ranging from 5 to 500 ng/mL. Analytical performance of the SRM assay was evaluated by measuring endogenous KLKs in relevant clinical samples and results were compared to selected ELISAs. The multiplex SRM assay was proven to be an accurate, reproducible, sensitive and highly specific alternative to the existing antibody-based assays. Finally, we used immunoenrichment-SRM and ELISA to unambiguously detect and quantify seminal plasma levels of kallikrein-4, a highly prostate-specific protein and a potential biomarker of prostate-related diseases. The presented multiplex SRM assay is an alternative analytical tool to study the biological and pathological roles of human KLKs.

### Sample Protocol
Seminal plasma samples were obtained by masturbation from normal men who were about to undergo vasectomy. Cervico-vaginal fluid was collected from non-pregnant women 25-35 years old, in flexible cups that are worn internally, around the cervix. Sweat samples from five men and five women were collected after physical exercise in wood fiber wipes. Seminal fluid was allowed to liquefy at room temperature for 1 hour after collection. All samples were centrifuged at 16,000 g for 30 min to ensure complete removal of cells and cellular debris. Twenty μg of total protein amount per sample were subjected to trypsin digestion. Denaturation of proteins was achieved by treatment of samples with 0.1% RapiGest at 65oC, and 10 mM DTT was used for reduction of disulfide bonds. After reduction, the samples were alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Five hundred femtomoles of heavy isotope-labeled peptides with a quantitation tag were added to all samples prior to trypsin digestion. Digestion (1:20, trypsin:total protein) was performed overnight at 37°C with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega). RapiGest SF detergent was cleaved with 1% trifluoroacetic acid and removed after centrifugation at 16,000 g for 15 min. Extraction of tryptic peptides was performed in 10 μL OMIX Bond-Elute monolithic C18 tips with 65% ACN in 0.1% FA. Elutions were further diluted to a final percentage of 5% ACN and 0.1% FA.

### Data Protocol
Raw files of shotgun and Parallel Reaction Monitoring (PRM) experiments in the quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer, .raw files of SRM runs in the triple quadrupole mass spectrometer, as well as .wiff files of SRM experiments in the quadrupole-ion trap mass spectrometer were analysed using Skyline Targeted Proteomics Environment v3.1.0.7382  (MacCoss Lab Software, Seattle, WA, U.S.A.), and the .csv files with peptide areas were extracted. Peak integration and peak areas were manually verified and normalized by the respectively internal standards to account for variation occurring during the sample preparation process and mass spectrometry analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Human kallikrein-related peptidases (KLKs) are a group of 15 secreted serine proteases encoded by the largest contiguous cluster of protease genes in the human genome. KLKs are involved in coordination of numerous physiological functions including regulation of blood pressure, neuronal plasticity, skin desquamation, and semen liquefaction, and thus represent promising diagnostic and therapeutic targets. Until now, quantification of KLKs in biological and clinical samples was accomplished by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISA). Here, we developed multiplex targeted mass spectrometry assays for the simultaneous quantification of all 15 KLKs. Proteotypic peptides for each KLK were carefully selected based on experimental data and multiplexed in single assays. Performance of assays was evaluated using three different mass spectrometry platforms including triple quadrupole, quadrupole-ion trap, and quadrupole-orbitrap instruments. Heavy isotope-labeled synthetic peptides with a quantifying tag were used for absolute quantification of KLKs in sweat, cervico-vaginal fluid, seminal plasma, and blood serum, with limits of detection ranging from 5 to 500 ng/ml. Analytical performance of assays was evaluated by measuring endogenous KLKs in relevant biological fluids, and results were compared with selected ELISAs. The multiplex targeted proteomic assays were demonstrated to be accurate, reproducible, sensitive, and specific alternatives to antibody-based assays. Finally, KLK4, a highly prostate-specific protein and a speculated biomarker of prostate cancer, was unambiguously detected and quantified by immunoenrichment-SRM assay in seminal plasma and blood serum samples from individuals with confirmed prostate cancer and negative biopsy. Mass spectrometry revealed exclusively the presence of a secreted isoform and thus unequivocally resolved earlier disputes about KLK4 identity in seminal plasma. Measurements of KLK4 in either 41 seminal plasma or 58 blood serum samples revealed no statistically significant differences between patients with confirmed prostate cancer and negative biopsy. The presented multiplex targeted proteomic assays are an alternative analytical tool to study the biological and pathological roles of human KLKs.

### Keywords
Cervicovaginal fluid, Seminal plasma, Klk4 secretion, Selected reaction monitoring, Sweat, Mass spectrometry, Kallikreins

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Theano Karakosta

### Lab Head
Dr Andrei P. Drabovich
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada


