### Accession
PXD044833

### Title
Severe kidney dysfunction in sialidosis mice reveals an essential role for neuraminidase 1 in reabsorption

### Description
Sialidosis is an ultrarare multisystemic lysosomal disease caused by mutations in the neuraminidase 1 (NEU1) gene. The severe Type II form of the disease, manifests with a prenatal/infantile or juvenile onset, bone abnormalities, severe neuropathology and visceromegaly. A subset of these patients presents with nephrosialidosis, characterized by abrupt onset of fulminant glomerular nephropathy. We studied the pathophysiological mechanism of the disease in two NEU1-deficient mouse models, a constitutive Neu1 knockout Neu1ΔEx3 and a conditional phagocyte-specific knockout Neu1Cx3cr1ΔEx3. Mice of both strains exhibited terminal urinary retention and severe kidney damage with elevated urinary albumin levels, loss of nephrons, renal fibrosis, presence of storage vacuoles and dysmorphic mitochondria in the intraglomerular and tubular cells. Glycoprotein sialylation in glomeruli, proximal and distal tubules was drastically increased including that of an endocytic reabsorption receptor megalin. The pool of megalin bearing O-linked glycans with terminal galactose residues, essential for protein targeting and activity, was reduced to below detection levels. Megalin levels were severely reduced, and the protein was directed to lysosomes instead of the apical membrane. Together, our results demonstrated that desialylation by NEU1 plays a crucial role in processing and cellular trafficking of megalin and that NEU1 deficiency in sialidosis impairs megalinmediated protein reabsorption.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were reconstituted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate with 10 mM TCEP [Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride; Thermo Fisher Scientific], and vortexed for 1 h at 37°C. Chloroacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) was added for alkylation to a final concentration of 55 mM. Samples were vortexed for another hour at 37°C. One microgram of trypsin was added, and digestion was performed for 8 h at 37°C. Samples were dried down and solubilized in 5% ACN-4% formic acid (FA). The samples were loaded on a 1.5 ul pre-column (Optimize Technologies, Oregon City, OR). Peptides were separated on an home-made reversed-phase column (150-μm i.d. by 200 mm) with a 56-min gradient from 10 to 30% ACN-0.2% FA and a 600-nl/min flow rate on a Easy nLC-1200 connected to a Exploris 480 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Each full MS spectrum acquired at a resolution of 120,000 was followed by tandem-MS (MS-MS) spectra acquisition on the most abundant multiply charged precursor ions for 3s. Tandem-MS experiments were performed using higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a collision energy of 34%.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed using PEAKS X Pro (Bioinformatics Solutions, Waterloo, ON) and a Uniprot mouse database (16976 entries). Mass tolerances on precursor and fragment ions were 10 ppm and 0.01 Da, respectively. Fixed modification was carbamidomethyl (C). Variable selected posttranslational modifications were acetylation (N-ter), acetylation (K), oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), phosphorylation (STY).

### Publication Abstract
Sialidosis is an ultra-rare multisystemic lysosomal disease caused by mutations in the neuraminidase 1 (NEU1) gene. The severe type II form of the disease manifests with a prenatal/infantile or juvenile onset, bone abnormalities, severe neuropathology, and visceromegaly. A subset of these patients present with nephrosialidosis, characterized by abrupt onset of fulminant glomerular nephropathy. We studied the pathophysiological mechanism of the disease in 2 NEU1-deficient mouse models, a constitutive Neu1-knockout, Neu1&#x394;Ex3, and a conditional phagocyte-specific knockout, Neu1Cx3cr1&#x394;Ex3. Mice of both strains exhibited terminal urinary retention and severe kidney damage with elevated urinary albumin levels, loss of nephrons, renal fibrosis, presence of storage vacuoles, and dysmorphic mitochondria in the intraglomerular and tubular cells. Glycoprotein sialylation in glomeruli, proximal distal tubules, and distal tubules was drastically increased, including that of an endocytic reabsorption receptor megalin. The pool of megalin bearing O-linked glycans with terminal galactose residues, essential for protein targeting and activity, was reduced to below detection levels. Megalin levels were severely reduced, and the protein was directed to lysosomes instead of the apical membrane. Together, our results demonstrated that desialylation by NEU1 plays a crucial role in processing and cellular trafficking of megalin and that NEU1 deficiency in sialidosis impairs megalin-mediated protein reabsorption.

### Keywords
Neuraminidase 1, Protein sialylation, Sialidosis, Renal reabsorption

### Affiliations
Centre de Recherche du CHU Ste-Justine
Proteomic Platform

### Submitter
Eric Bonneil

### Lab Head
Dr Alexey V. Pshezhetsky
Centre de Recherche du CHU Ste-Justine


