### Accession
PXD002169

### Title
Fixated rat liver tissue -  Cleavable crosslinkers as tissue fixation reagents for proteomic analysis

### Description
Formaldehyde fixation is widely used for long-term maintenance of tissue. However, due to formaldehyde-induced cross-links, fixated tissue proteins are difficult to extract hampering the performance of mass spectrometry (MS)-proteomic analysis on formaldehyde-fixated tissue. Recent years saw the use of different combinations of high-temperature and solubilizing agents (usually derived from antigen retrieval techniques) to unravel formaldehyde-fixated paraffin-embedded tissue proteomes. However, in order to achieve protein extraction yields similar to fresh-frozen tissue high-temperature heating is necessary. Such harsh extraction conditions may affect, labile post-translational modifications such as phosphorylations resulting in the loss of important protein information. The objective of the present work is to assess cleavable fixative reagents that allow tissue preservation as well as efficient protein extraction from fixated tissue for MS-proteomics under mild conditions. To this regard, we investigated disuccinimidyl tartrate (DST) and dithiobis[succinimidylpropionate] (DSP) as cleavable fixating reagents. These compounds crosslink proteins by reacting with amino groups leading to amide bond formation. Linkers can be cleaved with sodium metaperiodate (cis-diols) or reducing agents (disulfide bonds), respectively. Our results show that reversible protein crosslinking allows tissue fixation with morphology preservation comparable to formalin. In addition, cleavage of DSP improves protein recovery from fixated tissue by a factor of 18 and increases the number of identified proteins by approximately 20% under mild extraction conditions avoiding the need for sample boiling, which could affect labile post-translational modifications. A major advantage of DSP over formaldehyde is the introduction of well-defined protein modifications that can be taken into account during database searching. In contrast to DSP fixation, DST fixation followed by periodic cleavage, while effective, resulted in side reactions that prevented effective protein extraction and subsequent protein identification. Protein crosslinkers, which can be cleaved under mild conditions, are thus viable alternatives to formaldehyde as tissue fixatives facilitating protein analysis from paraffin embedded, fixated tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Fixated-paraffin-embedded rat liver tissue slices (see section 2.4) were deparaffinized (paraffin melting at 60ºC and removal, washing with 1 ml xylene four times, 300 rpm, 20 min) and rehydrated (100% ethanol 5 min, 100% ethanol 15 min, 80% ethanol 10 min, 60% ethanol 10 min, 60% ethanol 20 min, water 5 min, water 5 min while shaking at 300 rpm). To cleave the crosslinks, DST fixated tissue was incubated with 2% periodic acid (3 h, room temperature, dark, 300 rpm) and DSP fixated tissue was incubated with 250 mM DTT (2h, room temperature, 300 rpm) followed by incubation with 500 mM iodoacetamide (1h, room temperature, dark, 300 rpm). After crosslinker cleavage, the tissue was washed with water to remove any excess of cleavage reagents. Subsequently, tissue slices were snap frozen (liquid nitrogen) and homogenized with a mortar and pestle. After tissue grinding, 0.2 ml lysis buffer (2% SDS, 50 mM Tris buffer pH 7.6, 8 M urea, 0.1 M β-mercaptoethanol) was added, the sample was vortexed for 1 min and sonicated in a water bath for 2 min. The sample was centrifuged (14000 rpm for 10 min, Eppendorf Centrifuge 5417R) and the supernatant transferred to a new Eppendorf tube (protein extract). Proteins were precipitated (acetone precipitation) from 10 µl of protein extract and re-dissolved in 20 µl 4% (w/v) SDS. 10 µl of the previous solution were diluted to 0.5 ml with phosphate buffered saline and the total protein concentration was determined using the Micro BCA Assay (Pierce Protein Research Product, Thermo Scientific) following the manufacturer’s protocol in an absorbance plate reader at 550 nm (Molecular Devices, THERMOmax). Acetone protein precipitation was performed on a volume of protein extract corresponding to 10 µg protein. After precipitation, proteins were digested by on-pellet trypsin digestion. Briefly, 25 µl trypsin (4 µg/ml in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer) was added to the precipitated proteins and the mixture was shaken at 600 rpm for 4 h. DTT was added to the sample to a final concentration of 10 mM and the sample was incubated for 30 min (60ºC, 600 rpm). After sample cool down, iodoacetamide was added to the sample to a final concentration of 20 mM and let to react for 30 min (room temperature, dark, 600 rpm). After completion of the reaction, trypsin was added at a 1:20 (w:w, trypsin:protein) ratio and let to react 16 h at 37ºC. To stop trypsin digestion trifluoroacetic acid was added to a final concentration of 1% (v/v).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry measurements were carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nano LC system (Dionex, Germering, Germany) online coupled to a hybrid linear ion trap/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). One µL digest of each sample was loaded on a C18 trap column (C18 PepMap, 300 µm ID ×5 mm, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size; Dionex, The Netherlands) and desalted for 10 minutes using a flow rate of 20 µL/min of 0.1% TFA in water. Then the trap column was switched online with the analytical column (PepMap C18, 75 µm ID ×150 mm, 3 µm particle and 100 Å pore size; Dionex, The Netherlands) and peptides were eluted with the following binary gradient: 0%–25% solvent B in 120 minutes followed by 25%–50% solvent B in 60 minutes, where solvent A consists of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic in water and solvent B consists of 80% acetonitrile and 0.08% formic acid in water. Column flow rate was set to 300 nL/min. For mass spectrometry detection a data dependent acquisition method was used: a high resolution survey scan from 400–1800 Th was performed in the Orbitrap (value of target of automatic gain control AGC 106, resolution 30,000 at 400 m/z; lock mass was set to 445.120025 Th (protonated (Si(CH3)2O)6). Based on this survey scan the 5 most intense ions were consecutively isolated (AGC target set to 104 ions) and fragmented by collision-activated dissociation (CAD) applying 35% normalized collision energy in the linear ion trap. After precursors were selected for MS/MS, they were excluded for further MS/MS analysis for 3 minutes.   Bioworks (version 3.3) was used as peak picking software and data files were submitted to Mascot (version 2, Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) to interrogate the UniProt-database (release 2014_03; taxonomy: Rattus norvegicus, 7914 entries) for protein identification. Peptides with a Mascot ions sore > 25 (i.e. a peptide probability cut off value of 0.01) assigned to them were accepted as true identifications. Modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. Additional variable modifications were set for DSP modification of lysine (87.998 Da and 145.120 Da) and DST modification of lysine (55.990 Da and 74.000 Da). A maximum of 2 missed cleavages was allowed. Mass tolerance for precursor ions was set to 10 ppm and for fragment ions at 0.5 Da. The false discovery rate was determined by performing a database search against a decoy database and was below 1%.

### Publication Abstract
Formaldehyde fixation is widely used for long-term maintenance of tissue. However, due to formaldehyde-induced crosslinks, fixed tissue proteins are difficult to extract, which hampers mass spectrometry (MS) proteomic analyses. Recent years have seen the use of different combinations of high temperature and solubilizing agents (usually derived from antigen retrieval techniques) to unravel formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue proteomes. However, to achieve protein extraction yields similar to those of fresh-frozen tissue, high-temperature heating is necessary. Such harsh extraction conditions can affect sensitive amino acids and post-translational modifications, resulting in the loss of important information, while still not resulting in protein yields comparable to those of fresh-frozen tissue. Herein, the objective is to evaluate cleavable protein crosslinkers as fixatives that allow tissue preservation and efficient protein extraction from fixed tissue for MS proteomics under mild conditions. With this goal in mind, disuccinimidyl tartrate (DST) and dithiobis(succinimidylpropionate) (DSP) are investigated as cleavable fixating reagents. These compounds crosslink proteins by reacting with amino groups, leading to amide bond formation, and can be cleaved with sodium metaperiodate (cis-diols, DST) or reducing agents (disulfide bonds, DSP), respectively. Results show that cleavable protein crosslinking with DST and DSP allows tissue fixation with morphology preservation comparable to that of formaldehyde. In addition, cleavage of DSP improves protein recovery from fixed tissue by a factor of 18 and increases the number of identified proteins by approximately 20&#x2009;% under mild extraction conditions compared with those of formaldehyde-fixed paraffin-embedded tissue. A major advantage of DSP is the introduction of well-defined protein modifications that can be taken into account during database searching. In contrast to DSP fixation, DST fixation followed by cleavage with sodium metaperiodate, although effective, results in side reactions that prevent effective protein extraction and interfere with protein identification. Protein crosslinkers that can be cleaved under mild conditions and result in defined modifications, such as DSP, are thus viable alternatives to formaldehyde as tissue fixatives to facilitate protein analysis from paraffin-embedded, fixed tissue.

### Keywords
Reversible crosslinking, Rat liver, Cleavable crosslinkers, Tissue fixation

### Affiliations
RUG
University of Groningen, Department of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands, Tel. +31-50-363-3338 (secr. 3336), Fax +31-50-363-7582, r.p.h.bischoff@rug.nl.

### Submitter
Sara Ongay

### Lab Head
Dr Rainer Bischoff
University of Groningen, Department of Pharmacy, Analytical Biochemistry, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, 9713 AV Groningen, The Netherlands, Tel. +31-50-363-3338 (secr. 3336), Fax +31-50-363-7582, r.p.h.bischoff@rug.nl.


