### Accession
PXD023363

### Title
Mouse hippocampus RNA pull down LC-MS/MS

### Description
Antisense and sense probes of noncoding RNA GAS5 were used to perform the RNA pull down experiment on mouse hippocampus tissues. Then the proteins were identified by LC-MS/MS.

### Sample Protocol
The proteins which were separated by SDS-PAGE were reduced using 20 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 95 ℃ for 5 minutes and alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 30 minutes (in the dark). Then the samples were digested into peptides using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) and recovered from gel. Peptides were desalted using StageTips and resuspended using 0.1% formic acid with 2% acetonitrile (ACN). Mass spectrometry experiments were performed on a nanoscale UHPLC system (EASY-nLC1200, Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos equipped with a nanoelectrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were separated on a RPHPLC analytical column (75 μm × 25 cm) packed with 2 μm C18 beads (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a linear gradient ranging from 9% to 28% ACN in 90 minutes and followed by a linear increase to 45% B in 20 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The Orbitrap Fusion Lumos acquired data in a data-dependent manner alternating between full-scan MS and MS2 scans. The MS spectra (350-1800 m/z) were collected with 120,000 resolution, AGC of 4 × 105, and 50 ms maximal injection time. Selected ions were sequentially fragmented in a 3 s cycle by HCD with 30% normalized collision energy, specified isolated windows 1.6 m/z, 30,000 resolution. AGC of 5 × 104 and 100 ms maximal injection time were used. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.2), and MS/MS spectra were searched against the reviewed Swiss-Prot mouse proteome database. The cutoff values were showed below: a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm; fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da; only peptides longer than six amino acids were kept; FDR <1% and at least one unique peptide was required for protein identification.

### Publication Abstract
Increasing studies show that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) play essential roles in various fundamental biological processes. Long non-coding RNA growth arrest-specific transcript 5 (GAS5) showed differential expressions between young and old mouse brains in our previous RNA-Seq data, suggesting its potential role in senescence and brain aging. Examination using quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction revealed that GAS5 had a significantly higher expression level in the old mouse brain hippocampus region than the young one. Cellular fractionation using hippocampus-derived HT22 cell line confirmed its nucleoplasm and cytoplasm subcellular localization. Overexpression or knockdown of GAS5 in HT22 cell line revealed that GAS5 inhibits cell cycle progression and promotes cell apoptosis. RNA-Seq analysis of GAS5-knockdown HT22 cells identified differentially expressed genes related to cell proliferation (e.g., DNA replication and nucleosome assembly biological processes). RNA pull-down assay using mouse brain hippocampus tissues showed that potential GAS5 interacting proteins could be enriched into several Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways, and some of them are involved in senescence-associated diseases such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. These results contribute to understand better the underlying functional network of GAS5 and its interacting proteins in senescence at brain tissue and brain-derived cell line levels. Our study may also provide a reference for developing diagnostic and clinic biomarkers of GAS5 in senescence and brain aging.

### Keywords
Mouse hippocampus, Lc-ms/ms, Rna pull down

### Affiliations
University of Science and Technology of China, China
USTC

### Submitter
Huawei MU

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaoyuan Song
University of Science and Technology of China, China


