### Accession
PXD024479

### Title
The Conformational Stability of Pro-apoptotic BAX is Dictated by Discrete Residues of the Protein Core

### Description
BAX is a pro-apoptotic member of the BCL-2 family, which regulates the balance between cellular life and death. During homeostasis, BAX predominantly resides in the cytosol as a latent monomer but, in response to stress, transforms into an oligomeric protein that permeabilizes the mitochondria, leading to cell death. Because renegade BAX activation poses a grave risk to the cell, the architecture of BAX must ensure monomeric stability yet simultaneously enable conformational change upon stress signaling. The specific structural features that afford both stability and dynamic flexibility remain ill-defined and represent a critical control point of BAX regulation. Here, we identified a nexus of interactions involving four discrete residues of the BAX core α5 helix that are individually essential to maintaining the structure and latency of monomeric BAX and are collectively required for dimeric assembly.  We compared the HDX MS profile of full-length recombinant wild-type BAX in solution with that of the BAX L113A, F114A, Y115A, and F116A single point mutants. In each case, we observed striking, regiospecific consequences of replacing the bulky hydrophobic residue with alanine. We also compared HDX in a construct of α2-α5 for the wt protein as well as mutants. The dual yet distinct roles of these residues reveals the intricacy of BAX conformational regulation and opportunities for therapeutic modulation.

### Sample Protocol
Deuterium labeling:  BAX aliquots were freshly prepared in biological replicates prior to HXMS analysis with stock concentrations in 20 mM HEPES, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, pH 7.2, H2O as follows: BAX WT: 22 µM; BAX L113A: 29 or 26 µM; BAX F114A: 29 or 18.6 µM; BAX Y115A: 6.8 µM; BAX F116A: 16 or 24 µM.  Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution (18 µL for BAX WT, L113A, F114A, and F116A; 36 µL for BAX Y115A) into D2O buffer (20 mM HEPES, 150 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, pD 7.2, 99.9% D2O).  GFP-tagged BAX α2-α5 proteins were prepared similarly in stock concentrations in TBS (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl) as follows: BAX α2-α5 WT: 20 μM; BAX α2-α5 F116A: 20 μM; BAX α2-α5 L113A/F114A/Y115A/F116A: 20 or 13 μM. Deuterium labeling was initiated with an 18-fold dilution into D2O buffer (20 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, pD 8.0, 99.9% D2O).  After each labeling time (10 seconds, 1 minute, 10 minutes) at 20 °C, the labeling reaction was quenched with the addition of 19 μL of ice-cold quenching buffer [(0.8 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% (v/v) formic acid, pH 2.0, H2O for full-length proteins and 4 M guanidium chloride, 200 mM potassium phosphate, 0.72 M TCEP, pH 2.3, H2O for the GFP-BAX α2-α5 constructs)] and analyzed immediately.  LC/MS:  All LC steps were performed with a Waters HDX system containing an HDX unit and two Acquity M-class UPLC pumps.  Deuterated and control samples were digested online in the HDX cooling unit, where the digestion chamber was held at 15 °C, using an AffiPro Nepenthesin-2 column (AffiPro, AP-PC-004, 2.1 mm × 20 mm). Peptides were trapped and desalted on a VanGuard Pre-Column trap [2.1 mm × 5 mm, ACQUITY UPLC BEH C18, 1.7 μm, (Waters, 186002346)] for 3 minutes at 100 μL/min.  Peptides were then eluted from the trap using a 5%–35% gradient of acetonitrile over 6 minutes at a flow rate of 100 μL/min, and separated using an ACQUITY UPLC HSS T3, 1.8 μm, 1.0 mm × 50 mm column (Waters, 186003535).  The main cooling chamber of the Waters HDX unit, which housed all the chromatographic elements, was held at 0.0 ± 0.1 °C for the entire time of the measurements.  The back pressure averaged ~12,950 psi at 0 °C and 5% acetonitrile 95% water.  To eliminate peptide carryover, a wash solution [1.5 M guanidinium chloride, 0.8% formic acid and 4% acetonitrile] was injected over the Nepenthesin-2 column during each analytical run.  Mass spectra were acquired using a Waters Synapt G2-Si HDMSE mass spectrometer in ion mobility mode.  The mass spectrometer was calibrated with direct infusion of a solution of glu-fibrinopeptide (Sigma, F3261) at 200 femtomole/μL at a flow rate of 5 μL/min prior to data collection.  A conventional electrospray source was used, and the instrument was scanned over the range 50 to 2000 m/z.  The instrument configuration was: capillary voltage 3.2 kV, trap collision energy at 4 V, sampling cone at 40 V, source temperature of 80 °C, and desolvation temperature of 175 °C.  All comparison experiments were done under identical experimental conditions such that deuterium levels were not corrected for back-exchange and are therefore reported as relative. The error of determining the deuterium levels was ± 0.25 Da in this experimental setup.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS 3.0.1 (Waters, 720001408EN) using replicates of undeuterated control samples.  Raw MS data were imported into DynamX 3.0 (Waters, 720005145EN) and filtered with minimum consecutive products of 2, minimum number of products per amino acid of 0.25. Those peptides meeting the filtering criteria were further processed automatically by DynamX followed by manual inspection of all spectra and data processing.  The relative amount of deuterium in each peptide was determined by subtracting the centroid mass of the undeuterated form of each peptide from the deuterated form, at each time point, for each condition.  These deuterium uptake values were used to generate all uptake graphs and difference maps.

### Publication Abstract
BAX is a pro-apoptotic member of the BCL-2 family, which regulates the balance between cellular life and death. During homeostasis, BAX predominantly resides in the cytosol as a latent monomer but, in response to stress, transforms into an oligomeric protein that permeabilizes the mitochondria, leading to apoptosis. Because renegade BAX activation poses a grave risk to the cell, the architecture of BAX must ensure monomeric stability yet enable conformational change upon stress signaling. The specific structural features that afford both stability and dynamic flexibility remain ill-defined and represent a critical control point of BAX regulation. We identify a nexus of interactions involving four residues of the BAX core &#x3b1;5 helix that are individually essential to maintaining the structure and latency of monomeric BAX and are collectively required for dimeric assembly. The dual yet distinct roles of these residues reveals the intricacy of BAX conformational regulation and opportunities for therapeutic modulation.

### Keywords
Bcl-2 protein, Hdxms, Bax, Hydrogen deuterium exchange, Apoptosis

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University
Northeastern University

### Submitter
John R. Engen

### Lab Head
Dr John R. Engen
Department of Chemistry & Chemical Biology, Northeastern University


