### Accession
PXD002597

### Title
The Skin Barrier Defects Caused by Keratinocyte-Specific Deletion of ADAM17 or EGFR are Based on Highly Similar Proteome and Degradome Alterations

### Description
ADAM17 and EGFR are essential key players for epidermal integrity. Keratinocyte-specific deletion of ADAM17 in mice results in pronounced alterations in terminal differentiation of keratinocytes leading to severe epidermal barrier defects with enhanced transepidermal water loss. Thereby, mice deficient for ADAM17 in keratinocytes phenocopy mice with a keratinocyte-specific deletion of EGFR, highlighting the role of ADAM17 as a “ligand sheddase”, as it sheds membrane bound EGFR ligands from the cell surface and finally modulates EGFR signaling.  In this study we aim for the first proteomic / degradomic approach to characterize the disruption of the ADAM17-EGFR signaling axis and its consequences for epidermal barrier formation. Proteomic profiling of the epidermal proteome of mice deficient for either ADAM17 or EGFR in keratinocytes at postnatal days 3 and 10 revealed highly similar protein alterations for ADAM17 and EGFR deficiency. These include massive proteome alterations of structural and regulatory components important for barrier formation, like transglutaminases, involucrin, S100 protein family members and S100 fused-type proteins, such as filaggrin, filaggrin-2 and hornerin. Cleavage site analysis using TAILS reveals, among other ADAM17 dependent cleavage sites, increased proteolytic processing of S100 fused-type proteins, including filaggrin-2. Alterations in proteolytic processing are supported by altered protein abundance of numerous proteases upon keratinocyte-specific Adam17 or Egfr deletion, among them kallikreins, cathepsins and their inhibitors. In addition, N-terminal proteomics indicated usage of alternative translation start sites. This study highlights the essential role of proteolytic processing for maintenance of a functional epidermal barrier. Furthermore it suggests that most defects in formation of the postnatal epidermal barrier upon keratinocyte-specific ADAM17 deletion are mediated via EGFR.

### Sample Protocol
lProtein lysates the epidermis was detached from the dermis by heat separation. Epidermis was lysed in RIPA buffer. Proteins were precipitated using acetone and digested using trypsin. Formaldehyde labeling was performed as a label-switch experiment, meaning the wild type sample was labeled light in the first biological replicate and heavy in the second biological replicate. Labeling was performed after tryptic digestion. Data were converted to mzXML format using Proteowizard with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data. Peptide sequences were identified by X! Tandem (version 2013.09.01.1), including cyclic permutation, in conjunction with PeptideProphet (part of version 4.7 of the Trans Proteomic Pipeline (TPP)) and a decoy search strategy: the complete mouse proteome file was downloaded from UniProt on Nov 26th 2013. It was appended with an equal number of randomized sequences, derived from the original mouse proteome entries. The decoy database was generated with DBToolkit. Tryptic cleavage specificity with no missed cleavage sites was applied. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.3 Da for fragment ions. Static modifications are cysteine carboxyamidomethylation (+57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde 34.06 Da). X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95 %. Corresponding protein identifications are based on the ProteinProphet algorithm with a protein false discovery rate of < 1 %. The relative quantitation for each protein was calculated from the relative areas of the extracted ion chromatograms of the precursor ions and their isotopically distinct equivalents using the XPRESS algorithm. Reported Fc values are based on normalized XPRESS ratios. Proteins were considered to be altered in their abundance if they were (A) identified in both biological replicates of each experimental setup, (B) showed an alteration in abundance of more than 50 % (Fc < -0.58; Fc > 0.58) and (C) if their H/L ratio calculated by XPRESS was confirmed by manual inspection of the extracted ions chromatograms.  TAILS was performed using formaldehyde labeling according to the original publication [22]. 2 mg of protein were used per condition. Formaldehyde labeling was performed as a label-switch experiment, meaning the wild type sample was labeled light in the first biological replicate and heavy in the second biological replicate. After tryptic digest samples were desalted using a reversed phase C18 column, prefractionated by SCX as described, and desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (Empore, USA) [33]. LC-MS/MS analysis is described in the corresponding section. As for the quantitative proteome comparison, data were converted to mzXML format [26] using Proteowizard [27] with centroiding of MS1 and MS2 data. Peptide sequences were identified by X! Tandem (version 2013.09.01.1) [28], including cyclic permutation, in conjunction with PeptideProphet (part of version 4.7 of the Trans Proteomic Pipeline) [29] and a decoy search strategy: the complete mouse proteome file was downloaded from UniProt [30] on Nov 26th 2013. Semi Arg-C specificity with up to two missed cleavage sites was applied. Static modifications are (+ 57.02 Da), lysine and N-terminal dimethylation (light formaldehyde + 28.03 Da; heavy formaldehyde + 34.06 Da). For acetylated N-termini (+ 42.01 Da), modifications are cysteine carboxyamidomethylation, N-terminal acetylation, and lysine dimethylation. Mass tolerance was 10 ppm for parent ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. X!Tandem results were further validated by PeptideProphet at a confidence level of > 95 %. The relative quantification for each peptide was calculated using the XPRESS [32] algorithm as described for “Quantitative Proteome Comparison”. Two biological replicates comparing wild type and ADAM17ΔKC epidermal lysates of littermates at P3 with independent sample preparation (not the same samples as for quantitative proteome comparison) and mass spectrometric measurement were analyzed. N-termini were considered to be altered in their abundance if they were (A) identified in both biological replicates, (B) showed an alteration in abundance of more than 50 % (Fc < -0.58; Fc > 0.58) and (C) if their H/L ratio calculated by XPRESS was confirmed by manual inspection of the extracted ions chromatograms (XIC).

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis For nanoflow-LC-MS/MS, MS samples were analyzed on an Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific GmbH, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer. The instrument was coupled to an Ultimate3000 micro pump (Thermo Scientific) with a flow rate or 300 nl / min. 0.5 % acetic acid and 0.5 % acetic acid in 80 % acetonitrile (water and acetonitrile were at least HPLC gradient grade quality) with a gradient of increasing organic proportion were used for peptide separation. Column-tips with 75 µm inner diameter and a length of 11 cm were self-packed [34] with Reprosil-Pur 120 ODS-3 (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany). The mass spectrometer was operated in the data dependent mode and switched automatically between MS and MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Keratinocyte-specific deletion of ADAM17 in mice impairs terminal differentiation of keratinocytes leading to severe epidermal barrier defects. Mice deficient for ADAM17 in keratinocytes phenocopy mice with a keratinocyte-specific deletion of epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR), which highlights the role of ADAM17 as a "ligand sheddase" of EGFR ligands. In this study, we aim for the first proteomic/degradomic approach to characterize the disruption of the ADAM17-EGFR signaling axis and its consequences for epidermal barrier formation. Proteomic profiling of the epidermal proteome of mice deficient for either ADAM17 or EGFR in keratinocytes at postnatal days 3 and 10 revealed highly similar protein alterations for ADAM17 and EGFR deficiency. These include massive proteome alterations of structural and regulatory components important for barrier formation such as transglutaminases, involucrin, filaggrin, and filaggrin-2. Cleavage site analysis using terminal amine isotopic labeling of substrates revealed increased proteolytic processing of S100 fused-type proteins including filaggrin-2. Alterations in proteolytic processing are supported by altered abundance of numerous proteases upon keratinocyte-specific Adam17 or Egfr deletion, among them kallikreins, cathepsins, and their inhibitors. This study highlights the essential role of proteolytic processing for maintenance of a functional epidermal barrier. Furthermore, it suggests that most defects in formation of the postnatal epidermal barrier upon keratinocyte-specific ADAM17 deletion are mediated via EGFR.

### Keywords
Degradomics, Proteomics, Skin

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg Stefan Meier Strasse 17 79104 Freiburg, Germany
Institute for Molecular Medicine

### Submitter
Stefan Tholen

### Lab Head
Dr Oliver Schilling
Institute of Molecular Medicine and Cell Research  University of Freiburg Stefan Meier Strasse 17 79104 Freiburg, Germany


