### Accession
PXD033907

### Title
Escherichia coli LC-MS/MS treated by tavaborole

### Description
E.coli ATCC 25922 was overnight grown in 10 ml LB and passaged for 3 h with 1:50 dilution in fresh LB. Treated with tavaborole alone (80 μg/ml, labeled ‘A’) or tavaborole plus amikacin (80 μg/ml +40 μg/ml, labeled ‘AK’) for 6 h, cells were washed in PBS and harvested by centrifugation at 4,000 g, 8 min. After liquid nitrogen flash freezing, cells were stored at -80 °C and transported to company for following experiments

### Sample Protocol
According to the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure, bacteria was lysed by SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris-HCl,  1 mM DTT, pH 7.6) and protein was digested by trypsin and quantified by BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA). The digest peptides of each sample were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), enriched by vacuum centrifugation and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). Digested protein mixtures were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm*2 cm, nanoViper C18) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min in buffer of  0.1% formic acid and 84% acetonitrile. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. Survey of full-scan MS spectra  (300–1800 m/z) were acquired with a resolution of R=70,000 at m/z 200. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. The raw data were combined and searched using the MaxQuant 1.5.3.17  software for identification and quantitation analysis as described previously

### Publication Abstract
High incidences of urinary tract infection (UTI) of aminoglycosides-resistant E.coli causes a severe burden for public health. A new therapeutic strategy to ease this crisis is to repurpose non-antibacterial compounds to increase aminoglycosides sensibility against multidrug resistant E.coli pathogens. Based on high throughput screening technology, we profile the antimicrobial activity of tavaborole, a first antifungal benzoxaborole drug for onychomycosis treatment, and investigate the synergistic interaction between tavaborole and aminoglycosides, especially tobramycin and amikacin. Most importantly, by resistance accumulation assay, we found that, tavaborole not only slowed resistance occurrence of aminoglycosides, but also reduced invasiveness of E.coli in combination with tobramycin. Mechanistic studies preliminary explored that tavaborole and aminoglycosides lead to mistranslation, but would be still necessary to investigate more details for further research. In addition, tavaborole exhibited low systematic toxicity in vitro and in vivo, and enhanced aminoglycoside bactericidal activity in mice peritonitis model. Collectively, these results suggest the potential of tavaborole as a novel aminoglycosides adjuvant to tackle the clinically relevant drug resistant E. coli and encourages us to discover more benzoxaborole analogues for circumvention of recalcitrant infections.

### Keywords
Escherichia coli; lc-ms/ms;tavaborole

### Affiliations
The First Hospital of Changsha
Third xiangya hospital of central south university

### Submitter
Shasha Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Wu Yong
The First Hospital of Changsha


