### Accession
PXD037914

### Title
Detection of known and novel small proteins in Pseudomonas stutzeri using a combination of bottom-up and top-down proteomics and proteogenomics

### Description
Here we performed a comprehensive genomic and proteomics analysis of P. stutzeri in aerobic and oxygen-limiting conditions. We combined de novo genome assembly relying on 3rd generation long read sequencing technologies to report the first complete P. stutzeri ATCC14405 genome, which added over 110 kb of sequence and contains 126 full length CDS that were only partially covered in the fragmented short read-based genome assembly available for this strain. With this optimal basis for downstream functional genomics, we next carried out state of the art bottom-up and top-down proteomics analyses to report the most detailed study of proteome remodeling in response to oxygen limitation in P. stutzeri. We identified more than 2900 proteins, i.e. greater than 70% of the theoretical proteome, including 160 annotated small proteins. The proteins included well-established enzymes involved in denitrification and metabolic adaptation to oxygen-limiting conditions, as well as uncharacterized proteins. Notably, we identified 16 novel small proteins that had so far been missed in the genome annotation.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS measurements were carried out on an Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC (Thermo Fisher) system, equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap C18 trap column (2 cm * 75 µm, particle size: 3 µm; Thermo Fisher) and a C18 analytical column (50 cm * 75 µm, particle size: 1.7 µm; CoAnn Technologies) with an integrated liquid-junction and fused silica emitter coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher). Proteolytic digests and protein extracts were dissolved in 40 µl sample buffer (95% water, 5% CAN, supplemented with 0.1% FA) and trapped on column for 6 min at flow rate of 6 µl/min with loading buffer (98% water, 2% ACN, supplemented with 0.05% TFA). The following separations were performed with a flow rate of 250 nl/min and gradient elutions of buffer A (water, supplemented with 0.1% FA) and buffer B (80% ACN, 20% water, supplemented with 0.1% FA). Bottom-up proteomics samples were eluted with consecutive linear steps from 4-33% B in 150 min, 33-48% B in 30 min, 48-90% B in 1 min followed by constant flow at 90% B for 5 min. Peptides eluting from the column were analyzed in data-dependent mode with MS1 scans acquired from 350-1400 m/z in the orbitrap (max. IT: 50 ms, AGC: 50%, resolution: 60K) at a fixed cycle time of 1 s. Precursors were automatically selected based on highest intensity and passing filter criteria: charge state (2-5), minimum intensity (≥2.5*104) and matching peptide isotope pattern. Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole (window: 1.4 m/z) and subjected to HCD fragmentation (NCE: 30%). Fragment spectra were recorded in the orbitrap (max. IT: 54 ms, AGC: 100%, resolution: 30K). A dynamic exclusion list was used with a cycle time of 30 s and 10 ppm mass tolerance. Direct sequencing samples were eluted with consecutive linear steps from 4-33% B in 75 min, 33-65% B in 15 min, 65-95% B in 1 min followed by constant flow at 95% B for 11 min. Peptides and proteins eluting from the column were analyzed by two methods in data-dependent mode employing splitted MS1 windows for precursor selection as well as a modified BoxCar (Meier et al, 2018) method. For the splitted windows, MS1 scans were acquired in the orbitrap with mass ranges from 350-800 m/z and 800-2000 m/z (max. IT: 50 ms, AGC: 50%, resolution: 120K) with individual fixed cycle times of 2 s. Precursors were automatically selected based on highest intensities and passing filter criteria: charge state (2-15) and minimum intensity (≥2.5*104). Selected precursors were isolated in the quadrupole (windows: 1.4 m/z (low mass range), 1.6 (high mass range)) and subjected to HCD fragmentation (NCE: 30%). Fragment spectra were recorded in the orbitrap (max. IT: 54 ms, AGC: 80%, resolution: 30K). A dynamic exclusion list was used with a cycle time of 30 s and 10 ppm mass tolerance. For the modified boxcar method, survey MS1 scans were recorded with a mass range of 350-2000 m/z (max. IT: 50 ms, AGC: 50%, resolution: 120K) that was further split into bins of 45 m/z and distributed into three multiplexed tSIM scan events (max. IT: 118 ms, AGC: 400%, resolution: 60K) with a fixed total cycle time of 4.5 s. Precursors were automatically selected from the tSIM scans based on highest intensities and passing filter criteria: charge state (2-15) and minimum intensity (≥2.5*104). To enhance the detection of highly charged and/or high mass compounds, which were missed by the automated picking, an additional scan was enforced upon a detected charge state >5 or mass >1500 Da. Selected precursors were then isolated in the quadrupole (window: 1.6 m/z) and subjected to HCD fragmentation (NCE: 35%). Fragment spectra were recorded in the orbitrap (max. IT: 54 ms, AGC: 100%, resolution: 30K). A dynamic exclusion list was used with a cycle time of 60 s and 10 ppm mass tolerance.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of proteomic datasets Mass spectrometry data files were processed with PEAKS Studio (version 10.6). De novo sequencing and consecutive database searches against the RefSeq and iPtgxDB databases were performed with mass tolerances of 15 ppm (MS1) and 0.02 Da (MS2) respectively. For bottom-up files, carbamidomethylation (cysteine, fixed), oxidation (methionine, variable), acetylation (N-term, variable) and formylation (N-term, variable) were set as modifications and trypsin selected as digestion enzyme, allowing up to three missed cleavages. For direct sequencing files, oxidation (methionine, variable), acetylation (N-term, variable) and formylation (N-term, variable) were set as modifications using an unspecific search approach. Resulting database matches were filtered with a 0.1% peptide spectrum match (PSM) level FDR for bottom up and 0.3% for direct sequencing to achieve an estimated protein level FDR below 1%. To increase stringency, only proteins with at least one PSM in at least 2/3 samples per growth condition were retained in the dataset. Label free quantifications, including TIC normalization, retention time alignment and ID transfer, were performed with PEAKS Studio on the bottom-up samples in a feature-based approach, requiring at least one unique peptide for a protein in 2/3 samples for both conditions. Significant fold changes were determined using PEAKSQ with an adjusted Benjamini-Hochberg FDR of 1%. We further extracted proteins detected only in one condition manually by spectral counting. These proteins are listed separately, with specific PSM counts indicated for each selected candidate. Functional protein annotations were obtained through EGGNOG-mapper (Huerta-Cepas et al, 2017). Protein interactions and functional enrichment were analyzed in Cytoscape (v3.8.2, Shannon et al, 2003)) using the STRING database (Szklarczyk et al, 2019).  Analysis of novel CDS identified by proteogenomics The MS/MS data from both shotgun and direct sequencing were searched against the iPtgxDB with PEAKS Studio to identify novel sORFs. To increase stringency, on top of the PSM FDR cut-offs mentioned above (which result in an estimated protein FDR of 1%) an additional prediction resource-specific filter was applied, as previously described (Varadarajan et al JPR 2020), that requires more PSM evidence for the ab initio predictors Prodigal and Chemgenome (3 PSMs), and the modified in silico prediction (4 PSMs). Peptides implying novelty were furthermore assessed with PeptideClassifier (Qeli and Ahrens, 2010) with the extension for prokaryotic proteogenomics (Omasits et al, 2017). Moreover, PSMs implying potential novel small proteins were manually evaluated both for potential candidates identified with the top-down workflow and the bottom-up (shotgun proteomics) workflow, in order to filter false positives and create a high confidence list of novel small proteins (see Table 1). An additional protein length filter of 100 aa was applied to report an additional 13 novel proteins above that length threshold in the Supplement. Functional predictions for novel CDS were obtained from eggNOG-mapper v2.1.9 (Cantalapiedra et al., 2021) and from the Phyre2 web server (Blum et al., 2020). Signal peptides and transmembrane domains were computed with InterProScan v5.59-91 (Jones et al., 2014) using SignalP v4.1 (Nielsen, H, 2017) and Phobius v1.01 (Käll et al., 2004), and TMHMM v2.0c (Krogh et al. 2001), respectively. Potential lipoproteins were identified with LipoP 1.0a (Juncker et al., 2003). To predict whether novel proteins are part of an operon, the RefSeq 2022 annotated CDS (see below) and the novel ORFs were integrated into a combined GFF file and analyzed using the Operon Mapper web server (Blum et al., 2020). Possible conservation of novel small proteins was assessed in NCBIs selection of bacterial genomes using BlastP and tBlastN (parameters: low complexity region filter; word size of 6; 60 % coverage of the query sequence with at least 40 % identity, an E-value of ≤100 to capture all potential orthologs, but requiring an E-value between 0.01 up to 1 for high confidence hits (Allen et al., 2014), and summarized for different taxonomic groups. All results were merged into a single table using a custom Python script. Finally, the identified novel proteins were also compared to the newest RefSeq annotation (from August 1, 2022) and categorized into exact matches (identical start and stop coordinates between the novel ORF and the RefSeq gene) and stop matches (only identical stop coordinate).

### Publication Abstract
Small proteins of around 50 aa in length have been largely overlooked in genetic and biochemical assays due to the inherent challenges with detecting and characterizing them. Recent discoveries of their critical roles in many biological processes have led to an increased recognition of the importance of small proteins for basic research and as potential new drug targets. One example is CcoM, a 36 aa subunit of the <i>cbb3</i>-type oxidase that plays an essential role in adaptation to oxygen-limited conditions in <i>Pseudomonas stutzeri (P. stutzeri)</i>, a model for the clinically relevant, opportunistic pathogen <i>Pseudomonas aeruginosa</i>. However, as no comprehensive data were available in <i>P. stutzeri</i>, we devised an integrated, generic approach to study small proteins more systematically. Using the first complete genome as basis, we conducted bottom-up proteomics analyses and established a digest-free, direct-sequencing proteomics approach to study cells grown under aerobic and oxygen-limiting conditions. Finally, we also applied a proteogenomics pipeline to identify missed protein-coding genes. Overall, we identified 2921 known and 29 novel proteins, many of which were differentially regulated. Among 176 small proteins 16 were novel. Direct sequencing, featuring a specialized precursor acquisition scheme, exhibited advantages in the detection of small proteins with higher (up to 100%) sequence coverage and more spectral counts, including sequences with high proline content. Three novel small proteins, uniquely identified by direct sequencing and not conserved beyond <i>P. stutzeri</i>, were predicted to form an operon with a conserved protein and may represent <i>de novo</i> genes. These data demonstrate the power of this combined approach to study small proteins in <i>P. stutzeri</i> and show its potential for other prokaryotes.

### Keywords
Novel small proteins, Proteogenomics, Genome annotation, Top-down proteomics, Pseudomonas, Metabolism, Small proteome, Direct sequencing, Oxygen limitation

### Affiliations
MPIs for Biophysics and Brain Research
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research

### Submitter
Julian Langer

### Lab Head
Dr Julian D. Langer
Max Planck Institute of Biophysics Max Planck Institute for Brain Research


