### Accession
PXD035076

### Title
Phenylalanine Impairs Insulin Signaling and Inhibits Glucose Uptake Through Modification of IRβ

### Description
Whether amino acids act on cellular insulin signaling remains unclear, given that increased circulating amino acid levels are associated with the onset of type 2 diabetes (T2D). Here, we report that phenylalanine modifies insulin receptor beta (IRβ) and inactivates insulin signaling and glucose uptake. Mice fed phenylalanine-rich chow or phenylalanine-producing aspartame or overexpressing human phenylalanyl-tRNA synthetase (hFARS) developed insulin resistance and T2D symptoms. Mechanistically, FARS phenylalanylated lysine 1057/1079 of IRβ (F-K1057/1079), inactivating IRβ and preventing insulin from promoting glucose uptake by cells. SIRT1 reversed F-K1057/1079 and counteracted the insulin-inactivating effects of hFARS and phenylalanine. F-K1057/1079 and SIRT1 levels in white blood cells from T2D patients wereare positively and negatively correlated with T2D onset, respectively. Blocking F-K1057/1079 with phenylalaninol sensitizeds insulin signaling and relieveds T2D symptoms in hFARS-transgenic and db/db mice. These findings shed light on the activation of insulin signaling and T2D progression through inhibition of phenylalanylation.

### Sample Protocol
IR was ectopically expressed in HepG2 cells. Cells were harvested and lysed in 0.1% NP-40 buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH=7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1% Nonidet P 40) and anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (M8823-1ml, Sigma-Aldrich, Darmstadt, Germany) was employed to precipitate IR proteins for 3 hours at 4℃. The beads were then washed twice with 0.1% NP-40 buffer, twice with ddH2O and three times with 50mM NH4HCO3, followed by on-bead trypsin digestion at 37℃ overnight. The resulted peptides in the supernatants were collected through centrifugation and dried in a speed vacuum (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany). Obtained peptides were stored at -80℃ for LC-MS/MS analysis.LC peaks eluted at the same time as those of standard synthetic peptides were subject to MS analysis with Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer. Peptide counting and/or areas of samples were compared to those of standard synthetic peptides of known concentrations. The MS machine was operated in the data-dependent mode to switch automatically between MS and MS/MS acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 350-1600) were acquired in Orbitrap with a mass resolution of 60, 000 at m/z 200. The AGC target was set to 300, 000, and the maximum injection time was 50ms. MS/MS acquisition was performed in Orbitrap with 3 s cycle time, the resolution was 15, 000 at m/z 200. The intensity threshold was 50,000, and the maximum injection time was 200 ms. The AGC target was set to 200,000, and the isolation window was 2 m/z. Ions with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were sequentially fragmented by higher energy collisional dissociation with a normalized collision energy of 30%, fixed first mass was set at 120. In all cases, one micro scan was recorded using dynamic exclusion of 30 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were searched using Protein Discoverer(version 1.4.0.288, Thermo Fisher Scientific）with Mascot (version 2.7.0, Matrix Science). The data were processed with UniProt Human protein database (70727 entries, download in 20161202). The mass tolerances were 10 ppm for precursor and fragment Mass Tolerance 0.05 Da. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed.The search engine set protein N-acetylation, pyroglutamate on peptide N termini and oxidation on methionine and phenylalanylation of lysine as variable modifications, the cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Phenylalanylation, Insulin receptor

### Affiliations
86-13162869989
Obstetrics & Gynecology Institute, Institute of Metabolism and Integrative Biology, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

### Submitter
Qian Zhou

### Lab Head
Dr Shi-Min Zhao
Obstetrics & Gynecology Institute, Institute of Metabolism and Integrative Biology, Institutes of Biomedical Sciences, Fudan University, Shanghai, China


