### Accession
PXD025663

### Title
Structure of Tau filaments in Prion protein amyloidoses

### Description
In human neurodegenerative diseases associated with the intracellular aggregation of Tau protein, the ordered cores of Tau filaments adopt distinct folds. Here, we analyze Tau filaments isolated from the brain of individuals affected by Prion-Protein cerebral amyloid angiopathy (PrP-CAA) and Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease, two genetically determined Prion protein (PrP) amyloidoses characterized by the deposition of PrP amyloid (APrP) in the vessel walls and in the cerebral parenchyma, respectively. A nonsense and a missense mutation in the PRNP gene lead to a premature termination of translation at codon position 160 (Q160Ter) of PrP in PrP-CAA, or to the substitution of an amino acid at residue 198 (F198S) of PrP in GSS. These two diseases have different clinical and pathologic phenotypes; however, in both diseases, neuropathologic analyses have consistently shown the presence of numerous neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) made of filamentous Tau aggregates in neurons. We report that Tau filaments in PrP-CAA and GSS are composed of 3-repeat and 4-repeat Tau isoforms, having a striking similarity to NFTs in Alzheimer disease (AD). In PrP-CAA, Tau filaments are made of both paired helical filaments (PHFs) and straight filaments (SFs), while in GSS only PHFs were found.  Mass spectrometry analyses of Tau filaments extracted from PrP-CAA and GSS brains show the presence of post-translational modifications that are comparable to those seen in Tau aggregates from AD. Cryo-EM analysis reveals that the atomic models of the Tau filaments obtained from PrP-CAA and GSS are identical to those of the Tau filaments from AD, and are therefore distinct from those of Pick disease, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and corticobasal degeneration. Our data support the hypothesis that in the presence of amyloid deposits and regardless of the primary amino acid sequence of the amyloid protein, similar molecular mechanisms are at play in the formation of identical Tau filaments.

### Sample Protocol
Sarkosyl-insoluble Tau was extracted from grey matter of fresh-frozen frontal cortex. Briefly, 6 g of tissues were homogenized in buffer consisting of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 0.8 M NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 5 mM EDTA and 10% sucrose with protease and phosphatase inhibitors. After a centrifugation at 20,000 x g, the supernatants were brought to 1% sarkosyl and incubated at room temperature while shaking. The supernatants were spun at 100,000 x g for 1 hour at 4°C, and the sarkosyl-insoluble pellets were resuspended in 10 µl/g tissue 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4. This resuspended pellet was further purified by 30-fold dilution in A68 extraction buffer, followed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellet, containing large contaminants, was discarded, and the supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 1 hour at 4°C. The final pellet was resuspended in 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 100 mM NaCl, and stored at 4°C. 8 M Urea in 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5 was added, samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP at room temperature for 30 minutes, and alkylated with 10 mM CAM in the dark for 30 min.  Samples were diluted with 50 mM Tris pH 8.5 to less than 2 M Urea concentration and 2 ug of trypsin/LysC (Promega V5072) was used to digest samples overnight at 37 C.  After acidification with 0.4% TFA, peptides were cleaned up using Waters SepPak columns, speed vacced to dryness and resuspended in 32 uL 0.1% formic acid.   ¼ of each sample was injected on a 90 min gradient on an EasySpray 25 cm column (ES902A Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a CID followed by a technical replicate of EtHCD/HCD fragmentation (DDA top S) on a tribrid Lumos Orbitrap mass spectrometer (IUSM Proteomics Core, Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data was analyzed using PEAKS X Pro Studio 10.6 Build de novo, followed by database search of reviewed Uniprot Homo sapiens proteins and common contaminants, PEAKS PTM and Spider searches for all included PTMs and mutations.  Results were filtered by 1% FDR, Ascore≥12, mutation ion intensity≥ 1%, and de novo only score≥ 80% then exported to html format as well as mzid for Scaffold and Pride upload.

### Publication Abstract
In human neurodegenerative diseases associated with the intracellular aggregation of Tau protein, the ordered cores of Tau filaments adopt distinct folds. Here, we analyze Tau filaments isolated from the brain of individuals affected by Prion-Protein cerebral amyloid angiopathy (PrP-CAA) with a nonsense mutation in the PRNP gene that leads to early termination of translation of PrP (Q160Ter or Q160X), and Gerstmann-Str&#xe4;ussler-Scheinker (GSS) disease, with a missense mutation in the PRNP gene that leads to an amino acid substitution at residue 198 (F198S) of PrP. The clinical and neuropathologic phenotypes associated with these two mutations in PRNP are different; however, the neuropathologic analyses of these two genetic variants have consistently shown the presence of numerous neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) made of filamentous Tau aggregates in neurons. We report that Tau filaments in PrP-CAA (Q160X) and GSS (F198S) are composed of 3-repeat and 4-repeat Tau isoforms, having a striking similarity to NFTs in Alzheimer disease (AD). In PrP-CAA (Q160X), Tau filaments are made of both paired helical filaments (PHFs) and straight filaments (SFs), while in GSS (F198S), only PHFs were found. Mass spectrometry analyses of Tau filaments extracted from PrP-CAA (Q160X) and GSS (F198S) brains show the presence of post-translational modifications that are comparable to those seen in Tau aggregates from AD. Cryo-EM analysis reveals that the atomic models of the Tau filaments obtained from PrP-CAA (Q160X) and GSS (F198S) are identical to those of the Tau filaments from AD, and are therefore distinct from those of Pick disease, chronic traumatic encephalopathy, and corticobasal degeneration. Our data support the hypothesis that in the presence of extracellular amyloid deposits and regardless of the primary amino acid sequence of the amyloid protein, similar molecular mechanisms are at play in the formation of identical Tau filaments.

### Keywords
Brain, Aprp, Neurodegeneration, Gss, Cryo-em, Tau, Seeding, Prp-caa

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Dr., MSB A136, Indianapolis, IN 46202

### Submitter
Emma Doud

### Lab Head
Dr Ruben Vidal
Dept. of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of Medicine, 635 Barnhill Dr., MSB A136, Indianapolis, IN 46202


