### Accession
PXD034619

### Title
Project title Trypanosoma congolense s.l. natural infection induces proteome modifications in wild tsetse flies (Glossina palpalis palpalis)

### Description
Tsetse flies (Glossina spp.) are major vectors of African trypanosomes, causing either Human or Animal African Trypanosomiasis (HAT or AAT). Several approaches are developed to control the disease among which the anti-vector Sterile Insect Technique. Another approach in the frame of anti-vector strategies could consist in controlling the fly’s vector competence which needs identifying factors (genes, proteins, biological pathways, …) involved in this process. The present work aims to verify whether protein candidates identified under experimental controlled conditions on insectary-reared tsetse flies have their counterpart in field-collected flies. Glossina palpalis palpalis flies naturally infected with Trypanosoma congolense were sampled in two HAT/AAT foci in Southern Cameroon. After dissection, the proteome from guts of parasite-infected flies were compared to that from uninfected flies in order to identify quantitative and/or qualitative changes associated to infection. A total of 3291 proteins were identified of which 1818 could be quantified. The comparative analysis allowed identifying 175 proteins with significant decreased abundance in infected as compared to uninfected flies, while 61 proteins displayed increased abundance. Among the former are RNA binding proteins, kinases, actin, ribosomal proteins, endocytosis proteins, oxido-reductases, as well as proteins that are unusually found such as tsetse salivary proteins (Tsal) or Yolk proteins. Among the proteins with increased abundance are fructose-1,6-biphosphatase, serine proteases, membrane trafficking proteins, death proteins (or apoptosis proteins), and SERPINs (inhibitor of serine proteases, enzymes considered as trypanosome virulence factors) that displayed highest increased abundance. Sodalis, Wiggleswothia and Wolbachia proteins are strongly under-represented, particularly when compared to data from similar experimentation conducted under controlled conditions on T. brucei gambiense infected (or uninfected) G. palpalis gambiensis insectary reared flies. Comparing the overall recorded data, 364 proteins identified in gut extracts from field flies were shown to have a homologue in insectary flies. Discrepancies between the two studies may arise from differences in the species of studied flies and trypanosomes as well as in differences in environmental conditions in which the two experiments were carried out. Finally, the present study together with former proteomic and transcriptomic studies on the secretome of trypanosomes, on the gut extracts from insectary reared and on field collected tsetse flies, provide a pool of data and information on which to draw in order to perform further investigations on, for example, mammal host immunization or on fly vector competence modification via para-transgenic approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Sampling areas, fly dissection and midgut storage The tsetse flies used to perform the present investigation were part of those collected in May and June 2015 in two HAT/AAT foci, Campo and Bipindi (including respectively the villages of Ipono, Mabiogo and Campo-Beach, and Lambi, Bidjouka and Ebiminbang), located in the southern region of Cameroon (Figure 1). T Only non-teneral Glossina palpalis palpalis flies were dissected; their guts were individually transferred into tubes containing RNA later (Ambion; Texas, USA) and stored at -80°C until DNA and protein extraction processing.   DNA and protein extraction Samples stored at -80°C were thawed at room temperature, dried and freed from RNA later. The midguts were treated with the Nucleospin TriPrep extraction kit (MACHEREY-NAGEL; Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol, which allowed to extract both DNA and proteins.   The protein pellet was suspended in 100 µL of Laemmli buffer (Laemmli, 1970) prepared with Complete Mini Protease Inhibitor (Roche; Basel, Switzerland) and Pefabloc SC (Sigma-Aldrich; Saint-Louis, Missouri, USA). Total protein fractions were recovered by centrifugation at 14,000 g for 10 min at room temperature, and protein concentrations were measured using a 2D Quant kit (GE Healthcare; Chicago, Illinois, USA). The different products obtained were stored at -80°C until use Determination of the infection status of the flies - search for the presence of trypanosomes in the flies’ gut extracts and identification of the parasite species. The species of trypanosomes that may have infected the flies were identified using the DNA of the samples as template for PCR amplification with parasite specific primers as described by Herder et al. (2002).  This process allowed discriminating the extracts along the infection status of the flies, trypanosome infected or non-infected. Among the extracts from infected flies, only those from T. congolense infected flies were used. Finally, 4 biological replicates were constituted from respectively T. congolense infected flies and non-infected flies. Each replicate was a mix of 4 randomly chosen extracts from either infected or non-infected flies.  Protein preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis  Twenty micrograms of proteins from each of the 8 replicates were heated at 90°C for 5 min and centrifuged for 5 min at 14.000g prior to separation by one-dimensional SDS-PAGE on 10×7cm Tris/glycine PAGE gels (12% acrylamide Mini-PROTEAN TGX precast gels, Biorad; California, USA).  Further processing was similar to that described in Geiger et al. (2015). BProtein digestion was performed overnight at 37°C and stopped by addition of 100μL of 2% formic acid with sonication in an ultrasonic bath for 10 min. Supernatants containing trypsic peptides were transferred into a 0.1mL glass insert. The remaining trypsic peptides were extracted twice from bands by addition of 100 μL of 80% acetonitrile in 2% formic acid. Extracted peptides were pooled in glass inserts and then dried under vacuum. Peptides were then resuspended in 8μL of a 2% formic acid solution before LC-MS/MS analysis.  LC-MS/MS analysis The LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an Ultimate 3000 nano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc; Waltham, MA, USA) interfaced online with a nano easy ion source and a Q Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc; Waltham, MA, USA). The samples were analyzed in Data Dependent Acquisition (DDA). 1.6 µL of peptides were first loaded onto a pre-column (Thermo Scientific PepMap 100 C18, 5 µm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 300 µm i.d. x 5 mm length) from the Ultimate 3000 autosampler with 0.1% FA in 2% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 20 µL/min. After 3 min loading period, the column valve was switched to allow elution of peptides from the pre-column onto the analytical column. Then peptides were separated by reverse-phase column (Thermo Scientific PepMap C18, 3 μm particule size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm i.d. × 25cm length) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. using a three-step gradient used included increasing the amount of solvent B (0.1% FA in 90% acetonitrile.) by 5 to 15% in 70 minutes, then from 15 to 25% between 70 to 85 min, followed by 25 to 50% from 85 to 96 min. Peptides were transferred to the gaseous phase with positive ion electrospray ionization at 1.7 kV, and the top 10 precursors were acquired between 350 and 1500 m/z with a 2 Th (Thomson; San Diego, USA) selection window, dynamic exclusion of 60 s, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 and resolutions of 70,000 for MS and 17,500 for MS2. Spectrum was recorded with Xcalibur software (3.0.63) (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc; Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification The .raw files were analyzed with MaxQuant (Tyanova et al., 2016) version v 1.5.0.0 using default settings. The minimal peptide length was set to 7. The criteria “Trypsin/P” (which means C-terminus peptides of “K/R” unless followed by “P”: “K/R” followed by “P” cannot be a cleavage site) was chosen as digestion enzyme. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was selected as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine, and acetylation (protein N terminus) as variable modifications. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The mass tolerance for the precursor was 20 and 4.5 ppm for the first and the main searches respectively, and for the fragment ions was 20 ppm. The files were searched and a global database was built (759 499 entries) made of compiled Drosophila, Ceratitis, Glossina morsitans, Glossina palpalis, Trypanosoma brucei gambiense, Trypanosoma brucei brucei, Trypanosoma congolense, Wolbachia, Sodalis, Wigglesworthia, Spiroplasma, Homo sapiens, Sus scrofa, Bos Taurus and Ovis aeris protein databases from UniProtKb (2019-07). Identified proteins were filtered according to the following criteria: at least two different trypsin peptides with at least one unique peptide, an E value below 0.01 and a protein E value smaller than 0.01 were required. Using the above criteria, the rate of false peptide sequence assignment and false protein identification were lower than 1%. Proteins were quantified by label-free method with MaxQuant software using unique and razor peptides intensities (Cox and Mann, 2008). Statistical analyses were carried out using RStudio package software. The protein intensity ratio (protein intensity in infected fly / protein intensity in uninfected fly) and t-test was applied to identify the significant differences in the protein abundance. Hits were retained if they were quantified in at least three of the four replicates in at least one experiment. Proteins with a significant (p < 0.05) quantitative ratio (above 1.2 or below 0.8) were considered as significantly up-regulated and down-regulated respectively.  Functional Annotation The Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of proteins was performed using the UNIPROT Mass Spectrometry Data Analysis Site (The UniProt Consortium, 2017).

### Publication Abstract
Tsetse flies (Glossina spp.) are major vectors of African trypanosomes, causing either Human or Animal African Trypanosomiasis (HAT or AAT). Several approaches have been developed to control the disease, among which is the anti-vector Sterile Insect Technique. Another approach to anti-vector strategies could consist of controlling the fly's vector competence through hitherto unidentified regulatory factors (genes, proteins, biological pathways, etc.). The present work aims to evaluate the protein abundance in the midgut of wild tsetse flies (Glossina palpalis palpalis) naturally infected by Trypanosoma congolense s.l. Infected and non-infected flies were sampled in two HAT/AAT foci in Southern Cameroon. After dissection, the proteomes from the guts of parasite-infected flies were compared to that of uninfected flies to identify quantitative and/or qualitative changes associated with infection. Among the proteins with increased abundance were fructose-1,6-biphosphatase, membrane trafficking proteins, death proteins (or apoptosis proteins) and SERPINs (inhibitor of serine proteases, enzymes considered as trypanosome virulence factors) that displayed the highest increased abundance. The present study, together with previous proteomic and transcriptomic studies on the secretome of trypanosomes from tsetse fly gut extracts, provides data to be explored in further investigations on, for example, mammal host immunisation or on fly vector competence modification via para-transgenic approaches.

### Keywords
Tsetse fly; trypanosomiasis; natural fly infection; differential protein expression; vector competence control.

### Affiliations
INRA
Cirad Bios UMR Intertryp,      Campus international de Baillarguet TA A 17/G     F-34398 Montpellier Cedex 5          France

### Submitter
sonia hem

### Lab Head
Dr Philippe Solano
Cirad Bios UMR Intertryp,      Campus international de Baillarguet TA A 17/G     F-34398 Montpellier Cedex 5          France


