### Accession
PXD012077

### Title
Heat shock dependent proteome changes in HEK293 chromatin proteome

### Description
Identification of proteins that associate with chromatin (fraction) upon heat shock by SILAC-based quantitative proteomics

### Sample Protocol
Triple SILAC labeling (K0R0, K4R6, K8R10) of cells with label swapping reslulting in 3 biological replicates. Treatments: control, Heat shock, Heat shock plus recovery. A crude chromatin fraction was prepared from each SILAC culture and proteins were mixed in a 1:1:1 ratio followed by TCA prepcipitation and separatoin on a 4-12% NuPAGE gel. The threegel lanes were sliced into four equdistant gel pieces and subjected to standard in gel digestion with trypsin. STAGE tip purified peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS on a Q Exactive MS using Top10 standard DDA.

### Data Protocol
.RAW data were processed by MaxQuant 1.4.0.3 employing the following settings. MS1 MMD = 7ppm, MS2 MMD=20 ppm, "match between run" and "requantify" enabled. Fixed modification: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modificaitons: Deamidation (NQ), Oxidation (M), Acetylation (Protein N-terminus). Data were searched against Uniprot Homo sapiens database (June 2013) concatednated with a common contaminants file. Data were filtered: Protein FDR=0.01, PSM FDR=0.01, min peptide length=6.

### Publication Abstract
Molecular chaperones such as heat-shock proteins (HSPs) help in protein folding. Their function in the cytosol has been well studied. Notably, chaperones are also present in the nucleus, a compartment where proteins enter after completing de novo folding in the cytosol, and this raises an important question about chaperone function in the nucleus. We performed a systematic analysis of the nuclear pool of heat-shock protein 90. Three orthogonal and independent analyses led us to the core functional interactome of HSP90. Computational and biochemical analyses identify host cell factor C1 (HCFC1) as a transcriptional regulator that depends on HSP90 for its stability. HSP90 was required to maintain the expression of HCFC1-targeted cell-cycle genes. The regulatory nexus between HSP90 and the HCFC1 module identified in this study sheds light on the relevance of chaperones in the transcription of cell-cycle genes. Our study also suggests a therapeutic avenue of combining chaperone and transcription inhibitors for cancer treatment.

### Keywords
Hek293 cells, Chromatin, Heat shock response, Silac, Gelc-ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics - Proteomics Research Facility

### Submitter
Gerhard Mittler

### Lab Head
Dr Gerhard Mittler
Max Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics - Proteomics Research Facility


