### Accession
PXD025345

### Title
Tumour-associated antigenic peptides are present in the HLA class I ligandome of cancer cell line derived extracellular vesicles.

### Description
The recent success of monoclonal antibody checkpoint inhibitor therapies that enhance the ability of CD8+ T cells to detect cancer-related antigenic peptides has refocused the need to fully understand the repertoire of peptides being presented to the immune system. Whilst the peptide ligandome presented by cell surface HLA class I molecules on cancer cells has been studied extensively, the ligandome of extracellular vesicles remains poorly defined. Here we report the HLA class I ligandome of both cell surface and extracellular vesicles from eight breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-415, MDA-MB-453, HCC 1806, HCC 1395, and HCC 1954), and additionally the melanoma cell line ESTDAB-056 and the multiple myeloma line RPMI 8226. Utilising HLA class I immunoisolation and mass spectrometry we detected a total of 6574 peptides from the cell surface and 2461 peptides from the extracellular vesicles of the cell lines studied. Within the extracellular vesicle HLA class I ligandome we identified 150 peptides derived from tumour associated antigenic proteins, of which 19 peptides have been shown to elicit T cell responses in previous studies. Our data thus confirms for the first time the presence of clinically relevant tumour-associated antigenic peptides in the HLA class I ligandome present on EV.

### Sample Protocol
HLA class I ligandome of both cell surface and extracellular vesicles from eight breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-415, MDA-MB-453, HCC 1806, HCC 1395, and HCC 1954), the melanoma cell line ESTDAB-056 and the multiple myeloma line RPMI 8226 were defined by immunoisolation and mass spectrometry.  HLA-I peptide isolation. Large scale cultures for EV and cell isolation were maintained in EV-depleted FBS. EV-depleted FBS was prepared by ultracentrifugation of FBS at 100,000 x g for 4 hours using a SW32Ti rotor in a Beckman L100 ultracentrifuge, followed by 0.2 µm filtration to sterilize. All cell lines were either grown in DMEM (breast cancer cell lines) or in RPMI 1640 (myeloma and melanoma cell lines) supplemented with 2.5% EV-depleted FBS and 50 µg/ml kanamycin. Suspension cell line RPMI 8226 was cultured in 175cm2 flasks and cultured to approximately 2 million cells per ml. Cells were removed by centrifugation at 1200 rpm for 5 mins and the supernatant filtered with 0.2 µm syringe filter and stored at -20oC. All adherent cells were grown in either multiple 175cm2 flasks or in Falcon 5-layer multi-flasks with a surface area of 875cm2 (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK). At cell confluence the medium was harvested every three to four days and processed as above, with new medium then added to the flasks. Multiple EV harvests were made for all cell lines. The EV harvests were thawed and spun at 100,000 x g for 2 hours using a Sw32Ti rotor and the EV pellet lysed in lysis buffer as above, and stored at -20oC until immunoprecipitation. For EV harvests from breast cancer lines multiple batches of EV harvests were concentrated using Amicon 70 centrifugal concentrators (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) prior to ultracentrifugation. At culture closedown, the cells contained in multiflasks were harvested with trypsin EDTA and spun at 1,200 rpm for 5 mins. Cell pellets were lysed in lysis buffer as above, spun at 15,000 rpm to remove debris and the cell lysate stored at -20oC until immunoprecipitation.  Immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry analysis. EV and cell lysates were thawed and incubated with 0.5 ml anti-HLA-A, -B and -C antibody W6/32 coupled to Protein G-Sepharose beads (crosslinked to Protein G using BS3 crosslinker according to manufacturer instructions, ThermoFisher Scientific, UK) for 1- 2 hours. The beads were then washed extensively with wash buffer (150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris pH 7.4), and resuspended in 1 ml of 1% TFA for 10 mins at room temperature to release HLA-I and bound peptides. Eluted HLA-I and peptides were then bound to Pierce C18 100 µl tips (ThermoFisher Scientific, UK, 87784) based on manufacturer instructions. The peptide fraction was eluted in 30% acetonitrile and 0.1% TFA and dried down by speedvac for mass spectrometry. Peptides were then analyzed on an AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600+system mass spectrometer (Sciex, Framingham, MA) coupled to an Eksigent nanoLC AS-2/2Dplus system. The samples were loaded in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile and 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid) and bound to an Aclaim pepmap 100 µm x 2-cm trap (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and washed for 10 mins to waste after which the trap was turned in-line with the analytical column (Aclaim pepmap RSLC 75 µm x 15 cm). The analytical solvent system consisted of buffer A (2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (2% water with 0.1% formic acid in aceto- nitrile) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min with the following gradient: linear 1–20% of buffer B over 90 mins, linear 20 – 40% of buffer B for 30 mins, linear 40 –99% of buffer B for 10 mins, isocratic 99% of buffer B for 5 mins, linear 99 –1% of buffer B for 2.5 mins, and isocratic 1% solvent buffer B for 12.5 mins. The mass spectrometer was operated in the DDA top 20 positive ion mode, with 120 and 80 ms acquisition time for the MS1 (m/z 400–1250) and MS2 (m/z 95–1800) scans, respectively, and 15-s dynamic exclusion. Rolling collision energy was used for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification   LC-MS/MS data were searched against the human proteome (UP000005640, containing 74,711 protein entries) with an additional contaminant list from the global proteome machine (cRAP protein sequences). Peptide identification was performed with PEAKS Studio X (https://www.bioinfor.com/peaks-studio/).  Following mass spectrometry data acquisition, data files from the AB Sciex Triple TOF 5600+ were converted into mzML format using MSConvert software of proteowizard. Converted data files were imported into PEAKS Studio X for peptide identification. Data files were subjected to default data refinement followed by PEAKS de novo and PEAKS DB (database) searches to identify peptide sequences. PEAKS de novo and PEAKS DB searches were carried out by setting parent mass error tolerance to 15 parts per million (ppm), the fragment mass error tolerance to 0.1 Da, no enzyme selection and unspecific digestion mode. No post translational modification (PTM) was selected in PEAKS de novo and PEAKS DB searches. A 0.1% FDR cut off was applied during PEAK DB searches to select high confidence peptides and peptides only identified by PEAKS DB were selected for further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The recent success of monoclonal antibody checkpoint inhibitor therapies that enhance the ability of CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells to detect cancer-related antigenic peptides has refocused the need to fully understand the repertoire of peptides being presented to the immune system. Whilst the peptide ligandome presented by cell surface human leucocyte antigen class I (HLA-I) molecules on cancer cells has been studied extensively, the ligandome of extracellular vesicles (EVs) remains poorly defined. Here, we report the HLA-I ligandome of both the cell surface and EVs from eight breast cancer cell lines (MCF7, MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-361, MDA-MB-415, MDA-MB-453, HCC 1806, HCC 1395, and HCC 1954), and additionally the melanoma cell line ESTDAB-056 and the multiple myeloma line RPMI 8226. Utilizing HLA-I immunoisolation and mass spectrometry, we detected a total of 6574 peptides from the cell surface and 2461 peptides from the EVs of the cell lines studied. Within the EV HLA-I ligandome, we identified 150 peptides derived from tumour associated antigenic proteins, of which 19 peptides have been shown to elicit T-cell responses in previous studies. Our data thus show the prevalence of clinically relevant tumour-associated antigenic peptides in the HLA-I ligandome presented on EV.

### Keywords
Evs, Taa, Extracellular vesicles, Tumour., Hla class i ligandome, Tumour-associated antigens, T-cell epitopes, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of St Andrews
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TF, Scotland, UK.

### Submitter
Pankaj Kumar

### Lab Head
Dr Simon J Powis
School of Medicine, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife, KY16 9TF, Scotland, UK.


