### Accession
PXD017804

### Title
LC-MSMS of postmenopausal with low BMD

### Description
Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) is a major global public health concern and older women are more susceptible to experiencing fragility fractures. Our study investigated the associations between circulating proteins with bone mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal women with or without low BMD (osteoporosis and osteopenia) to explore the pathogenesis of PMOP and discover novel biomarkers for this disease..

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction: 100µl of pooled plasma was immunodepleted for removal of the 14 most abundant human plasma proteins using Multiple Affinity Removal LC Column-Human 14 (Agilent，Cat. 5188-6560) coupled to a High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC, Shimadzu LC-10AT) . Protein depletion was undertaken according to the manufacturer’s instructions and buffer exchange was performed with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate using spin columns with a 10kDa-molecular weight cut-off (Merck Millipore). Both of high abundance and low-abundance protein components were collected. The protein concentration was determined using a Bradford Assay according to the manufacturer’s (BioRad) instructions. Filter-aided sample preparation (FASP Digestion): 200 μg of proteins for each sample were incorporated into 30 μl SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0). The detergent, DTT and other low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then 100 μl iodoacetamide (100 mM IAA in UA buffer) was added to block reduced cysteine residues and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with 100 μl UA buffer three times and then 100 μl 100 mM TEAB buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 40 μl TEAB buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The peptide content was estimated by UV light spectral density at 280 nm using an extinctions coefficient of 1.1 of 0.1% (g/l) solution that was calculated on the basis of the frequency of tryptophan and tyrosine in vertebrate proteins. TMT Labeling: 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide Fractionation with High pH reversed-phase : Pierce high pH reversed-phase fractionation kit (Thermo scientific) was used to fractionate TMT-labeled digest samples into 10 (or 15 determined by project proposal) fractions by an increasing acetonitrile step-gradient elution according to instructions.  Mass Spectrometry: HPLC: Each fraction was injected for nanoLC-MS/MS analysis. The peptide mixture was loaded onto a reverse phase trap column（Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100μm*2cm, nanoViper C18）connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology. The linear gradient was determined by the project proposal: 1 hour gradient：0-50% buffer B for 50 min, 50-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. 1.5 hours gradient：0-55% buffer B for 80 min, 55-100% buffer B for 5 min, hold in 100% buffer B for 5 min. LC-MS/MS Analysis: LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) that was coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 60 mins. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17500 at m/z 200 (TMT 6plex), 35000 at m/z 200 (TMT 10plex), and isolation width was 2 m/z.. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.2) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4

### Publication Abstract
Postmenopausal osteoporosis (PMOP) is a major global public health concern and older women are more susceptible to experiencing fragility fractures. Our study investigated the associations between circulating proteins with bone mineral density (BMD) in postmenopausal women with or without low BMD (osteoporosis and osteopenia) using a tandem mass tag (TMT) labeling proteomic experiment and parallel reaction monitoring testing. Across all plasma samples, we quantitatively measured 1,092 proteins, and the OP and normal control (NC) samples were differentiated by principal component analysis and a partial least squares-discrimination analysis model based on the protein profiling data. The differentially abundant proteins between the low BMD and NC samples mostly exhibited binding, molecular function regulator, transporter and molecular transducer activity, and were involved in metabolic and cellular processes, stimulus response, biological regulation, immune system processes and so forth. TMT analysis and RRM validation indicated that the expression of protein Lysozyme C (P61626) was negatively related to BMD, while the expression of proteins Glucosidase (A0A024R592) and Protein disulfideisomerase A5 (Q14554) was positively related to BMD values. Collectively, our results suggest that postmenopausal women with low BMD have a different proteomic profile or signature. Protein alterations may play an important role in the pathogenesis of PMOP, and they may act as novel biomarkers and targets of therapeutic agents for this disease.

### Keywords
Human, Postmenopausal, Plasma, Lc-msms, Low bmd

### Affiliations
Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University
Clinical Laboratory of Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University

### Submitter
Jihan Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jihan Wang
Clinical Laboratory of Honghui Hospital, Xi'an Jiaotong University


