### Accession
PXD001833

### Title
Immunohistochemical markers distinguishing cholangiocellular carcinoma from pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma discovered by proteomic analysis of microdissected cells

### Description
Cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are two highly aggressive cancer types which arise from epithelial cells of the pancreatobiliary system. Due to their histologic and morphologic similarity, differential diagnosis between CCC and metastasis of PDAC located in the liver frequently proves an unsolvable issue for pathologists. Biomarkers with high specificity and sensitivity for the differentiation of these tumour types would therefore be a valuable tool, but so far none are available. Here, we address this problem by comparing microdissected CCC and PDAC tumour cells in a label-free proteomics approach. The novel biomarker candidates were subsequently verified by immunohistochemical staining of primary and secondary tumour tissue.

### Sample Protocol
Tumour tissue was collected during surgery, frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. For laser capture microdissection (LCM) the tissue was cryosectioned and stained with cresyl violet on PEN membrane-covered slides. LCM was performed on a Palm MicroBeam (Carl Zeiss Microscopy). Cells were lysed by sonication and tryptic protein digestion was carried out in solution using RapiGest surfactant as recommended by the manufacturer. LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex, Idstein, Germany) online coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
Ion intensity-based label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis QI for proteomics (ver. 2.0.5387.52102, Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd., Newcastle upon Tyne, UK). LC-MS runs were aligned to account for retention time shifts. Detected ions were filtered for those charged positively 2-, 3- or 4-fold and exhibiting more than 2 isotopes. Further details about peptide quantification have been described previously (Megger et al., 2013). Protein identification was performed using Proteome Discoverer (ver. 1.4) (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) searching the UniProt database (Release 2014_05; 545.388 entries) via Mascot (ver. 2.3.0.2) (Matrix Sciences Ltd., London, UK). Information about the search parameters has been published (Padden et al., 2014). Proteins quantified with only one unique peptide were removed from the study. A significant regulation was defined as a fold change > 2 and an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value < 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Cholangiocellular carcinoma (CCC) and pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) are two highly aggressive cancer types that arise from epithelial cells of the pancreatobiliary system. Owing to their histological and morphological similarity, differential diagnosis between CCC and metastasis of PDAC located in the liver frequently proves an unsolvable issue for pathologists. The detection of biomarkers with high specificity and sensitivity for the differentiation of these tumor types would therefore be a valuable tool. Here, we address this problem by comparing microdissected CCC and PDAC tumor cells from nine and eleven cancer patients, respectively, in a label-free proteomics approach. The novel biomarker candidates were subsequently verified by immunohistochemical staining of 73 CCC, 78 primary, and 18 metastatic PDAC tissue sections. In the proteome analysis, we found 180 proteins with a significantly differential expression between CCC and PDAC cells (p value &lt; 0.05, absolute fold change &gt; 2). Nine candidate proteins were chosen for an immunohistochemical verification out of which three showed very promising results. These were the annexins ANXA1, ANXA10, and ANXA13. For the correct classification of PDAC, ANXA1 showed a sensitivity of 84% and a specificity of 85% and ANXA10 a sensitivity of 90% at a specificity of 66%. ANXA13 was higher abundant in CCC. It presented a sensitivity of 84% at a specificity of 55%. In metastatic PDAC tissue ANXA1 and ANXA10 showed similar staining behavior as in the primary PDAC tumors (13/18 and 17/18 positive, respectively). ANXA13, however, presented positive staining in eight out of eighteen secondary PDAC tumors and was therefore not suitable for the differentiation of these from CCC. We conclude that ANXA1 and ANXA10 are promising biomarker candidates with high diagnostic values for the differential diagnosis of intrahepatic CCC and metastatic liver tumors deriving from PDAC.

### Keywords
Cholangiocellular carcinoma, Biomarker, Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma, Lc-ms/ms, Laser capture microdissection

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center - Ruhr-Universität Bochum

### Submitter
Juliet Padden

### Lab Head
Dr Barbara Sitek
Medizinisches Proteom-Center - Ruhr-Universität Bochum


