### Accession
PXD023514

### Title
Hemocyte proteome of the Baikal amphipod Eulimnogammarus verrucosus

### Description
Hemocytes are blood cell circulating in the hemolymph and playing important role in crustacean immunity. On the one side this cells functions as phagocytes and express immune compounds in the external milieu on the other side. To find out the protein composition of hemocytes, we obtained hemocytes proteome of Baikal endemic amphipod Eulimnogammarus verrucosus for the first time. For this, a proteomic analysis of the protein extract were performed using liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). A total of 1152 unique proteins were discovered. Hemocyanin/phenoloxidase, actin and tubulin were detected in proteome in the greatest amount. Also we discovered proteins of the C-type lectin superfamily, which are probably involved in the molecular pattern recognition during immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Protein isolation was performed as described in Bedulina et al. [2017. DOI: 10.7717/peerj.2864] with modifications. 20% phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (PMSF) was added to the purified hemocyte fraction in amount of 1% of the sample volume. The protein purification buffer (0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.6, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail) was added to the sample further in a 1:1 ratio. For more efficient isolation of hemocyte membrane proteins, 0.2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added to one of two samples. The mixture was centrifuged (8,500 rpm for 15 min at 4 °С) for removing non-protein compounds. Protein concentration in samples was measured with the Bradford method [Bradford, 1976. DOI: 10.1016/0003-2697(76)90527-3]. The samples with at least 100 mg of protein were mixed with 10% trichloroacetic acid and centrifuged (13,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °С) to precipitate the proteins. The pellet was washed twice with cold 80% ethanol. Pure hemocyte protein was resuspended in the protein purification buffer, mixed with cold acetone, and incubated for 30 min at -24 °С. The samples were dried at room temperature. For analysis we prepared one sample with SDS and one sample without SDS different way of protein isolation method. This reagent can enhance isolation efficiency of membrane protein, but also able to worsen sample preparation for mass-spectrometry. 3 technical repetitions were mad to each sample. Mass spectrometric analysis itself was carried out in Advanced Mass Spectrometry Core Facility (AMS) at Skoltech. Further preparation of the provided sample included protein hydrolysis with trypsin, ZipTip desalination, chromatography-mass spectrometric analysis in three replicates (gradient up to 120 minutes) using a Q-exactive hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass-spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was carried out using SearchGUI v3.3.17 and Peptide Shaker v1.16.44 software [Vaudel et al., 2015. DOI: 10.1038/nbt.3109]. Protein identification was conducted using a database, which includes proteins based on the E. verrucosus transcriptome assembly GHHK01 [Drozdova et al., 2019. DOI: 10.1186/s12864-019-6024-3] predicted with TransDecoder v.5.5.0 [Haas et al., 2013. DOI: 10.1038/nprot.2013.084] and protein contaminants database CRAP [ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP]. Peptide search was performed with the following options: trypsin as the digesting enzyme, precursor m/z tolerance 10.0 ppm; fragment m/z tolerance 0.5 Da; two missed cleavage sites possible, false-positive frequency of occurrence for peptides and proteins - less than 1% Cysteine carbamidomethylation (carbamidomethylation of C) and methionine oxidation (oxidation of M) were used as fixed and variable modifications respectively.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemocyte proteome of the baikal amphipod eulimnogammarus verrucosus

### Affiliations
Laboratory “Stress-physiology and perspective biotechnology”, Research Institute of Biology, Irkutsk State University, Russia
Research institute of Biology at Irkutsk State University 

### Submitter
Elena Zolotovskaya

### Lab Head
Dr Maxim Anatolyevich Timofeev
Laboratory “Stress-physiology and perspective biotechnology”, Research Institute of Biology, Irkutsk State University, Russia


