### Accession
PXD039342

### Title
Ultra-fast and controlled capturing, loading, and release of extracellular vesicles by a portable microstructured electrochemical fluidic device

### Description
In this project two sets of DIA-based proteomics studies were performed to characterize the proteome of isolated extracellular vesicles. For each set, seven biological replicates were analyzed

### Sample Protocol
Samples were dissolved in 1% sodium deoxy cholate in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer pH 8, reduced with 1 mM DTT and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 10 minutes at RT. The samples therein were in-solution digested with trypsin (Promega). Sodium deoxycholate was precipitated using 50% TFA (Trifluoroacetic acid) and Tryptic peptides were purified by STAGE tips prior LC-MS/MS measurements.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed using Spectronaut software version 15.7 (Biognosys) with standard settings (without imputation) in direct DIA mode using reference proteome of mus musculus (UniProt, full length) and common contaminants.

### Publication Abstract
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are secreted by all living cells and are found in body fluids. They exert numerous physiological and pathological functions and serve as cargo shuttles. Due to their safety and inherent bioactivity, they have emerged as versatile therapeutic agents, biomarkers, and potential drug carriers. Despite the growing interest in EVs, current progress in this field is, in part, limited by relatively inefficient isolation techniques. Conventional methods are indeed slow, laborious, require specialized laboratory equipment, and may result in low yield and purity. This work describes an electrochemically controlled "all-in-one" device enabling capturing, loading, and releasing of EVs. The device is composed of a fluidic channel confined within antibody-coated microstructured electrodes. It rapidly isolates EVs with a high level of purity from various biofluids. As a proof of principle, the device is applied to isolate EVs from skin wounds of healthy and diabetic mice. Strikingly, it is found that EVs from healing wounds of diabetic mice are enriched in mitochondrial proteins compared to those of healthy mice. Additionally, the device improves the loading protocol of EVs with polyplexes, and may therefore find applications in nucleic acid delivery. Overall, the electrochemical device can greatly facilitate the development of EVs-based technologies.

### Keywords
Vesicles, Lc-msms, Mouse, Exosomes

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland


