### Accession
PXD027616

### Title
Discovery of a pathway for endogenous mucin glycodomain catabolism in mammals

### Description
Mucins are functionally implicated in a range of human pathologies, including cystic fibrosis, influenza, bacterial endocarditis, gut dysbiosis, and cancer. These observations have motivated the study of mucin biosynthesis as well as development of strategies for inhibition of mucin glycosylation. Mammalian pathways for mucin catabolism, however, have remained underexplored. The canonical view, derived from analysis of N-glycoconjugates in human lysosomal storage disorders, is that proteolysis and glycan degradation occur largely independently. Here, we challenge this view by providing genetic and biochemical evidence supporting mammalian proteolysis of heavily O-glycosylated mucin domains, without prior deglycosylation. Using activity screening coupled with mass spectrometry we ascribed mucin-degrading activity in murine liver to the lysosomal protease cathepsin D. Knockout of cathepsin D in a murine model of the human lysosomal storage disorder neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis resulted in accumulation of mucins in liver-resident macrophages. Our findings suggest that mucin-degrading activity is not limited to the bacterial kingdom and is a component of glycoprotein catabolism in mammalian tissues.

### Sample Protocol
Bovine serum albumin (BSA) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (A7906-1KG). Fetuin was purchased from Promega (V4961). Recombinantly expressed MUC16, podocalyxin, CD43, and PSGL-1 were purchased from R&D Systems (5609-MU, 1658-PD, 9680-CD, 3345-PS, respectively). Each protein was digested with cathepsin D (CTSD) or trypsin (Tryp) separately, or a sequential digestion was performed with CTSD proteolysis followed by trypsin. These samples were digested in solution, similar to previous methods to investigate glycoproteases. Cathepsin D digestions were set up with 31.2 µl 100 mM NaOAc, pH 5, 3 µl of 1 mg/mL protein substrate in water, and 1.8 µl of 10 µM cathepsin D purified from human liver (Molecular Innovations, HCD) in PBS, then incubated at 37 °C overnight. One third (12 µl) of the reactions was removed and quenched via addition of 4 µl NuPAGE™ LDS Sample Buffer (4X) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 250 mM DTT. These samples were boiled for 5 mins at 95 °C then loaded along with minus cathepsin D control samples into an 18-well 4-12% Criterion™ XT Bis-Tris gels (Bio-Rad) and run in MOPS. Total protein was detected using AcquaStain Coomassie stain (Bulldog Bio) and visualized with a Li-Cor Odyssey Blot Imager. The remaining two-thirds of the cathepsin D reactions (24 µl) was diluted to 99 µl with 100 mM tris, pH 8, then de-N-glycosylated via addition of 1 µl PNGase-F (NEB, diluted to 5000 U/mL in 100 mM tris, pH 8) and incubated at room temperature for 8 hours at 37 °C. Dithiothreitol was added to a final concentration of 5 mM and the tubes were incubated at 55 °C for 15 mins. Samples were allowed to return to room temperature, then iodoacetamide was added to a final concentration of 15 mM and allowed to react in the dark at room temperature for 30 mins. One half of the reaction was removed and trypsin (Promega) was added at a 20:1 protein:protease ratio for 8 hours at 37 °C. All samples were quenched by dilution with 500 µl 0.2% formic acid. Peptides were desalted on a 10 mg Strata-X cartridge (Phenomenex) by conditioning the cartridge with 1 mL ACN followed by 1 mL 0.2% formic acid (FA) in water. Acidified peptides were loaded onto the cartridge, followed by a 1 mL wash with 0.2% FA in water. Peptides were eluted with 400 µl of 0.2% FA in 80% ACN, dried via lyophilization, then resuspended in 10 µl of 0.2% FA.  LC-MS/MS  Loading and gradient elution were performed using the same conditions as described above, and an Orbitrap Fusion was used for MS analysis. Again, precursors were ionized using an EASY-Spray ionization source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) held at +2.2 kV compared to ground, the column was held at 40 °C, and the inlet capillary temperature was held at 275 °C. Survey scans of peptide precursors were collected in the Orbitrap from 500-1800 m/z with an AGC target of 400,000, a maximum injection time of 50 ms, RF lens at 60%, and a resolution of 120,000 at 200 m/z. Monoisotopic precursor selection was enabled for peptide isotopic distributions, precursors of z = 2-10 were selected for data-dependent MS/MS scans for 3 seconds of cycle time, and dynamic exclusion was set to 45 seconds with a ±10 ppm window set around the precursor monoisotope. Precursor priorities were set to favor highest charge state and lowest m/z precursor ions, and an isolation window of 2 m/z was used to select precursor ions with the quadrupole.  All methods used were product-dependent,  where the presence of at least two out of nine oxonium ions (126.055, 138.0549, 144.0655, 168.0654, 186.076, 204.0865, 274.0921, 292.1027, and 366.1395) in a “scouting” higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) MS/MS scan triggered acquisition of a second MS/MS scan46–48, which was an EThcD scan in these experiments. Requiring at least two oxonium ions can help improve the specificity of triggering on glycopeptide precursor ions. The “scout HCD” scan had an automated scan range determination and a first mass of 100 Th, an NCE of 36, an AGG target value of 50,000, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. If at least two of the nine listed oxonium ions were present in the scout HCD scan within a ±10 ppm tolerance and were among the 20 most intense peaks, a second MS/MS scan was triggered. All triggered EThcD MS/MS scans used a fixed scan range of 120-4,000 m/z (this extended mass range has been shown to improve glycopeptide characterization49), an AGC target of 100,000 ions, a maximum injection time of 200 ms, and a resolution of 30,000 at 200 m/z. Calibrated charge dependent parameters for calculating reagent AGC targets and ion-ion reaction times50 were enabled for EThcD scans, and supplemental activation of 25 NCE was used.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were searched using O-Pair Search implemented in MetaMorpheus (0.0.308), which is available at https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus.51 All files were searched in one batch so that the FDR calculations were performed on the entire dataset. The “Glyco Search” option was selected, where the O-glycopeptide search feature was enabled and the Oglycan.gdb glycan database was selected, representing 12 common O-glycans: HexNAc(1), HexNAc(1)Hex(1), HexNAc(1)NeuAc(1), HexNAc(2)Hex(1), HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(1), HexNAc(1)Hex(1)NeuAc(2), HexNAc(2)Hex(2) NeuAc(1), HexNAc(2)Hex(2)NeuAc(2), HexNAc(2)Hex(2), HexNAc(2)Hex(1)NeuAc(1), HexNAc(2)Hex(2)Fuc(1)NeuAc(1), HexNAc(2)Hex(2)Fuc(1)NeuAc(2). The “Keep top N candidates” feature was set to 50, and Data Type was set as HCD with Child Scan Dissociation set as EThcD. The “Maximum OGlycan Allowed” setting was set to 5, where this number represents both the maximum number of O-glycan modifications that could occur on a glycopeptide candidate and the number of times each O-glycan could occur per peptide. Under Search Parameters, both “Use Provided Precursor” and “Deconvolute Precursors” were checked. Peak trimming was not enabled and Top N peaks and minimum ratio were set to 1000 and 0.01, respectively. In-Silico Digestion Parameters were set to generate decoy proteins using reversed sequences, and the initiator methionine feature was set to “Variable”. The maximum modification isoforms allowed was 1024, and non-specific digestion was enabled for peptides ranging from 5 to 25 residues.  Precursor and product mass tolerances were 10 and 20 ppm, respectively, and the minimum score allowed was 3. Modifications were set as Carbamidomethyl on C as fixed, and Oxidation on M and Deamidation on N as variable. Note, O-Pair Search returns a single identification representing two spectra, both an HCD and EThcD spectrum. Identifications are made using the HCD spectrum, and the associated EThcD spectrum is used to localize O-glycosites.  The oglyco.psmtsv and single.psmtsv results file was used for all data processing as the O-glycopeptide and standard peptide identifications, respectively. For both O-glycopeptide and standard peptides, identifications were filtered to include only target matches (T) and identifications with a q-value < 0.01. O-glycopeptide identifications were filtered to include only Level 1 or Level 1b identifications, as described in the O-Pair Search reference51, which include only identifications with confident and unambiguous O-glycosite localization. To get cleavage motifs, identifications that were in common between the “trypsin only” files were removed to retain identifications that resulted only from CTSD-derived cleavage. Note, this means that some semi-tryptic peptides remain from the sequential digestion data, where the non-tryptic terminus is attributed to CTSD cleavage. The percent of O-glycosylated serine and threonine residues was determined by counting the number of modified residues at a given position relative to the total number of residues. Serine and threonine data were summed, so this is an aggregate value for both residues. Calculations were performed in Microsoft Excel or in Visual Studio 2017 using C#, and data was graphed using OriginPro 2018. WebLogo was used for Logo plot generation (https://weblogo.berkeley.edu/logo.cgi)52. To make this plot, residues +5 and -5 residues from the cleavage site were used. Spectral annotation was aided by the Interactive Peptide Spectral Annotator (IPSA, http://www.interactivepeptide-spectralannotator.com)53.

### Publication Abstract
Mucins are functionally implicated in a range of human pathologies, including cystic fibrosis, influenza, bacterial endocarditis, gut dysbiosis, and cancer. These observations have motivated the study of mucin biosynthesis as well as the development of strategies for inhibition of mucin glycosylation. Mammalian pathways for mucin catabolism, however, have remained underexplored. The canonical view, derived from analysis of <i>N</i>-glycoproteins in human lysosomal storage disorders, is that glycan degradation and proteolysis occur sequentially. Here, we challenge this view by providing genetic and biochemical evidence supporting mammalian proteolysis of heavily <i>O</i>-glycosylated mucin domains without prior deglycosylation. Using activity screening coupled with mass spectrometry, we ascribed mucin-degrading activity in murine liver to the lysosomal protease cathepsin D. Glycoproteomics of substrates digested with purified human liver lysosomal cathepsin D provided direct evidence for proteolysis within densely <i>O</i>-glycosylated domains. Finally, knockout of cathepsin D in a murine model of the human lysosomal storage disorder neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 10 resulted in accumulation of mucins in liver-resident macrophages. Our findings imply that mucin-degrading activity is a component of endogenous pathways for glycoprotein catabolism in mammalian tissues.

### Keywords
Human, Glycoproteomics, Mucins, Catabolism, Mucinase

### Affiliations
Stanford University
Stanford University, Department of Chemistry and ChEM-H, Stanford, CA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, CA

### Submitter
Nicholas Riley

### Lab Head
Dr Carolyn Bertozzi
Stanford University, Department of Chemistry and ChEM-H, Stanford, CA Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford, CA


