### Accession
PXD023835

### Title
The regulatory landscape of the human HPF1- and ARH3-dependent ADP-ribosylome (part 1)

### Description
Despite the involvement of Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) in many important biological pathways, the target residues of PARP1-mediated ADP-ribosylation remain ambiguous. To explicate the ADP-ribosylation regulome, we analyze human cells depleted for key regulators of PARP1 activity, histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1) and ADPribosylhydrolase 3 (ARH3). Using quantitative proteomics, we characterize 1,596 ADP-ribosylation sites, displaying up to 1000-fold regulation across the investigated knockout cells. We find that HPF1 and ARH3 inversely and homogenously regulate the serine ADP-ribosylome on a proteome-wide scale with consistent adherence to lysine-serine-motifs, suggesting that targeting is independent of HPF1 and ARH3. Notably, we do not detect an HPF1-dependent target residue switch from serine to glutamate/aspartate under the investigated conditions. Our data support the notion that serine ADP-ribosylation mainly exists as mono-ADP-ribosylation in cells, and reveal a remarkable degree of histone co-modification with serine ADP-ribosylation and other post-translational modifications.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa and U2OS cells were cultured at 37 °C and 5% CO2 in DMEM supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum and a penicillin/streptomycin mixture (100 U/mL). For Af1521 and pan-ADPr antibody comparison experiments, ADP-ribosylation was induced in HeLa by treatment of the cells with 1 mM H2O2 (Sigma Aldrich) for 10 min in PBS at 37°C. One batch of cells was prepared, totaling 2.7 billion cells, corresponding to approximately 75 million HeLa cells per technical replicate measured on the mass spectrometer (MS). For HPF1 KO and ARH3 KO experiments, U2OS cells were mock treated or ADP-ribosylation was induced by treatment of the cells with 1 mM H2O2 for 10 min in PBS at 37°C. For MS analysis, approximately 150 million U2OS cells were cultured per biological replicate. For all experiments, cells were harvested in ice-cold PBS, lysed in 6 M guanidine buffer, reduced and alkylated, and subsequently digested with Lys-C and trypsin. ADP-ribosylated peptides were enriched using the Af1521 macrodomain. All samples were high-pH fractionated on StageTip.  All samples were measured using an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo), and analyzed on 20-cm long analytical columns with an internal diameter of 75 μm, packed in-house using ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). On-line reversed-phase liquid chromatography to separate peptides was performed using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo), and the analytical column was heated to 40°C using a column oven. Peptides were eluted from the column using a gradient of Buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and Buffer B (80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid). The primary gradient ranged from 3% buffer B to 24% buffer B over 50 minutes, followed by an increase to 40% buffer B over 12 minutes to ensure elution of all peptides, followed by a washing block of 18 minutes. Electrospray ionization (ESI) was achieved using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, capillary temperature to 275°C, and RF level to 30%. Full scans were performed at a resolution of 60,000, with a scan range of 300 to 1,750 m/z, a maximum injection time of 60 ms, and an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 600,000 charges. Precursors were isolated with a width of 1.3 m/z, with an AGC target of 200,000 charges, and precursor fragmentation was accomplished using electron transfer disassociation with supplemental higher-collisional disassociation (EThcD) at 20 NCE, using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters. Calibration of charge-dependent ETD parameters was essentially performed as described previously (Rose et al., 2015). Charge-dependent ETD calibration resulted in ETD activation times of 48.39 ms for z=3 precursors, 27.22 ms for z=4 precursors, and 17.42 ms for z=5 precursors. This equates to an ETD Time Constant (τ) of 2.42. Precursors with charge state 3-5 were isolated for MS/MS analysis, and prioritized from charge 3 (highest) to charge 5 (lowest). Selected precursors were excluded from repeated sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 60 seconds. MS/MS spectra were measured in the Orbitrap, with a loop count setting of 5, a maximum precursor injection time of 120 ms, and a scan resolution of 60,000.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of the mass spectrometry raw data was performed using MaxQuant software (REFs), version 1.5.3.30. MaxQuant default settings were used, with exceptions outlined below. Two separate computational searches were performed, one for Af1521 and pan-ADPr antibody comparison data (“antibody_data”, hereafter referred to as Search 1), and the other for the HPF1/ARH3 KO data (“main_data”, hereafter referred to as Search 2). For generation of the theoretical spectral library, a HUMAN.fasta database was downloaded from UniProt on the 24th of May, 2019. N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, cysteine carbamidomethylation, and ADP-ribosylation on all amino acid residues known to potentially be modified (C, D, E, H, K, R, S, T, and Y), were included as variable modifications. For Search 2, additionally lysine acetylation, lysine mono-, di-, and tri-methylation, and serine, threonine, and tyrosine phosphorylation, were included as variable modifications. For the Search 2 first search, which is only used for mass recalibration, phosphorylation was omitted as a variable modification. Up to 6 or 5 missed cleavages were allowed, a maximum allowance of 4 or 3 variable modifications per peptide was used, and maximum peptide mass was set to 4,600 or 3,900 Da, respectively for Search 1 and 2. Second peptide search was enabled (default). Matching between runs was enabled with an alignment time window of 20 minutes and a match time window of 42 or 60 s, first search precursor mass tolerance of 20 or 15 ppm, main search precursor mass tolerance of 4.5 or 3 ppm, respectively for Search 1 and 2. For fragment ion masses, a tolerance of 20 ppm was used. Modified peptides were filtered to have an Andromeda score of >40 (default), and a delta score of >20. Data was automatically filtered by posterior error probability to achieve a false discovery rate of <1% (default), at the peptide-spectrum match, the protein assignment, and the site-specific levels.

### Publication Abstract
Despite the involvement of Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP1) in many important biological pathways, the target residues of PARP1-mediated ADP-ribosylation remain ambiguous. To explicate the ADP-ribosylation regulome, we analyze human cells depleted for key regulators of PARP1 activity, histone PARylation factor 1 (HPF1) and ADP-ribosylhydrolase 3 (ARH3). Using quantitative proteomics, we characterize 1,596 ADP-ribosylation sites, displaying up to 1000-fold regulation across the investigated knockout cells. We find that HPF1 and ARH3 inversely and homogenously regulate the serine ADP-ribosylome on a proteome-wide scale with consistent adherence to lysine-serine-motifs, suggesting that targeting is independent of HPF1 and ARH3. Notably, we do not detect an HPF1-dependent target residue switch from serine to glutamate/aspartate under the investigated conditions. Our data support the notion that serine ADP-ribosylation mainly exists as mono-ADP-ribosylation in cells, and reveal a remarkable degree of histone co-modification with serine ADP-ribosylation and other post-translational modifications.

### Keywords
Par, Adp-ribosylation, Hpf1, Arh3, Parg, Parp1, Af1521, Adpr, Mar

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


