### Accession
PXD006297

### Title
Membrane Proteome Profiling of Peripheral Immune Cells in Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients Treated with First Line Combination Chemotherapy

### Description
Four lung adenocarcinoma patients with progression free survival (PFS) ranged from 2.13 to 14.5 months were recruited in the study. Paired PBMCs were collected before and after first regimen of PEM/CIS treatment for individualized analysis of membrane proteome profiles. The membrane protein fractions were purified from PBMCs, subjected to gel-assisted digestion, labeled with iTRAQ reagents, fractionated by high-pH reversed phase StageTip, and analyzed in duplicate by LC-MS/MS. Protein identification and quantitation was obtained by using Mascot with 1% false discovery rate and Multi-Q.

### Sample Protocol
PBMC pellets were immersed in hypotonic buffer, for 15 minutes, then stroke by Dounce homogenizer for 50 times, and centrifuged at 1000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C to remove pellet (nucleus). The supernatant was added sucrose to a final concentration of 0.25 M and centrifuged at 13,500 rpm at 4°C for 1 hour to collect membrane protein pellet. The pellet was washed with 0.1 M Na2CO3 (pH 11.5) to remove the membrane-associated proteins. The membrane pellet was vacuum dried and dissolved in 90% formic acid for Bradford assay to determine the membrane protein amount. The membrane proteins were vacuum dried and resuspended in 6 M urea, 5 mM EDTA, and 2% SDS in 0.1 M TEABC. 5 mM TCEP was added for chemical reduction of proteins and 2 mM MMTS was applied for alkylation at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were incorporated into gels in an microcentrifuge tube by adding acrylamide/bisacrylamide solution (40%, 29:1), 10% APS, and 100% TEMED. The gel was cut into small pieces, washed several times with TEABC containing 50% ACN, and further dehydrated with 100% ACN before drying on SpeedVac. Proteolytic digestion was then performed with trypsin (protein/trypsin = 10:1) in 25 mM TEABC with incubation overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel using sequential extraction with TEABC, 0.1% TFA, 0.1% TFA in ACN and 100% ACN. The solutions were combined and concentrated in a SpeedVac. The resulting membrane peptides from paired pre- and post-treated PBMC samples from the same patient were labeled with different iTRAQ. Pre-chemotherapy peptides of patient A01, A02 and A03 were labeled with iTRAQ114, while their post-chemotherapy peptides were labeled with iTRAQ115. Pre-chemotherapy peptides of patient A04, and their subsequent peptides from post-chemotherapy collection were labeled iTRAQ 116 and iTRAQ117, respectively. The labeled samples from each patient were mixed together to generate 3 groups of iTRAQ experiments and subjected to a reverse-phase (RP) StageTip fractionation.  The reversed-phase (RP) C18 StageTip was prepared using a small piece of C8 EmporeTM disk taking off by 16-gauge blunt end needle and fitting into the top of D200 tips. 5 mg of C18 resin was dissolved in 100 μl buffer A (1.62% FA and 3.48% NH4OH, pH 10) and 100 μl buffer B (100% ACN) and added to the C8 disk fitted tips. The RP StageTip was activated by passing methanol, equilibrated with 80% ACN in buffer A, and 20.8% ACN in buffer A sequentially by centrifugation at 1500g for 2 minutes each. After conditioning the tip by soaking with buffer A for 10 minutes, 10 μg of iTRAQ-labeled membrane peptides was dissolved in buffer A and loaded into tip through centrifugation at 1,500 x g for 2 minutes. The unbounded peptides were collected as a flow-through fraction. Peptides were then fractionated by step-wise elutions with 11.1%, 14.5%, 17.4%, 20.8%, 45% and 80% ACN in buffer A by centrifugation at 1,500 x g for 2 minutes each step. All the collected fractions were vacuum dried. Each RP fraction was resuspended in 0.1% FA and analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap Velos (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) equipped with a nanoACQUITY UPLC. ). The sample were loaded and separated a 75 μm ID, 25 cm length C18 BEH column, packed with 1.7 μm particles with a pore with of 130 Å and were separated using a segmented gradient in 120 min from 5% to 40% solvent B (ACN with 0.1% FA) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min and a column temperature of 35°C. The MS survey scan range was m/z 350 – 1600. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependant mode. Briefly, survey full scan MS spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (m/z 350–1600) with the resolution set to 60K at m/z 400 and automatic gain control target at 5x105. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated for higher-energy collisional dissociation and detected in the orbitrap with previously selected ions dynamically excluded for 60 s.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS files were applied database searching against SwissPort human protein sequence database (release 2015_08, 20,204 sequence entries) by using Mascot Distiller (v2.5.1, Matrix Sapiens, London, United Kingdom) with the following parameters: the tryptic peptides with maximums of two missed cleavage sites; MS tolerance of 10 ppm and MS/MS tolerance of 0.05 Da. The variable modifications were set to be Deamidated (NQ), Oxidation (M), Methylthio (C), iTRAQ (K) and iTRAQ (N-terminal). All the identified peptide and proteins were filtered to 1% false discovery rates. Protein quantitation was performed by using Multi-Q. Only unique, iTRAQ-labeled peptides with MS/MS spectra carrying isotopic peaks of m/z 114, 115, 116 and 117 with ion counts ≧ 5000 counts were used for peptide quantitation. Protein ratios were calculated using the weighted average of their quantified peptides and normalized by mean of ratios. The identified proteins were annotated with biological process, molecular function and cellular component properties against Gene Ontology (GO) by using GoMiner and Database for Annotation, Visualization and Integrated Discovery (DAVID), while pathway analysis is performed by using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA). Immune cell protein expressions were selected based on DAVID analysis for functional and pathways analysis for roles in immune-related mechanisms, then subsequently clustered for lineage and cell specificities. Distinct cell markers for immune cells were evaluated based on previous study by Maecker et al (2012) and CD Marker Handbook Human and Mouse provided by BD Bioscience (BD Bioscience, San Jose, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Membrane proteomics, Llung adenocarcinoma, Immune cell profiling

### Affiliations
Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 100, Taiwan
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan

### Submitter
Denise Utami Putri

### Lab Head
Dr Chia-Li Han
Master Program for Clinical Pharmacogenomics and Pharmacoproteomics, College of Pharmacy, Taipei Medical University, Taipei 100, Taiwan


