### Accession
PXD008827

### Title
Evolutionary Instability of CUG-Leu in the Genetic Code of Budding Yeasts

### Description
The standard genetic code is almost universal, and the evolutionary factors that caused a few organisms to deviate from it are poorly understood. We report that three independent changes of the genetic code occurred during the evolution of budding yeasts, each of which was a reassignment of the codon CUG from leucine to another amino acid. We identify five major yeast clades that differ by translating CUG as either Ser (2 clades), Ala (1 clade), or Leu (2 clades). The newly discovered Ser2 clade is in the final stages of transition from one genetic code to another. It appears to use only a novel tRNASer (tSCAG) to translate CUG codons, but the gene for the ancestral tRNALeu (tLCAG) is still intact in most species in the clade, consistent with the ‘ambiguous intermediate’ theory. We propose that the three parallel changes of the genetic code in yeasts were not driven by natural selection in favor of their effects on the proteome, but by selection to eliminate the ancestral tLCAG, possibly in response to a killer toxin.

### Sample Protocol
Total protein was extracted from cultures grown in YPD, and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Triplicate samples were run on a Thermo Scientific Q Exactive mass spectrometer connected to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 (RSLCnano) chromatography system. Tryptic peptides were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid. Each sample was loaded onto a fused silica emitter (75 μm i.d., pulled using a Sutter Instruments P2000 laser puller), packed with 1.8 μm 120 Å UChrom C18 packing material (NanoLCMS Solutions) and was separated by an increasing acetonitrile gradient over 60 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary temperature of 320 °C, and with a potential of 2300V applied to the frit. All data was acquired with the mass spectrometer operating in automatic data dependent switching mode. A high resolution (70,000) MS scan (300-1600 m/z) was performed using the Q Exactive to select the 8 most intense ions prior to MS/MS analysis using HCD.

### Data Protocol
In a first approach to empirical genetic code determination, de novo peptide sequences were extracted from the LC-MS/MS data using PEAKS{Zhang, 2012 #5765} Studio 7 software. Peptides that mapped to a unique site in the genome with ≤1 mismatch to the standard-code translation were identified{Riley, 2016 #5331}. If a genomic site mapped to multiple peptides, all peptides were required to agree. This method deduced the complete genetic code table of each species (Data S2), except for ambiguity of Leu and Ile, which cannot be differentiated by mass, and showed that no species had reassigned any codon other than CUG. In a second approach, which used peptide mass fingerprinting rather than complete de novo peptide sequences, we generated 19 hypothetical proteome databases from each genome, corresponding to every possible sense translation of CUG{Muhlhausen, 2016 #5413}. We then used MaxQuant{Cox, 2008 #5766;Tyanova, 2015 #5767} version 1.5.5.1 to identify peptides that had a unique match to only one of these databases, filtered the matches to include only CUG-encoded residues that were individually supported by b- and/or y-ion data, and tabulated the translations of CUG seen at each genomic site (Table S1). The accepted mass ranges for individual amino acids in b/y ion fragment determination are listed in Table S6.

### Publication Abstract
The genetic code used in nuclear genes is almost universal, but here we report that it changed three times in parallel during the evolution of budding yeasts. All three changes were reassignments of the codon CUG, which is translated as serine (in 2 yeast clades), alanine (1 clade), or the 'universal' leucine (2 clades). The newly discovered Ser2 clade is in the final stages of a genetic code transition. Most species in this clade have genes for both a novel tRNA<sup>Ser</sup>(CAG) and an ancestral tRNA<sup>Leu</sup>(CAG) to read CUG, but only tRNA<sup>Ser</sup>(CAG) is used in standard growth conditions. The coexistence of these alloacceptor tRNA genes indicates that the genetic code transition occurred via an ambiguous translation phase. We propose that the three parallel reassignments of CUG were not driven by natural selection in favor of their effects on the proteome, but by selection to eliminate the ancestral tRNA<sup>Leu</sup>(CAG).

### Keywords
Genetic code yeast cug

### Affiliations
Conway Institute and School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Tadeusz Krassowski

### Lab Head
Dr Kenneth Wolfe
Conway Institute and School of Medicine, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland


