### Accession
PXD016474

### Title
Proteomic comparison study between cancer cachexia muscle of C26 and CT mice

### Description
Background Loss of skeletal muscle mass in advanced cancer is recognized as an independent predictor of mortality. Mechanisms involved in this wasting process and parameters for early diagnosis are still lacking. As skeletal muscle is considered as a secretory organ, the aim of this present experimental work was to characterize the changes in muscle proteome and secretome associated with cancer-induced cachexia to better understand cellular mechanisms involved in this wasting process and to identify secreted proteins which might reflect the ongoing muscle atrophy process. Methods We investigated first the changes in the muscle proteome associated with cancer-induced cachexia by using differential label-free proteomic analysis on muscle of the C26 mouse model. The differentially abundant proteins were submitted to sequential bioinformatic secretomic analysis in order to identify potentially secreted proteins. Selected reaction monitoring and Western blotting were used to verify the presence of candidate proteins at the circulating level. Their muscle source was demonstrated by assessing their gene expression in skeletal muscle and in cultured myotubes. Finally, we also investigated their regulation in muscle cells. Alterations in several molecular pathways potentially involved in muscle atrophy were highlighted using Gene ontology enrichment analyses. Results Our results revealed a dramatic increased production (2-to 25-fold) by the muscle of several acute phase reactants (APR: Haptoglobin, Serpina3n, Complement C3, Serum amyloid A1) which are also released in the circulation during C26 cancer cachexia. Their production was confirmed in other preclinical models of cancer cachexia as well as in cancer patients. The muscular origin of these APR was demonstrated by their increased expression in skeletal muscle and myotubes. Glucocorticoids and pro-inflammatory cytokines contribute directly to their increased expression in muscle cells in vitro, while the role of IL-6 in the muscular induction of these APR was demonstrated in vivo. Conclusions Cancer is associated with marked changes in muscle secretome during muscle wasting. Our study demonstrates a marked increased production of APR by skeletal muscle in pre-clinical models of cancer cachexia and in cancer patients. Further studies are required to unravel the potential role of these proteins in muscle atrophy and their interest as biomarkers of cancer cachexia.

### Sample Protocol
Gastrocnemius muscles (n=6 per group), collected in buffer with Tris-HCl 40mM, pH7 with proteases inhibitor (cOmplete™ ULTRA Tablets, Mini, EASYpack Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Roche, #04693124001), were crushed using ultra-turrax (6x 10 seconds) and centrifuged 10 minutes at 10000 x g to collect the supernatant with soluble proteins or the sarcoplasmic fraction (SF). The remaining pellet re-suspended in urea 8M/Tris-HCl 50 mM buffer at pH7 was incubated one hour on ice and further centrifuged 5 minutes at 5000 x g at 4°C to isolate the myofibrillar fraction (MF), containing proteins initially insoluble and resolubilized thanks to 8M urea buffer. The protein concentrations of SF and MF were measured using respectively BiCinchoninic acid (BCA) method dosage (Pierce™ BCA Protein Assay Kit, Thermo Scientific™, #23225) and the Bradford method (Protein Assay Dye Reagent Concentrate, Bio-Rad, #5000006) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Muscle protein extracts digestion  Fifty micrograms of each sample (n=24) were processed. A 2-D clean up (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK, #80-6484-51) procedure was performed on all the samples, according to the manufacturer’s instructions before reduction, alkylation and digestion steps. Prior to enzymatic digestion, all the samples were re-suspended in a solution of urea 8M /50mM Tris-HCl (pH8). The samples were reduced by adding dithiothreitol (DTT, Affymetrix, #15397) to obtain a final concentration of 5mM. Samples were mixed and incubated for 30 minutes at 37°C. After reduction, the samples were alkylated using iodoacetamide (IAA, Sigma, #I1149) at 15mM final. Samples were mixed and incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at room temperature. A two-step digestion was performed using Trypsin/Lys-C mix (Trypsin/Lys-C Mix, Mass Spec Grade, Promega, Madison, USA, #V5072) according to manufacturer’s recommendations. Briefly, Trypsin/Lys-C mix was added to proteins extracts at enzyme to protein ratio 1:25. Samples were mixed and incubated for 3 hours at 37°C.  The samples were further diluted to reduce the urea concentration to maximum 1M and incubated overnight at 37°C. The digestion was stopped by adding the trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Acros Organics, #29381) to 0.5% final. Finally, the samples were purified using C18 pipette tips (Pierce, ThermoFisher Scientific, #87782) and lyophilized in a speed-vacuum to dryness at room temperature. The pellets were stored at -20 °C until further analysis. Sample protein digests reconditioning and Liquid Chromatography-tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis  Prior to LC-MSMS analysis, a quantity of 2.0 µg of each protein digest was re-suspended in 9 µl of 100 mM Ammonium formate solution (pH10) and spiked with the MassPREPTMDigestion Standard Mixture (MPDS mix 1 (C26 samples) and 2 (CT samples), Waters, #186002865; #186002866) at 50 fmoles in ADH. This commercial mix contains yeast alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH, P00330), rabbit glycogen phosphorylase b (GPB, P00489), yeast enolase I (ENO1, P00924), and bovine serum albumin (BSA, P02769).  The twenty-four purified and reconditioned protein digests were analyzed on an instrumental system composed of a nanoACQUITY two-dimensional UPLC (Waters Corporation, Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q Exactive Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Data processing protocol 50 à 5000 caractères MaxQuant (version 1.5.5.1) (Tyanova et al, Nature protocols, 2016, 2301-2319) was used to manage the 24 raw MS data files. The following parameters for the data base search and protein identification were selected as follows: trypsin with max 2 missed cleavages, N-terminal protein acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation was used as fixed modification, MS/MS spectra were searched against the mus musculus Uniprot-release-2016_11, containing 16839 sequences. The protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) were both set at 0.01. Seven amino acids were the minimum peptide length and at least two peptides per protein were required for confident identification, if including at least one unique peptide. The precursor mass tolerance was set at 4.5 ppm. The quantification was done using the label-free quantification algorithms (LFQ) (Cox J et al, Mol Cell Proteomics, 2014, 2513-2526) based on a ‘global normalization’. MS runs were analyzed with match between runs using the default parameter settings.  The Perseus program (version 1.5.5.0) was used to carry out the statistical analyses using the LFQ output generated by MaxQuant (Tyanova et al, Nature Methods, 2016, 731-40) and after a log2-transformation to ensure normal distribution. Comparison of the distribution of the proteins quantified in 6 replicates out of 6 in at least one group was applied using unpaired student t-test with truncation based on p-values. Only p-value <0.05 were considered as significant.

### Publication Abstract
Loss of skeletal muscle mass in cancer cachexia is recognized as a predictor of mortality. This study aimed to characterize the changes in the muscle secretome associated with cancer cachexia to gain a better understanding of the mechanisms involved and to identify secreted proteins which may reflect this wasting process. The changes in the muscle proteome of the C26 model were investigated by label-free proteomic analysis followed by a bioinformatic analysis in order to identify potentially secreted proteins. Multiple reaction monitoring and Western blotting were used to verify the presence of candidate proteins in the circulation. Our results revealed a marked increased muscular production of several acute phase reactants (APR: Haptoglobin, Serine protease inhibitor A3N, Complement C3, Serum amyloid A-1 protein) which are released in the circulation during C26 cancer cachexia. This was confirmed in other models of cancer cachexia as well as in cancer patients. Glucocorticoids and proinflammatory cytokines are responsible for an increased production of APR by muscle cells. Finally, their muscular expressions are strongly positively correlated with body weight loss as well as the muscular induction of atrogens. Our study demonstrates therefore a marked increased production of APR by the muscle in cancer cachexia.

### Keywords
Atrophy, C26 mice, Biomarkers, Cachexia, Muscle, Cancer

### Affiliations
translational gastroenterology laboratory
University of Liege, GIGA institute: 
university hospital CHU Liège, BE
Translational Gastroenterology,GIGA institute,University of Liège, Belgium  Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology Dep., University hospital of Liège, BE

### Submitter
Marie-Alice Meuwis

### Lab Head
Dr Meuwis Marie-Alice
Translational Gastroenterology,GIGA institute,University of Liège, Belgium  Hepato-Gastroenterology and Digestive Oncology Dep., University hospital of Liège, BE


