### Accession
PXD019793

### Title
Human proteome derivatized with iodoacetamide and acrylamide

### Description
This dataset was generated to parametrize and benchmark software for unbiased discovery of post-translationally modified peptides.

### Sample Protocol
OCIAML2 cell proteomes was extracted, and cysteine residues were reduced and derivatized with either acrylamide or iodoacetamide. Samples were analyzed by LC-MSMS pure and as 1:1 mixture, to generate peptide mixtures containing exclusively propionylated or carbamidomethylated cysteins, or a mixture of the two.

### Data Protocol
Samples were analyzed using MSFragger, Byonic and X!tandem plus SAMPEI to agnostcially identify alkylated cysteins.

### Publication Abstract
Recent studies have revealed diverse amino acid, post-translational, and noncanonical modifications of proteins in diverse organisms and tissues. However, their unbiased detection and analysis remain hindered by technical limitations. Here, we present a spectral alignment method for the identification of protein modifications using high-resolution mass spectrometry proteomics. Termed SAMPEI for spectral alignment-based modified peptide identification, this open-source algorithm is designed for the discovery of functional protein and peptide signaling modifications, without prior knowledge of their identities. Using synthetic standards and controlled chemical labeling experiments, we demonstrate its high specificity and sensitivity for the discovery of substoichiometric protein modifications in complex cellular extracts. SAMPEI mapping of mouse macrophage differentiation revealed diverse post-translational protein modifications, including distinct forms of cysteine itaconatylation. SAMPEI's robust parametrization and versatility are expected to facilitate the discovery of biological modifications of diverse macromolecules. SAMPEI is implemented as a Python package and is available open-source from BioConda and GitHub (https://github.com/FenyoLab/SAMPEI).

### Keywords
Lc-msms iodoacetamide acrylamide modifications ptm orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA

### Submitter
Alex Kentsis

### Lab Head
Dr Alex Kentsis
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA


