### Accession
PXD024095

### Title
Defining changes in the total levels of proteins upon RPN-6 RNAi

### Description
Here we defined changes in the total levels of individual proteins upon RPN-6 RNAi in young C. elegans adults (day 5)

### Sample Protocol
For proteomics analysis of proteasome-less worms, we collected day 5 adult worms treated with either Vector RNAi or rpn-6 RNAi. To remove bacteria, we washed the worms 5 times with M9 buffer. Then, animals were resuspended in 10 M urea containing 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) and 25 mM N-Ethylmaleimide. Protein was extracted using a Precellys 24 homogenizer (Bertin Technologies). Samples were centrifuged at 13,000 r.p.m. for 10 min at room temperature and supernatants were collected. Then, we determined protein concentrations with Pierce BCA protein assay (Thermo Scientific). For each sample, 22 mg of total protein were used as starting material and treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at room temperature to reduce disulfide bonds. Carbamidomethylation was performed by incubation with 30 mM chloroacetamide (CAA) for 30 min at room temperature. The urea concentration was diluted to 2 M with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and samples were digested with 220 µg trypsin (1:100 (wt/wt) enzyme:substrate ratio) for 3 h at room temperature. Then, we further added 220 µg trypsin and digested the samples overnight. After digestion, we added 0.5% formic acid and centrifuged 3500xg for 5 min the samples to remove precipitate. Peptides were desalted with 500-mg tC18 Sep-Pak cartridge (Waters). 200 µg of peptides were separated and cleaned up using C18 Stage Tips (Thermo Fischer) for label-free proteomics of total protein levels. The rest of material was used for enrichment of Ub-modified peptides. First, peptides were frozen at -80 °C for 3 h and then completely dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried samples were dissolved in immunoaffinity purification solution (IAP).

### Data Protocol
The liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) equipment consisted of an EASY nLC 1000 coupled to the quadrupole based QExactive Plus Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific) via a nano-spray electroionization source. Peptides were separated on an in-house packed 50 cm column (2.7 µm C18 beads, Dr. Maisch) using a binary buffer system: A) 0.1% formic acid and B) 0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile. The content of buffer B was raised from 5% to 30% within 65 min and followed by an increase to 50% within 10 min. Then, within 1 min buffer B fraction was raised to 95% and then followed by washing and column equilibration for 15 min. Eluting peptides were ionized by an applied voltage of 2.2 kV. The capillary temperature was 275 °C and the S-lens RF level was set to 60. MS1 spectra were acquired using a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z, an Automatic Gain Control (AGC) target of 3e6 and a maximum injection time of 20 ms in a scan range of 300-1750 Th. In a data dependent mode, the ten most intense peaks were selected for isolation and fragmentation in the higher collisional dissociation (HCD) cell using a normalized collision energy of 27 at an isolation window of 1.8 Th. Dynamic exclusion was enabled and set to 20 s. The MS/MS scan properties were: 17,500 resolution at 200 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 5e5 and a maximum injection time of 60 ms. All label-free proteomics data sets were analysed with the MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.8). MS2 spectra were searched against the C. elegans Uniprot database, including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates (FDR) on protein and peptide–spectrum match (PSM) level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 0.01% (Protein FDR) and 0.01% (PSM FDR), respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and the match-between runs option was enabled. Carbamidomethylation (C) was considered as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term) and GlyGly (K) were included as variable modifications. For protein identification and label-free quantification (LFQ), we used the LFQ mode and MaxQuant default settings61. All the downstream analyses of the resulting output were performed with Perseus (version 1.6.2.2) and R program (version 5.3.3). Protein groups flagged as “reverse”, “potential contaminant” or “only identified by site” were removed. LFQ values were log2 transformed and missing values were replaced using an imputation-based approach (i.e., random sampling from a normal distribution using a down shift of 1.8 and a width of 0.3). Significant differences between the experimental groups were assessed by Student’s t-test.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, C. elegans, Aging, Proteasome

### Affiliations
University of Cologne
CECAD, University of Cologne

### Submitter
David Vilchez

### Lab Head
Dr David Vilchez
CECAD, University of Cologne


