### Accession
PXD037657

### Title
Lipid metabolism reprogramming and Trastuzumab resistance in Breast cancer cell lines overexpressing the ERBB2 membrane receptor.

### Description
ERBB2 overexpression is associated with aggressive breast cancer (BCa) disease. The introduction in the clinic of Trastuzumab (Tz) targeting this receptor has considerably improved patient outcomes. However, de novo or acquired resistance to Tz occurs and negatively impacts prognosis.  Many molecular mechanisms have been reported in the development of Tz resistance. This study aimed to establish whether common mechanisms could be identified in in vitro models of acquired BCa Tz resistance. In particular, we used widely available ERBB2+ Breast cancer cell lines BT474, MDA-MB-361, and SKBR-3, adapted in vitro to grow in Tz concentration ten times higher than the saturation one.   Wt and TZ-R cells were studied to address changes in phenotype, proliferation, apoptosis, and ERBB2 membrane expression that did not highlight alterations common to the three cell lines. We used high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis to gain insight into the mechanisms associated to the adaptation of continuous growth in very high Tz concentration. This analysis identified a common set of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in Tz-R vs. wt cells. Bioinformatic tools available in the public domain revealed that all three Tz-R cell models shared modulation of proteins involved in the metabolism of lipids, organophosphate biosynthetic process, and macromolecule methylation. This data was partially supported by evidence of a higher number of lipid droplets in TZ-R SKBR-3 with respect to wt.  In conclusion, our data strongly support previous evidence that complex metabolic adaptation, including lipid metabolism, protein phosphorylation, and possibly chromatin remodeling, may fuel Tz resistance. At the same time, identifying a common set of 10 DEPs in all three TZ-resistant cell lines may provide possible novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

### Sample Protocol
Tandem mass analysis of tryptic digests has been performed on an Ultimate 3000 nano chromatography system (Thermo Scientific Instrument), equipped with a PepMap RSLC18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, 2 μm particle size, Thermo Scientific Instrument) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and a temperature of 60°C. Mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and mobile phase B was 80% ACN, 20% H2O and 0.08% v/v formic acid. The following 105 min gradient was selected: 0.0-3.0 min isocratic 2% B; 3.0-7.0 min 7% B; 7.0-65.0 min 30% B; 65.0-78.0 min 45% B; 78.0-83.0 min 80% B; 83.0-85.0 isocratic 80% B; 85.0-85.1 2% B and finally 85.1-105.0 isocratic 2% B. After separation, the flow has been sent directly to an Easyspray source connected to an Exactive Plus Orbitrap Q mass spectrometer (both Thermo Scientific Instrument). The software Xcalibur (version 4.1, Thermo Scientific Instrument) was used for operating the UHPLC/HR-MS. MS scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 between 200 and 2,000 m/z, an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3.0E6 and a maximum injection time (maxIT) of 100 ms. MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500, an AGC target of 1.0E5 and a maxIT of 50 ms. A quadrupole isolation window of 2.0 m/z was used, and HCD was performed using 30 normalized collision energy (NCE).

### Data Protocol
Data from mass spectrometer in *.raw format was processed with ProteomeDiscoverer® software version 2.4.1.15 using a workflow adapted to LTQ ORBITRAP label-free quantification. Briefly, the software divides the data analysis in two steps: Processing and Consensus.  In the Processing step it was established the database for PMSs identification in MS/MS spectra and concatenated decoy (Homo sapiens - sp_canonical v2022-03-02, Target FDR strict = 0.01, Target FDR relaxed = 0.05 for proteins, peptides and PSMs), static modification (Carbamidomethyl/+57.021Da on C) and dynamic modifications (Oxidation / +15.995 Da (M); Phospho / +79.966 Da (S, T, Y)), as well as identification engines (MS Amanda 2.0], Sequest HT® and tolerances (Precursor mass tolerance=10ppm, Fragment Mass Tolerance =0.02Da).  In the consensus step Precursors abundance was calculated by intensity, using Unique+Razor peptides and considering protein for peptide uniqueness. Peptide’s normalization (based on total peptide amount, scaling on all average), peptide filters (high confidence, minimum length=6) and proteins quantification (by summed abundances, pairwise ratio based, t-test background based) were also assessed in this step using IMP-apQuant node. 
*.Raw files description is in supplementary table of the pubblication.

### Publication Abstract
Trastuzumab (Tz), an antibody targeting ERBB2, has significantly improved the prognosis for breast cancer (BCa) patients with overexpression of the ERBB2 receptor. However, Tz resistance poses a challenge to patient outcomes. Numerous mechanisms have been suggested to contribute to Tz resistance, and this study aimed to uncover shared mechanisms in in vitro models of acquired BCa Tz resistance. Three widely used ERBB2+ BCa cell lines, adapted to grow in Tz, were examined. Despite investigating potential changes in phenotype, proliferation, and ERBB2 membrane expression in these Tz-resistant (Tz-R) cell lines compared to wild-type (wt) cells, no common alterations were discovered. Instead, high-resolution mass spectrometry analysis revealed a shared set of differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) in Tz-R versus wt cells. Bioinformatic analysis demonstrated that all three Tz-R cell models exhibited modulation of proteins associated with lipid metabolism, organophosphate biosynthesis, and macromolecule methylation. Ultrastructural examination corroborated the presence of altered lipid droplets in resistant cells. These findings strongly support the notion that intricate metabolic adaptations, including lipid metabolism, protein phosphorylation, and potentially chromatin remodeling, may contribute to Tz resistance. The detection of 10 common DEPs across all three Tz-resistant cell lines offers promising avenues for future therapeutic interventions, providing potential targets to overcome Tz resistance and potentially improve patient outcomes in ERBB2+ breast cancer.

### Keywords
Human, Cell culture, Chemioresistance, Breast, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Genova
U.O. Bioterapie IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino Largo R. Benzi, 10 16132-Genova Italy

### Submitter
Gabriela Coronel Vargas

### Lab Head
Dr Patrizio Castagnola
U.O. Bioterapie IRCCS Ospedale Policlinico San Martino Largo R. Benzi, 10 16132-Genova Italy


