### Accession
PXD045562

### Title
Aspartyl-tRNA synthetase 2 orchestrates iron-sulfur metabolism in hematopoietic stem cells via fine-tuning alternative RNA splicing

### Description
Aspartyl-tRNA synthetase 2 (Dars2) is involved in the regulation of mitochondrial protein synthesis and tissue-specific mitochondrial unfolded protein response (UPRmt). The role of Dars2 in the self-renewal and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is unknown. Here we show that knockout (KO) of Dars2 significantly impairs the maintenance of HSCs and progenitor cells (HSPCs) without involving its tRNA synthetase activity. Dars2 KO results in significantly reduced expression of Srsf2/3/6 and impairs multiple events of mRNA alternative splicing (AS). Dars2 directly localizes to Srsf3 labeled spliceosomes in HSPCs and regulates the stability of Srsf3. Dars2-deficient HSPCs exhibit aberrant AS of mTOR and Slc22a17. Dars2 KO greatly suppresses the levels of labile ferrous iron and iron-sulfur cluster containing proteins, which dampens mitochondrial metabolic activity and DNA damage repair pathway in HSPCs. Our study reveals that Dars2 plays an unprecedented role in the iron-sulfur metabolism and maintenance of HSPCs by modulating RNA splicing.

### Sample Protocol
Dars2f/f transgenic mice (C57BL/6 background) were generated by using a homologous combination knockout strategy, in which exon2 was flanked with two loxP sites. Dars2f/f, Dars2f/+ or WT mice were genotyped by PCR with Forward primer (F): 5’-ATGTCACTTACCAAAATGGACAGC-3’; Reverse primer (R): 5’-TATCCCTATTGTGTTTACCTGCACA-3’. The WT allele was detected as a band at 155 bp, whereas the floxed allele was detected as a band of 200 bp. Mx1-Cre was genotyped by PCR with Transgene F: 5’-GTGAGTTTCGTTTCTGAGCTCC-3’; Transgene R: 5’-CGGTTATTCAACTTGCACCA-3’; Internal Positive Control F: 5’-GACAAAATGGTGAAGGTCGG-3’ and Internal Positive Control R: 5’-CAAAGGCGGAGTTACCAGAG-3’. Mx1-Cre recombination was induced with pIpC (Invivogen) by intraperitoneal injection (10 mg/kg body weight, every other day for 3 times). Dars2f/f and Mx1-Cre;Dars2f/f mice were used for analysis 7 or 10 days after pIpC injection. All of the experiments started when mice were at 6-8 weeks of age. All animals were bred in house in pathogen-free environment. All animal procedures were conducted in accordance with the Guidelines for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine. The proteins were extracted with RIPA lysate and precipitated with cold acetone at -20 °C overnight. The supernatant was discarded after centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C, the remaining precipitate was washed 3 times with cold 80% acetone for twice. The proteins were reduced with DTT for 10 min at 55 °C (dithiothreitol, final 5 mM concentration) and alkylated in the dark with IAA for 15 min at 37 °C (iodoacetamide, final 10 mM concentration). After that, the proteins were digested with trypsin at the ratio of 1:50 (trypsin to protein, w:w) overnight at 37 °C. TFA (trifluoroacetic acid, final 2% concentration) was added to remove sodium deoxycholate (SDC). Peptide mixtures were desalted using reversed­phase C18 column according to manufacturer’s specifications. For each sample, 2 μg of total peptides were separated and analyzed with a nano­UPLC (EASY­ nLC1200) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a nano­electrospray ion source. Separation was performed using a reversed ­phase column (100 μm ID x 15 cm, Reprosil­Pur 120 C18­AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). Mobile phases were H2O with 0.1% FA, 2% ACN (phase A) and 80% ACN, 0.1% FA (phase B). Separation of sample was executed with a 120 min gradient at 300 nL/min flow rate. Gradient B: 2­5% for 2 min, 5­22% for 88 min, 22­45% for 26 min, 45­95% for 2 min, 95% for 2 min. Data dependent acquisition (DDA) was performed in profile and positive mode with Orbitrap analyzer at a resolution of 120,000 (200 m/z) and m/z range of 350­-1600 for MS1; For MS2, the resolution was set to 15,000 with a dynamic first mass. The automatic gain control (AGC) target for MS1 was set to 3E6 with max IT 50 ms, and 1E5 for MS2 with max IT 110 ms. The top 20 most intense ions were fragmented by HCD with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27%, and isolation window of 1.2 m/z. The dynamic exclusion time window was 45 s, single charged peaks and peaks with charge exceeding 6 were excluded from the DDA procedure.

### Data Protocol
The differential analysis was conducted by a two-tailed t-test on normalized protein expression levels (in the scale of log2) between Dars2 KO and WT. The differentially expressed proteins (DEPs) were identified by the cutoffs of false discovery rate (FDR) less than 0.05 and absolute value of fold change (FC) larger than 1.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Stem cell, Rna-splicing

### Affiliations
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Indiana University

### Submitter
Kailing Li

### Lab Head
Dr Bin Guo
Department of Pathophysiology, Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


