### Accession
PXD031944

### Title
Salmonella Typhimurium proteome analysis albicidin resistance

### Description
Salmonella Typhimurium proteome changes induced by resistance development against the antibiotic albicidin.

### Sample Protocol
In-solution digest of pelleted bacterial cells followed by LC-ESI-MS/MS analysis on a Q Exactive HF instrument.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS raw data were processed and analyzed using the MaxQuant software package version 1.6.14 with implemented Andromeda peptide search engine. Data were searched against the custom database for Salmonella Typhimurium with 5000 protein sequences generated from the whole genome sequence of IMT-9866 Salmonella Typhimurium strain from our lab. The default settings of MaxQuant were used except for enabling label-free quantification (LFQ) and match between runs (MBR). Filtering and statistical analysis was carried out using the Perseus software version 1.6.14. After initial filtering (removing contaminants, reverse hits and hits only identified by site), only proteins which were quantified with LFQ intensity values in at least 3 replicates (within at least one of the two experimental groups) were used for downstream analysis. Missing values were replaced from a normal distribution (imputation) near the detection limit using the default settings (width 0.3, down shift 1.8). Mean log2 fold protein LFQ intensity differences between the 2 experimental groups (T12 - WT) were calculated in Perseus using student’s t-test with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05. The volcano plot was created by plotting the -log10 p-values against the mean log2 fold protein LFQ intensity differences. Proteins were considered significantly changed between experimental groups if they have a q-value < 0.05 and at least a 2-fold change in LFQ intensity (log2 fold change >1 for the evolved strain or log2 fold change <-1 for the background strain, respectively).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Albicidin, Lc-msms, Salmonella typhimurium

### Affiliations
Veterinary Centre for Resistance Research (TZR), Freie Universität Berlin, 14163 Berlin, Germany
Freie Universität Berlin, Institute of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laboratory of Protein Biochemistry, Thielallee 63, D-14195, Berlin, Germany

### Submitter
Benno Kuropka

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Marcus Fulde
Veterinary Centre for Resistance Research (TZR), Freie Universität Berlin, 14163 Berlin, Germany


