### Accession
PXD009071

### Title
Proteomic analysis of S-nitrosylated nuclear proteins in rat cortical neurons

### Description
S-nitrosothiol Resin Assisted Capture(SNORAC) coupled with mass spectrometry analysis has been used to study S-nitrosylated proteins in rat cortical neurons. Proteins were captured on the resin by covalently attaching their former S-NO moiety. Then, nistrosylated proteins were eluted by on-bead digestion. Formerly S-nitrosylated peptides were also eluted from the beads in a second step, and analyzed separately for assessment of the nitrosylation site (qualitative analysis). Out of over 600 nitrosyltated proteins, 131 proteins have never been shown to be S-nitrosylated in any system and 612 are new targets of S-nitrosylation in cortical neurons. The site(s) of Snitrosylation were also identified for 59% of the targets.

### Sample Protocol
EXP 1 A1. 1 mM Cys (cont) A4. 1 mM CysNO A5. 1 mM CysNO – ascorbate (cont) Exp 2 B1. 1 mM Cys (cont) B2. 1 mM CysNO B4. 1 mM CysNO – ascorbate (cont) Rat cortical neurons were treated with the NO donor CysNO, and S-nitrosylated proteins were isolated using SNORAC. Overnight on-bead digestion was performed. Following tryptic digestion, supernatants were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in the corresponding solutions (samples: SNO-proteins). The digested proteins samples were subjected to O18 labelling. Aliquots of samples A-4, A-5, B-1, B-2 were labeled by H2O(18) 98%, whereas aliquots of samples A-1, A-4, B-2, B-4 were incubated with normal HPLC water (light). Labelled samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio as follows: A-4(H):A-1(L); A-5(H):A-4(L); B-2(H):B-4(L); B-1(H):B-2(L). Mixed samples were purified by strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips.  LC-MS/MS RAW Files SNORAC-Exp1-A1L-A4H SNORAC-Exp1-A4L-A5H SNORAC-Exp2-B2L-B1H SNORAC-Exp2-B4L-B2H  Exp 3 C7. 200μM Cys (cont) C8. 200μM CysNO C9. 200μM CysNO without ascorbate (cont) Exp 4 E1. 200μM Cys (cont) E2. 200μM CysNO E3. 200μM CysNO without ascorbate (cont)  Proteins were isolated and on-bead digested as described above. THe supernatants were subjected to DTT reduction (10 mM) and alkylation by iodoacetamide (20 mM). Complete overnight digestion was achieved by adding a new 300 ng aliquot of trypsin. Samples were labelled according to the standard dimethyl labelling procedure ("medium", M, and "light", L labeling). Digest pairs were  purified by SCX StageTips and subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis withtechnical duplicates (2 injections per sample).  LC-MS/MS RAW Files SNORAC-Exp3-C8M-C7L(r) SNORAC-Exp3-C8M-C9L(r) SNORAC-Exp4-E2M-E1L(r) SNORAC-Exp4-E2M-E3L(r)  Exp 5  Nuclear extracts 1. 200μM Cys (control) 2. 200μM CysNO Cytoplasmic extracts 3. 200μM Cys (control) 4. 200μM CysNO  SNO-proteins were isolated as described in Experiment 1. Digested proteins were prepared and labelled by O18 as described above. Labelled samples were mixed in a 1:1 ratio as indicated in the file names. Mixed samples were purified by strong cation exchange (SCX) StageTips. Because of the higher amount of protein sample recovered in this experiment, sample fractionation at the peptide level could be achieved (4 fractions).  LC-MS/MS RAW Files SNORAC-Exp5-1H-2L-(1-4) SNORAC-Exp5-2H-1L-(1-4) SNORAC-Exp5-3H-4L-(1-4) SNORAC-Exp5-4H-3L-(1-4)  SNO-site identification For experiments 1-5, in order to elute formerly cys-nitrosylated peptides still covalently attached to the beads, 100 μL of buffer B were added to each sample, followed by the addition of 10 μL of 100 mM DTT (incubation for 1 h at 37 °C). Alkylation of released cysteines was achieved by adding 10 μL of 200 mM iodoacetamide (1h at 37 °C in the dark). The supernatants were recovered, and the beads were washed with 50 μL of buffer B. Supernatants and their respective washes were pooled and evaporated in a vacuum centrifuge (samples: SNO-peptides). For a qualitative analysis of putative nitrosylation sites, SNO-peptides from the evaporated extracts were purified by SCX StageTips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.  LC-MS/MS RAW Files SNORAC-Exp1-2-peptides    SNORAC-Exp3-pep-C8M-C7L  SNORAC-Exp3-pep-C8M-C9L  SNORAC-Exp4-pep-E2M-E1L  SNORAC-Exp4-pep-E2M-E3L  SNORAC-Exp5-pep-1  SNORAC-Exp5-pep-2  SNORAC-Exp5-pep-3  SNORAC-Exp5-pep-4     Protein identification of total inputs in neuronal extracts  Neuronal nuclear protein extracts (50 μg) were precipitated by adding cold acetone (4:1 v/v). The pellet was solubilied in 50 μL of 5% sodium deoxycholate (DOC) containing 60 mM tris buffer (pH 8.8). After reduction (10mM DTT) and  Cysteine alkylation (24 mM iodoacetamide), overnight protein digestion was allowed to proceed at 37 °C (trypsin, 1:100 w/w).The peptide peptide mixture was fractionated on SCX StageTips (7 fractions). A 2 μL aliquot of each fraction was subjected to nanoLC-MS/MS analysis using a long elution gradient (see below). LC-MS/MS RAW Files Total-inputs-NE-F(1-7)   nanoLC-MS/MS analysis  Chromatography was performed on an Easy LC 1000 nanoscale liquid chromatography (nanoLC) system coupled to a quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer Q-Exactive (Thermo Fisher). Analytical column: 75 μm i.d., in-house packed, 10 cm,3 μm C18 silica particles. Gradient from 5% B to 35% B in 60 min (50 min for SNO-peptides, 120 min for nuclear extracts): A)  0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile: B)  0.1% formic acid, 80% acetonitrile. MS parameters: positive ion mode, top-12 method (top-8 for SNO-peptide), HCD 25%; resolution (FWHM), AGC target and maximum injection time (ms) for full MS and MS/MS were 70,000/17,500, 1e6/1e5, 20/60, respectively. MS/MS parameters for detection of SNO-peptides were: resolution 35,000; AGC target 2e5, max injection time 120 ms. MS full scan range was 350-1800 m/z. Mass window for precursor ion isolation was 1.6 m/z. Ion threshold for triggering MS/MS events was 5e4. Dynamic exclusion was 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification was achieved in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany), using Sequest as search engine and the RATTUS proteome sequence database (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/uniprot) accessed on March 2015. The database was merged with a list of common contaminants named “Common Repository of Adventitious Proteins” retrieved from The Global Proteome Machine website (http://www.thegpm.org/crap/index.html). In total, 27,927 entries were searched. The following general search parameters were used: MS tolerance 15 ppm; MS/MS tolerance 0.02 Da; enzyme trypsin; max. missed cleavages 2; variable modification: oxidised methionine. Additionally, the following search parameters were used, depending on Experiment number: Exp 1 and 2) variable modification: C-terminal 18O labelling; fixed modification: methyl thio-cysteine (MMTS); Exp. 3 and 4) variable modifications: N-ethylmaleimide-cysteine (NEM), scarbamidomethyl-cysteine (CAM); fixed modifications (in two parallel searches): (a) N-ter dimethyl (light); dimethyl-lysine (light); (b) N-ter dimethyl (medium); dimethyl-lysine (medium). Exp. 5) variable modification: C-terminal 18O labelling; fixed modification: N-ethylmaleimide-cysteine (NEM); For SNOpeptide searches, the following additional parameters were used: Exp. 1 and 5) fixed modification: carbamidomethyl-cysteine (CAM). False discovery rate estimation was performed in Proteome Discoverer using the Target-decoy validator node. Minimum requirement for protein ID for every experiment was 2 peptides at 95% confidence, whereas for SNO-peptide identification peptide confidence threshold was set to 99%.

### Publication Abstract
Neurons modulate gene expression in response to extrinsic signals to enable brain development, cognition, and learning and to process stimuli that regulate systemic physiological functions. This signal-to-gene communication is facilitated by posttranslational modifications such as S-nitrosylation, the covalent attachment of a nitric oxide (NO) moiety to cysteine thiols. In the cerebral cortex, S-nitrosylation of histone deacetylase 2 (HDAC2) is required for gene transcription during neuronal development, but few other nuclear targets of S-nitrosylation have been identified to date. We used S-nitrosothiol resin-assisted capture on NO donor-treated nuclear extracts from rat cortical neurons and identified 614 S-nitrosylated nuclear proteins. Of these, 131 proteins have not previously been shown to be S-nitrosylated in any system, and 555 are previously unidentified targets of S-nitrosylation in neurons. The sites of S-nitrosylation were identified for 59% of the targets, and motifs containing single lysines were found at 33% of these sites. In addition, lysine motifs were necessary for promoting the S-nitrosylation of HDAC2 and methyl-CpG binding protein 3 (MBD3). Moreover, S-nitrosylation of the histone-binding protein RBBP7 was necessary for dendritogenesis of cortical neurons in culture. Together, our findings characterize S-nitrosylated nuclear proteins in neurons and identify S-nitrosylation motifs that may be shared with other targets of NO signaling.

### Keywords
Q-exactive, Rat, Cortical neurons, S-nitrosylation

### Affiliations
University of Catanzaro
Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catanzaro, Viale Europa, 88100 Catanzaro (Italy)

### Submitter
Marco Gaspari

### Lab Head
Dr Marco Gaspari
Dept Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Catanzaro, Viale Europa, 88100 Catanzaro (Italy)


