### Accession
PXD039697

### Title
Signaling in Renal Compensatory Hypertrophy Revealed by Multi-Omics_Outer Cortex

### Description
This mouse kidney outer cortex proteomics data set is part of multi-omic approach in a mouse unilateral nephrectomy model to identify signaling processes associated with compensatory hypertrophy of the renal proximal tubule.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney outer cortex from each mouse was collected and homogenized by beads homogenizer in  100mM TEAB buffer with 1X HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
The raw mass spectra were searched against the mouse UniProt reference proteome (UP000002494_10116.fasta) using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0, and lot-specific TMT isotopic impurity correction factors were used as recommended in the TMT product data sheets. “Trypsin/P” was set as the digestion enzyme with up to two missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine (C) was configured as a fixed modification. Variable modifications included oxidation of methionine (M). The FDR was limited to 1% using the target-decoy algorithm. Other parameters were kept as the defaults. Results are reported as MS2 reporter ion intensity ratios between UNx samples and Sham controls.

### Publication Abstract
Indole alkaloids are one of the largest alkaloid classes, proving valuable structural moiety in pharmaceuticals. Although methods for the synthesis of indole alkaloids are constantly explored, the direct single-step synthesis of these chemical entities with broad structural diversity remains a formidable challenge. Herein, we report a modular assembly of tetrahydrocarboline type of indole alkaloids from simple building blocks in a single step while showing broad compatibility with medicinally relevant functionality. In this protocol, the 2-alkylated or 3-alkylated indoles, formaldehyde, and amine hydrochlorides could undergo a one-pot reaction to deliver &#x3b3;-tetrahydrocarbolines or &#x3b2;-tetrahydrocarbolines directly. A wide scope of these readily available starting materials is applicable in this process, and numerous structural divergent tetrahydrocarbolines could be achieved rapidly. The control reaction and deuterium-labelling reaction are conducted to probe the mechanism. And mechanistically, this multicomponent reaction relies on a multiple alkylamination cascade wherein an unusual C(sp<sup>3</sup>)-C(sp<sup>3</sup>) connection was involved in this process. This method could render rapid access to pharmaceutically interesting compounds, greatly enlarge the indole alkaloid library and accelerate the lead compound optimization thus facilitating drug discovery.

### Keywords
Unilateral nephrectomy, Proteomics, Multi-omics, Kidney, Hypertrophy

### Affiliations
National Institutes of Health, USA
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603

### Submitter
CHIN-RANG YANG

### Lab Head
Dr Mark A. Knepper
Epithelial Systems Biology Laboratory Systems Biology Center National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute Bethesda, Maryland 20895-1603


