### Accession
PXD033128

### Title
Indolin-2-one nitroimidazole antibiotics exhibit an unexpected dual mode of action

### Description
Nitroimidazoles such as metronidazole are used as anti-infective drugs against anaerobic bacteria. Upon in vivo reduction of the nitro group, reactive radicals damage DNA and proteins in the absence of oxygen. Unexpectedly, a recent study of nitroimidazoles linked to an indolin-2-one substituent revealed potent activities against aerobic bacteria. This suggests a different, yet undiscovered mode of action (MoA). To decipher this MoA, we first performed whole proteome analysis of compound treated cells, revealing an upregulation of bacteriophage-associated proteins, indicative of DNA damage. Since DNA binding of the compound was not observed, we applied activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) for direct target discovery. Labeling studies revealed topoisomerase IV, an essential enzyme for DNA replication, as the most enriched hit in pathogenic Staphylococcus aureus cells. Subsequent topoisomerase assays confirmed the inhibition of DNA decatenation in the presence of indolin-2-one nitroimidazole with an activity comparable to ciprofloxacin, a known inhibitor of this enzyme. Furthermore, we determined significantly increased redox potentials of indolin-2-one nitroimidazoles compared to classic 5-nitroimidazoles such as metronidazole, which facilitates in vivo reduction. Overall, this study unravels that indolin-2-one functionalized nitroimidazoles feature an unexpected dual MoA, which impairs resistance development. Given the clinical application of this compound class, the new mechanism could be a starting point to mitigate resistance.

### Sample Protocol
Activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) experiments: Live cells of S. aureus were treated with activity-based probe or DMSO as control and lysed. Labeled proteins were clicked to biotin tags and enriched on avidin beads, digestes with trypsin and peptides analyzed on a Q Exacative Plus instrument operating in DDA mode.   Full proteome experiment: Live cells of S. aureus were treated with compound and control, lysed and the proteins digested (trypsin). Peptides were measured on a Orbitrap Fusion instrument in DDA mode.   Detailed protocols are given in the supporting information of the publication.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identifications were performed using MaxQuant 1.6.17.0 software with Andromeda as search engine using following parameters: Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, trypsin (without N-terminal cleavage to proline) as the proteolytic enzyme with max. of 2 missed cleavages. Label-free quantification (LFQ) mode was performed with a minimum ratio count of 2. Searches were performed with the Uniprot database for S. aureus NCTC8325 (taxon identifier: 93061, downloaded on 13.05.2021). The “match between runs” (0.7 min match and 20 min alignment time window) and second peptide identification options were activated. All other parameters were used as pre-set in the software. Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus 1.6.2.2. LFQ intensities were log2(x) transformed. Putative contaminants, reverse peptides and peptides only identified by site were deleted. Valid values were filtered for three in at least one group and a missing values imputation was performed over the total matrix (width 0.3, downshift 1.8). A two-sample student`s t-test with permutation-based FDR (0.05) and the significance cut-off was set at p-value = 0.05 (-log10(p-value) = 1.3) and an enrichment factor of 2 (log2(x) = 1) or 4 (log2(x) = 2) as indicated in the plots.

### Publication Abstract
Nitroimidazoles such as metronidazole are used as anti-infective drugs against anaerobic bacteria. Upon <i>in vivo</i> reduction of the nitro group, reactive radicals damage DNA and proteins in the absence of oxygen. Unexpectedly, a recent study of nitroimidazoles linked to an indolin-2-one substituent revealed potent activities against aerobic bacteria. This suggests a different, yet undiscovered mode of action (MoA). To decipher this MoA, we first performed whole proteome analysis of compound-treated cells, revealing an upregulation of bacteriophage-associated proteins, indicative of DNA damage. Since DNA binding of the compound was not observed, we applied activity-based protein profiling (ABPP) for direct target discovery. Labeling studies revealed topoisomerase IV, an essential enzyme for DNA replication, as the most enriched hit in pathogenic <i>Staphylococcus aureus</i> cells. Subsequent topoisomerase assays confirmed the inhibition of DNA decatenation in the presence of indolin-2-one nitroimidazole with an activity comparable to ciprofloxacin, a known inhibitor of this enzyme. Furthermore, we determined significantly increased redox potentials of indolin-2-one nitroimidazoles compared to classic 5-nitroimidazoles such as metronidazole, which facilitates <i>in vivo</i> reduction. Overall, this study unravels that indolin-2-one-functionalized nitroimidazoles feature an unexpected dual MoA: first, the direct inhibition of the topoisomerase IV and second the classic nitroimidazole MoA of reductive bioactivation leading to damaging reactive species. Importantly, this dual MoA impairs resistance development. Given the clinical application of this compound class, the new mechanism could be a starting point to mitigate resistance.

### Keywords
Target-id, Antibiotics, Abpp

### Affiliations
TU Muenchen Center for Functional Protein Assemblies Department of Chemistry Chair for Organic Chemistry II
TU München

### Submitter
Nina Bach

### Lab Head
Dr Stephan A. Sieber
TU Muenchen Center for Functional Protein Assemblies Department of Chemistry Chair for Organic Chemistry II


