### Accession
PXD024320

### Title
SILAC-based quantitative proteomics of cancer cells treated with the anti-tumor antibody 14F7

### Description
An investigation of the effect of humanized 14F7 on HeLa cells using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in combination with LC-MS and microscopy.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells were cultured for at least five cell doublings in media either containing 13C- and 15N-labeled L-arginine and 13C-labeled L-lysine or media containing unlabeled L-arginine and L-lysine amino acids. HeLa cell lysates from each labeling, heavy and light, were mixed 1:1 and subjected to SDS-PAGE. Each Coomassie G-250 stained SDS-PAGE gel lane was cut into 12 slices, which were in-gel digested using 0.1 µg of trypsin in 25 µl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 7.8. After micropurification using µ-C18 ZipTips, the peptides were dried in a SpeedVac and dissolved in 10 µl 1% formic acid, 5% acetonitrile in water. Half of the volume was injected into an Ultimate 3000 nanoLC system connected to a linear quadrupole ion trap-orbitrap mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. For liquid chromatography separation, an Acclaim PepMap 100 column capillary of 50 cm bed length was used. The flow rate was 0.3 μl/min, with a solvent gradient of 7% B to 35% B in 110 minutes. Solvent A was aqueous 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B aqueous 90% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent mode to automatically switch between Orbitrap-MS and LTQ-MS/MS acquisition.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification and quantification were performed with MaxQuant69 (v.1.2.2.5) utilizing the Andromeda search engine70 with the IPI human database (v.3.68 – 87.061 human sequences) including common contaminants. For estimation of the false discovery rate (FDR), that is the rate of falsely discovered proteins in our dataset, we included the reversed sequences into the database search. All hits to the reversed database could thus be regarded as false hits. By restricting the number of matches to this database to only 1% of total matches, we thus proceeded with an FDR of 1% to ensure reliable protein identification. For quantification, at least two quantification events were required per protein, and we further required the proteins to be quantified in at least 2 of 3 replicates. All normalized protein ratios were subject to z-statistics for estimation of ratio significances, and a Benjamini-Hochberg correction for multiple hypothesis testing was applied according to Cox et. al. 69. Proteins with corrected p-values < 0.001 and a minimum fold change of 2.5 were regarded differentially altered. Functional annotation was performed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources version 6.736, 37 available at http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov/ using whole genome (Homo sapiens) as background. The STRING database (http://string-db.org/) (version 9.1) provides known and predicted protein associations resulting in networks covering >1100 organisms and was used to visualize protein-protein interactions between the regulated proteins and their interaction partners.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neugc gm3, Anti-tumor antibody, Silac, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Oslo
Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Paula  Bousquet

### Lab Head
Dr Ute Krengel
Department of Chemistry, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway


