### Accession
PXD012833

### Title
Transfer of antigen target into CAR T cells via trogocytosis

### Description
To characterize transfer of molecules from target cells into CAR T cells via trogocytosis we cultured NALM-6 leukemia cell line expressing a CD19-mCherry fusion protein with CAR T cells.  NALM6-CD19-mCherry were loaded with heavy amino acid and cocultured with CAR T cells for 1 hour. CAR T cells were next sorted into two fractions, mCherry-positive (TrogPos), and -negative (TrogNeg). Proteomics analysis revealed the presence of targeted antigen (CD19) in the TrogPos only.

### Sample Protocol
NALM6 cells transduced to express CD19-mCherry fusion protein were grown in RPMI 1640 containing stable isotope 13C6 L-lysin (SILAC Protein Quantitation Kit-RPMI 1640, Thermo Scientific) for 7 days before processing to co-culture with CAR T cells.  CAR T cells cultured with light amino acid were cultured briefly (1 hour) with NALM6-CD19-mcherry and singlet  mCherry-positive (TrogPos) and -negative (TrogNeg) were sorted by flow cytometry.  Cells were lysed (8M Urea in 200mM EPPS pH 8.4 lysis buffer containing Roche protease inhibitor cocktail), sonicated (1 min), centrifuged (8000 x g for 10 min at 4°C) then the supernatant transferred to new tubes and protein concentration determined by BCA (Pierce). Lysates were reduced with DTT (37°C, 1hr), alkylated with iodoacetamide  (RT, 30 min, dark), and quenched with an additional 5mM DTT (RT, 15 min, dark). In-solution Lys-C digestion (E:S 1:100) was performed at 37°C for 6 hours, then the urea concentration diluted to 1.3 M with buffer and trypsin was added (1:100) and further incubated another 16hr at 37°C. Enzyme activity quenched with TFA and samples frozen (-80C). Based on the BCA assay, 10ug aliquots were removed from each sample for fractionation. To fractionate the mixture of peptides, a 5-cutter method based on the StageTip technique of Rappsibler using C18 disk (3M Empore Solid Phase Extraction Disk, #2315) was used. Prior to loading samples, StageTips were conditioned with 50uL washes of acetonitrile, 50% acetonitrile in 2.5 mM ammonium bicarbonate, then 2.5mM ammonium bicarbonate. After washing, fractions 1-5 were eluted with 30uL of 8, 15, 22, 30, and 50% acetonitrile in 2.5mM ammonium bicarbonate. Fractions were frozen, lyophilized to dryness, and reconstituted in 5uL of 0.1% formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis.  Fractions were analyzed by Microcapillary LC coupled (Waters NanoAcquity, 100-μm i.d. × 10cm C18 column, 1.7 um BEH130, configured with a trap column) to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were eluted at 300 nL/min using a 4hr acetonitrile gradient (2-50% acetonitrile in water with 0.1% formic acid). The QE Plus was operated in automatic, data-dependent MS/MS mode with one MS full scan (380–1800 m/z) at 70,000 mass resolution and up to ten MS/MS scans at 17,500 resolution, an isolation window of 1.5 amu and normalized collision energy of 27. AGC was set to 3×106 for MS1 and 5×104 and 60ms max IT for MS2.

### Data Protocol
MS data was processed using MaxQuant version 1.5.5.30 and the Uniprot human protein sequence database (downloaded 2017/08/01). Carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification and the following variable modifications allowed: oxidation (M), N-terminal protein acetylation, deamidation (N and Q), phosphorylation (S,T,Y). Search parameters specified an MS tolerance of 8ppm, an MS/MS tolerance at 40 ppm and full trypsin digestion, allowing for up to two missed cleavages. Peptides were required to be at least 7 amino acids in length with 1% false discovery rates (FDRs) calculated at peptides level.

### Publication Abstract
Chimeric antigen receptors (CARs) are synthetic antigen receptors that reprogram T cell specificity, function and persistence<sup>1</sup>. Patient-derived CAR T cells have demonstrated remarkable efficacy against a range of B-cell malignancies<sup>1-3</sup>, and the results of early clinical trials suggest activity in multiple myeloma<sup>4</sup>. Despite high complete response rates, relapses occur in a large fraction of patients; some of these are antigen-negative and others are antigen-low<sup>1,2,4-9</sup>. Unlike the mechanisms that result in complete and permanent antigen loss<sup>6,8,9</sup>, those that lead to escape of antigen-low tumours remain unclear. Here, using mouse models of leukaemia, we show that CARs provoke reversible antigen loss through trogocytosis, an active process in which the target antigen is transferred to T cells, thereby decreasing target density on tumour cells and abating T cell activity by promoting fratricide T cell killing and T cell exhaustion. These mechanisms affect both CD28- and 4-1BB-based CARs, albeit differentially, depending on antigen density. These dynamic features can be offset by cooperative killing and combinatorial targeting to augment tumour responses to immunotherapy.

### Keywords
T cell, Leukemia, Cd19, Trogocytosis, Car t cell

### Affiliations
MSKCC
Director, Center for Cell Engineering, Sloan Kettering Institute

### Submitter
Zhuoning Li

### Lab Head
Dr Michel Sadelain
Director, Center for Cell Engineering, Sloan Kettering Institute


