### Accession
PXD007266

### Title
Protein patterns of Antrodia camphorata arthroconidia

### Description
The protein patterns of arthroconidia after 24 h of incubation in the presence or absence of vanillin were compared via isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
The freeze-dried protein powders in each sample were resuspended in triethylammonium bicarbonate after reductive alkylation. Then, proteins were digested by trypsin with enzyme to substrate ratio of 1:50 (w/w) at 37°C for 15 h. Furthermore, the digested peptides were labeled with iTRAQ Reagent Kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster city, CA, USA), using 114-tag, 115-tag, 116-tag, and 117-tag for the culture samples, respectively. The iTRAQ-labeled samples were analyzed by Majorbio Bio-pharm Technology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China), with a NanoAquity UPLC system connected to Q Exactive hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
The amino acid sequences of identified proteins from iTRAQ were matched to the local protein database, and the GO (http://geneontology.org/) and KEGG (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/) databases to search protein candidates which might be involved in the germination of A. camphorata arthroconidia.

### Publication Abstract
Wild fruiting bodies of medicinal mushroom <i>Antrodia camphorata</i> are only found on the endemic species bull camphor tree, <i>Cinnamomum kanehirae</i>, in Taiwan. Despite the evident importance of the host components in promoting the growth of <i>A. camphorata</i>, insights into the underlying mechanisms are still lacking. Here, we first evaluated effects of the compounds from <i>C. kanehirai, C. camphora</i>, and <i>A. camphorata</i>, and their structural analogs on the germination rate of <i>A. camphorata</i> arthroconidia. Among the 54 tested compounds, vanillin (4-hydroxy-3-methoxybenzaldehyde) was determined as the optimum germination promoter, while <i>o</i>-vanillin and 1-octen-3-ol as major negative regulators of arthroconidia germination. Second, the protein patterns of arthroconidia after 24 h of incubation in the presence or absence of vanillin were compared via isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ)-based proteomics. Via bioinformatic analysis, it was found that 61 proteins might relate to the germination of arthroconidia, in which 16 proteins might involve in two potential protein kinase A (PKA) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathways in the vanillin-promoted germination of <i>A. camphorata</i> arthroconidia. Last, the mRNA expression levels of the 16 germination-related genes in the potential PKA and MAPK signaling pathways were analyzed by quantitative real time PCR. Together, our results are beneficial for the elucidation of molecular mechanisms underlying the germination of <i>A. camphorata</i> arthroconidia.

### Keywords
Arthroconidia, Itraq, Antrodia camphorata

### Affiliations
Jiangnan University

### Submitter
Zhen-Ming Lu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhen-Ming Lu
Jiangnan University


