### Accession
PXD008565

### Title
AELs suppress ABA signaling and responses by phosphorylating and destabilizing ABA receptors PYR/PYLs

### Description
Unveiling the signal transduction of phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA) will be greatly helpful to improve plant responses to stressful environment. ABA signaling is perceived and mediated by multi-member receptor PYR/PYLs, while whose post-translational modification, especially phosphorylation, is largely unknown. Here we demonstrated that Arabidopsis EL1-like (AEL), a casein kinase that regulates various physiological processes, phosphorylates PYR/PYLs and stimulates whose ubiquitination and degradation, leading to the suppressed ABA responses. Arabidopsis ael triple mutants display hypersensitive responses to ABA treatment, which is consistent with the suppressed degradation of PYR/PYL proteins. PYR/PYLs are phosphorylated in vivo and mutation of the conserved AEL-phosphorylation sites results in the reduced phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and degradation of PYR/PYLs, and hence the enhanced ABA responses. Our studies demonstrate the crucial roles of AEL-mediated phosphorylation in regulating the stability and function of PYR/PYLs and provide informative clues for elucidating the functional mechanism of ABA through regulating PYR/PYL receptors.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for mass spectrometry analyses The Flag-PYL1 fusion protein was purified from seedlings overexpressing Flag-PYL1 by the Flag-trap IP method. Plant tissues were ground in liquid N2 and homogenized in IP buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM PMSF, 1 Mm EDTA, and 1  Protease inhibitor cocktail). After centrifuging at 14,000g for 10 min at 4oC, the supernatant was mixed with Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (M8823, Sigma) and rotated at 4oC for 2 h. Then beads were pelleted and washed four times with ice-cold IP buffer (without protease inhibitors). The bound proteins were eluted from the beads with 2X SDS-PAGE sample buffer by heating at 95oC for 10 min. Protein samples were fractionated by10% SDS-PAGE GEL (BioRad) and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue. Bands of interest were excised and cut into small pieces. After dehydration, proteins in the gel slice were reduced by DTT (10 mM). IAA (55 mM) was then added to alkylate the reduced sulfydryl. After washing and dehydration with acetonitrile, the proteins were digested with trypsin and subjected to MS analyses.   LC-MS/MS Tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) was performed on an Orbitrap Fusion™ Lumos™ Tribrid™ mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Flag-PYL1 protein were lyophilized and redissolved in 15 μl solvent (2% CH3CN/0.1% FA in ddH2O). 3 μl samples were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 precolumn (100 μm X 2 cm, C18, 5 μm, Thermo Scientific) and eluted on an Acclaim PepMap 100 analytical column (75 μm X 15 cm, C18, 3 μm, Thermo Scientific) with 60 min gradient. 0.1% FA and CH3CN/H2O(4:1, v/v) with 0.1% FA were used as mobile phase A and B, respectively. The loading buffer was same as the mobile phase A. The gradient was: 5 min 4% B, 31 min linear gradient from 4% B to 30% B, 7 min linear gradient from 30% B to 50% B, 3 min linear gradient from 50% B to 99% B. After washing the column for 4 min with 99% B, the buffer was decreased to 4% B in 1 min and the column was reconditioned with initial gradient for 9 mins. The column temperature was 35oC.The flow rates through the trap column and analytical column were 3 μl/min and 0.3 μl/min, respectively. MS/MS experiment was operated in the data-dependent mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans with a cycle time of 3 second. The full ms scans were operated over a mass range of m/z 350-1800 with detection in the orbitrap (120K resolution). Fragmentation of ions was achieved with high energy collisional dissociation (HCD, 30% collision energy) and the spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (30K resolution) with a maximum injection time of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS data processing Two methods were used for data processing. Firstly, Proteome Discoverer software suite (v2.1, Thermo Fisher Scientific) were used for peptide identification and Sequest HT was used to search for phosphorylation sites . The data were searched against the homemade database with protein sequence of PYL1( UniProtKB - Q8VZS8) using a target false discovery rate (FDR) of 1%.At the MS1 level, a precursor ion mass tolerance of 10 ppm was used, and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. The fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.02 Da for the Orbitrap MS2 detection methods. Oxidation of methionine, and N-terminal protein acetylation were defined as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation on cysteines was set as a fixed modification. Phosphorylation in serine, threonine was also set as variable modification in the analysis. Phosphorylation site localization was calculated using the phosphoRS algorithm. Quantitation data were retrieved from the “Precursor ion area detector” node from Proteome Discoverer (v2.1) using 2 ppm mass tolerance for the peptide extracted ion current. All data were acquired with Xcalibur software 4.0 and data analysis was performed on Thermo Proteome Discoverer software 2.1. Secondly, Peaks Studio 8.5 software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc) were also used to analyze RAW MS/MS data with against the homemade database with protein sequence of PYL1( UniProtKB - Q8VZS8).The search parameters were conducted with carbamidomethylation (C, +57.02) as a fixed modification and oxidation (M,+15.99) and phosphorylation (S/T/Y, +79.96) were selected as variable modifications. The other parameters used were as follows: parention mass tolerance,20.0 ppm; fragment ion mass tolerance, 0.1Da; enzyme, trypsin; max missed cleavages, 2; maximum allowed variable post translational modification (PTM) per peptide, 3. False discovery rate (FDR), was used at≤1.0% at both protein and peptide levels. The peptide identification was accepted only if at least two spectra were matched to this peptide sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis | aba | ael (arabidopsis el1-like) | pyr/pyls | phosphorylation | degradation

### Affiliations
National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China
CAS SIPPE

### Submitter
li qu

### Lab Head
Dr Hongwei Xue
National Key Laboratory of Plant Molecular Genetics, CAS Center for Excellence in Molecular Plant Sciences, Institute of Plant Physiology and Ecology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese academy of Sciences, 200032 Shanghai, China


