### Accession
PXD033203

### Title
Solar exposed skin induces sex-dependent food-seeking behavior

### Description
Considering the distinct physiologies of men and women, it stands to reason that they would react differently to solar exposure, but such a study was never  conducted before. Here we show that solar exposure induces food-seeking behavior, food intake and weight gain in males, but not in females, by epidemiological analysis, blood-serum proteomics, UVB-exposed mouse behavioral models and human cohort questionnaires . The underlying mechanism entails increased ghrelin secretion from skin adipocytes into the circulation. UVB irradiation led to p53 transcriptional activation of ghrelin in skin adipocytes, with mouse conditional p53-knockout abolishing UVB-induced ghrelin expression and food-seeking behavior. In females, estrogen interferes with the p53–chromatin interaction on the ghrelin promotor, thus blocking ghrelin and, consequently, food-seeking behavior in response to UVB exposure. These results identify the skin as a major mediator of human physiology in furless animals and may lead to therapeutic opportunities for sex-based treatment of endocrine-related diseases.

### Sample Protocol
The samples were percipitated on 90% Ethanol, in 900C for 10min followed by 10000rpm centrifugation. The supernatant was dried,  trypsinyzed desalted and analyzed by LC-MS/MS on Q exactive HF

### Data Protocol
The data was analyzed with MaxQuant 1.5.2.8  vs the Human Uniprot database with FDR <0.01.  Normalization was done by the 5 most intense proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Solar exposure, Food-seeking, Serum

### Affiliations
Technion
Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler School of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel-Aviv, Israel  69978

### Submitter
Tamar Ziv

### Lab Head
Dr Carmit Levy
Department of Human Genetics and Biochemistry Sackler School of Medicine Tel Aviv University Tel-Aviv, Israel  69978


