### Accession
PXD026796

### Title
A novel SNF2 ATPase complex in Trypanosoma brucei with a role in H2A.Z-mediated chromatin remodelling

### Description
A cascade of histone acetylation events with subsequent incorporation of a histone H2A variant plays an essential part in transcription regulation in various model organisms. A key player in this cascade is the chromatin remodellling complex SWR1, which replaces the canonical histone H2A with its variant H2A.Z. Transcriptional regulation of polycistronic transcription units in the unicellular parasite Trypanosoma brucei has been shown to be highly dependent on acetylation of H2A.Z, which is mediated by the histone-acetyltransferase HAT2. The chromatin remodellling complex, which mediates H2A.Z incorporation is not known and an SWR1 orthologue in trypanosomes has not yet been reported. In this study, we identified and characterised an SWR1-like remodelller complex in T. brucei that is responsible for Pol II-dependent transcriptional regulation. Bioinformatic analysis of potential SNF2 DEAD/Box helicases, the key component of SWR1 complexes, identified a 1211 amino acids-long protein that exhibits key structural characteristics of the SWR1 subfamily. Systematic protein-protein interaction analysis revealed the existence of a novel complex exhibiting key features of an SWR1-like chromatin remodelller. RNAi-mediated depletion of the ATPase subunit of this complex resulted in a significant reduction of H2A.Z incorporation at transcription start sites and a subsequent decrease of steady-state mRNA levels. Furthermore, depletion of SWR1 and RNA-polymerase II (Pol II) caused massive chromatin condensation. The potential function of several proteins associated with the SWR1-like complex and with HAT2, the key factor of H2A.Z incorporation, is discussed.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were run on a Novex Bis-Tris 4-12% gradient gel (Thermo) with ‘3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid’ (MOPS) buffer (Thermo) for 10 min at 180 V. The gel was stained with coomassie blue G250 dye (Biozym) prior to cutting each gel lane into pieces, gel lanes were minced and destained in 50% EtOH/water. The gel pieces were dehydrated with pure acetone, reduced with 10 mM DTT (Sigma Aldrich) and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma Aldrich) in the dark. The dried gel pieces were rehydrated with 1 μgM trypsin for an in-gGel digestion overnight at 37°C. At the following day the digested peptides were desalted and stored on StageTips (96) for further analysis. Using a C18 reverse phase column that was previously packed in-house with Reprosil C18 (Dr. Maisch GmbH) the peptides were separated along a 240 105 min gradient on using an EasyLC 1000 UHPLC system. The column was enclosed into a column oven (Sonation) and peptides were sprayed into a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo), which was operating in a data-dependent top10 acquisition mode using a top10 method. Spray voltage was set to approximately 2.4 kilovolt (kV).

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.2) (97) using the Trypanosoma brucei protein database downloaded from TriTrypDB and activated LFQ quantitation. Contaminants, reverse hits, and protein groups that were only identified by site and protein groups with less than two peptides (one of them unique) were removed prior to bioinformatics analysis. For enrichment, the median of the log2 LFQ intensity values of the replicates was calculated and the p-value was determined by a Welch t-test between the IP and the control sample. The volcano plot was plotted using the R environment.

### Publication Abstract
A cascade of histone acetylation events with subsequent incorporation of a histone H2A variant plays an essential part in transcription regulation in various model organisms. A key player in this cascade is the chromatin remodelling complex SWR1, which replaces the canonical histone H2A with its variant H2A.Z. Transcriptional regulation of polycistronic transcription units in the unicellular parasite Trypanosoma brucei has been shown to be highly dependent on acetylation of H2A.Z, which is mediated by the histone-acetyltransferase HAT2. The chromatin remodelling complex which mediates H2A.Z incorporation is not known and an SWR1 orthologue in trypanosomes has not yet been reported. In this study, we identified and characterised an SWR1-like remodeller complex in T. brucei that is responsible for Pol II-dependent transcriptional regulation. Bioinformatic analysis of potential SNF2 DEAD/Box helicases, the key component of SWR1 complexes, identified a 1211 amino acids-long protein that exhibits key structural characteristics of the SWR1 subfamily. Systematic protein-protein interaction analysis revealed the existence of a novel complex exhibiting key features of an SWR1-like chromatin remodeller. RNAi-mediated depletion of the ATPase subunit of this complex resulted in a significant reduction of H2A.Z incorporation at transcription start sites and a subsequent decrease of steady-state mRNA levels. Furthermore, depletion of SWR1 and RNA-polymerase II (Pol II) caused massive chromatin condensation. The potential function of several proteins associated with the SWR1-like complex and with HAT2, the key factor of H2A.Z incorporation, is discussed.

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz
Quantitative Proteomics
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB)

### Submitter
F Butter

### Lab Head
Dr Falk Butter
IMB, Ackermannweg 4, 55128 Mainz


