### Accession
PXD047347

### Title
DCAF1-based PROTACs with activity against clinically validated targets overcoming intrinsic- and acquired-degrader resistance

### Description
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) mediates protein level through small molecule induced redirection of E3 ligases to ubiquitinate neo-substrates and mark them for proteasomal degradation. TPD has recently emerged as a key modality in drug discovery. So far only a few ligases have been utilized for TPD. Interestingly, the workhorse ligase CRBN has been observed to be down-regulated in settings of resistance to immunomodulatory inhibitory drugs (IMiDs). Here we show that the essential E3 ligase receptor DCAF1 can be harnessed for TPD utilizing a selective, non-covalent DCAF1 binder. We con firm that this binder can be functionalized into an efficient DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC. Chemical and genetic rescue experiments validate specific degradation via the CRL4DCAF1  E3 ligase. Additionally, a dasatinib-based DCAF1 PROTAC successfully degrades cytosolic and membrane-bound tyrosine kinases. A potent and selective DCAF1-BTK-PROTAC (DBt-10) degrades BTK in cells with acquired resistance to CRBN-BTK-PROTACs while the DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC (DBr-1) provides an alternative strategy to tackle intrinsic resistance to VHL-degrader, highlighting DCAF1-PROTACS as a promising strategy to overcome ligase mediated resistance in clinical settings.

### Sample Protocol
Lysate generation. HEK293T cell pellets were suspended in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.8% NP-40, 5% glycerol, and 1x protease inhibitors (Thermo)) at 2x pellet volume. The samples were sonicated on ice for 30 seconds at 20% amplitude with a 2 second pulse ON and 3 second pulse OFF. Cell debris was removed by centrifugation at 20,000 x g for 20 minutes at 4°C. Protein concentration was determined by BCA (Pierce) and diluted down to 5 mg/mL with pulldown buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 1 mM DTT, 0.4% NP-40, 1x protease inhibitors (Thermo Fisher Scientific)).    Chemical proteomics pulldowns experiment. 1 mL of 5 mg/mL HEK293T lysates was treated with 100 μM competition ligand or DMSO for 1 h at 4°C in replicate. Following incubation, the lysates were incubated with 35 μL of affinity matrix at 4°C for 4. Unbound proteins on affinity matrix were washed and bound proteins were eluted with 2X LDS sample buffer (NuPAGE, Invitrogen) containing 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 25 mM iodoacetamide, and processed through detergent removal columns (Thermo). In-solution digestion and isobaric labeling with TMT reagents for the four samples (126/130 for (16); 127/131 for the DMSO) was performed according to standard procedures. Equal amounts of labeled peptides were pooled and separated by high pH reverse phase separation (RP10) using a Dionex UltiMate 3000 (HPLC) system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an Xbridge C18 3.5 μm 2.1 x 150 mm HPLC column (Waters). Resulting fractions were pooled to yield 12 final fractions which were dried, and reconstituted in 0.1% FA / 2% acetonitrile for nLC-MS/MS analysis using a EASY nLC1200 system using a 1 cm online custom trap and 75 µm inner diameter separation column (ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 3 µm material; Dr. Maisch GmbH; 90 min water-acetonitrile gradient containing 0.1% formic acid) coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). MS1 spectra were acquired at 120k resolution in the Orbitrap and MS2 spectra were acquired in higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) mode at 30k resolution in the Orbitrap (isolation width 0.8, collision energy 40%).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed using an in-house data analysis pipeline utilizing Mascot (Matrix Science), Transproteomic pipeline v3.3sqall (Institute for Systems Biology) and the Homo sapiens UniProt protein (downloaded 2017) database supplemented with common contaminants. Peptide mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, fragment tolerance set to 0.1 Da and trypsin cleavage specificity allowing for 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, and TMT-modification of N-termini and lysine residues were set as variable modifications.  Peptide and protein data validation was performed using PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet modules in TPP and high confidence protein identifications were reported using a false positive prediction of <1% by ProteinProphet. Peptide quantitation was achieved using the sum of TMT reporter ion intensities for spectral matches to a given peptide sequence and only peptide-to-spectrum matches that were unique assignments to a given identified protein within the total dataset were considered for protein quantitation. Protein fold changes were calculated as median peptide fold change and p-values were calculated using a one-way T-test (arbitrarily set to 1 for non-significant single peptide quantitations) and adjusted using the Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate (FDR).  Only proteins with 2 or more quantified peptides are reported in the final dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted protein degradation (TPD) mediates protein level through small molecule induced redirection of E3 ligases to ubiquitinate neo-substrates and mark them for proteasomal degradation. TPD has recently emerged as a key modality in drug discovery. So far only a few ligases have been utilized for TPD. Interestingly, the workhorse ligase CRBN has been observed to be downregulated in settings of resistance to immunomodulatory inhibitory drugs (IMiDs). Here we show that the essential E3 ligase receptor DCAF1 can be harnessed for TPD utilizing a selective, non-covalent DCAF1 binder. We confirm that this binder can be functionalized into an efficient DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC. Chemical and genetic rescue experiments validate specific degradation via the CRL4<sup>DCAF1</sup> E3 ligase. Additionally, a dasatinib-based DCAF1 PROTAC successfully degrades cytosolic and membrane-bound tyrosine kinases. A potent and selective DCAF1-BTK-PROTAC (DBt-10) degrades BTK in cells with acquired resistance to CRBN-BTK-PROTACs while the DCAF1-BRD9 PROTAC (DBr-1) provides an alternative strategy to tackle intrinsic resistance to VHL-degrader, highlighting DCAF1-PROTACS as a promising strategy to overcome ligase mediated resistance in clinical settings.

### Keywords
Chemical proteomics

### Affiliations
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research
Novartis Biomedical Research

### Submitter
Jason Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Markus Schirle
Novartis Institutes for Biomedical Research


