### Accession
PXD025838

### Title
Proteomic analysis of induced pluripotent stem cell-derived kidney organoids

### Description
Kidney organoids were generated from a control iPSC line using a previously published protocol (https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2016.098). Organoids were collected at three timepoints during the protocol (day 14, 18 and 25) and prepared for proteomic analyses. The focus of the study was to define the proteomic composition of kidney organoids during differentiation with a particular emphasis on the extracellular matrix and its comparison to in vivo systems. Following a ample fractionation and matrix enrichment strategy, samples were prepared for high resolution label-free tandem mass spectrometry to define the proteomic composition of human kidney organoids.

### Sample Protocol
Kidney organoids (n=3 differentiations per timepoint, minimum 12 organoids per sample) were processed by serial chemical fractionation to enrich for extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. Firstly, samples were homogenised in Tris-buffer (10 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 25 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, supplemented with a protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifuged to collect soluble cellular proteins (Fraction 1). The remaining pellet was incubated in 20 mM Na4OH in PBS-Triton to disrupt cell-matrix interactions, then centrifuged again to yield Fraction 2. The remaining pellet was treated  with benzonase (0.4ug) for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by inactivation at 65°C for 20 minutes. The sample was centrifuged, the supernatant removed, and the pellet was then suspended in S-trap lysis buffer (5% SDS in 50 mM TEAB pH 7.5) to yield the ECM fraction (Fraction 3). Fractions 1 and 2 were combined (1:1) into a cellular fraction. For in-solution digestion, Fraction 3 samples were sonicated using a Covaris LE220+ Focused Ultrasonicator (Covaris). Extracted proteins were reduced with 5 mM DTT at 60 °C for 10 min under agitation (at 800 rpm), then alkylated with 15 mM IA for 10 min at RT in the dark and had 5 mM DTT added to a 10 mM final concentration to quench the residual alkylation reaction. Samples were centrifuged for 10 min at 1400 x g, then acidified with 1.2% formic acid and transferred to S-Trap Micro Spin columns (Protifi) equipped with collecting 2.0 ml plastic microtubes to retain the flowthrough. Detergents and salt contaminants were removed by centrifugation (4000 x g for 2 min) and proteins trapped in the S-trap resin were digested for 1h at 47°C with 0.12 g/l trypsin prepared in 50 mM TEAB buffer. Peptides were washed with 50 mM TEAB, centrifuged, washed with 0.1% formic acid, centrifuged again, and finally eluted from the S-trap columns with 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid solution. Peptide samples were incubated for 5 min at RT with 5.0 mg OligoTM R3 reverse-phase beads (1133903, Applied Biosystems) prepared in 50% ACN, in a 96-well plate equipped with 0.2 m polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) membrane filter (3504, Corning). After centrifuging, the bead-bound peptides were washed twice with 0.1% formic acid, centrifuged again, and eluted from the filter using 30% ACN in 0.1% formic acid. Retrieved peptides were dried by vacuum centrifugation, then resuspended in 5% ACN in 0.1% formic acid and sent to the Bio-MS Core Research Facility (Faculty of Biology, Medicine and Health, University of Manchester, UK) for mass spectrometry analysis. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent acquisition. Peptides were selected for fragmentation automatically by data dependent acquisition. Raw spectra data were acquired and analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software v.2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
MS data was searched against SwissProt and TrEMBL databases (v. 2018_01O) using SEQUEST HT and Mascot search tools. For the search we use the following criteria: tryptic peptides with up to 1 missed cleavage, mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine, proline and lysine, and N-terminal acetylation as dynamic modifications. Peptide-spectrum match, peptide and protein false discovery rates were set to 1%, and protein validation was performed using Target/Decoy strategy. Protein abundances were determined by label-free quantification based on precursor ion intensity.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Enrichment, Kidney organoid, Extracellular matrix, Mass spectrometry, Kidney, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
University of Manchester
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.

### Submitter
Louise Hopkinson

### Lab Head
Dr Rachel Lennon
Wellcome Centre for Cell-matrix biology, University of Manchester, UK.


