### Accession
PXD014673

### Title
Integrative Structural Characterization of the Human Canonical and Non-canonical Cop9 Signalosome Complexes

### Description
The COP9 signalosome (CSN) is an evolutionarily conserved protein complex that functions as a deneddylase to inactivate Cullin-RING E3 ligases for controlling protein ubiquitination. CSN possesses structural flexibility that is important for its activation upon binding to a diverse array of CRLs. The canonical and non-canonical CSN complexes consist of 8 (CSN1-8) and 9 (CSN1-9) subunits, respectively. Although CSN9 is not essential for CSN assembly and function, it appears to be important in non-catalytic regulation of CRLs by CSN. Here we employed a combinatory cross-linking mass spectrometry (XL-MS) approach to generate the largest PPI maps of human CSN complexes, which significantly enhanced the precision of integrative structural modeling. The resulting integrative structures allowed us not only to elucidate architectures of both complexes, but also to assess CSN structural dynamics that was not described in the crystal structure. In addition, we have determined CSN9 docking sites and its impact on the CSN structure. While CSN9 binding did not induce global conformational changes, it triggered subunit local reorientations that may be associated with CSN9 involvement in CSN-mediated steric regulation of CRLs.

### Sample Protocol
Expression and Purification of CSN complexes  Eight of total nine subunits of human COP9 signalosome (CSN) complex, except CSN5, were over-expressed and purified from E. coli. Two three-subunit subcomplexes, CSN1-2-3 and CSN4-6-7, were prepared through co-expression. Briefly, CSN2 was subcloned into a modified pGEX4T1 (Amersham Biosciences) vector containing a glutathione S-transferase (GST) tag followed by a Tobacco etch virus (TEV) protease cleavage site, while both CSN1 and CSN3 were subcloned into a modified pET15b (Novagen) vector containing a chloramphenicol resistance cassette. After co-expression in BL21(DE3) (Novagen), the CSN1-2-3 formed a complex and was purified by glutathione-affinity chromatography. Following TEV cleavage, the CSN1-2-3 subcomplex was further purified by anion exchange and gel filtration chromatography. CSN4-6-7 was prepared in the same way. CSN8 and CSN9 were subcloned into the pGEX4T1 vector individually and subjected to the same purification procedure. Recombinant full length CSN5 was prepared from insect cells using baculovirus expression system. Two CSN complexes, with or without CSN9, were reconstituted by incubating the purified subcomplexes and individual subunits in equimolar ratio and polished by size exclusion chromatography. Neddylated Cul1-Rbx1 complex was prepared as described previously {Yu, 2015}.  Chemical Cross-linking of CSN Complexes Affinity purified human CSN complex with or without CSN9 were cross-linked with DSSO, DHSO, or BMSO, respectively. Each CSN complex was reacted with a selected cross-linker at their optimized molar ratios (protein to linker) respectively: DSSO (1:250), BMSO (1:400) and DHSO (1:30) {Kao, 2011; Gutierrez, 2016; Gutierrez, 2018}. DMTMM was used to activate acidic residues for DHSO cross-linking {Gutierrez, 2016}. All reactions were performed for 1 h at room temperature. The resulting cross-linked proteins were digested by lys-C and trypsin, and the resulting peptides were separated by peptide SEC to enrich cross-linked peptides for MS analysis as previously described {Gutierrez, 2016; Gutierrez, 2018}.  LC MSn Analysis of Cross-linked Peptides LC MSn analysis was performed using a Thermo Scientific™ Dionex UltiMate 3000 system online coupled with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos™ mass spectrometer. A 50 cm x 75 μm Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 column was used to separate peptides over a gradient of 1% to 25% ACN in 114 mins at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Two different types of acquisition methods were utilized to maximize the identification of DSSO, DHSO and BMSO cross-linked peptides: (1) top 4 data-dependent MS3 and (2) targeted MS3 acquisition optimized for capturing DSSO, DHSO and BMSO cross-linked peptides by utilizing the mass difference between characteristic MS2 fragment ions of DSSO cross-linked peptides (−β) (i.e. Δ = T−A = βT−βA = 31.9721 Da) {Yu, 2016}.

### Data Protocol
Database Searching and Identification of Cross-linked Peptides MSn data extraction and analysis were performed in the same way as previously described {Kao, 2011}. MS3 data was subjected to a developmental version of Protein Prospector (v.5.19.1) for database searching, using Batch-Tag against limited to custom random concatenated database consisting of CSN 1-9 (18 entries) with mass tolerances for parent ions and fragment ions set as ±20 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. Trypsin or Chymotrypsin was set as the enzyme with three or four maximum missed cleavages allowed, respectively. A maximum of four variable modifications were also allowed, including protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and N-terminal conversion of glutamine to pyroglutamic acid.  Cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a constant modification except when using BMSO.  In addition, the previously defined modifications for either DSSO {Kao, 2011}, DHSO {Gutierrez, 2016}, or BMSO {Gutierrez, 2018} were also input into the search.  For DSSO cross-links, three defined modification on uncleaved lysines were chosen, which included alkene (C3H2O; +54 Da), sulfenic acid (C3H4O2S; +104 Da), and thiol (C3H2SO; +86 Da), representing cross-linker fragment moieties on lysine residues {Kao, 2011}. For DHSO cross-links, three defined modification were chosen, which included alkene (C3H4N2; +68 Da), sulfenic acid (C3H6N2SO; +118 Da), and thiol (C3H4N2S; +100 Da), representing cross-linker fragment moieties on aspartic or glutamic acid residues {Gutierrez, 2016}. For BMSO cross-links, five defined modifications representing cross-linker fragment moieties on cysteine residues were selected: alkene closed-ring (C9H10N2O3, +194.0691 Da), alkene open-ring (C9H12N2O4, +212.0797 Da), sulfenic acid closed-ring/unsaturated thiol open-ring (C9H12N2O4S, +244.0518 Da), sulfenic acid open-ring (C9H14N2O5S, +262.0623 Da), and unsaturated thiol closed-ring (C9H10N2O3S, +226.0412 Da) modifications on cysteine residues {Gutierrez, 2018}. Initial acceptance criteria for peptide identification at the MS3 level required a reported expectation value ≤ 0.18, which yielded a false discovery rate of 0.34%. The in-house program xl-Tools, a revised version of the previously developed Xl-Discoverer, was used to validate and summarize cross-linked peptides based on MSn data and database searching {Yu, 2016; Wang, 2017}. \Following integration of MSn data, no cross-links were identified involving decoy proteins. Only cross-linked peptides that were identified in more than 60% biological replicates were reported (Supplementary Tables 4 and 5). Raw data has been deposited at the MassIVE repository FTP site: ftp://MSV000080313@massive.ucsd.edu (Password: LH26SXL110416). PRM Targeted Quantitation of Cross-linked Peptides 341 PRM targets were obtained based on highly reproducible DHSO cross-linked peptides of CSNc and CSNn complexes as summarized in Supplementary Tables 4 and 5. For targeted analysis, the mass spectrometer was operated with the following settings: No survey scan collected, tMS2 resolving power 30,000, AGC target 5e4, maximum injection time 54 ms, isolation window 1 m/z, and CID normalized collision energy of 23%. A total of 341 cross-links were monitored over 3 separate targeted analyses for each sample, along with a set of 16 heavy-labeled AQUA peptides. Targeted analysis of AQUA peptides used the same settings as cross-link ions except were subjected to HCD with NCE of 30%. Transition lists based on expected cross-link fragmentation ions were generated and quantified using Skyline v.4.2.0.19072. Once exported, extracted intensities were normalized within sample sets using relative intensities of AQUA peptides based on quantified b and y ions. Target selection, MS acquisition, data extraction, analysis,

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sulfoxided based cross-linkers, Cross-linking, Ms-cleavable, Mass spectrometry, Intergrative  modeling platform (imp), Cop9 signalosme

### Affiliations
Physiology and Biophysics
Huang Lab

### Submitter
Craig Gutierrez

### Lab Head
Dr Lan Huang
Physiology and Biophysics


