### Accession
PXD022734

### Title
Oxygen sensitive regulation of TFAM linking the von Hippel-Lindau cancer syndrome to impaired mitochondrial biogenesis

### Description
The major consumers of oxygen in the cell are mitochondria. Here we identified an oxygen-sensitive regulation of TFAM, a key activator of mitochondrial transcription and replication. TFAM is hydroxylated by EglN3 on proline 53/56 and subsequently bound by the tumor suppressor von Hippel Lindau (pVHL). pVHL binding stabilizes TFAM by preventing mitochondrial LON proteolysis. Cells lacking wild-type VHL or in which EglN3 was inactivated genetically or by lack of oxygen have reduced mitochondria. All VHL cancer syndrome mutations tested, type 1, 2A, 2B, 2C, failed to bind hydroxylated TFAM, regardless of whether they have the ability to bind hydroxylated HIFa or not. In contrast, VHL-R200W polycythemia-mutation bound hydroxylated TFAM similar as wild-type VHL. VHL-R200W causes polycythemia with total absence of tumor development, despite increased HIFa signaling. Tumors of VHL related malignancies such as pheochromocytoma and renal carcinoma cells show low mitochondrial content, implicating that impaired mitochondrial biogenesis is linked to the malignancies of the VHL hereditary cancer syndrome.

### Sample Protocol
Experimental Protein extraction, proteolytic digestion and chemical labeling Cell were lysed in 500 µL of ECC buffer (50 mM Tris, pH 8; 0.5% NP-40 and 120 mM NaCl) and proteins in 200 µL of supernatant was precipitated with 800 µL of chilled acetone at -20°C overnight. Proteins (50 µg) were solubilized in 1 M urea (Sigma-Aldrich), 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 10% acetonitrile (AcN) and reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT) to a final concentration of 5 mM via incubation for 1 hour at 25°C and alkylated with iodoacetamide to a final concentration of 15 mM via incubation for 1 hour at 25°C in the dark. The excess of iodoacetamide was quenched by adding an additional 10 mM DTT. Digestion was performed with 1.5 µg trypsin (final enzyme to protein ratio 1:30) at 37°C overnight followed by additional proteolysis with 1 µg Lys-C at 37°C for 6 h. After acidification with formic acid (5% final concentration) the tryptic peptides were cleaned with C18 HyperSep Filter Plate, bed volume 40 µL (Thermo Scientific) and dried on a  speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific).  TMT-10plex reagents (Thermo Scientific) in 100 µg aliquots were dissolved in 30 µL dry AcN, scrambled and mixed with 25 µg digested samples dissolved in 70 µL of 50 mM TEAB (resulting final 30% AcN), followed by incubation at 22°C for 2 h at 450 rpm. The reaction was then quenched with 11 µL of 5% hydroxylamine at 22°C for 15 min at 450 rpm. The labeled samples were pooled and dried on a speedvac (miVac, Thermo Scientific).  Liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry The TMT-labeled tryptic peptides were dissolved in 2% AcN/0.1% formic acid at 1 µg/µL and 2 µL samples were injected in an Ultimate 3000 nano-flow LC system on-line coupled to an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The chromatographic separation of the peptides was achieved using a 50 cm long C18 EASY spray column (Thermo Scientific), with the following gradient: 4-26% AcN in 120 min, 26-95% AcN in 5 min, and 95% AcN for 8 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The MS acquisition method was comprised of one survey full mass spectrum ranging from m/z 375 to 1600, acquired with a resolution of R=120,000 (at m/z 200), followed by data-dependent HCD fragmentations of precursor ions with a charge state 2+ to 7+, using 45 s dynamic exclusion. The tandem mass scans were acquired with a resolution of R=50,000, targeting 5x104 ions, setting isolation width to m/z 1.4 and normalized collision energy to 35%.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were directly loaded in Proteome Discoverer v2.3 and searched against human SwissProt protein databases (21,008 entries) using the Mascot 2.5.1 search engine (Matrix Science Ltd.). Parameters were chosen as follows: up to two missed cleavage sites for trypsin, precursor mass tolerance 10 ppm, and 0.02 Da for the HCD fragment ions. Dynamic modifications of oxidation on methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation of N-termini were set. Protein annotation was also performed in Proteome Discoverer using the Gene Ontology database on the server of Thermo Scientific linked with biological processes, cellular localization and molecular function. For quantification both unique and razor peptides were requested.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Oxygen regulation, Hippel-lindau cancer syndrome, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt, Mitocondria

### Affiliations
Division of Chemistry I, Department of Medical Biochemistry and Biophysics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden
Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden

### Submitter
JIMMY RODRIGUEZ

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Schlisio
Department of Microbiology, Tumor and Cell Biology, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden


