### Accession
PXD028652

### Title
Mounting, structure and autocleavage of a type VI secretion-associated Rhs polymorphic toxin

### Description
Bacteria have evolved effectors or toxins to outcompete other bacteria or to hijack host cell pathways. One broad family of bacterial polymorphic toxins regroups multidomain proteins with a modular organization, that comprise a C-terminal toxin domain fused to a N-terminal domain that adapt to the delivery apparatus. Polymorphic toxins include bacteriocins, contact-dependent growth inhibition systems, and specialized Hcp, VgrG, PAAR or Rhs Type VI secretion (T6SS) components. We recently described and characterized Tre23, a toxin domain fused to a T6SS-associated Rhs protein in Photorhabdus laumondii. Here, we show that the Rhs polymorphic toxin forms a complex with the T6SS spike protein VgrG and a cognate chaperone EagR. Using truncation derivatives and cross-linking mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that VgrG-EagR-Rhs complex formation requires the VgrG C-terminal β-helix and the Rhs Nterminal prePAAR and PAAR domains. We then report the cryo-electron-microscopy structure of the Rhs-EagR complex, demonstrating that the Rhs central region forms a β-barrel cage-like structure that encapsulates the C-terminal toxin domain, and provide evidence for processing of the Rhs protein through aspartyl autoproteolysis. We propose a model for Rhs loading on the T6SS, transport and delivery into the target cell.

### Sample Protocol
mass spectrometry Sample preparation and cross-linking - The VgrG-EagR-Rhs complex was purified from a 100-mL culture as detailed above, with the exception that buffer B (50 mM HEPES pH7.5, 250 mM NaCl, 1 mM TCEP, cOmpleteTM protease inhibitor cocktail) was used instead of buffer A to avoid the Tris buffer that interferes with chemical cross-linking. One hundred nmoles of the NNP9 crosslinker (Nury et al, 2015) were added to 200 μg of complex. After incubation for 30 min at 4°C, the reaction was quenched by the addition of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 15 min at 4°C. Samples were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen until further analyses. Protein digestion, cross-linked peptides enrichment and mass spectrometry analysis were performed as previously described (Rey et al, 2021). Protein digestion  Cross-linked proteins were transferred 462 onto a 0.5-mL Amicon 30 kDa filter, and the excess of cross-linker was removed by six concentration-dilution cycles with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were digested overnight on the filter, with a trypsin:protein ratio of 1:100 (w:w). Tryptic peptides were recovered from the filter after centrifugation.  Enrichment of labeled peptides Peptides were purified by click-chemistry on a photocleavable support. Photo-cleavable alkyne (PCA) agarose beads (1 μL, 10 nmol) were mixed with the tryptic peptides, in presence of copper(II) sulfate (5:1), Tris(benzyltriazolylmethyl)amine (THPTA; 25:1) and sodium ascorbate (50:1) (ratios are given relative to NNP9 concentration). After 30 min of at room temperature with gentle agitation, PCA agarose beads were washed four times with PBS and twice with 0.1% formic acid to remove unlabeled peptides. PCA agarose beads were transferred onto a 96-well plate (10 μL PCA agarose beads maximum per well), covered with 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid and placed 10 min under UV and rotational mixing (500 rpm). Released peptides were pipetted and transferred into the polypropylene injection vial. Cross-linked peptides MS analysis Peptides eluted from PCA agarose beads were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an EASY-nLC™ 1200 system (Thermo-Scientific) coupled to the nanoelectrospray ion source of an Orbitrap Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific). Peptides were loaded on an in-house packed nano-HPLC column (75 μm × 25 cm) containing C18 resin (Aeris PEPTIDE XB-C18, 1.7-μm particles, 100-Å pore size, Phenomenex) and separated by reverse-phase chromatography at 250 nL/min. A 1-hour linear gradient from 8 to 30 % solvent B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid) followed by a 35 min ramp up to 60 % solvent B was used. The Orbitrap mass spectrometer was set up in data dependent acquisition mode. After a survey scan over the 300-1500 m/z range in the Orbitrap (resolution 60k at m/z 200), the 10 most intense precursor ions above 4.2×105 intensity with 3 to 8 charges were selected for HCD fragmentation with 487 a normalized collision energy (NCE) set up to 26.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis All raw data were processed using MassSpec Studio V2.4 (Sarpe et al, 2016). Data were analyzed using the “E-Value Generator” algorithm with PercentEValueThreshold set at 0.1. Cross-linked peptide identifications were confirmed manually and discrepancies in the cross-linked sites were resolved to ensure that 2 chromatographic peaks did not share the same pair of sites.

### Publication Abstract
Bacteria have evolved toxins to outcompete other bacteria or to hijack host cell pathways. One broad family of bacterial polymorphic toxins gathers multidomain proteins with a modular organization, comprising a C-terminal toxin domain fused to a N-terminal domain that adapts to the delivery apparatus. Polymorphic toxins include bacteriocins, contact-dependent growth inhibition systems, and specialized Hcp, VgrG, PAAR or Rhs Type VI secretion (T6SS) components. We recently described and characterized Tre23, a toxin domain fused to a T6SS-associated Rhs protein in Photorhabdus laumondii, Rhs1. Here, we show that Rhs1 forms a complex with the T6SS spike protein VgrG and the EagR chaperone. Using truncation derivatives and cross-linking mass spectrometry, we demonstrate that VgrG-EagR-Rhs1 complex formation requires the VgrG C-terminal &#x3b2;-helix and the Rhs1 N-terminal region. We then report the cryo-electron-microscopy structure of the Rhs1-EagR complex, demonstrating that the Rhs1 central region forms a &#x3b2;-barrel cage-like structure that encapsulates the C-terminal toxin domain, and provide evidence for processing of the Rhs1 protein through aspartyl autoproteolysis. We propose a model for Rhs1 loading on the T6SS, transport and delivery into the target cell.

### Keywords
Spike, Re-arrangement hot spot, Architecture, Cross-linking, Β-roll, Chaperone, Autocleavage, Polymorphic toxin, Vgrg

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000, Institut Pasteur,  CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France.
CNRS, Pasteur

### Submitter
Martial Rey

### Lab Head
Dr Julia Chamot-Rooke
Mass Spectrometry for Biology Unit,  CNRS USR2000, Institut Pasteur,  CNRS,  28 rue du Dr Roux, Paris 75015, France.


