### Accession
PXD009583

### Title
Helicobacter pylori infection dysregulates gastric proteome

### Description
The purpose of the study was to define gastric cell-specific proteomic changes, induced by H. pylori oncogenic strains, that are critical for initiation of the gastric carcinogenic cascade. Gastric cell scrapings were harvested from H. pylori-infected and uninfected animals for quantitative proteomic analyses using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). Canonical and disease pathway mapping using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) identified significantly altered inflammatory and cancer-signaling pathways that included Rab/Ras signaling proteins.

### Sample Protocol
Lysates were digested and labeled with iTRAQ reagents, and quantitative analyses were performed following 2D LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched against a database containing the Mus musculus subset of the UniprotKB protein database using Spectrum Mill (Agilent). Files with .tsv extensions contain results from Spectrum Mill searches. Excel (.xlxs) files contain quantified proteins after applying FDR thresholds using Spectrum Mill autovalidation (<1% FDR) and after filtering to include proteins that were identified with at least 2 unique peptides

### Publication Abstract
<i>Helicobacter pylori</i> is the strongest risk factor for gastric cancer. Initial interactions between <i>H. pylori</i> and its host originate at the microbial-gastric epithelial cell interface, and contact between <i>H. pylori</i> and gastric epithelium activates signaling pathways that drive oncogenesis. One microbial constituent that increases gastric cancer risk is the <i>cag</i> pathogenicity island, which encodes a type IV secretion system that translocates the effector protein, CagA, into host cells. We previously demonstrated that infection of Mongolian gerbils with a carcinogenic <i>cag</i><sup>+</sup><i>H. pylori</i> strain, 7.13, recapitulates many features of <i>H. pylori</i>-induced gastric cancer in humans. Therefore, we sought to define gastric proteomic changes induced by <i>H. pylori</i> that are critical for initiation of the gastric carcinogenic cascade. Gastric cell scrapings were harvested from <i>H. pylori</i>-infected and uninfected gerbils for quantitative proteomic analyses using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ). Quantitative proteomic analysis of samples from two biological replicate experiments quantified a total of 2764 proteins, 166 of which were significantly altered in abundance by <i>H. pylori</i> infection. Pathway mapping identified significantly altered inflammatory and cancer-signaling pathways that included Rab/Ras signaling proteins. Consistent with the iTRAQ results, RABEP2 and G3BP2 were significantly up-regulated <i>in vitro</i>, <i>ex vivo</i> in primary human gastric monolayers, and <i>in vivo</i> in gerbil gastric epithelium following infection with <i>H. pylori</i> strain 7.13 in a <i>cag</i>-dependent manner. Within human stomachs, RABEP2 and G3BP2 expression in gastric epithelium increased in parallel with the severity of premalignant and malignant lesions and was significantly elevated in intestinal metaplasia and dysplasia, as well as gastric adenocarcinoma, compared with gastritis alone. These results indicate that carcinogenic strains of <i>H. pylori</i> induce dramatic and specific changes within the gastric proteome <i>in vivo</i> and that a subset of altered proteins within pathways with oncogenic potential may facilitate the progression of gastric carcinogenesis in humans.

### Keywords
Gastric proteome, Helicobacter pylor

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt Proteomics Core
Vanderbilt university

### Submitter
Kristie Lindsey Rose

### Lab Head
Dr Kristie Lindsey Rose
Vanderbilt Proteomics Core


