### Accession
PXD016431

### Title
Extensive Rewiring of the the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor EGFR Networks in Colorectal Cancer Cells Expressing Transforming Levels of Oncogenic KRASG13D

### Description
Protein-protein-interaction networks (PPINs) organize fundamental biological processes, but how oncogenic mutations impact these interactions and their functions at a network-level scale is poorly understood. Here, we analyze how a common oncogenic KRAS mutation (KRASG13D) affects PPIN structure and function of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) network in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Mapping >6,000 PPIs shows that this network is extensively rewired in cells expressing transforming levels of KRASG13D (mtKRAS). The factors driving PPIN rewiring are multifactorial including changes in protein expression and phosphorylation. Mathematical modelling also suggests that the binding dynamics of low and high affinity KRAS interactors contribute to rewiring. PPIN rewiring substantially alters the composition of protein complexes, signal flow, transcriptional regulation, and cellular phenotype. These changes are validated by targeted and global experimental analysis. Importantly, genetic alterations in the most extensively rewired PPIN nodes occur frequently in CRC and are prognostic of poor patient outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
Serum starved HCT116 (mtKRASHi) and HKE3 (mtKRASLo) were lysed in 8M urea and protein concentration was determined using a BCA protein assay (Bradford Biorad). 500 μg of protein extracts were digested with 5μg/ml trypsin in 2M urea, 25mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 5mM dithiothreitol at room temperature overnight. Cysteines were alkylated using 10mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour. Tryptic peptides were purified on an SPE reverse phase Bond Elut LMS cartridge, 25mg (Agilent), dried under low pressure and stored at -20oC. Then, phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 beads. Briefly, 25μl of 0.5M lactic acid in 50% acetonitrile was added to the samples. After sonication, the sample was added to 8μl resin (100μg/μl of 10μm TiO2 beads in isopropanol) and incubated overnight. Then, the sample/TiO2 mixture was transferred to a filter and spun for 5 minutes. The resin on the filter was washed twice with 25μl of 0.5M lactic acid in 50% acetonitrile, and once with 200μl 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Phosphopeptides were eluted twice with 50μl of 50mM KH2PO4 followed by further elutions with 50μl of 2M ammonia and 50μl of 80% acetonitrile in 0.1% TFA. Eluates were dried in a speedvac and then reconstituted in 100μl Buffer A for desalting in C18 stage tips. Peptides were dried under low pressure, reconstituted in 7μl 0.5%v/v trifluoroacetic acid to a final concentration of 1μg/μl and filtered through a 0.45μm filter.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were searched using MASCOT Version 2.4 (Matrix Science Ltd) against the human subset of the UniProt database with the maximum missed-cut value set to 2. The following features were used in all searches: (i) variable methionine oxidation, (ii) fixed cysteine carbamidomethylation, (iii) precursor mass tolerance of 10ppm, (iv) MS/MS tolerance of 0.05amu, (v) significance threshold (p) below 0.05 (MudPIT scoring), and (vi) final peptide score of 20. Progenesis version 4 (Nonlinear Dynamics) was used for label-free quantitation. Only MS/MS ions with a charge of 2+, 3+ or 4+ were taken into account for the total number of ‘Features’ (signal at one particular retention time and m/z), and only the five most intense spectra per ‘Feature’ were included. Normalization was first performed based on the median of the ion intensities of these sets of multi-charged ions. Where the same peptide was detected multiple times, the one with the highest Mascot score was retained. The associated unique peptide ion intensity was transformed using an ArcSinH function (a log transform is not ideal considering the significant amount of near zero measurements generated by the current method of detection). For the quantitative analysis we used the intensities of the representative peptides having the highest Mascot scores. Based on the abundance values, within group means were calculated and from there the fold changes (in comparison to control) were generated. One-way ANOVA testing was used to calculate the p-values based on the transformed values. Differentially phosphorylated proteins were only considered significant if the following conditions were fulfilled: (i) pairwise p-values < 0.05, (ii) number of peptides detected and used in quantification per protein equal to or more than 1 peptide, and (iii) absolute fold change at least 1.5 (i.e. ≥1.5 fold for up-regulated proteins or ≤ 0.667 fold for down-regulated proteins).  Furtermore, Data were analyzed using Maxquant to confirm and Validate identified phosphopeptides.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-protein-interaction networks (PPINs) organize fundamental biological processes, but how oncogenic mutations impact these interactions and their functions at a network-level scale is poorly understood. Here, we analyze how a common oncogenic KRAS mutation (KRAS<sup>G13D</sup>) affects PPIN structure and function of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) network in colorectal cancer (CRC) cells. Mapping &gt;6000 PPIs shows that this network is extensively rewired in cells expressing transforming levels of KRAS<sup>G13D</sup> (mtKRAS). The factors driving PPIN rewiring are multifactorial including changes in protein expression and phosphorylation. Mathematical modelling also suggests that the binding dynamics of low and high affinity KRAS interactors contribute to rewiring. PPIN rewiring substantially alters the composition of protein complexes, signal flow, transcriptional regulation, and cellular phenotype. These changes are validated by targeted and global experimental analysis. Importantly, genetic alterations in the most extensively rewired PPIN nodes occur frequently in CRC and are prognostic of poor patient outcomes.

### Keywords
Extensive rewiring of the the epidermal growth factor receptor egfr networks in colorectal cancer cells expressing transforming levels of oncogenic krasg13d

### Affiliations
Medical Bioanalytics, University Clinic Tuebingen
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics  Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP)  Institute for Ophthalmic Research  Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen  Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7  D-72076 Tuebingen.  Germany.

### Submitter
Mohamed Ali Jarboui

### Lab Head
Dr Mohamed Ali Jarboui
Core Facility for Medical Bioanalytics  Proteomics Platform Tübingen (PxP)  Institute for Ophthalmic Research  Eberhard-Karls University of Tuebingen  Elfriede-Aulhorn-Str. 7  D-72076 Tuebingen.  Germany.


