### Accession
PXD001057

### Title
Phosphoproteomic analysis of osmotic stress response in Arabidopsis

### Description
Elucidating how plants sense and respond to water loss is important for identifying genetic and chemical interventions that may help sustain crop yields in water-limiting environments. Currently, the molecular mechanisms involved in the initial perception and response to dehydration are not well understood. Modern mass spectrometric methods for quantifying changes in the phosphoproteome provide an opportunity to identify key phosphorylation events involved in this process. Here, we have used both untargeted and targeted isotope-assisted mass spectrometric methods of phosphopeptide quantitation to characterize proteins in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) whose degree of phosphorylation is rapidly altered by hyperosmotic treatment. Thus, protein phosphorylation events responsive to 5 min of 0.3 m mannitol treatment were first identified using 15N metabolic labeling and untargeted mass spectrometry with a high-resolution ion-trap instrument. The results from these discovery experiments were then validated using targeted Selected Reaction Monitoring mass spectrometry with a triple quadrupole. Targeted Selected Reaction Monitoring experiments were conducted with plants treated under nine different environmental perturbations to determine whether the phosphorylation changes were specific for osmosignaling or involved cross talk with other signaling pathways. The results indicate that regulatory proteins such as members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family are specifically phosphorylated in response to osmotic stress. Proteins involved in 5′ messenger RNA decapping and phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate synthesis were also identified as targets of dehydration-induced phosphoregulation. The results of these experiments demonstrate the utility of targeted phosphoproteomic analysis in understanding protein regulation networks and provide new insight into cellular processes involved in the osmotic stress response.

### Sample Protocol
Plant Growth and Sample Preparation: Wild-type Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) Columbia-0 seeds were grown in liquid culture under constant light for 10 to 11 d before experimental treatment and protein extraction. For untargeted proteomic experiments using full metabolic labeling, samples were processed as described previously (Minkoff et al., 2014). Briefly, plants were grown in modified Murashige and Skoog medium containing 1% (w/v) Suc, 0.05% (w/v) MES salt, and either ammonium and potassium nitrate or 15N-enriched ammonium nitrate and potassium nitrate (more than 98% 15N; Cambridge Isotope Laboratories) as the sole nitrogen source. After 10 d, mannitol treatment was applied by decanting the existing medium and replacing with control medium or medium containing 0.3 m mannitol. After 5 min of treatment, plant samples were flash frozen and homogenized. Samples were then combined in an experimental pair consisting of one treated sample grown in 14N medium and one control sample grown in 15N medium. For the second reciprocal experimental pair, the samples were combined in the inverse fashion (15N treated and 14N control). Ground frozen tissue was combined at a 1:1 weight ratio prior to further homogenization. For targeted proteomic experiments, sample medium consisted of one-half-strength Murashige and Skoog salts, 1% (w/v) Suc, and 0.05% (w/v) MES salt. After 11 d of growth, sample medium was replaced with fresh medium and allowed to equilibrate for 4 to 5 h prior to experimental treatment. Treatment was applied in the same manner as described for the untargeted experiments. Three biological replicates were processed for each treatment condition. For all experiments, samples were further homogenized in grinding buffer (Huttlin et al., 2007) supplemented with phosphatase inhibitors using a sonicator (1-cm probe, 5 × 10 s, and 50% duty cycle) while kept on ice. The resulting supernatant was filtered through two layers of Miracloth (Calbiochem) and underwent a soft spin (1,500g, 20 min, and 4°C) to remove unbroken cells. Sample Prefractionation for Untargeted MS Analysis: Sample supernatants from experimental pairs 1 and 2 were further centrifuged at 100,000g for 90 min at 4°C (Beckman Ultracentrifuge) to isolate the microsome pellet. The microsome pellet was resuspended in 50 mm Tris-HCl, pH 8, and proteins were extracted from both the microsome resuspension and soluble fraction using a previously described methanol/chloroform/water method (Wessel and Flügge, 1984; Minkoff et al., 2014). Precipitated proteins were solubilized in 8 m urea-containing phosphatase inhibitor mixture (1× PhosStop; Roche). Samples were diluted to 2 m urea, and protein concentration was measured using a bicinchoninic acid assay kit (BCA, Thermo Scientific Pierce). Five milligrams of protein from microsome and soluble fractions was reduced with 5 mm dithiothreitol (45 min at 50°C) and alkylated using 15 mm iodoacetamide (45 min at room temperature). Samples were then diluted to 1.2 m urea using 50 mm NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified using 0.5% (v/v) formic acid to stop enzymatic digestion and desalted using C-18 solid-phase extraction columns (Waters). Soluble fractions were then subject to further fractionation via SCX chromatographic separation using a polysulfoethyl aspartamide column (4.6 × 200 mm; PolyLC) on a Waters Alliance 2795 HPLC device. Separation was achieved using a 0% to 25% (v/v) buffer B (5 mm KH2PO4, 350 mm KCl, and 30% [v/v] acetonitrile [ACN], pH 2.65) gradient over 33 min at a flow rate of 3 mL min−1. The gradient was followed by a 100% buffer B wash and reequilibration with buffer A (5 mm KH2PO4 and 30% [v/v] ACN, pH 2.65). Independent fractions were collected every 4 min, and blanks were run between samples to ensure no carryover. Sample fractions were flash frozen, lyophilized, and desalted using solid-phase extraction. SCX fractions 3 to 8 and microsome samples were enriched for phosphopeptides using titanium dioxide (TiO2) particles (5 μm; GL Sciences) as described previously (Sugiyama et al., 2007; Minkoff et al., 2014).

### Data Protocol
Untargeted MS and Data Analysis: Phosphopeptide-enriched samples were analyzed on an LTQ-Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) using the same method as described by Kline et al. (2010). Briefly, samples were separated by HPLC using an 11-cm C-18 packed analytical column and a 240-min ACN gradient in line with MS analysis. Two to three injection replicates were performed for each sample. Acquired data files containing MS/MS spectra were searched against The Arabidopsis Information Resource 9 protein database using MASCOT software (Matrix Science). Search parameters were set at two allowed missed cleavages, precursor and fragment ion mass tolerances of 15 ppm and 0.6 D, respectively, fixed modifications of Cys carbamidomethylation, and variable modifications of Met oxidation, Ser/Thr/Tyr phosphorylation, and Asn/Gln deamidation. Searches were performed using settings for both 14N and 15N protein masses. MASCOT search results were filtered to maintain a 1% false discovery rate at the peptide level using a reverse-protein sequence database and in-house software. The software determines the minimum MASCOT score in which 1% of MS/MS peptide identifications match the decoy reverse-protein sequence database. All peptide identifications scoring lower than this calculated MASCOT score were excluded from analysis. Quantitative ratio measurements from MS1 peak areas were performed using Census software (Park et al., 2008) as described by Kline et al. (2010). To correct for errors in mixing ratios (i.e. initial combination of 14N and 15N ground, frozen tissue), all data sets for each experimental sample were normalized to the median 14N-15N area ratio value. Only phosphopeptides quantified in both experiments 1 and 2 were considered for analysis. Phosphopeptides showing reciprocal changes of 1.5-fold or greater were manually validated by visual inspection of Census chromatograms. MS/MS spectra were manually validated for all phosphopeptides in Supplemental Tables S1 and S3 and can be found in Supplemental Figure S1. Targeted SRM Analysis: Proteins were precipitated from sample supernatant with 80% (v/v) acetone overnight at −20°C and then resuspended in 2% (w/v) SDS-Tris-HCl buffer prior to methanol/chloroform/water protein extraction. This initial precipitation step was added to reduce sample volume. Extracted protein was resuspended and quantified by a bicinchoninic acid assay kit as described for the untargeted sample preparation above. For each sample, 3 mg of protein was spiked with isotopically labeled phosphopeptide standards, synthesized by the Sigma-Aldrich PEPscreen platform, Sigma-Aldrich AQUA, or the University of Wisconsin-Madison Biotechnology Center’s peptide synthesis core facility. Phosphopeptide standards were pooled into a master mix, divided into aliquots, and frozen. Each batch of samples received a spike from the same phosphopeptide standard master mix aliquot to avoid the variability that may arise from peptide loss due to freeze-thaw cycles or retention in plastic tubes. The concentration of each phosphopeptide standard in the master mix was individually tailored to generate optimum signal levels during SRM analysis. Calculations were based on empirically determined chromatographic and mass spectrometric behavior of the phosphopeptide standards. Samples were reduced with 5 mm dithiothreitol (45 min at 50°C) and alkylated using 15 mm iodoacetamide (45 min at room temperature). Samples were then diluted to 1.2 m urea using 50 mm NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio overnight at 37°C. Samples were acidified using 0.5% (v/v) formic acid to stop enzymatic digestion and desalted using C-18 solid-phase extraction columns (Waters). Phosphopeptide enrichment was performed using homemade TiO2 columns containing 2.4 mg of TiO2 particles (5 μm; GL Sciences), as described by Minkoff et al. (2014).

### Publication Abstract
Elucidating how plants sense and respond to water loss is important for identifying genetic and chemical interventions that may help sustain crop yields in water-limiting environments. Currently, the molecular mechanisms involved in the initial perception and response to dehydration are not well understood. Modern mass spectrometric methods for quantifying changes in the phosphoproteome provide an opportunity to identify key phosphorylation events involved in this process. Here, we have used both untargeted and targeted isotope-assisted mass spectrometric methods of phosphopeptide quantitation to characterize proteins in Arabidopsis (Arabidopsis thaliana) whose degree of phosphorylation is rapidly altered by hyperosmotic treatment. Thus, protein phosphorylation events responsive to 5 min of 0.3 m mannitol treatment were first identified using <sup>15</sup>N metabolic labeling and untargeted mass spectrometry with a high-resolution ion-trap instrument. The results from these discovery experiments were then validated using targeted Selected Reaction Monitoring mass spectrometry with a triple quadrupole. Targeted Selected Reaction Monitoring experiments were conducted with plants treated under nine different environmental perturbations to determine whether the phosphorylation changes were specific for osmosignaling or involved cross talk with other signaling pathways. The results indicate that regulatory proteins such as members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase family are specifically phosphorylated in response to osmotic stress. Proteins involved in 5' messenger RNA decapping and phosphatidylinositol 3,5-bisphosphate synthesis were also identified as targets of dehydration-induced phosphoregulation. The results of these experiments demonstrate the utility of targeted phosphoproteomic analysis in understanding protein regulation networks and provide new insight into cellular processes involved in the osmotic stress response.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation arabidopsis stress

### Affiliations
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Biochemistry Dept. Biotechnology Center.
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Kelly Stecker

### Lab Head
Dr Michael R. Sussman
University of Wisconsin-Madison. Biochemistry Dept. Biotechnology Center.


