### Accession
PXD033348

### Title
A toolbox for systematic discovery of stable and transient protein interactors in baker’s yeast

### Description
Identification of both stable and transient interactions is essential for understanding protein function and regulation. While assessing stable interactions is more straightforward, capturing transient ones is challenging. In recent years, sophisticated tools have emerged to improve transient interactor discovery, with many harnessing the power of evolved biotin ligases for proximity labelling. However, biotinylation-based methods have lagged behind in the model eukaryote, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, possibly due to the presence of several abundant, endogenously biotinylated proteins. In this study, we optimised robust biotin-ligation methodologies in yeast and increased their sensitivity by creating a bespoke technique for downregulating endogenous biotinylation which we term ABOLISH (Auxin-induced BiOtin LIgase diminiSHing). We used the endoplasmic reticulum insertase complex (EMC) to demonstrate our approaches and uncover new substrates. To make these tools available for systematic probing of both stable and transient interactions, we generated five full-genome collections of strains in which every yeast protein is tagged with each of the tested biotinylation machineries; some on the background of the ABOLISH system. This comprehensive toolkit enables functional interactomics of the entire yeast proteome.

### Sample Protocol
400μl lysis buffer (150 mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 5% Glycerol, 1% digitonin (Sigma, #D141), 1mM MgCl2, protease inhibitors (Merck), benzonase (Sigma, #E1014) was used to resuspend the cell pellets. The cell suspension was then transferred to a 2ml FastPrep™ tube (lysing matrix C, MP Biomedicals) and lysis was carried out by 6 x 1min maximum speed cycles on a FastPrep-24™ cell homogeniser (MP Biomedicals), with the samples being returned to ice for 5min between each cycle. Lysates were cleared at 16,000g for 10min at 16,000g at 4°C and the supernatant was transferred to a fresh microcentrifuge tube. For HA-IP, samples were first incubated for 1h at 4°C with 2μl of anti-HA antibody (BioLegend) and then for another hr after adding 30μl of washed magnetic ProteinG beads (Cytiva). The beads were washed twice with 200μl of digitonin wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 1% digitonin) and then four times in basic wash buffer (150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) before being incubated with 50μl elution buffer (2M urea, 20mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 2mM DTT, and 0.5μl trypsin (0.5μg/μl, Promega, #V5111)) per sample for 90min. The eluate was removed from the beads and collected in a fresh microcentrifuge tube. 50μl alkylation buffer (2M urea, 20mM Tris-HCl pH8.0, 50mM iodacetamide (IAA)) was then added to the beads and incubated for 10min. This buffer was also removed from the beads and combined with the first eluate. Finally, the beads were washed with 50μl urea buffer (2 M urea, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) for another 10min, and again the buffer was removed and combined with the above mixture. All elution steps were carried out at room temperature (RT) in the dark with shaking (1400rpm). The eluted mixture (150μl total volume) was incubated overnight at RT in the dark at 800rpm. The following morning 1μl 0.25μg/μl trypsin was added to each sample and incubated for a further 4h at RT in the dark at 800rpm. For streptavidin-AP, the same protocol as for HA-IP was used with the following changes: (1) 100μl streptavidin-conjugated beads (Cytiva) were used per sample and incubated overnight at 4°C; (2) post-AP beads were washed twice in 500μl 2% SDS wash buffer (2% v/v SDS (BioRad, #1610418), 150mM NaCl, 50mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0), twice in 500 μl 0.1% SDS wash buffer, then twice in 500 μl basic wash buffer. All washes were 5min and were carried out at RT on overhead rotator. Following   digestion, peptides were desalted using Oasis HLB, μElution format (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The samples were vacuum dried and stored at -80˚C until further analysis. ULC/MS-grade solvents were used for all chromatographic steps. Each sample was loaded using split-less nano-Ultra Performance Liquid Chromatography (10kpsi nanoAcquity; Waters, Milford, MA, USA). The mobile phase was: (A) H2O + 0.1% formic acid and (B) acetonitrile + 0.1% formic acid. Desalting of the samples was performed online using a reversed-phase Symmetry C18 trapping column (180μm internal diameter, 20mm length, 5μm particle size; Waters). The peptides were then separated using a T3 HSS nano-column (75μm internal diameter, 250mm length, 1.8μm particle size; Waters) at 0.35μL/min. Peptides were eluted from the column into the mass spectrometer using the following gradient: 4% to 30% B over   55min, 30% to 90% B over 5min, maintained at 90% for 5min and then back to the initial conditions. The nanoUPLC was coupled online through a nanoESI emitter (10μm tip; New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA) to a quadrupole orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive HF; Thermo Scientific) using a FlexIon nanospray apparatus (Proxeon). Data was acquired in data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, using a Top10 method. MS1 resolution was set to 120,000 (at 200m/z), mass range of 375-1650m/z, AGC of 3e6 and maximum injection time was set to 60 msec. MS2 resolution was set to 15,000, quadrupole isolation 1.7m/z, AGC of 1e5, dynamic exclusion of 20sec and maximum injection time of 60msec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was processed with MaxQuant v1.6.6.0. The data was searched with the Andromeda search engine against the SwissProt S. cerevisiae ATCC204508/S288c proteome database (November 2018 version, 6049 entries) in addition to the MaxQuant contaminants database. All parameters were kept as default except: Minimum peptide ratio was set to 1, maximum of 3 miscleavages were allowed, and match between runs was enabled. Carbamidomethylation of C was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of M, deamidation of N and Q, and protein N-term acetylation were set as variable modifications. The LFQ intensities were used for further calculations using Perseus v1.6.2.3. Decoy hits were filtered out, as well as proteins that were identified on the basis of a modified peptide only. The LFQ intensities were log2-transformed and only proteins that had at least 2 valid values in at least one experimental group were kept. The remaining missing values were imputed by a random low range distribution. Student’s t-tests were performed between the relevant groups to identify significant changes in protein levels.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interaction profiling, Yeast libraries, Substrate discovery, Turboid

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel

### Submitter
Meital Kupervaser

### Lab Head
Dr Maya Schuldiner
Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, 7610001, Israel


