### Accession
PXD045261

### Title
Characterisation of vestibular schwannoma tissues using LC-MS/MS analysis

### Description
Vestibular schwannoma is the most common benign neoplasm of the cerebellopontine angle. Its first symptoms include hearing loss, tinnitus, and vestibular symptoms, followed by cerebellar and brainstem symptoms, along with palsy of the adjacent cranial nerves. However, the clinical picture has unpredictable dynamics and currently, there are no reliable predictors of tumour behaviour.  The major objective of this study was to verify whether a technique using in-sample specific protein digestion with trypsin would have the potential to provide proteomic characterisation of these pathological tissues.

### Sample Protocol
From all included patients, tumour samples were collected from the internal auditory canal floor, fundus (FU) and the area arising at the cerebellopontine angle (CPA). The peripheral nerve of the cervical plexus was chosen as a control tissue (CTRL). Approximately 3 mg of each sample were placed in a 1.5-mL Eppendorf tube. First, samples were pre-incubated for 15 min in 100 µL of propan-2-ol in an ultrasonic cleaner. The supernatant was then removed by pipette. Specific digestion was carried out with the samples   of 20-μg/mL sequencing-grade trypsin in 100 mM NH4HCO3 at 37 ºC for 4 hours. This specific digestion was performed without the reduction and alkylation of disulphide bonds. The solution containing the released peptides was purified on ZipTip packed with reversed-phase (C18) resin. The samples were eluted to 0.2 mL Eppendorf PCR tubes and dried in the Thermomixer without shaking at 50ºC for approximately 2 hours. Mass spectra were acquired using a Maxis Impact ESI-QToF mass spectrometer connected with a Dionex Ultimate3000 RSLCnano UHPLC chromatograph. Dry samples were resuspended with 3% v/v acetonitrile and 0.1% v/v formic acid. Subsequently, the samples were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap 100 trap column (100 µm × 2 cm, C18 reversed phase, particle size: 5 µm; Thermo Scientific) using a flow rate of 7 µL/min. After 5 min of washing, the flow was directed to an Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 analytical column (75 µm × 150 mm, C18 reversed phase, particle size: 2 µm; Thermo Scientific). The mobile phase A was 0.1% v/v formic acid in water and the mobile phase B was 0.1% v/v formic acid in acetonitrile. Peptides were eluted with a linear gradient of 3–35% B for 90 min followed by column washing (90% B) and re-equilibration of the columns (3% B) before loading the next sample. The flow rate during the peptide elution was set to 0.3 µL/min. The eluted peptides were introduced directly into a Captive spray ESI source. Spray voltage was set to 1 200 V, the temperature to 150 °C, and the flow of dry nitrogen to 3 L/min. Measurements were performed in the data-dependent analysis mode. Mass spectra were recorded every 3 s in the range of 50–2200 m/z. Precursors for collision-induced dissociation were selected in the range of 400–1400 m/z and MS/MS spectra were collected at the speed of 4–16 Hz depending on the intensity of the precursors. The preferred charge range was 2–5, with single charged precursors being excluded; a dynamic exclusion time of one minute was applied. Both profile and line spectra were saved.

### Data Protocol
Proteins in the raw spectra were identified and intensities extracted by MaxQuant label-free quantification software (version 1.6.17 for Windows) [20] using the Homo sapiens NCBI protein database (assembly GRCh38.p14) and the UniProt Homo sapiens proteome database (UP000005640, accessed 25th May 2022). Reverse sequences were selected for the target-decoy database strategy [21]. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied to both the peptide-spectrum match and the protein-group levels. Trypsin was set as the proteolytic enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed; no fixed modification was selected. Methionine oxidation, N-terminal acetylation, and broken cysteine disulphide bonds (Cys-Cys) were searched as variable protein modifications. The minimum required peptide length was set at seven amino acids. The match between runs was turned on. The Bruker Q-TOF instrument setting was used with the following default tolerances: 20 ppm for the first search and 10 ppm for the main peptide search at the MS level. Proteins were identified using the default 40 ppm as mass tolerance at the MS/MS level for the TOF analyser. MaxQuant label-free quantification (LFQ) without the FastLFQ option was used for initial protein and peptide intensity normalisation. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. Protein groups identified through target-decoy database strategy, proteins identified only by modification site (the “Only identified by site” column in the MaxQuant proteinGroups file), potential contaminants and protein groups identified by less than two unique peptides (the “Unique peptides” column) were removed and are not included in any subsequent analyses. The overall protein intensity were computed as follows: for each unique peptide detected for a given protein, the MaxQuant label-free quantification value (LFQ) was divided by peptide length and the maximum of these values was used as the protein intensity quantification value.  For partial least squares – discrimination analysis (PLS-DA) and linear discriminant analysis over principal components (PCA-LDA), the data were centred, scaled, and the zero variance points were removed between the samples. Only proteins identified in at least 50% of the samples in any of the studied groups were used. PLS-DA discrimination analysis was performed in the R software (version 4.2.2 for Windows) using “caret” (6.0.93) and “pls” (2.8.1) packages. For estimation of accuracy leave-one-out cross-validation was selected, for the determination of the optimal number of latent variables, the one-SE rule was selected.

### Publication Abstract
Vestibular schwannoma is the most common benign neoplasm of the cerebellopontine angle. Its first symptoms include hearing loss, tinnitus, and vestibular symptoms, followed by cerebellar and brainstem symptoms, along with palsy of the adjacent cranial nerves. However, the clinical picture has unpredictable dynamics and currently, there are no reliable predictors of tumor behavior. Hence, it is desirable to have a fast routine method for analysis of vestibular schwannoma tissues at the molecular level. The major objective of this study was to verify whether a technique using in-sample specific protein digestion with trypsin would have the potential to provide a proteomic characterization of these pathological tissues. The achieved results showed that the use of this approach with subsequent liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis of released peptides allowed a fast identification of a considerable number of proteins in two differential parts of vestibular schwannoma tissue as well as in tissues of control healthy samples. Furthermore, mathematical analysis of MS data was able to discriminate between pathological vestibular schwannoma tissues and healthy tissues. Thus, in-sample protein digestion combined with LC-MS/MS separation and identification of released specific peptides followed by mathematical analysis appears to have the potential for routine characterization of vestibular schwannomas at the molecular level. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD045261.

### Keywords
In-sample protein digestion, Tandem mass spectrometry, Vestibular schwannomas, Liquid chromatography, Principal component analysis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague
University of Chemistry and Technology Prague

### Submitter
Jiri Santrucek

### Lab Head
Dr Radovan Hynek
Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague


