### Accession
PXD045934

### Title
RHBDL4-triggered downregulation of COPII adaptor protein TMED7 suppresses TLR4-mediated inflammatory signaling

### Description
The toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is a central regulator of innate immune signaling that primarily recognizes bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) cell wall constituents to trigger cytokine secretion. We identify the intramembrane protease RHBDL4 as a negative regulator of TLR4 signaling. We show that RHBDL4-triggers the degradation of TLR4’s trafficking factor TMED7, a member of the p24 family of COPII adaptor proteins, which counteracts the transport of TLR4 to the cell surface. Besides TMED7, RHBDL4 cleaves a subset of related p24 cargo receptors, suggesting that this is a general protein abundance control mechanism to regulate the loading of specific secretory proteins into COPII vesicles. Notably, TLR4 activation by LPS mediates transcriptional upregulation of RHBDL4. Hence, TLR4 activation triggers an RHBDL4-dependent negative feedback loop to reduce the export of newly synthesized TLR4 molecules from the endoplasmic reticulum into COPII-coated vesicles. This secretory cargo tuning mechanism prevents the over-activation of TLR4-dependent signaling and consequently alleviates septic shock in a mouse model.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in DMEM medium (Silantes) supplemented with 10% dialyzed FBS (Silantes), and either light arginine and lysine or heavy (Lys-8 (13C6, 15N2), Arg-10 (13C6, 15N4) isotopes for approximately six doublings. The samples were pooled and microsomes were prepared by swelling the cells in hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.4, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 10 mM KCl, 0.5 mM DTT) containing 10 μg/ml PMSF and EDTA-free complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and lysed by passing five times through a 27-gauge needle. After the removal of cell debris, the supernatant was subjected to centrifugation for 20 min at 4°C by 100,000 x g. The pellet was resuspended in rough microsome buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.4, 250 mM sucrose, 50 mM KOAc, 2 mM Mg(OAc)2, 1 mM DTT), and extracted by 500 mM KOAc and 50 mM EDTA for 15 min on ice followed by centrifugation through a sucrose cushion (500 mM sucrose, 50 mM HEPES, 500 mM KOAc, 5 mM Mg(OAc)2) for 45 min at 140,000 x g and 4°C. Subsequently, the pellet was resuspended in a freshly prepared ice-cold sodium carbonate solution (100 mM) and transferred onto an alkaline sucrose cushion (125 mM sucrose, 100 mM Na2CO3) and centrifuged for 45 min at 140,000 x g and 4°C. The cell pellet was resuspended in rough microsome buffer with the help of a Dounce homogenizer.  For proteomic analysis, protein samples were dissolved in SDS-sample buffer (see below) and separated by SDS-PAGE for 1 cm. Gels were stained with Quick Coomassie Stain (Serva). Each gel lane was cut into two pieces, washed with 50% acetonitrile, reduced with DTT and alkylated with iodoacetamide, followed by digestion with trypsin in 0.01% trifluoroacetic acid. Tryptic peptides were extracted with 50% acetonitrile and 10% formic acid. Acetonitrile was removed, and peptides were mixed with 1% trifluoracetic acid. Nanoflow LC-MS2 analysis was performed with an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system directly coupled to an Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo-Fischer, Bremen, Germany). Samples were delivered to an in-house packed analytical column (inner diameter 75 µm x 20 cm; CS – Chromatographie Service GmbH, Langerwehe, Germany) filled with 1.9 µm ReprosilPur-AQ 120 C18 material (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA; ProteoChem, Denver, CO, USA) in H2O (Bisolve) and solvent B was composed of 0.1% FA (ProteoChem), 10% H2O (Biosolve) and 89.9% ACN (Biosolve). Sample was loaded to the analytical column for 20 min with 3% B at 550 nL/min flow rate. The peptide separation was carried out with 2h linear gradient (3-40% B) with the reduced flow rate of 300 nL/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependente acquisition mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2. MS spectra (m/z 400–1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap at 60,000 (m/z 400) resolution, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target value of 106 and maximal ion injection time (IT) 10 ms. Collision induced dissociation MS2 spectra were generated for up to 15 precursors with normalized collision energy of 35% in the ion trap. The MS2 AGC target value was set to 104 with a maximum IT of 100 ms.

### Data Protocol
The uninterpreted MS/MS spectra were searched against the SwissProt-human database (Human_26082014) and the contaminants database using MaxQuant software (v1.6.12.0). The algorithm was set to assuming acetylation, deamidation and oxidation as variable modifications of peptides with a minimal length of seven amino acids. For further analysis, the Perseus software was used. Rows “only identified by site”, “reverse” and “potential contaminants” were removed. Proteins were filtered for GOCC term “endoplasmic reticulum” and H/L ratio of equal or greater than 1.0. Data from two independent experiments were combined for Table S1 displayed in the manuscript.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rhomboid-family proteins, Organelle proteomics, Er-associated degradation, Protein homeostasis, Intramembrane proteolysis, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
Heidelberg University Centre for molecular biology (ZMBH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany
ZMBH, Im Neuenheimer Feld 282, 69122 Heidelberg

### Submitter
Thomas Ruppert

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Ruppert
Heidelberg University Centre for molecular biology (ZMBH) Im Neuenheimer Feld 282 69120 Heidelberg Germany


