### Accession
PXD041772

### Title
Astaxanthin and DHA ameliorates adipose tissue dysfunction – A proteomics approach

### Description
Albino wistar rats were made perinatally undernourished and/or treated with AsX &amp; DHA. TMT labelled quantitative proteomics was performed to identify differentially regulated proteins in adipose tissue, to understand molecular mechanism of perinatal undernourishmentinduced obesity in adult life.

### Sample Protocol
The adipose tissue samples were crushed and lysed using SDS-lysis buffer and subjected to probe–sonication–based protein extraction.The protein amount were estimated using BCA estimation and equal amount of proteins were taken for further downstream processing. Acetone precipitation was carried out to reduce contaminants like salts and polyphenols. Proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation and digestion by using 10mM DTT, 20 mM of IAA and Trypsin at a ratio of 1:20 (Enzyme: Protein) respectively. Peptide samples were labelled using TMT 10plex reagents. The samples were desalted, pooled and dried using vacuum evaporator. TMT labelled samples were fractionated by using C18 StageTips and dried. The dried samples were dissolved in 20µL of 0.1% Formic acid (FA). Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific, Bremen, Germany) connected to Easy-nLC-1200 nan flow liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fischer Scientific) for data acquisition.

### Data Protocol
All the MS/MS raw files were searched for peptides and proteins using Mascot and Sequest HT search engines present in Proteome Discoverer 2.2. The proteomic database was searched against the Rattus norvegicus proteome database (RefSeq version: 108). Protein sequences were theoretically digested using protease trypsin with maximum two missed cleavages and searched against the LC-MS/MS generated peptide precursor and fragment ions (b and y ions) with 10 ppm and 0.05 Da peptide and fragment mass tolerance, respectively. Modifications such as, TMT, carbamidomethylation at cysteine (C), oxidation at (M), and acetylation (Protein N-termini) were included as fixed and variable modifications. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was calculated using the Percolator node. To calculate the FDR, the decoy databasewas generated by reversing the amino acid sequences at the peptide and protein levels. ThePSMs identified with FDR less than 1% (q-value &lt;0.01) were considered accurate matches.

### Publication Abstract
Maternal diet is an essential factor that directly and indirectly regulates fetal growth. Exposure to certain environmental conditions substantially impacts an individual's short- and long-term health. Adipose tissue dysfunction is a worldwide chronic disease caused by improper lipid build-up in adipose tissue leading to obesity. Therefore, it is the need of the hour to invent anti-obesity agents. As a keto-carotenoid, Astaxanthin (AsX) has been shown to have preventive effects against problems associated with obesity. A crucial role in the pathogenesis of obesity has been attributed to dietary polyunsaturated fatty acids. Adipose tissue plays a vital role in maintaining overall body homeostasis. Metabolic dysfunction of white adipocytes forms a critical step in the emergence of insulin resistance and related diseases. Here we aim to investigate the effect of AsX and Docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) supplementation on the proteomic profile of perinatal undernutrition-induced adipose tissue dysfunction in adult life using a rat model. The LC-MS/MS quantitative proteomics enabled us to identify differentially expressed proteins in perinatal undernourished but AsX and DHA-supplemented animal models. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier&#xa0;PXD041772.This study explored biological roles, molecular functions of differentially expressed proteins, and pathways related to adipose tissue dysfunction induced by undernutrition and its effective modulation by AsX and DHA.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Perinatal undernourishment, Adipocytes

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Center Yenepoya (Deemed to be University)
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Center Yenepoya (Deemed to be University)


