### Accession
PXD044422

### Title
Xenopus laevis Cdc45-FLAG interactions on chromatin during DNA replication

### Description
The aim of the project was to purify Xenopus replisome from replicationg chromatin assembled in Xenopus laevis egg extract. To this end recombinant Cdc45-TEV-His10-FLAG5 was expressed in bacteria and purified. 4 ml of Xenopus laevis egg extract was activated into interphase and supplemented with 10 ng/µl of demembranated sperm DNA, 70 nM recombinant Cdc45, 40 µM aphidicolin, 5 mM caffeine and incubated at 23°C for 60 min. Chromatin was isolated in ANIB100 buffer (50 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 100 mM KOAc, 10 mM MgOAc, 2.5 mM Mg-ATP, 0.5 mM spermidine, 0.3 mM spermine, 1 µg/ml of each aprotinin, leupeptin and pepstatin, 25 mM β-glycerophosphate, 0.1 mM Na3VO4 and 10 mM 2-chloroacetamide) as described previously (Gillespie, Gambus et al. 2012). Chromatin pellets re-suspended in ANIB100 containing 20% sucrose. Protein complexes were released from chromatin by digestion with 4 U/µl benzonase nuclease (E1014-25KU, Sigma) and sonicated for 5 min using a sonicator with settings: 30 sec on, 30 sec off, low power (Bioruptor Diagenode UCD-200). Immunoprecipitation was performed using 100 µl of anti-FLAG M2 magnetic beads (Sigma-Aldrich). Before elution the sample was washed four times with 1 ml of ANIB100 20% sucrose, ANIB100 20% sucrose 0.1% Triton X-100, ANIB100 and elution buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100 mM KAc, 5 mM MgAc, 1 mM ATP and 0.02% NP-40), respectively. The sample was eluted adding 250 µM 3xFLAG peptide (Stratech) to 200 µl of elution buffer and a small proportion of it analysed by mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol Cdc45-TEV-His10-FLAG5 immunoprecipitation eluted from the M2 beads was run on a 5-20% gradient gel (Invitrogen) for 1 cm and cut into 10 bands. Samples were submitted pre-plated for analysis.  Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) with the following protocol: ·         Washed with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. ·         Reduced with 10 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at RT. ·         Digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4h. ·         Quenched with formic acid and the supernatant was analysed directly without further processing. Mass Spectrometry The gel digests were analysed by nano LC/MS/MS with a Waters M-class HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Fusion Lumos. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75 µm analytical column at 350 nL/min; both columns were packed with Luna C18 resin (Phenomenex). A 30min gradient was employed. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 60,000 FWHM resolution and 15,000 FWHM resolution, respectively. APD was turned on. The instrument was run with a 3 s cycle for MS and MS/MS. Proteome Discoverer v1.4 was used for peak generation.

### Data Protocol
Data processing Data were searched using a local copy of Mascot (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.8.0.1) with the following parameters:  Enzyme: Trypsin Fully Specific Database: Uniprot Xenopus (forward and reverse appended with common contaminants) released on 04/15/2014. 79,274 (including reverse and CON) entries in the database were searched.   Fixed modification: Carbamidomethyl (C) Variable modifications: Oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), GlyGly (K), Phospho (STY) Mass values: Monoisotopic Peptide Mass Tolerance:  10 ppm Fragment Mass Tolerance: 0.02 Da Max Missed Cleavages: 2 Mascot DAT files were parsed into the Scaffold (version Scaffold_5.1.0, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) software for validation, filtering and to create a non-redundant list per sample. Data were filtered with 1% protein and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and requiring at least two unique peptides per protein. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 34.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation {Kall, 2008 #979}. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm {Nesvizhskii, 2003 #980}. Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
The MCM motor of the replicative helicase is loaded onto origin DNA as an inactive double hexamer before replication initiation. Recruitment of activators GINS and Cdc45 upon S-phase transition promotes the assembly of two active CMG helicases. Although work with yeast established the mechanism for origin activation, how CMG is formed in higher eukaryotes is poorly understood. Metazoan Downstream neighbor of Son (DONSON) has recently been shown to deliver GINS to MCM during CMG assembly. What impact this has on the MCM double hexamer is unknown. Here, we used cryoelectron microscopy (cryo-EM) on proteins isolated from replicating Xenopus egg extracts to identify a double CMG complex bridged by a DONSON dimer. We find that tethering elements mediating complex formation are essential for replication. DONSON reconfigures the MCM motors in the double CMG, and primordial dwarfism patients' mutations disrupting DONSON dimerization affect GINS and MCM engagement in human cells and DNA synthesis in Xenopus egg extracts.

### Keywords
Xenopus laevis, Dna replication, Replisome, Cdc45

### Affiliations
University of Birmingham
Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.62,                                                             University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT

### Submitter
Aga Gambus

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Aga Gambus
Chromosomal Replication Laboratory, Institute for Cancer and Genomic Sciences, IBR west, WX2.62,                                                             University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT


