### Accession
PXD021100

### Title
Glioma-derived IL-33 orchestrates an inflammatory brain tumor microenvironment that accelerates glioma progression

### Description
In order to further understand how glioma-derived IL-33 is orchestrating changes within the tumor microenvironment and based on the significant increase of anti-inflammatory mediators including a number of signaling molecules observed in IL-33+ tumors, we performed phospho-proteomic analysis using mass spectrometry on the brains of tumor-bearing mice.

### Sample Protocol
The procedure was previously developed by Rush and colleagues 156. Briefly, frozen U87 pcDNA or IL-33 expressing xenografts were lysed in Urea Lysis Buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM b-glycerophosphate) via sonication. The lysates were then centrifuged at 60,000 g for 15 min, protein concentration was determined in the resulting supernatant using the Bradford assay and protein amount was normalized in all samples to 4.5 mg. The lysates were then reduced with 4.5 mM of DTT at 55°C for 20 min followed by carboxoamidomethylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide in the dark at RT for 15 min. Trypsin digestion of the lysates was carried out by diluting the lysates four times with HEPES buffer to a final concentration of 2 mM of Urea and adding trypsin-TPCK solution (Worthington Biochemical) to a final concentration of 10 μg/ml which was then left at room temperature overnight. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 column (Waters Corp), and lyophilized for two days in freeze dry system. Lyophilized peptides were resuspended in Immunnoaffinity Purification (IAP) buffer (50 mM MOPS pH 7.2, 10 mM sodium phosphate, 50 mM NaCl) and transferred to a microfuge tube having 40 l of pY antibody-tagged resin (Cell Signaling Technology). IAP was carried out for 2 hours at 4°C. Beads were subsequently washed three times with IAP buffer and water. Bound peptides were eluted with 0.15% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Eluted peptides were further purified using ZipTips C18 (Millipore Corp).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files acquired from the mass spectrometer were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.5.3.30) according to the standard workflow 157. MS/MS Spectra were searched against the Human Uniprot database containing using the Andromeda search engine built into MaxQuant 158. A false discovery rate of 0.01 for proteins and peptides was permitted. Bioinformatics analysis was completed by using Perseus tools within the MaxQuant environment.

### Publication Abstract
Despite a deeper molecular understanding, human glioblastoma remains one of the most treatment refractory and fatal cancers. It is known that the presence of macrophages and microglia impact glioblastoma tumorigenesis and prevent durable response. Herein we identify the dual function cytokine IL-33 as an orchestrator of the glioblastoma microenvironment that contributes to tumorigenesis. We find that IL-33 expression in a large subset of human glioma specimens and murine models correlates with increased tumor-associated macrophages/monocytes/microglia. In addition, nuclear and secreted functions of IL-33 regulate chemokines that collectively recruit and activate circulating and resident innate immune cells creating a pro-tumorigenic environment. Conversely, loss of nuclear IL-33 cripples recruitment, dramatically suppresses glioma growth, and increases survival. Our data supports the paradigm that recruitment and activation of immune cells, when instructed appropriately, offer a therapeutic strategy that switches the focus from the cancer cell alone to one that includes the normal host environment.

### Keywords
Tumor microenvironment (tme), Phosphoproteomics, Glioma, Human glioblastoma (gbm), Tumor associated macrophages/monocytes/microglia, Il-33

### Affiliations
Department of Oncology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Shyam Menon

### Lab Head
Dr Stephen Mark Robbins
Department of Oncology, Cumming School of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada


