### Accession
PXD002676

### Title
Proteomic and bioinformatic analysis of the nuclear intrinsically disordered proteome

### Description
Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) are biologically active molecules which are involved in many cellular functions although they do not possess a defined three-dimensional structure. They are mostly signalling and regulatory proteins. This study is the first large-scale proteomic analysis of the nuclear IDPs. We experimentally showed that IDPs are overrepresented in the nucleus in comparison to the whole cell. The analysis in terms of molecular function indicated that nuclear intrinsically disordered proteome (IDP-ome) is enriched in proteins involved in transcription regulation and especially in transcription factors.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclei from HEK293 cells were isolated in a hypoosmotic buffer containing detergent and further purified by centrifugation in a high-density sucrose solution. Proteins from the obtained nuclei were extracted in a high-salt (350 mM NaCl) lysis buffer. The samples were enriched in IDPs by the heat-treatment method (Galea et al., 2006 and 2009). Three independent experiments using cells from three subsequent passages were conducted. For each replication, samples from nuclear lysate enriched in IDPs (N_IDPs) as well as from not enriched nuclear lysate (N), whole cell lysate (WCL) and whole cell lysate enriched in IDPs (WCL_IDPs) were collected. The received proteins were prepared for a shotgun LC-MS/MS analysis using FASP approach (Wiśniewski et al., 2009). LC-MS/MS measurements were performed using micrOTOF–Q II (Bruker Daltonics) tandem mass spectrometer coupled with nanoHPLC (UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano System, Dionex). Peptides were separated in a 240 min gradient of acetonitrile from 2% to 40% in the presence of 0.05% FA. Mass spectrometry measurement cycle consisted of one MS scan and five subsequent MS/MS scans in data dependent manner.

### Data Protocol
The obtained data were internally calibrated and analysed using Data Analysis 4.1 software (Bruker Daltonics). An in-house MASCOT server (v. 2.3.0, Matrix Science) was used for searching against Swissprot_201407 database restricted to Homo sapiens taxonomy (20284 sequences). The searching was done via ProteinScape 3.0 platform (Bruker Daltonics). The parameters were as follows: enzyme – trypsin, number of missed cleavages – 1, fixed modification – carbamidomethylation (C), variable modifications – oxidation (M), deamidation (NQ), peptide mass tolerance – ±20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance – ±0.05 Da and an automatic decoy database search was performed. False Positive Rate (FPR) was set to below 1% at a protein level. After the first LC-MS/MS analysis, a Scheduled Precursor List (SPL) was generated on the basis of search results and the second run was performed with SPL as an exclusion list. At the end, the compilation of the search results from two measurements was done with the use of ProteinScape 3.0 platform.  Data submitted to the ProteomeXchange include: Bruker mass spectrometer output files (.baf) and pride xml files generated from Mascot DAT files for each of 24 MS measurements.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Transcription factors, Intrinsically disordered proteins, Subproteome, Nuclear proteome

### Affiliations
1. Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

2. Department of Structural Biology, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland
1. Department of Structural Biology, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland 2. Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland

### Submitter
Bozena Skupien-Rabian

### Lab Head
Dr Sylwia Kedracka-Krok
1. Department of Structural Biology, Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland 2. Department of Physical Biochemistry, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland


