### Accession
PXD012566

### Title
A mass spectrometry guided pre-clinical funnel for the identification of novel vaccine candidates against Helicobacter pylori

### Description
We established a generic pipeline for the identification of surface-exposed vaccine candidates in gram-negative bacteria. Using Helicobacter pylori as a model organism, our approach combines design of experiment driven surface shaving with quantitative mass spectrometry to identify 22 highly conserved vaccine candidates, some of which we exemplarily validate.

### Sample Protocol
100 µg protein sample was reduced with 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes and alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide for 45 minutes in an ultrasound water bath. To remove the detergent, proteins were precipitated. Therefore, 80 % (v/v) acetone was added at -20°C, incubated for 2h and the resulting precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation and washed twice with 80 % (v/v) acetone. Afterwards, the precipitated proteins are dissolved in 6M Urea/2M Thiourea, 10 mM Hepes, pH 8.0 and digested by addition of 1 µg LysC for 3h. Subsequently, samples were diluted 1:5 in 50 mM sodium bicarbonate and digested by addition of 2 µg trypsin overnight. Finally, the resulting peptide mixtures are desalted by C18 StageTips and directly analyzed by MS.

### Data Protocol
We processed the raw data with MaxQuant (v. 1.5.3.14) and searched MS/MS spectra against the H. pylori J99 UniprotKB Fasta database (1,488 forward entries; version from October 2015). The enzyme specificity was set to trypsin while allowing up to two miss cleavages and cleavage N-terminal to proline. We set the minimum length of peptides to be considered for identification to seven assuming carbamidomethyl of cysteines as fixed and methionine Oxidation (M) as well as acetylation of N-termini as variable modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) cutoff of 1% was applied for both, the peptides and proteins. We performed nonlinear retention time alignment of all measured samples in MaxQuant which allows us to transfer of peptide identifications in the absence of sequencing (MS1 only), within a maximum retention time window of 0.7 min (“Match between runs”). Protein intensities were normalized within MaxQuant based on normalized extracted ion currents. We stringently filtered our data requiring at least two peptide ratios for protein quantification. In addition, common contaminants (n=247) as well as proteins only identified with side modifications were strictly excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Vaccination is the most effective method to prevent infectious diseases. However, approaches to identify novel vaccine candidates are commonly laborious and protracted. While surface proteins are suitable vaccine candidates and can elicit antibacterial antibody responses, systematic approaches to define surfomes from gram-negatives have rarely been successful. Here we developed a combined discovery-driven mass spectrometry and computational strategy to identify bacterial vaccine candidates and validate their immunogenicity using a highly prevalent gram-negative pathogen, Helicobacter pylori, as a model organism. We efficiently isolated surface antigens by enzymatic cleavage, with a design of experiment based strategy to experimentally dissect cell surface-exposed from cytosolic proteins. From a total of 1,153 quantified bacterial proteins, we thereby identified 72 surface exposed antigens and further prioritized candidates by computational homology inference within and across species. We next tested candidate-specific immune responses. All candidates were recognized in sera from infected patients, and readily induced antibody responses after vaccination of mice. The candidate jhp_0775 induced specific B and T cell responses and significantly reduced colonization levels in mouse therapeutic vaccination studies. In infected humans, we further show that jhp_0775 is immunogenic and activates IFN&#x3b3; secretion from peripheral CD4<sup>+</sup> and CD8<sup>+</sup> T cells. Our strategy provides a generic preclinical screening, selection and validation process for novel vaccine candidates against gram-negative bacteria, which could be employed to other gram-negative pathogens.

### Keywords
Surfome, Helicobacter pylori, Proteomics, Vaccine

### Affiliations
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Felix Meissner
Experimental Systems Immunology, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


