### Accession
PXD026981

### Title
Extensive arginine phosphorylation in Staphylococcus aureus is influences by Stp1

### Description
Ever since the identification of the first protein-arginine kinase, McsB, in B. subtilis arginine phosphorylation gained more attention. However, the analysis of phosphorylations especially phosphormaidates comes along with several challenges. The sub-stoichiometric nature of protein phosphorylation requires proper enrichment strategies prior to LC-MS/MS analysis and the acid instability of phosphoramidates was long though to impede those enrichments. Further good spectral quality is required which can be reduced by the presence of neutral losses of phosphoric acid upon higher energy collision induced dissociation. Adaptation of common enrichment strategies to less acidic conditions and the use of electron-transfer dissociation allowed the identification of more than 200 pArg sites in B. subtilis and S. aureus so far.  Here we show that pArg is stable enough for commonly used Fe3+-IMAC enrichment followed by LC-MS/MS and that HCD is still the gold standard for phosphoproteomics. By profiling a serine/ threonine kinase (Stk1) and phosphatase (Stp1) mutant from a methicillin-resistant S. aureus mutant library, we identified 1062 pArg sites and thus the most comprehensive arginine phosphoproteome to date. Using synthetic phosphoarginine peptides we validated the presence and localization of arginine phosphorylation in S. aureus and lastly, we could show that Stp1 is influencing the arginine phosphoproteom without being a protein-arginine phosphatase.

### Sample Protocol
Endogenous samples: Bacterial samples were lysed and phosphopeptides were enriched using Fe3+-IMAC column.  Synthetic peptides: Synthetic peptides were ordered at Pepscan (Lelystad, the Netherlands) and JPTPeptide Technologies GmbH, Berlin, Germany. Stability of the phosphopeptides was analyzed by incubation at pH 2 over a time course of 2hr at 4C or over-night at room temperature and retention time was analyzed by spiked in iRT peptides. HCD, ETD and EThcD fragmentation were compared for pArg peptides.  Dephosphorylation: Stp1 was overexpressed using the expression vector pET28a(+)Stp1, bacteria were lysed and Stp1 was purified using Ni-NTA agarose beads. Purified Stp1 was used to dephosphorylated synthetic pArg or pSTY peptides, as well as endogenous S. aureus peptides.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.3.4 and 1.6.17.0 for HCD data and version 1.5.3.30 for ETD, EThcD and HCD data) and the Andromeda search engine was used to search against either S. aureus USA300 (Uniprot, June 2018, 5,954 entries), E. coli (Uniprot, March 2016, 4434 entries) or B. subtilis (Uniprot/TrEMBL, December 2017, 4,247 entries) or a data base containing all 17 synthetic pArg peptides with the following parameters for phosphoproteome analysis: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 3 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteines (57.02 Da) as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), N-acetylation of proteins N-termini (42.01 Da) and phosphorylation on serine, threonine, tyrosine, histidine and arginine residues (79.96 Da) in case of pArg searches as variable modifications. Mass tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm at the MS1 level and 20 ppm at the MS2 level. The False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide-spectrum matches (PSMs) and protein identification using a target-decoy approach, a score cut-off of 40 was used in the case of modified peptides and the minimum peptide length was set to 7 residues. The match between run feature was enabled with a matching time window of 0.7 min and an alignment time window of 20 min for the endogenous phosphoproteome. The MaxQuant generated tables “evidence.txt” and “phospho (HSTY)Sites.txt” were used to calculate the number of unique phosphopeptides and phosphosites identified, respectively, and known contaminants were filtered out. For full proteome analysis the following deviations were applied: trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, carbamidomethylation of cysteine’s (57.02 Da) as a fixed modification, methionine oxidation (15.99 Da), N-acetylation of protein N-termini (42.01 Da) as variable modifications. Relative label-free quantification was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm with the minimum ratio count set to 2. All scripts used for further data processing are deposited on https://github.com/hecklab/Protein-arginine-phosphorylation

### Publication Abstract
Staphylococcus aureus is a major cause of infections worldwide, and infection results in a variety of diseases. As of no surprise, protein phosphorylation is an important game player in signaling cascades and has been shown to be involved in S.&#xa0;aureus virulence. Albeit long neglected, eukaryotic-type serine/threonine kinases in S.&#xa0;aureus have been implicated in this complex signaling cascades. Due to the substoichiometric nature of protein phosphorylation and a lack of suitable analysis tools, the knowledge of these cascades is, however, to date, still limited. Here, were apply an optimized protocol for efficient phosphopeptide enrichment via Fe<sup>3+</sup>-IMAC followed by LC-MS/MS to get a better understanding of the impact of protein phosphorylation on the complex signaling networks involved in pathogenicity. By profiling a serine/threonine kinase and phosphatase mutant from a methicillin-resistant S.&#xa0;aureus mutant library, we generated the most comprehensive phosphoproteome data set of S.&#xa0;aureus to date, aiding a better understanding of signaling in bacteria. With the identification of 3800 class I p-sites, we were able to increase the number of identifications by more than 21 times compared with recent literature. In addition, we were able to identify 74 downstream targets of the only reported eukaryotic-type Ser/Thr kinase of the S.&#xa0;aureus strain USA300, Stk1. This work allowed an extensive analysis of the bacterial phosphoproteome and indicates that Ser/Thr kinase signaling is far more abundant than previously anticipated in S.&#xa0;aureus.

### Keywords
Phosphorylation, Stp1, Arginine phosphorylation, Staphylococcus aureus, Fragmentation

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Nadine Prust

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Lemeer
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


