### Accession
PXD017008

### Title
Multi-omics analysis identifies ALDH7A1 as a key regulator of the visual-olfactory bimodal learning in honeybee

### Description
Specific genes or encoded proteins are involved in regulating various learning models of different species through certain signaling pathways，but whether there are also regulatory genes during bimodal learning and memory is largely unknown. Using a multi-omics approach to examine gene expression changes in bees brain performed with three different learning assays, a general up-regulation of genes and proteins were observed in bimodal learning compared to controls. Protein-protein network predictions of differential proteins together with FISH assays suggest ALDH7A1 may be involved in regulation of bimodal learning and memory. Injecting siRNA-ALDH7A1 to the bee brain results in significant inhibition the expressions of ALDH7A1 and regucalcin, and increase β-alanine content. Interestingly, we found that loss of ALDH7A1 only affect visual-olfactory bimodal learning and memory, but not single visual or olfactory conditioned learning after ALDH7A1-RNAi in bees. Therefore, our data suggests that ALDH7A1 may affect bimodal learning and memory though controlling β-alanine related plasticity mechanisms.

### Sample Protocol
Honeybees (Apis cerana cerana ) came from the same colony and were obtained from the Honey-bee Research Institute, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang, China. the emerging workers were put into incubator for seven days(34°C，75% relative humidity). All bees in this study were obtained by this method, unless with special instructions. Three groups of bees were cold-anaesthetized and harnessed in copper tubes for the proboscis extension response (PER) assay. During times when they were not used for behavioural experiments, harnessed bees were kept in an incubator and fed with 10μL of 50% (weight/weight) sucrose solution every six hours. Four hours before starting the experiment, each bee was fed with 10μL of 40% sucrose. During the experiment, each bee was placed in the center of the experimental device, located in a dark room illuminated with 40 W ultraviolet-free fluorescent lamps. The olfactory stimuli used was 1-Nonanol (GR:99.8%, sigma). Odor needles were freshly prepared daily by placing 0.4ml of pure odorant onto a 1-cm2 stripe of filter paper loaded into a 10 ml plastic syringe, which allowed odorant delivery to the antennae. Odor was delivered using machine-controlled damping (Air-liquid damping cylinder，Ningbo maigenuo machinery manufacturing co. LTD) cylinder to inject odor for 6s into bees. Odor was immediately removed by an exhaust system. The visual stimuli consisted of two of blue light (λ=439nm) and orange light (λ=580 nm). Each monochromatic light was adjusted to have an irradiance of 3000 lx at the level of the bee’s eyes, measured by an illuminometer (PeakmeterMS6612, China)(The timing of visual stimuli is controlled by a delay relay).  In the experiments, rewarded trial uses compound stimulus with a visual (blue, X), an olfactory (1-Nonanol, O) component (XO+) and non-rewarded trial use a compound stimulus with another visual (orange, Y) but the same odor (YO-). The training lasted two days with a total of 16 rewarded trials and 16 non-rewarded trials. Each trial lasted for 30 s. At the beginning of each trial, the bee was placed inside the device during 8 sec so as to have an intimate knowledge of the experimental context. An extractor placed near the subject was running continuously to prevent odorant accumulation. Thereafter, the visual stimulus (X) was presented for 12 sec. Six sec after color onset, the odor (O) was presented for 6 sec, so visual stimulus and odor stimulus overlapped for 6 sec. After the visual disappeared, 1μL of 40% sucrose solution was delivered to the bee for 3 sec by a precision syringe. Afterward, the bee was kept in the context for 7 sec before another trial (YO-). Non-rewarded trials (YO-) followed the same time sequence. After the two trials, the next trial starts in 10 minutes. Visual control group was trained to discriminate X+ from Y- in the absence of odors. Olfactory control group was trained to discriminate O+ from O- in the absence of colors. In olfactory control group, the bees were placed inside the device during 11 sec and kept in the context for10 sec before another trial. One hour after training, a retention test was performed in a randomized presentation of YO and XO. Test sequence was randomized from bee to bee. The present stimulus of retention tests were the same dynamics as in the training. When all testing was done, only the bees that showed a correct proboscis (occurrence of PER with XO and absence of PER with YO) were flash frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C for the follow-up study. In addition, bees were randomly collected in two control groups after the retention test

### Data Protocol
Sample preparation, protein digestion and TMT labeling were performed as previously described70,71. Briefly, each tryptic digest was labeled using TMT as per the manufacturer’s instruction. Peptides derived from samples were labeled with TMT TMT10-plex reagents (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label ReagentSet, Thermofisher). The samples were alkylated and digested with Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI) at 37°C for 16h. TMT-labeled peptide mix was fractionated using a C18 column (waters BEHC18 4.6 × 250 mm, 5 µm)。LC-MS/MS analyses were performed using a Easy nanoLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled an Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting spectra from each fraction were searched separately against NCBI (ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genomes/genbank/invertebrate/Apis_cerana/all_assembly_versions/GCA_002290385.1_ApisCC1.0) by the search engines: Proteome Discoverer 3.0 (PD 3.0, Thermo). Mann-Whitney Tests were used to compare the differences among three groups. The differentially expressed proteins were statistically analyzed by Mann-Whitney Test, and P< 0.05 and |log 2 FC| > 1.2 or 0.83 < |log 2 FC|. TMT analysis was performed as a service at the Termo Fisher Center for multiplexed Proteomics at Novogene (Beijing, China). The mass spectrometry proteomics data have been deposited to the Proteome X change Consortium via PRIDE17 partner repository with the dataset identifers PXD01145318 (FA) and PXD01086119 (UUO).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Visual-olfactory bimodal learning

### Affiliations
86+18770910663
jiangxi

### Submitter
zhang yong

### Lab Head
Dr zhang yong
jiangxi


