### Accession
PXD042358

### Title
Identification of membrane proteins regulated by ADAM15 by SUSPECS proteomics

### Description
ADAM15 is a member of the disintegrin-metalloproteinase family of sheddases, which plays a role in several biological processes including cartilage homeostasis. In contrast with well-characterized ADAMs, such as the canonical sheddases ADAM17 and ADAM10, little is known about substrates of ADAM15 or how the enzyme exerts its biological functions. Herein, we used “surface-spanning enrichment with click-sugars (SUSPECS)” proteomics to identify ADAM15 substrates and/or proteins regulated by the proteinase at the cell surface of chondrocyte-like cells. Silencing of ADAM15 by siRNAs significantly altered membrane levels of 13 proteins, all previously not known to be regulated by ADAM15. We used orthogonal techniques to validate ADAM15 effects on 3 of these proteins which have known roles in cartilage homeostasis. This confirmed that ADAM15-silencing increased cell surface levels of the programmed cell death 1 ligand 2 (PDCD1LG2) and reduced cell surface levels of vasorin and the sulfate transporter SLC26A2 through an unknown post-translational mechanism. The increase of PDCD1LG2 by ADAM15 knockdown, a single-pass type I transmembrane protein, suggested it could be a proteinase substrate. However, shed PDCD1LG2 could not be detected even by a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, a highly sensitive method for identification and quantification of proteins in complex protein samples, suggesting that ADAM15 regulates PDCD1LG2 membrane levels by a mechanism different from ectodomain shedding.

### Sample Protocol
Conditioned media from HTB94 ADAM15KD and NTC were collected and subjected to FASP protocol. Briefly, proteins were reduced by the addition of 1 M Dithiothreitol (DTT, Thermo Fischer Scientific) in 100 mM Tris/HCl, 8 M urea pH 8.5 for 30 min at 37 °C. Proteins were then alkylated in 50 mM iodoacetamide (IAA, Thermo Fischer Scientific) for 5 min at room temperature and washed twice in 100 mM Tris/HCl, 8 M urea pH 8.0 at 14,000× g for 30 min. Proteins were digested with 0,2 μg LysC (Promega, Madison, United States) in 25 mM Tris/HCl, 2 M urea pH 8.0 overnight and with 0,1 μg trypsin (Promega) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 4 h. Resulting peptides were desalted by stop-and-go extraction (STAGE) on reverse phase C18 (Supelco Analytical Products, part of Sigma-Aldrich, Bellefonte, US), and eluted in 40 μL of 60% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. Then, volume was reduced in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the peptides resuspended in 20 μL of 0.1% formic acid. Peptide concentration was measured by a NanoDrop microvolume spectrophotometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific) and 1 μg peptides were applied to LC-MS/MS analysis. To achieve high sensitivity, a nanoLC system (Vanquish Neo UHPLC  – part of Thermo Scientific) using an Acclaim PEPMap C18 column (25cm × 75 µm ID, Thermo Scientific, Waltham) was coupled online to an Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fischer Scientific). Peptides were separated using a 130 minutes binary gradient of water and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid. Data-independent acquisition (DIA) was performed using a MS1 full scan followed by 60 sequential DIA windows with an overlap of 1m/z and window placement optimization option enabled. Full scans were acquired with 120000 resolution, automatic gain control (AGC) of 3x106, and maximum injection time of 50ms. Afterwards, 60 isolation windows were scanned with a resolution of 30000, an AGC of 8x105 and maximum injection time was set as auto to achieve the optimal cycle time. Collision induced dissociation fragmentation was induced with 30% of the normalized HCD collision energy.

### Data Protocol
The data were analysed by the software DIA-NN (version 1.8.1) by using a predicted library generated from in silico digested human Uniprot reference database involving cuts at K* and R*, two missed cleavage allowed, minimal peptide length set a 6, which consisted of 20923 proteins, 31382 protein groups, 6894911 precursors in 2140232 elution groups. The false discovery rate for peptide and protein identification was set at 0.01%. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was used for proteins quantification.

### Publication Abstract
ADAM15 is a member of the disintegrin-metalloproteinase family of sheddases, which plays a role in several biological processes including cartilage homeostasis. In contrast with well-characterized ADAMs, such as the canonical sheddases ADAM17 and ADAM10, little is known about substrates of ADAM15 or how the enzyme exerts its biological functions. Herein, we used "surface-spanning enrichment with click-sugars (SUSPECS)" proteomics to identify ADAM15 substrates and/or proteins regulated by the proteinase at the cell surface of chondrocyte-like cells. Silencing of ADAM15 by siRNAs significantly altered membrane levels of 13 proteins, all previously not known to be regulated by ADAM15. We used orthogonal techniques to validate ADAM15 effects on 3 of these proteins which have known roles in cartilage homeostasis. This confirmed that ADAM15-silencing increased cell surface levels of the programmed cell death 1 ligand 2 (PDCD1LG2) and reduced cell surface levels of vasorin and the sulfate transporter SLC26A2 through an unknown post-translational mechanism. The increase of PDCD1LG2 by ADAM15 knockdown, a single-pass type I transmembrane protein, suggested it could be a proteinase substrate. However, shed PDCD1LG2 could not be detected even by a data-independent acquisition mass spectrometry, a highly sensitive method for identification and quantification of proteins in complex protein samples, suggesting that ADAM15 regulates PDCD1LG2 membrane levels by a mechanism different from ectodomain shedding.

### Keywords
Metalloproteases, Adams, Chondrocytes, Proteomics, Adam15, Osteoarthritis, Mass spectrometry-lc-ms/ms, Specs

### Affiliations
Fondazione Ri.MED

### Submitter
Matteo Calligaris

### Lab Head
Dr Simone Dario Scilabra
Fondazione Ri.MED


