### Accession
PXD017306

### Title
Analysis of the proteome in ‘physiologically humanised’ adipose tissue

### Description
Rodents are commonly housed below thermoneutrality (~20°C) 1. Under these conditions there is a substantial effect on rodent physiology including the hyperactivation of brown (BAT) and beige adipose tissue 2. Here, we raised animals from weaning, on an obesogenic diet at thermoneutrality (28°C) to closer mimic human physiology and determine the impact of a) moderate cold exposure (i.e. 20°C, a temperature reduction of ~8°C) or b) treatment with YM-178, a highly-selective, clinically used β3-adrenoreceptor agonist on classical BAT or subcutaneous inguinal (IWAT) beige depots. Under these conditions, uncoupling protein 1 mRNA was undetectable in IWAT in all groups. Maintenance at 20°C drove weight gain and a 125% increase in subcutaneous fat, an effect not seen with YM-178 administration thus suggesting a direct effect of ambient temperature in promoting weight gain and adiposity in obese rats. Using exploratory adipose tissue proteomics we reveal novel processes and pathways associated with cold-induced weight gain in BAT (i.e. histone deacetylation and glycosphingolipid biosynthesis) and IWAT (i.e. NAD+ binding and retinol metabolism). Conversely, YM-178 had minimal metabolic-related effects on BAT and drove a pro-inflammatory phenotype in IWAT.   Exercise training elicits diverse effects on brown (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) physiology in rodents housed below their thermoneutral zone (i.e. 28-32°C). In these conditions, BAT is chronically hyperactive and, unlike human residence, closer to thermoneutrality. Therefore, we set out to determine the effects of exercise training in obese animals at 28°C (i.e. thermoneutrality) on BAT and WAT in its basal (i.e. inactive) state.  Sprague-Dawley rats (n=12) were housed at thermoneutrality from 3 weeks of age and fed a high-fat diet. At 12 weeks of age half these animals were randomised to 4-weeks of swim-training (1 hour/day, 5 days per week). Following a metabolic assessment interscapular and perivascular BAT and inguinal (I)WAT were taken for analysis of thermogenic genes and the proteome.  Exercise attenuated weight gain but did not affect total fat mass or thermogenic gene expression. Proteomics revealed an impact of exercise training on2-oxoglutarate metabolic process, mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV, carbon metabolism and oxidative phosphorylation. This was accompanied by an upregulation of multiple proteins involved in skeletal muscle physiology suggesting an adipocyte to myocyte switch in BAT. UCP1 mRNA was undetectable in IWAT with proteomics highlighting changes to DNA binding, the positive regulation of apoptosis, HIF-1 signalling and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve male Sprague-Dawley rats aged 3 weeks were obtained from Charles River (Kent, UK) and housed (3 per cage) immediately at thermoneutrality (c.28°C) under a 12:12-hour reverse light-dark cycle (lights off at 08:00, on at 20:00) so as to closer mimic human physiology 20, minimise animal stress and maximise data quality and translatability 22. Animals were fed a high-fat diet (824018 SDS, Kent, UK) ad-libitum with half of these animals randomised to 4 weeks of exercise training (Ex) at 12 weeks of age. Body weight, food and water intake (ad-lib) were monitored weekly. At 12 weeks of age, the Ex group were acclimatised to water (c.35°C) for a 3-day period (10-20 minutes per day). After acclimatisation, the Ex group underwent the 4-week swim training programme (1 h/day for 5 days/week). As described by the American Physiological Society, “Continuous swimming involves continuous movement of the rat’s forelimbs and hindlimbs while maintaining its snout above the waterline” 23. We confirmed this behaviour, and the ability of each animal to swim, prior to commencing the training programme. Animals were individually placed in an open-circuit calorimeter for 48 h following training and prior to tissue collection. Assessment of whole body metabolism was performed as previously described 21, after which all animals were weighed and fasted overnight prior to euthanasia by rising CO2 gradient. BAT, IWAT, PVAT from the thoracic aorta and portion of the central liver lobe were then rapidly dissected, weighed, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C for subsequent analysis. All fat depots were excised and weighed to calculate total fat mass. 50-100 mg of frozen BAT and IWAT was homogenised in 500 mL CellLytic MT cell lysis buffer (Sigma, C3228) prior to removal of lipid and other non-protein components using the ReadyPrep 2D clean up Kit (Biorad, 1632130). Samples (50 ug) were then subjected to reduction, alkylation (DTT, iodoacetamide) and overnight trypsinisation at 37 C, following which they were dried down at 60°C for and stored at -80°C before resuspension in 30 uL LCMS grade 5% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for subsequent analysis. Analysis by mass spectrometry was performed on a SCIEX TripleTOF 6600 instrument (Duospray source, 5 uL/min, YMC triart C18 column (150x0.3mm 3 um, 4 uL injection). Briefly, samples were analysed in both SWATH (57 min, Data Independent Acquisition, 100 variable windows) and IDA (87 min, Information Dependent Acquisition) modes for quantitation and spectral library generation respectively.

### Data Protocol
For IWAT, SWATH-MS data were extracted against a spectral library generated from multiple information dependent acquisition MS analyses (5 pools) searched together using ProteinPilot 5.02 searched against Swissprot Rat protein fasta (June 2018 release, carbamidomethylation of cysteines fixed, oxidation methionines variable), limited to proteins/peptides at 1 % FDR, excluding modified peptides.  For BAT, the libraries from IWAT were combined with a previously generated library from Rat NRK52 cell lysates using OneOmics. IDA library data were aligned to the SWATH files in Peakview 2.1 using the SWATH microapp (Sciex). Data were processed using the OneOmics cloud processing software (Sciex), 6 peptides per protein, 6 transitions per peptide, 30 ppm xic, 5 min SWATH window.

### Publication Abstract
<b>Aim:</b> Exercise training elicits diverse effects on brown (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT) physiology in rodents housed below their thermoneutral zone (i.e., 28-32&#xb0;C). In these conditions, BAT is chronically hyperactive and, unlike human residence, closer to thermoneutrality. Therefore, we set out to determine the effects of exercise training in obese animals at 28&#xb0;C (i.e., thermoneutrality) on BAT and WAT in its basal (i.e., inactive) state. <b>Methods:</b> Sprague-Dawley rats (<i>n</i> = 12) were housed at thermoneutrality from 3 weeks of age and fed a high-fat diet. At 12 weeks of age half these animals were randomized to 4-weeks of swim-training (1 h/day, 5 days per week). Following a metabolic assessment interscapular and perivascular BAT and inguinal (I)WAT were taken for analysis of thermogenic genes and the proteome. <b>Results:</b> Exercise attenuated weight gain but did not affect total fat mass or thermogenic gene expression. Proteomics revealed an impact of exercise training on 2-oxoglutarate metabolic process, mitochondrial respiratory chain complex IV, carbon metabolism, and oxidative phosphorylation. This was accompanied by an upregulation of multiple proteins involved in skeletal muscle physiology in BAT and an upregulation of muscle specific markers (i.e., Myod1, CkM, Mb, and MyoG). UCP1 mRNA was undetectable in IWAT with proteomics highlighting changes to DNA binding, the positive regulation of apoptosis, HIF-1 signaling and cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction. <b>Conclusion:</b> Exercise training reduced weight gain in obese animals at thermoneutrality and is accompanied by an oxidative signature in BAT which is accompanied by a muscle-like signature rather than induction of thermogenic genes. This may represent a new, UCP1-independent pathway through which BAT physiology is regulated by exercise training.

### Keywords
Adipocyte, Adipose, Exercise, Rat, Cold, Lc-msms, Swath, Thermoneutrality, Dia

### Affiliations
Nottingham Trent University
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre Nottingham Trent University Nottingham, UK

### Submitter
David Boocock

### Lab Head
Dr David Boocock
John van Geest Cancer Research Centre Nottingham Trent University Nottingham, UK


