### Accession
PXD000261

### Title
Host response profile of human brain proteome in toxoplasma encephalitis

### Description
Frontal cortex brain tissues obtained from 5 toxoplasma encephalitis  patients and 5 controls were used for protein extraction.  Protein amount was normalized on 10% SDS-PAGE, equal amount of protein from 5 patients and 5 controls were pooled separately and subjected to reduction, alkylation and trypsin digestion. iTRAQ labelling of samples were carried out in replicates. Peptides from  control samples were labelled with iTRAQ labels leading to the reporter ions of 114 and 115 whereas peptides from patient  samples were labelled with iTRAQ labels leading to the reporter ions of 116 and 117. Labelled peptides were then pooled and  subjected to SCX fractionation and obtained 21 fractions, which were subsequently subjected to high-resolution Fourier transform  mass spectrometry (LTQ-Orbitrap Velos).

### Sample Protocol
100 mg of frontal lobe brain sample from five individuals with toxoplasma encephalitis-HIV and five uninfected control were homogenized in liquid nitrogen.  Tissues were lysed in 0.5% SDS and centrifuged at 14,000xg for 30 min 4°C. The protein concentration of the cleared lysate was estimated using BCA assay and equal amounts of protein from five TE-HIV samples were pooled. Similar processing was done for control samples. The equal amounts of protein from toxoplasma encephalitis-HIV and control were then subjected to tryptic digestion following reduction and alkylation with DTT and IAA respectively. Tryptic peptides were then labeled by using 4-plex iTRAQ labels in technical replicates. Pooled peptides were subjected to SCX fractionation. The fractions collected were pooled based on SCX profile into 21 fractions and desalted using C18 stage tip followed by LC-MS/MS analysis. Mass spectrometry data was acuired on LTQ Orbitrap Velos ETD – mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data obtained was searched against the Human RefSeq 52 database through Proteome Discoverer  version 1.3 (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) with the following parameters: a) Trypsin with 1 missed cleavage b) Oxidation of methionine was set as dynamic modification c) Methylthio modification of cysteine and iTRAQ modification at N-terminus of the peptide and lysine were set as static modifications d) Precursor mass tolerance was set to 20ppm e) Fragment mass tolerance was set to 0.1 Da. The raw data was searched against decoy database to calculate 1% false discovery rate cut-off score.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Neuroinfections, Immunosuppression, Ltq-orbitrap velos

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21205 USA


