### Accession
PXD001043

### Title
Proteasome composition analysis

### Description
Proteasome complexes diversity was studied by AP-MS approaches.

### Sample Protocol
Proteasome complexes were affinity purified and analysed by LC-MS/MS on a LTQ-Orbitrap mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The mascot engine was used for the database search and proteins were validated and quantified using MFPaQ.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotic cells, intracellular protein breakdown is mainly performed by the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Proteasomes are supramolecular protein complexes formed by the association of multiple sub-complexes and interacting proteins. Therefore, they exhibit a very high heterogeneity whose function is still not well understood. Here, using a newly developed method based on the combination of affinity purification and protein correlation profiling associated with high-resolution mass spectrometry, we comprehensively characterized proteasome heterogeneity and identified previously unknown preferential associations within proteasome sub-complexes. In particular, we showed for the first time that the two main proteasome subtypes, standard proteasome and immunoproteasome, interact with a different subset of important regulators. This trend was observed in very diverse human cell types and was confirmed by changing the relative proportions of both 20S proteasome forms using interferon-&#x3b3;. The new method developed here constitutes an innovative and powerful strategy that could be broadly applied for unraveling the dynamic and heterogeneous nature of other biologically relevant supramolecular protein complexes.

### Keywords
Human, Proteasome

### Affiliations
Department of Biophysics and Structural Biology, IPBS/CNRS, Toulouse, France
CNRS/IPBS

### Submitter
Fabre Bertrand

### Lab Head
Dr Burlet-Schiltz Odile
Department of Biophysics and Structural Biology, IPBS/CNRS, Toulouse, France


