### Accession
PXD003553

### Title
Distinct Combinatorial Cascade of Events Generated by ECM Proteolysis Dictates Cell Behavior

### Description
It is well established that the expression profiles of multiple and possibly redundant matrix remodeling proteases (e.g. collagenases) strongly differentiates in disease and development. Although enzymatic redundancy might be inferred from their close similarity in structure, their in-vivo activity can lead to extremely diverse tissue-remodeling outcomes. We observed that proteolysis of collagen, generated uniquely by individual homologous proteases, leads to a specific cascade of combinatorial events, which eventually affects overall extracellular matrix (ECM) topography, visco-elastic properties and composition. We reveal striking differences in the migratory and signaling patterns, morphology, and gene expression profiles of cells interacting with native collagen-rich ECM matrix degraded by different collagenases. Thus unlike envisioned before degradative matrix remodeling systems are not redundant and give rise to precise ECM-cell crosstalk. As ECM proteolysis is an abundant biochemical process critical to tissue homeostasis these results improve our fundamental understanding of systemic factors dictating cell behavior.

### Sample Protocol
Extra cellular matrix proteins were isolated, then subjected to tryptic digestion or MMP digestion followed by tryptic digestion.Extra cellular matrix proteins were isolated, then subjected to tryptic digestion or MMP digestion followed by tryptic digestion.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using the Elucidator system and protein identifications were generated using Proteinlynx Global Server v2.5.2.

### Publication Abstract
It is well established that the expression profiles of multiple and possibly redundant matrix-remodeling proteases (e.g., collagenases) differ strongly in health, disease, and development. Although enzymatic redundancy might be inferred from their close similarity in structure, their in vivo activity can lead to extremely diverse tissue-remodeling outcomes. We observed that proteolysis of collagen-rich natural extracellular matrix (ECM), performed uniquely by individual homologous proteases, leads to distinct events that eventually affect overall ECM morphology, viscoelastic properties, and molecular composition. We revealed striking differences in the motility and signaling patterns, morphology, and gene-expression profiles of cells interacting with natural collagen-rich ECM degraded by different collagenases. Thus, in contrast to previous notions, matrix-remodeling systems are not redundant and give rise to precise ECM-cell crosstalk. Because ECM proteolysis is an abundant biochemical process that is critical for tissue homoeostasis, these results improve our fundamental understanding its complexity and its impact on cell behavior.

### Keywords
Proteomics, Metalloproteinase, Ecm

### Affiliations
Weizmann Institute of Science
Weizmann Institute of Science, Israel

### Submitter
Yishai Levin

### Lab Head
Dr Irit Sagi
Weizmann Institute of Science


