### Accession
PXD011452

### Title
Quantitative analyses reveal novel roles for N-glycosylation in a major enteric bacterial pathogen

### Description
In eukaryotes glycosylation plays a role in proteome stability, protein quality control and modulating protein function, however, similar studies in bacteria are lacking. Here, we investigate the role of general protein glycosylation systems in bacteria using the enteropathogen Campylobacter jejuni as a well-defined example. By using a quantitative proteomics strategy, we were able to monitor changes in the C. jejuni proteome when glycosylation is disrupted. We demonstrate that in C. jejuni, N-glycosylation is essential to maintain proteome stability and protein quality control. These findings guided us to investigate the role of N-glycosylation in modulating bacterial cellular activities. In glycosylation deficient C. jejuni, the multidrug efflux pump and electron transport pathways were significantly impaired. In vivo, we demonstrate that fully glycosylation deficient C. jejuni were unable to colonise its natural avian host. These results provide the first evidence of a link between proteome stability and complex functions via a bacterial general glycosylation system.

### Sample Protocol
Protein preparation and digestion C. jejuni were grown overnight in Brucella broth under microaerophilic conditions at 37 oC under shaking conditions at 75 rpm. The following day, 3.5 ml were withdrawn to inoculate 30 ml culture to a final OD600 =0.1. The cultures were then incubated as above till OD600= 0.4-0.5. Cells were harvested by centrifugation at 4000 xg for 45 minutes. Supernatant was discarded, and cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2M thiourea, 5 mM DTT and 2% (wt/vol) CHAPS) ultrasonicated following the manufacturers procedure for extraction of native protein samples from yeast cells (Covaris, US). Protein concentration was then measured using Bradford assay (Sigma, UK) following the manufacturer’s protocol then normalised to a total protein amount of 25 μg for enzymatic digestion. Prior to enzymatic digestion and labelling, samples were loaded into a stack gel for lysis buffer clean-up to eliminate any chemical interference at the labelling stage and to compress the whole proteome into a single band. Sample volumes were dried by half in a SpeedVac (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) with the volume replaced by Laemmli buffer (2x) and boiled for 10 minutes at 96 oC. Reduced samples were loaded on to a 10% BisTris NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen, UK) and resolved for 10 minutes (100 volts; 59 mA; 6 watts) to ‘stack’ the whole sample in to a single band. Protein bands were visualised using Imperial protein stain (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK). Gel bands were then excised, chopped, washed with acetonitrile (ACN), dried and reduced by rehydration in 10 mM DTT for 30 minutes at 56 oC. Gel slices were then washed with ACN, dried and alkylated by incubation in 55 mM IAA at ambient temperature for 20 mins in the dark followed by washing in 100 mM TEAB, drying and incubation in 40 μl trypsin (1.25 μg) at 37 oC overnight. Peptides were extracted by collecting reaction supernatant. Peptide TMT labelling  Each sample was treated individually with labels added at a 1:1 ratio. TMT6plex labels (Thermo Fisher Scientific, UK) were resuspended in 41 µl ACN, vortexed and centrifuged for 1 minute at 14000 rpm. Each vial of TMT reagent was added to the appropriate sample, vortexed and briefly centrifuged at 14000 rpm before incubation at room temperature for 1 hour. Reaction was stopped by adding 8 μl of 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma, UK) to each sample and incubated for a further 15 minutes at room temperature. Samples were then combined for each TMT6plex and incubated at room temperature for further 15 minutes followed by freezing at –80 oC and drying in SpeedVac. LC-MS/MS tandem mass spectrometry The combined TMT labelled peptide sample was resuspended in a solution containing water:acetonitrile:trifluoroacetic acid (98%:2%:0.05%) and analysed by LC-MS/MS. Chromatographic separations were performed using an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (ThermoFisherScientific, UK). A 3 l injection of peptides (equivalent of 15 g peptides) was resolved by reversed phase chromatography on a 75 m C18 column (50 cm) using a three-step linear gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid. The gradient was delivered to elute the peptides at a flow rate of 250 nL/min over 120 min. The eluate was ionised by electrospray ionisation using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos (ThermoFisherScientific, UK) operating under Xcalibur v4.1. The instrument was programmed to acquire in automated data-dependent switching mode, selecting precursor ions based on their intensity for sequencing by Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) for peptide identification and reporter ion fragmentation. Selection of precursor ions based on their intensity for sequencing by HCD in a TopN method. The MS/MS analyses were conducted using higher than normal collision energy profiles that were chosen based on the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) and the charge state of the peptide. To increase fragmented peptide coverage and reporter ion intensities, a further Synchronous Precursor Scan (SPS) of the Top 5 most intense peaks using MS3 was performed.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data were processed into peak list files using Proteome Discoverer (Thermo Scientific; v2.2). The raw data file was processed and searched using the Mascot search algorithm (v2.6.0; www.matrixscience.com) and the Sequest search algorithm against the current Campylobacter jejuni 11168 proteome curated within Uniprot. Following processing with Proteome Discoverer, the result file was exported into Perseus (v1.6.1; http://www.perseus-framework.org) for qualitative and quantitative data analysis.

### Publication Abstract
In eukaryotes, glycosylation plays a role in proteome stability, protein quality control, and modulating protein function; however, similar studies in bacteria are lacking. Here, we investigate the roles of general protein glycosylation systems in bacteria using the enteropathogen <i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> as a well-defined example. By using a quantitative proteomic strategy, we were able to monitor changes in the <i>C. jejuni</i> proteome when glycosylation is disrupted. We demonstrate that in <i>C. jejuni</i><i>, N-</i>glycosylation is essential to maintain proteome stability and protein quality control. These findings guided us to investigate the role of <i>N-</i>glycosylation in modulating bacterial cellular activities. In glycosylation-deficient <i>C. jejuni</i>, the multidrug efflux pump and electron transport pathways were significantly impaired. We demonstrate that <i>in vivo</i>, fully glycosylation-deficient <i>C. jejuni</i> bacteria were unable to colonize its natural avian host. These results provide the first evidence of a link between proteome stability and complex functions via a bacterial general glycosylation system.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Advances in genomics and mass spectrometry have revealed several types of glycosylation systems in bacteria. However, why bacterial proteins are modified remains poorly defined. Here, we investigated the role of general <i>N-</i>linked glycosylation in a major food poisoning bacterium, <i>Campylobacter jejuni</i> The aim of this study is to delineate the direct and indirect effects caused by disrupting this posttranslational modification. To achieve this, we employed a quantitative proteomic strategy to monitor alterations in the <i>C. jejuni</i> proteome. Our quantitative proteomic results linked general protein <i>N-</i>glycosylation to maintaining proteome stability. Functional analyses revealed novel roles for bacterial <i>N-</i>glycosylation in modulating multidrug efflux pump, enhancing nitrate reduction activity, and promoting host-microbe interaction. This work provides insights on the importance of general glycosylation in proteins in maintaining bacterial physiology, thus expanding our knowledge of the emergence of posttranslational modification in bacteria.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Glycosylation, Tmt, Campylobacter

### Affiliations
Wren Lab  London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine

### Submitter
Sherif Abouelhadid

### Lab Head
Dr Sherif Abouelhadid
Wren Lab  London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine


