### Accession
PXD009743

### Title
Mutations in NDUFS1 Cause Metabolic Reprogramming and Disruption of the Electron Transfer

### Description
Complex I (CI) is the first enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and couples the electron transfer with proton pumping. Mutations in genes encoding CI subunits can frequently cause inborn metabolic errors. We applied proteome and metabolome profiling of patient-derived cells harboring pathogenic mutations in two distinct CI genes to elucidate underlying pathomechanisms on the molecular level. Our results indicated that the electron transfer within CI was interrupted in both patients by different mechanisms. We showed that the biallelic mutations in NDUFS1 led to a decreased stability of the entire N-module of CI and disrupted the electron transfer between two iron–sulfur clusters. Strikingly interesting and in contrast to the proteome, metabolome profiling illustrated that the pattern of dysregulated metabolites was almost identical in both patients, such as the inhibitory feedback on the TCA cycle and altered glutathione levels, indicative for reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress. Our findings deciphered pathological mechanisms of CI deficiency to better understand inborn metabolic errors.

### Sample Protocol
Three confluent biological replicates of each patient and two primary control fibroblast cell lines were harvested from T75 flasks and lysed under denaturing conditions in a buffer containing 6 M guanidinium chloride (GdmCl), 5 mM tris (2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, 20 mM chloroacetamide and 50 mM Tris pH 8.5. Lysates were denatured at 95°C for 15 min, shaking at 800 rpm in a thermal block and sonicated in a water bath for 15 min. A small aliquot of cell lysate was used for BCA assay to quantify the total protein amount. Lysates were diluted with dilution buffer containing 10% acetonitrile and 25 mM Tris, pH 8.5, to reach a 1M GdmCl concentration. 100 µg protein was digested with 2 µg LysC (MS-grade Roche, enzyme to protein ratio 1:50), shaking at 800 rpm at 25°C for 2 hours. The digestion mixture was diluted again to 0.5 M GdmCl. Then, 2 µg trypsin (MS-grade, Roche, enzyme to protein ratio 1:50) was added and the digestion mixture was incubated at 37°C overnight on a rocking platform at 800 rpm for 14 hours. Solid phase extraction (SPE) disc cartridges (C18-SD, Waters, Milford, MA, USA) were used for peptide desalting according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Desalted peptides were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid in water and further separated into four fractions by strong cation exchange chromatography (SCX, 3M Purification, Meriden, CT, USA). Eluates were dried by SpeedVac and dissolved in 20 µl 5% acetonitrile, 2% formic acid, briefly vortexed and sonicate in a water bath for 30 seconds prior injection to nano LC-MS. LC−MS/MS was carried out by nanoflow reverse phase liquid chromatography (Dionex Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) coupled online to a Q-Exactive Plus Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). Briefly, the LC separation was performed using a PicoFrit analytical column (75 μm ID × 55 cm long, 15 µm Tip ID) (New Objectives, Woburn, MA) in-house packed with 2.1-µm C18 resin (Reprosil-AQ Pur, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were eluted using a non-linear gradient from 2 to 40% solvent B over 101 min at a flow rate of 266 nL/min (solvent A: 99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid; solvent B: 79.9% acetonitrile, 20% water, 0.1% formic acid). 3.5 kilovolts were applied for nanoelectrospray generation. A cycle of one full FT scan mass spectrum (300−1,750 m/z, resolution of 60,000 at m/z 200, AGC target 1e6) was followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans (resolution of 30,000, AGC target 5e5, isolation window 2 m/z) with normalized collision energy of 25 eV. Target ions already selected for MS/MS were dynamically excluded for 15 seconds. In addition, only peptide charge states between two to eight were allowed.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data were processed with MaxQuant software (v1.6.0.1) and searched against the human proteome database UniProtKB with 21,074 entries, released in 12/2018. Parameters of MaxQuant database searching were: A false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01 for proteins and peptides, a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids, a mass tolerance of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 20 ppm for fragment ions were required. A maximum of two missed cleavages was allowed for the tryptic digest. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, while N-terminal acetylation and methionine oxidation were set as variable modifications. Contaminants as well as proteins identified by site modification and proteins derived from the reversed part of the decoy database were strictly excluded from further analysis. The MaxQuant processed output contains peptide and protein identification, accession numbers, % sequence coverage of the protein, q-values, and LFQ intensities.

### Publication Abstract
Complex I (CI) is the first enzyme of the mitochondrial respiratory chain and couples the electron transfer with proton pumping. Mutations in genes encoding CI subunits can frequently cause inborn metabolic errors. We applied proteome and metabolome profiling of patient-derived cells harboring pathogenic mutations in two distinct CI genes to elucidate underlying pathomechanisms on the molecular level. Our results indicated that the electron transfer within CI was interrupted in both patients by different mechanisms. We showed that the biallelic mutations in <i>NDUFS1</i> led to a decreased stability of the entire N-module of CI and disrupted the electron transfer between two iron-sulfur clusters. Strikingly interesting and in contrast to the proteome, metabolome profiling illustrated that the pattern of dysregulated metabolites was almost identical in both patients, such as the inhibitory feedback on the TCA cycle and altered glutathione levels, indicative for reactive oxygen species (ROS) stress. Our findings deciphered pathological mechanisms of CI deficiency to better understand inborn metabolic errors.

### Keywords
Ndufs1, Metabolome profiling, Mt-nd5, Proteome profiling, Mitochondrial complex i

### Affiliations
Mass Spectrometry Facility MPIMG
Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Ihnestrasse 63-73 14195 Berlin GERMANY

### Submitter
David Meierhofer

### Lab Head
Dr David Meierhofer
Mass Spectrometry Facility Max Planck Institute for Molecular Genetics Ihnestrasse 63-73 14195 Berlin GERMANY


