### Accession
PXD029487

### Title
Proteomic Changes of Wheat Male Sterile Anther Induced by Temperature

### Description
Wheat, an important human food crop, is very sensitive to temperature changes.  Thermosensitive sterile lines (TMS) is a natural material for exploring the effects of anther development and temperature changes on male fertility. In order to study the possible molecular mechanism of regulating protein activity during anther fertility alteration, proteomics analysis based on high resolution mass spectrometry were used to study the binuclear anther of wheat YS3038.

### Sample Protocol
The same growth environment of wheat before booting. One week before the booting stage of wheat, it was moved to different fertility temperatures, greenhouses setting sterile（YS3038-A） environment and fertile（YS3038-B） environment.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant search engine (v.1.5.2.8). Tandem mass spectra were searched against human uniprot database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 5 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 0.02 Da. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification and acetylation modification and oxidation on Met were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1% and minimum score for modified peptides was set > 40.

### Publication Abstract
Thermosensitive sterile lines are natural materials for exploring the effects of anther development on male fertility. To study the possible molecular mechanisms regulating protein activity during the induction of male sterility, proteomic and phosphoproteomic analyses with tandem mass tags (TMTs) were used to study the binucleate anther of the thermosensitive sterile wheat line YS3038. A total of 9072 proteins, including 5019 phosphoproteins, were identified. Enrichment analyses of differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) and phosphoproteins (DAPPs) in metabolic pathways showed that both were mainly related to energy metabolism. Soluble sugar and ATP content were significantly decreased, free fatty acid content was significantly increased, and ROS was abnormally accumulated in male sterile YS3038-A. In addition, 233 kinase-substrate pairs involved in potential phosphorylation control networks were predicted to regulate fertility. Candidate proteins were identified, and a quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) analysis was used to validate the TMT results. <i>TaPDCD5</i> is likely to be involved in fertility conversion of YS3038 by barley stripe mosaic virus-induced gene silencing (BSMV-VIGS). Our data provide new insights into the mechanism of TCMS, which has value for identifying potential candidate proteins associated with the formation or abortion of pollen and promotion of wheat heterosis utilization.

### Keywords
Anther, Proteome, Male sterile, Wheat

### Affiliations
College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shanxi, China
Northwest A&F University

### Submitter
Lingjian Ma

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjian Ma
College of Agronomy, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shanxi, China


