### Accession
PXD008327

### Title
Kinases orchestrate phospho-proteome dynamics during mitotic exit

### Description
The cell division cycle culminates in mitosis when two daughter cells are born. As cyclin-dependent kinase (Cdk) activity reaches its peak, the Anaphase Promoting Complex (APC) is activated to trigger sister chromatid separation and mitotic spindle elongation, followed by spindle disassembly and cytokinesis. Degradation of mitotic cyclins and activation of Cdk-counteracting phosphatases are thought to cause protein dephosphorylation to control these sequential events. Here, we use budding yeast to analyze phosphorylation dynamics of 3456 phosphosites on 1101 proteins with high temporal resolution as cells progress synchronously through mitosis. This illustrates sequential protein dephosphorylation and reveals that the order arises from successive inactivation of S and M phase Cdks and of the mitotic kinase Polo. Unexpectedly, we detect as many new phosphorylation events as there are dephosphorylation events. These correlate with late mitotic kinase activation and identify numerous candidate targets of these kinases. Our findings revise our view of mitotic exit and portray it as a dynamic process in which a range of mitotic kinases instruct the order of both protein dephosphorylation as well as phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
GAL1-CDC20 cells were grown for > 8 generations in synthetic complete medium containing 0.1 mg/ml of 13C10-arginine and 13C8-lysine and raffinose + galactose as the carbon source, then synchronized in mitosis by filtration and shift to medium containing raffinose only. Upon arrest, 10 aliquots of the culture were harvested and resuspended in 20% trichloroacetic acid for protein fixation. In parallel, a culture grown in rich medium containing the normal light amino acids was equally synchronized and then released for progression through mitotic exit. At the indicated timepoints, aliquots of this culture were retrieved, resuspended in 20% trichloroacetic acid and mixed with one of the metaphase aliquots of cells grown with heavy amino acids. Following acetone washes, cells were resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5 mM EDTA pH 7.5, 8 M urea) and opened by glass bead breakage. Protein extracts were cleared by centrifugation.  1 mg of protein sample was reduced by 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (56 °C, 25 min), alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide (room tem-perature, 30 min, dark) and quenched with 7.5 mM DTT. Samples were then diluted with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate to reduce the urea concentration to < 2 M prior to trypsin digestion (37 °C, overnight). Peptides were then desalted using a C18 Sep-Pak Lite cartridge (130 mg bed volume) under vacuum and dried. To ensure complete digestion, peptides were further digested using Lys-C in 10% acetonitrile, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate (37 °C, 2 h), followed by trypsin digestion (37 °C, overnight). Digested proteins were then desalted again and dried. Phosphopeptide enrichment using titanium dioxide (TiO2) was carried out as follows. Dried peptide mixtures were resuspended in 1 M glycolic acid + 80% acetonitrile + 5% trifluoroacetic acid, sonicated (10 min) and added to titanium dioxide beads (5:1 (w/w) beads/protein). The beads were washed using 80% acetonitrile + 1% trifluoroacetic acid, followed by 10% acetonitrile + 0.2% tri-fluoroacetic acid and dried under vacuum centrifugation. Phosphopeptides were eluted from the beads by adding 1% ammonium hydroxide, followed by 5% ammonium hydroxide and dried by vacuum centrifugation. Dried phosphopeptides were re-suspended in 100 l of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and sonicated (15 min). A C18 membrane was packed into a 200 l pipette tip, washed using methanol and equilibrated with 1% trifluoroacetic acid. The peptides were loaded onto the stage tip and washed with 1% trifluoroacetic acid followed by elution with 80% acetonitrile + 5% trifluoroacetic acid. The eluted peptides were again dried by vacuum centrifugation.

### Data Protocol
An LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was used for data acquisition. Phosphopeptide mixtures were re-suspended in 35 l 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and injected three times (10 l per injection). Each run consisted of a 3 hr gradient elution (75 m x 50 cm C18 column) with one activation method per run: collision induced dissociation (CID), multi-stage activation (MSA) and higher energy collision dissociation (HCD).   MaxQuant (version 1.3.0.5) was used for all data processing. The data were searched against a UniProt extracted S. cerevisiae proteome FASTA file, amended to include common contaminants. A decoy database containing reverse sequences was used to estimate false discovery rates and set the false discovery rate at 1%. Default MaxQuant parameters were used with the following adjustments: Phospho(STY) was added as a variable modification, ‘Filter labeled amino acids’ was deselected, requantify was selected with the instruction to keep low-scoring versions of identified peptides within parameter groups and match between runs was selected. MaxQuant output files were imported into Perseus (version 1.4.0.2) and the normalized heavy-to-light (H/L) ratios were used for all subsequent analyses.

### Publication Abstract
Modifiable hydrogels have revealed tremendous insight into how physical characteristics of cells' 3D environment drive stem cell lineage specification. However, in native tissues, cells do not passively receive signals from their niche. Instead they actively probe and modify their pericellular space to suit their needs, yet the dynamics of cells' reciprocal interactions with their pericellular environment when encapsulated within hydrogels remains relatively unexplored. Here, we show that human bone marrow stromal cells (hMSC) encapsulated within hyaluronic acid-based hydrogels modify their surroundings by synthesizing, secreting and arranging proteins pericellularly or by degrading the hydrogel. hMSC's interactions with this local environment have a role in regulating hMSC fate, with a secreted proteinaceous pericellular matrix associated with adipogenesis, and degradation with osteogenesis. Our observations suggest that hMSC participate in a bi-directional interplay between the properties of their 3D milieu and their own secreted pericellular matrix, and that this combination of interactions drives fate.

### Keywords
Phosphatases, Phosphoproteomics, Mitosis, Cell cycle, Kinases

### Affiliations
The Francis Crick Institute
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK

### Submitter
Andrew Jones

### Lab Head
Dr Bram Snijders
Mass Spectrometry Proteomics Science Technology Platform, The Francis Crick Institute, London, UK


