### Accession
PXD028490

### Title
Phosphoproteome profiling using the isobaric carrier without the need for phosphoenrichment

### Description
Phosphorylation is a crucial component of signaling cascades in a cell. It controls various biological cellular functions such as cell growth and apoptosis. Due to the low stoichiometry of phosphorylaion, enrichment of phosphopeptide prior to LC-MS/MS is necessary for comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis and typical quantitative phosphoproteomic workflows are often limited by the amount of sample input. To address this issue, we developed an easy-to-establish, widely applicable and reproducible strategy to amplify phosphoproteome signals from a small amount of sample without phosphoenrichment step. Taking advantage of the multiplexing nature of isobaric labeling to achieve merged signal from multiple samples, and using a large amount of enriched phosphopeptides as a carrier, we were able to amplify a trace amount of phosphopeptide in the unpurified sample to an identifiable level and quantify it with the reporter ion intensity of the isobaric tag. Our result showed that >1400 phosphopeptide were quantified from 250 ng of tryptic peptides of cell extract. Through proof-of-concept experiments of our strategy, we distinguished 3 types of lung cancer cell line based on their quantitative phosphoproteome data and also identified phosphoproteome changes upon cellular perturbation achieved by drug treatment.

### Sample Protocol
The PBS-washed cell pellets were disrupted by ultrasonication in a lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0), 8 M urea, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1´ phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (Thermo scientific, Bremen, Germany). The lysate was centrifuged (13,000 ´g, 10 min, 4 °C) and the supernatant were collected. Proteins in the supernatant were reduced with 5 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride for 1 hr at 25 °C and then alkylated with 5 mM iodoacetamide for 2 hr. Samples were then diluted by 10-fold with 50 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) to lower the concentration of urea to 0.8 M and digested with 1:25 trypsin/lys-C mix (Promega, Madison, WI) for 16 h at 25 °C. Digests were acidified with trifluoroacetic acid and peptides were desalted on an OASYS HLB cartridge (Waters, Milford, MA) followed by drying in a vacuum centrifuge (Genevac Ltd, Gardiner, NY) to completion. For preparing phosphopeptide carrier used in this part, a commercial phosphopeptide enrichment kit, High-Select Fe-NTA Phosphopeptide Enrichment Kit (Thermo Scientific) was used. ~0.3 mg of tryptic peptides from bulk cell lysate was reconstituted to 200 µl of binding buffer and applied to phosphoenrichment according to manufacturer’s instructions. Briefly, peptide samples were incubated with Fe-NTA conjugated bead slurry at room temperature for 30 min with occasional tapping and the supernatant were discarded by centrifugation. After washing the beads with wash buffer twice and water once, the phosphopeptides were eluted from the Fe-NTA beads with strong alkaline elution buffer. The eluted phosphopeptide were dried down directly to reduce the detrimental effect of strong alkaline in elution buffer on phosphopeptide as previously described in our study21. The elution buffer for phosphopeptide consists of ammonium hydroxide, which have high vaporization rate as well as acetonitrile. Therefore, as ammonia evaporates, the pH drops quickly unlike hydroxylamine. This is why we concluded that drying the eluates of phosphopeptide directly is enough to avoid beta elimination of phosphate moiety. Dried peptides derived from tryptic digested sample and phosphoenrichment were re-suspended in water and concentration of peptide were determined by a quantitative colorimetric peptide assay (Thermo scientific) and the peptides were diluted to 1 mg/mL and 1 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate to final concentration 0.1 M. An equivalent aliquot was taken and mixed with TMT10 label reagent (Thermo scientific) priorly prepared in 82 µl of anhydrous acetonitrile (ACN) and incubated for 1 hr at room temperature. Tryptic derived from cells were labeled by mass reporters 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, 130N, 130C, 131N and 131C. Phosphopeptide derived from previous step were labeled by mass reporters 126 as phosphocarrier channel. TMT labeling reaction was quenched by addition of 5% aqueous hydroxylamine. After quenching step, TMT labeled peptide were merged except phosphocarrier. The reaction mixture was diluted with HPLC water to adjust ACN concentration to 5% and acidified to 0.5% TFA. The diluted sample was desalted on an HLB cartridge as described in our previous publication21. Eluted TMT-labeled peptides were dried in a vacuum centrifuge to completion. After desalting, dried peptide was reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid. After determination of the concentration of peptide by quantitative colorimetric peptide assay again, phospho-carrier labeled by TMT10-126 and tryptic peptide sample labeled by TMT10-128N~131C (8-channels) were mixed based on variable ratio combinations. The samples were reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid and analyzed with a reversed-phase C18 column (25 cm × 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 120 Å, packed in-house; Dr. Maisch GmbH) on an Eksigent nanoLC-ultra 1D plus system. Before use, the column was equilibrated with 95% mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid in H2O) and 5% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in ACN). The peptides were eluted with a linear gradient from 2-30%B over 110 min followed by 70%B wash at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. The HPLC system was connected to a Q-Exactive quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) operated in DDA mode. Survey full-scan MS spectra (m/z 400–1800) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000. Source ionization parameters were as follows: spray voltage, 2.5 kV; capillary temperature, 300 °C; s-lens level, 44.0. The MS peak width at half height was <15 s. The MS/MS spectra of the 10 most intense ions from the MS1 scan with a charge state ≥2 were acquired with the following options: resolution, 35,000; isolation width, 1.2 m/z; normalized collision energy, 32; fixed first mass, 120.0 m/z; ion selection threshold, 5.00E+06 counts; maximum IT, 300 ms; peptide match, ‘preferred’; dynamic exclusion, 60 sec.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed by Proteome discoverer 2.2.0.388 (Thermo Scientific) supported by the SequestHT search engine. The MS/MS spectra were searched against the UniProt human database (released in July. 2018) with the following search parameters: full tryptic specificity, up to three missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues, TMT6 labeling of peptide N-terminal and lysine residues set as a fixed modification, and methionine oxidation, phosphorylation at serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues were set as variable modification. Searches were performed using a 20 ppm of precursor ion tolerance and 0.05 Da for fragment ion tolerance. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01 both at the peptide and the peptide spectrum matches (PSM) level.

### Publication Abstract
Phosphorylation is a crucial component of cellular signaling cascades. It controls a variety of biological cellular functions, including cell growth and apoptosis. Owing to the low stoichiometry of phosphorylated proteins, the enrichment of phosphopeptides prior to LC-MS/MS is necessary for comprehensive phosphoproteome analysis, and quantitative phosphoproteomic workflows are typically limited by the amount of sample required. To address this issue, we developed an easy-to-establish, widely applicable, and reproducible strategy to increase phosphoproteomic signals from a small amount of sample without a phosphoenrichment step. By exploiting the multiplexing nature of isobaric labeling to generate a merged signal from multiple samples, and using a larger amount of enriched phosphopeptides as a carrier, we were able to increase trace amounts of phosphopeptides in the unpurified sample to an identifiable level and perform quantification using the reporter ion intensity of the isobaric tag. Our results showed that &gt;1400 phosphopeptides were quantified from 250 ng of tryptic peptides prepared from cells. In a proof-of-concept of our strategy, we distinguished three types of lung cancer cell lines based on their quantitative phosphoproteomic data and identified changes in the phosphoproteome induced by drug treatment.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomics, Isobaric labeling, Tmt, Phosphoproteome, Carrier

### Affiliations
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Center for theragnosis,  Korea Institute of Science and Technology

### Submitter
Yumi Kwon

### Lab Head
Dr Cheolju Lee
Center for theragnosis,  Korea Institute of Science and Technology


