### Accession
PXD027071

### Title
Gastrobodies are engineered antibody mimetics resilient to pepsin and hydrochloric acid

### Description
Protein-based targeting reagents, such as antibodies and non-antibody scaffold proteins, are rapidly inactivated in the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Hydrochloric acid in gastric juice denatures proteins and activates pepsin, concentrations of which reach 1 mg/mL in the mammalian stomach. Here we present gastrobodies, a protein scaffold derived from Kunitz soybean trypsin inhibitor (SBTI). SBTI is highly resistant to the challenges of the upper GI tract, including digestive proteases, pH 2 and bile acids. Computational prediction of SBTI’s evolvability identified two nearby loops for randomization, to create a potential recognition surface which was experimentally validated by alanine scanning. We established display of SBTI on full-length pIII of M13 phage. Phage selection of gastrobody libraries against the glucosyltransferase domain of Clostridium difficile toxin B (GTD) identified hits with nanomolar affinity and enzyme inhibitory activity. Anti-GTD binders retained high stability to acid, digestive proteases and heat. We use mass spectrometry to identify cut sites outside of the gastrobody.

### Sample Protocol
SBTI-His6, His6-Thrombin site-SpyTag003-T12, His6-Thrombin site-SpyTag003-GT01 and His6-Thrombin site-SpyTag003-GT01 R63A were digested with 1 mg/mL pepsin in 50 mM glycine-HCl pH 2.2 or with 100 TAME U/mL trypsin from bovine pancreas (T1426, Merck) [1 unit hydrolyzes 1 µM of p-toluene-sulfonyl-L-arginine methyl ester (TAME) per minute at 25 °C at pH 8.2 in the presence of 1 mM Ca2+], 25 BTEE U/mL α-chymotrypsin from bovine pancreas (C3142, Merck) [1 unit hydrolyzes 1 µM of benzoyl-L-tyrosine ethyl ester (BTEE) per minute at pH 7.8 and 25 °C], or 10 U/mL elastase from porcine pancreas (E1250, Merck) in 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8 + 10 mM CaCl2 for 15 min at 37 °C. Pepsin digestion was stopped by addition of 2.5 M Tris-HCl pH 8.8. Trypsin, chymotrypsin and elastase digestion was stopped by addition of PMSF to 1 mM. Samples were acidified to 0.9% (v/v) with formic acid. Acidified proteins were aspirated under vacuum for 0.3 s and loaded onto a C4 solid-phase extraction cartridge. Samples were eluted in an aqueous wash step [0.1% (v/v) formic acid in deionized water] following the main elution and analyzed by RapidFire MS. Samples were analyzed on a RapidFire Agilent 6550 quadrupole-time of flight mass spectrometer (Mass Spectrometry Research Facility, Department of Chemistry, University of Oxford.

### Data Protocol
Spectra were deconvoluted using the MassHunter software platform Qualitative Analysis B.07.00 (Agilent). Deconvolution settings were Deconvolute (protein), maximum entropy deconvolution algorithm, mass range 10,000.00 – 50,000.00 Da, mass step 1.0000 Da, m/z limited range 500.0000 – 2400.0000 m/z, baseline subtraction factor 7.00, proton adduct and automatic isotope width. Masses were predicted by ExPASy ProtParam, based on formation of all disulfide bonds and removal of N-terminal formylmethionine.

### Publication Abstract
Protein-based targeting reagents, such as antibodies and non-antibody scaffold proteins, are rapidly inactivated in the upper gastrointestinal (GI) tract. Hydrochloric acid in gastric juice denatures proteins and activates pepsin, concentrations of which reach 1&#x2009;mg/mL in the mammalian stomach. Two stable scaffold proteins (nanobody and nanofitin), previously developed to be protease-resistant, were completely digested in less than 10&#x2009;min at 100-fold lower concentration of pepsin than found in the stomach. Here we present gastrobodies, a protein scaffold derived from Kunitz soybean trypsin inhibitor (SBTI). SBTI is highly resistant to the challenges of the upper GI tract, including digestive proteases, pH 2 and bile acids. Computational prediction of SBTI's evolvability identified two nearby loops for randomization, to create a potential recognition surface which was experimentally validated by alanine scanning. We established display of SBTI on full-length pIII of M13 phage. Phage selection of gastrobody libraries against the glucosyltransferase domain of Clostridium difficile toxin B (GTD) identified hits with nanomolar affinity and enzyme inhibitory activity. Anti-GTD binders retained high stability to acid, digestive proteases and heat. Gastrobodies show resilience to exceptionally harsh conditions, which should provide a foundation for targeting and modulating function within the GI tract.

### Keywords
Sbti, Gastrobody, Protease

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford

### Submitter
Niels Wicke

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Howarth
Department of Biochemistry, University of Oxford


