### Accession
PXD035943

### Title
RAD51AP1 regulates ALT-HDR through chromatin-directed homeostasis of TERRA

### Description
Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) is a homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanism of telomere elongation that controls proliferation in subsets of highly aggressive cancer. Recent studies have revealed that TERRA (telomere repeat-containing RNA) acts to initiate ALT-associated HDR (ALT-HDR). Here we report that RAD51AP1, a crucial ALT factor, interacts with TERRA and utilizes it to generate D- and R- loop HR intermediates. We also show that RAD51AP1 binds to and may generate and potentially stabilize TERRA-containing R-loops as RAD51AP1 depletion reduces R-loop formation at telomere DNA breaks. Proteomic analyses uncover a new role for RAD51AP1 mediated TERRA R-loop homeostasis in a mechanism of chromatin-directed suppression of TERRA and prevention of transcription-replication collisions during ALT-HDR. Intriguingly, we find that both TERRA binding and this non-canonical function of RAD51AP1 require its intrinsic SUMO-SIM regulatory axis. These findings provide new insights into the multi-contextual functions of RAD51AP1 within the ALT mechanism and regulation of TERRA.

### Sample Protocol
U2OS stably expressing myc-BirA alone, myc-BirA-TRF1 or myc-BirA-RAD51AP1 were generated by retroviral infection with particles generated from amphotropic 293T viral packaging cell lines. Infected cells were selected using puromycin (2μg/mL) for 5–7 days, and stable protein expression was validated by western blot and immunofluorescence. Proximity-dependent biotinylation and streptavidin capture of biotinylated proteins was performed as described(García-Expósito et al., 2016). Immunoprecipitated samples were separated ~1.5cm on a 10% Bis-Tris Novex mini-gel (Invitrogen) using the MES buffer system. The gel was stained withCoomassie, and each lane was excised into ten equally sized segments. Gel pieces were processed using a robot (ProGest, DigiLab) as follows: First washes were with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by acetonitrile. Then, reduced with 10mM dithiothreitol at 60°C followed by alkylation with 50mM iodoacetamide at RT. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 4hrs and then quenched with formic acid. Samples supernatants were analyzed directly without further processing using a nano-LC/MS/MS with a Waters NanoAcquity HPLC system interfaced to a ThermoFisher Q Exactive. Peptides were loaded on a trapping column and eluted over a 75mm analytical column at 350nL/min; both columns were packed with Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, with MS and MS/MS performed in the Orbitrap at 70,000 FWHM resolution and 17,500 FWHM resolution, respectively. The fifteen most abundant ions were selected for MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Raw spectral files were converted to mzML format using Proteowizard. The mzML files were searched using X!Tandem search engine (Craig and Beavis, 2004). The searches were performed using the following parameters: trypsin digestion, allowing up to two missed tryptic cleavages, parent ion tolerance window of 10 ppm, and fragment ion tolerance of 0.02 Da. Oxidation of Methionine (+15.9949@M) was specified as variable modification and carbamidomethylation of Cysteine (+57.0215@C) as fixed. All protein searches were performed using the Human UniProt protein database appended with common contaminants and reversed protein sequences to serve as decoys. The X!Tandem results were then post-processed with PeptideProphet (Keller et al., 2002)and ProteinProphet (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). The data was filtered to 1% protein-level FDR using the target decoy strategy. Protein abundance in each sample was estimated using spectral counts. Spectral counts were extracted from the search results for all reported proteins across all 12 experiments (4 replicates for each of TRF1 and RAD51AP1, and the negative controls experiments) using Abacus (Fermin et al., 2011).  The resulting table of spectral counts was processed using SAINT (run using reprint-apms.org resource) to calculate fold change (FC) scores and probabilities of true interactions using default settings (Choi et al., 2011; Mellacheruvu et al., 2013). Using spectral counts as measures of protein abundance in each sample, SAINT calculates the probability for each identified protein that it is a true interactor of the bait protein. In doing so, IP replicates of cells expressing only the empty vector were used as negative controls. Proteins with a SAINT probability of >=0.7 for either or both bait proteins were kept as potential interacting proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Alternative lengthening of telomeres (ALT) is a homology-directed repair (HDR) mechanism of telomere elongation that controls proliferation in subsets of aggressive cancer. Recent studies have revealed that telomere repeat-containing RNA (TERRA) promotes ALT-associated HDR (ALT-HDR). Here, we report that RAD51AP1, a crucial ALT factor, interacts with TERRA and utilizes it to generate D- and R-loop HR intermediates. We also show that RAD51AP1 binds to and might stabilize TERRA-containing R-loops as RAD51AP1 depletion reduces R-loop formation at telomere DNA breaks. Proteomic analyses uncover a role for RAD51AP1-mediated TERRA R-loop homeostasis in a mechanism of chromatin-directed suppression of TERRA and prevention of transcription-replication collisions (TRCs) during ALT-HDR. Intriguingly, we find that both TERRA binding and this non-canonical function of RAD51AP1 require its intrinsic SUMO-SIM regulatory axis. These findings provide insights into the multi-contextual functions of RAD51AP1 within the ALT mechanism and regulation of TERRA.

### Keywords
Chromatin, Transcription, Rad51ap1, Alt, Telomere, Homology-directed repair, Cancer, Terra

### Affiliations
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
Dept.Pharmacology & Chemical Biology UPMC Hillman Cancer Center

### Submitter
Alexey Nesvizhskii

### Lab Head
Dr Roderick J O'Sullivan
Dept.Pharmacology & Chemical Biology UPMC Hillman Cancer Center


