### Accession
PXD045115

### Title
Integrating endometrial proteomic and single cell transcriptomic pipelines reveals distinct menstrual cycle and endometriosis-associated molecular profiles

### Description
Endometriosis is a debilitating gynecological disorder affecting approximately 10% of the female population. Despite its prevalence, robust methods to classify and treat endometriosis remain elusive. Changes throughout the menstrual cycle in tissue size, architecture, cellular composition, and individual cell phenotypes make it extraordinarily challenging to identify markers or cell types associated with uterine pathologies since disease-state alterations in gene and protein expression are convoluted with cycle phase variations. Here, we developed an integrated workflow to generate both proteomic and single-cell RNA-sequencing (scRNA-seq) data sets using tissues and cells isolated from the uteri of control and endometriotic donors. Using a linear mixed effect model (LMM), we identified proteins associated with cycle stage and disease, revealing a set of genes that drive separation across these two biological variables. Further, we analyzed our scRNA-seq data to identify cell types expressing cycle and disease- associated genes identified in our proteomic data. A module scoring approach was used to identify cell types driving the enrichment of certain biological pathways, revealing several pathways of interest across different cell subpopulations. Finally, we identified ligand-receptor pairs including Axl/Tyro3 – Gas6, that may modulate interactions between endometrial macrophages and/or endometrial stromal/epithelial cells. Analysis of these signaling pathways in an independent cohort of endometrial biopsies revealed a significant decrease in Tyro3 expression in patients with endometriosis compared to controls, both transcriptionally and through histological staining. This measured decrease in Tryo3 in patients with disease could serve as a novel diagnostic biomarker or treatment avenue for patients with endometriosis. Taken together, this integrated approach provides a framework for integrating LMMs, proteomic and RNA-seq data to deconvolve the complexities of complex uterine diseases and identify novel genes and pathways underlying endometriosis.

### Sample Protocol
Before digestion of the biopsy tissue for single cell analysis, a roughly 5 mm slice was isolated for proteomic analysis. Following collection, 50 μl of RapiGest (Product number 186001861; Waters Corporation, Milford, MA) reconstituted in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at a concentration of 2mg/ml was used to digest the biopsy sample for 24 hours at 37°C. Next, urea (Cat # 29700, Thermofisher, Waltham, MA) and dithiothreitol (Cat # R086, Thermofisher, Waltham, MA) were added to the sample to bring the mixture of a final concentration of 4 mM and 5 mM, respectively. This was left at 37°C for 24 hours in an incubator with a stir bar spinning at 1400 rpm. Finally, iodoacetamide (CAS 144-48-9, MilliporeSigma, Burlington, MA) was added to the sample, for a final concentration of 15 mM and kept in the dark, at 37°C, for 30 minutes. Samples were frozen at -80°C until all patient samples had been collected and processed.  Samples were lyophilized overnight and then reconstituted in NH4HCO3. A standard mixture was created by mixing equal parts from all of the patient samples into one tube. For each proteomics run, one aliquot of this standard mixture was used to normalize the sample readings between runs. Samples were digested with Trypsin Gold, mass spectrometry grade, from Promega (Madison, WI) using a ratio of 1 ug trypsin to 50 ug sample protein as quantified using a Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit (Cat # 23225, Thermofisher, Waltham, MA). Samples were digested overnight at room temperature using a rotor for mixing and then placed in a speed vacuum to reduce sample volume. Dried down peptide samples were labeled with TMT10plex (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). After labeling, the samples were mixed and purified with peptide desalting spin columns (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). 1/5 of the sample was used for one LC/MS/MS analysis. The dried peptide mix was reconstituted in a solution of 2 % formic acid (FA) for MS analysis. Peptides were loaded with the autosampler directly onto a 50cm EASY-Spray C18 column (ES803a, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were eluted from the column using a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Nano LC system with a 5 min gradient from 1% buffer B to 10 % buffer B (100 % acetonitrile, 0.1 % formic acid), followed by a 44.8 min gradient to 25%, and a 9.2 min gradient to 36% B, followed by a 0.5 min gradient to 80% B, and held constant for 4.5 min. Finally, the gradient was changed from 80 % buffer B to 99 % buffer A (100% water, 0.1% formic acid) over 0.1 min, and then held constant at 99 % buffer A for 19.9 more minutes.  The application of a 2.2 kV distal voltage electrosprayed the eluting peptides directly into the Thermo Exploris480 mass spectrometer equipped with a FAIMS and an EASY-Spray source (Thermo Scientific). Mass spectrometer-scanning functions and HPLC gradients were controlled by the Xcalibur data system (Thermo Scientific). MS1 scans parameters were 120,000 resolution, scan range m/z 375-1600, AGC at 300%, IT at 50ms. MS2 scan parameters were either at 30,000 or 45,000 resolution, isolation width at 0.7, HCD collision energy at 36%, AGC target at 300% and IT set to auto. Cycle time for MS2 was 2sec for each MS1 scan.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Sequest (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA; version IseNode in Proteome Discoverer 2.3.0.523). Sequest was set up to search uniprot_human_reviewed_032120.fasta (version March 21, 2020) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. Sequest was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.020 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Carbamidomethyl of cysteine and TMT6plex of lysine were specified in Sequest as fixed modifications. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of the n- terminus were specified in Sequest as variable modifications.  Scaffold Q+ (version Scaffold_5.0.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to quantitate Label Based Quantitation peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 10.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% by the Percolator posterior error probability calculation (Käll et al., 2008). Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99.0% probability to achieve an FDR less than 1.0% and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii et al., 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony. Channels were corrected by the matrix found in Supplemental Table 2 in all samples according to the algorithm described in i-Tracker (Shadforth et al., 2005). Normalization was performed iteratively (across samples and spectra) on intensities, as described in Statistical Analysis of Relative Labeled Mass Spectrometry Data from Complex Samples Using ANOVA (Oberg et al., 2008). Medians were used for averaging. Spectra data were log-transformed, pruned of those matched to multiple proteins and those missing a reference value, and weighted by an adaptive intensity weighting algorithm.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms, Endometriosis, Thermo orbitrap exploris480

### Affiliations
MIT
Director, Center for Gynepathology Research Member, Center for Environmental Health Sciences Member, Center for Emergent Behaviors of Integrate Cellular Systems Member, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research

### Submitter
Charles Demurjian

### Lab Head
Dr Linda Griffith
Director, Center for Gynepathology Research Member, Center for Environmental Health Sciences Member, Center for Emergent Behaviors of Integrate Cellular Systems Member, Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research


