### Accession
PXD041221

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana-Actinacidiphila interaction

### Description
How bacteria from the microbiota modulate the physiology of its host is an important question to address. Previous work revealed that the metabolic status of Arabidopsis thaliana was crucial for the specific recruitment of Streptomycetaceae into the microbiota. Here, the Arabidopsis-Actinacidiphila interaction was further depicted by inoculating axenic Arabidopsis with Actinacidiphila cocklensis DSM 42063 or Actinacidiphila bryophytorum DSM 42138(previously named Streptomyces cocklensis and Streptomyces bryophytorum). We demonstrated that these two bacteria colonize A. thaliana wild-type plants, but their colonization efficiency was reduced in a chs5 mutant with defect in isoprenoid, phenylpropanoids and lipids synthesis. We observed that those bacteria affect the growth of the chs5 mutant but not of the wild-type plants. Using a mass spectrometry-based proteomic approach, we showed a modulation of the Arabidopsis proteome and in particular its components involved in photosynthesis or phytohormone homeostasis or perception by A. cocklensis and A. bryophytorum. This study unveils specific aspects of the Actinacidiphila-Arabidopsis interaction, which implies molecular processes impaired in the chs5 mutant and otherwise at play in the wild-type. More generally, this study highlights complex and distinct molecular interactions between Arabidopsis thaliana and bacteria belonging to the Actinacidiphila genus.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds (wt or mutant) were sterilized and then inoculated with a bacterial suspension ( A.cocklensis or A. bryophytorum) or mock inoculated (control). Seedlings (3 replicates of 15 seedlings each per condition) were grown for 24 days, crushed in liquid nitrogen with a pestle in a mortar and stored at -80°C for further protein extraction. Lysis buffer (1 ml: Tris 50 mM pH8, SDS 1%) was added to 100 mg of frozen material in 2 ml-tubes containing 0.25-0.5 mm glass beads for grinding the mixture 3 min with a Cell Disruptor Genie® (Scientific 233 Industries, Bohemia, New York, USA) at 27,850 rpm. The ground mixture was centrifuged at 12,000 g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatants were transferred into new tubes and protein precipitation was performed by adding 5 volumes of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in 100% methanol, mixing, and incubating overnight at -20°C. The pellet obtained after a 15 min centrifugation step at 12,000 g was washed once with 0.1% ammonium acetate in 100% methanol and dried. Unless specified, all chemicals were from Merck Sigma (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). Protein extracts were suspended in 100-130 μl of Tris 10 mM pH 6.8, EDTA 1 mM, SDS 5%, glycerol 10% buffer. Protein concentration was assessed to 2-6 μg/μl using a Detergent Compatible Assay (DC Protein Assay, Biorad, Hercules,CA, USA). Reductant (10 mM DTT) and bromophenol blue (0.01%) were added to the samples and 40 μg of proteins were loaded on in-house poured 5% acrylamide stacking gels. Gels were stained with Coomassie Blue, and the stacking bands were manually excised. Proteins were then reduced, alkylated and digested overnight at 37°C with modified trypsin in a 1:100 enzyme:protein ratio (Sequencing grade Trypsin, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Peptides were extracted from the gel by gentle shaking in 80 μl of 8/2 acetonitrile/water for one hour. Peptide mixtures were then dried and resuspended in 20 μl of water acidified with 0.1% formic acid. Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) Analyses: nanoLCMS/MS analyses of peptide extracts were performed on a NanoAcquity LC-system (Waters,Milford, MA, USA) coupled to a Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap (Thermo Fisher Scientific,Waltham, MA, USA) mass spectrometer equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source. Mobile phase A (99.9% water and 0.1% FA) and mobile phase B (99.9% acetonitrile and 0.1% FA) were delivered at 400 nl/min. Samples were loaded into a Symmetry C18 precolumn (0.18 x 20 mm, 5 μm particle size, Waters) over 3 min in 1% buffer B at a flow rate of 5 μl/min. This step was followed by reverse-phase separation at a flow rate of 400 nl/min using an ACQUITY UPLC® BEH130 C18 separation column (250 mm x 258 75 μm id, 1.7 μm particle size, Waters). 900 ng of peptides mixtures were eluted using a gradient from 1% to 35% B in 120 min, from 35% B to 90% B in 1 min, maintained at 90% B for 5 min and the column was reconditioned at 1% B for 20 min. The Q-Exactive plus Orbitrap instrument was operated in data dependent acquisition mode by automatically switching between full MS and consecutive MS/MS acquisitions. Survey full scan MS spectra (mass range 300-1800) were acquired with a resolution of 70,000 at 200 m/z with an automatic gain control (AGC) fixed at 3E6 ions and a maximum injection time set at 50 ms. The ten most intense peptide ions in each survey scan with a charge state >= 2 were selected for MS/MS fragmentation. MS/MS scans were performed at 17,500 resolution at 200 m/z with a fixed first mass at 100 m/z, AGC was fixed at 1E5 and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms. Peptides were fragmented by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a normalized collision energy set to 27. Peaks selected for fragmentation were automatically put on a dynamic exclusion list for 60 sec and peptide match selection was turned on. MS data were saved in .raw file format (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using XCalibur.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to .mgf peaklists using MSconvert and were submitted to Mascot database searches (version 2.6.2, MatrixScience, London, UK) against an A. thaliana protein sequences database downloaded from The Arabidopsis Information Resource TAIR site (TAIR10 gene model, 27,416 entries) concatenated with a selection of bacterial sequences downloaded on 10th of July 2020 from UniprotKB (only Streptomyces tagged proteomes with more than 1000 proteins were kept, in addition to the phylogenetically related genus Achromobacter, total of 5,889,978 entries). In house assembled A. cocklensis and A. bryophytorum proteomes (using the illumina sequenced genomes, 17,237 entries) from in-house genome sequencing (section 2.5) were also added to the database, as well as common contaminants (118 entries) and decoy sequences. The concatenated target/decoy database contains 2 283 x 5,934,749 protein entries. Spectra were searched with a mass tolerance of 5 ppm in MS mode and 0.07 Da in MS/MS mode. One trypsin  missed cleavage was tolerated. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine residues and acetylation of proteins’ N-termini were set as variable modifications. Identification results were imported into Proline software (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) for validation. Peptide Spectrum Matches (PSM) with pretty rank equal to one were retained. False Discovery Rate was then optimized to be below 1% at PSM level using Mascot Adjusted E-value and below 1% at Protein Level using Mascot Mudpit score. To obtain unambiguous bacterial identifications, peptide sequences shared between A. thaliana (or contaminant proteins) and bacterial sequences were removed, as well as shared spectra (leading to close but different sequences).  For label free quantification, peptides abundances were  extracted thanks to Proline software version 2.1 (http://proline.profiproteomics.fr/) using a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm. Alignment of the LC-MS runs was performed using Loess smoothing and peptide identity. Cross Assignment was performed between all runs using only confident features with a m/z tolerance of 5 ppm and a retention time tolerance of 42 sec. Protein Abundances were computed by summing unique peptides abundances.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Actinacidiphila, Q-exactive plus (thermo), Nanoacquity (waters)

### Affiliations
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO) Département des Sciences Analytiques (DSA) Institut pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien (IPHC) - UMR7178 Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) Université de Strasbourg (Unistra) France
IPHC-UMR7178-CNRS-UDS-LSMBO

### Submitter
Magali Rompais

### Lab Head
Dr Christine CARAPITO
Laboratoire de Spectrométrie de Masse BioOrganique (LSMBO) Département des Sciences Analytiques (DSA) Institut pluridisciplinaire Hubert Curien (IPHC) - UMR7178 Centre national de la recherche scientifique (CNRS) Université de Strasbourg (Unistra) France


### SDRF
- organism: Arabidopsis Thaliana
- organism part: Whole organism
- cell type: not available
- disease: not available
- label: label free sample
- instrument: Q Exactive Plus, Q Exactive Plus

