### Accession
PXD022665

### Title
Comprehensive quantitative proteome analysis of Aedes aegypti to interrogate Wolbachia pipientis and Zika virus interference phenomenon

### Description
Zika virus is a global public health emergency due to its association with microcephaly,  Guillain-Barré syndrome, neuropathy, and myelitis in children and adults. A total of 87 countries have had evidence of autochthonous mosquito-borne transmission of Zika virus, distributed across four continents, and no antivirus therapy or vaccines are available. Therefore, several strategies have been developed to target the main mosquito vector, Aedes aegypti, to reduce the burden of different arboviruses. Among such strategies, the use of the maternally-inherited endosymbiont Wolbachia pipientis has been applied successfully to reduce virus susceptibility and decrease transmission. However, the mechanisms by which Wolbachia orchestrate resistance to ZIKV infection remains to be elucidated. In this study, we apply quantitative isobaric mass spectrometry-based proteomics to quantify proteins and identify pathways altered during ZIKV infection; Wolbachia infection; co-infection with Wolbachia/ZIKV in the Ae. aegypti. We show that Wolbachia regulates proteins involved in ROS production, regulates humoral immune response, and antioxidant production. The reduction of ZIKV polyprotein in the presence of Wolbachia in the mosquitoes was determined by mass spectrometry and corroborates the idea that Wolbachia helps to block ZIKV infections in Ae. aegypti.  The present study offers a rich resource of data to help elucidate mechanisms by which Wolbachia orchestrate resistance to ZIKV infection in Ae. aegypti.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from a total of 152 female's heads of Ae. aegypti were processed, of which 39 were coinfected with Wolbachia and ZIKV (WZ); 36 were non-infected (A); 35 were infected with Wolbachia (W) only and 42 were infected with ZIKV (Z). On 14 days post-infection, each mosquito head was separated from the body using a scalpel blade which was discarded after every single use. Proteins were extracted by lysis with a buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 50 mM HEPES pH 8, 75 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM PMSF and protease/phosphatase inhibitor cocktails (Roche). Then, samples were vortexed, sonicated in cold bath for 10 minutes and sonicated by probe for 10 minutes. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 g for 10 minutes at 4°C and the supernatants were carefully transferred to new tubes for further steps. The protein concentration was determined by the Qubit Protein Assay Kit® fluorometric (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer's instructions. A total of 100 μg of proteins from each condition was processed. Protein samples were incubated with dithiothreitol (DTT -GE Healthcare) at 10 mM and 30ºC for one hour. Subsequently, iodoacetamide solution (GE Healthcare) was added, with a final concentration of 40 mM. The reaction was performed at room temperature, in the dark, for 30 minutes. The samples were diluted 10x with 50 mM HEPES buffer to reduce the concentration of urea/thiourea. The solution was incubated with trypsin (Promega) in a 1:50 (w/w, enzyme/protein) ratio at 37º C for 18 hours. The resulting peptides were desalted with C-18 macro spin column (Harvard Apparatus) and then vacuum dried. The dried peptides were labeled with isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) 4-plex (ABSciex). The labeling process was performed according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, dried peptides were dissolved in 50 mM TEAB and iTRAQ tags were dissolved in dry ethanol, labeling was performed by mixing peptide and tag solutions during one hour at room temperature. The four tag reactions were combined in a single tube (ratio 1:1:1:1)  and dried in a speed vac prior to fractionation. Each condition was labeled as follows i) Tag 114 corresponds to sample W (Wolbachia infected); ii) Tag 115 to sample A (none infection); iii) Tag 116 to sample WZ (Wolbachia and ZIKV co-infection); and iv) Tag 117 to sample Z (ZIKV infection). The iTRAQ labeled peptide mixture was fractionated off-line by HILIC (Hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography) prior LC-MS/MS analysis. The dried samples were resuspended in acetonitrile (ACN) 90% / trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) 0.1% and injected into Shimadzu UFLC chromatography using a TSKGel Amide-80 column (15 cm x 2 mm i.d. x 3 μm - Supelco), flow rate 0.2 ml/minute; mobile phases A (ACN 85%/TFA 0. 1%) and B (TFA 0.1%); gradient: 0% of phase B in 5 minutes; 0% to 10% of phase B from 5 to 10 minutes; 10% to 20% of phase B from 10 to 55 minutes; 20% to 100% of phase B from 55 to 60 minutes; and 100% to 0% of phase B from 60 to 65 minutes. For each pooled sample, 10 fractions were collected and pooled according to the separation and intensity of the peaks. The pools of fractions were dried in speed vac and resuspend in 0.1% formic acid (FA). The samples were analyzed in Easy-nLC 1000 HPLC coupled to a Q-Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  For each fraction (or pool of fractions), a linear gradient of 5% to 40% of B was performed in 120 minutes. Ionization was performed in an electrospray source with the acquisition of spectra in positive polarity by data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode, spray voltage of 2.5 kV, and temperature of 200ºC in the heated capillary. Acquisition was set as follows: full scan or MS1 in the range of 375 - 1800 m/z, resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200), fragmentation of the 10 most intense ions in HCD collision cell, with standardized collision energy (NCE) of 30, resolution of 17,000 in the acquisition of MS/MS spectra, first mass of 110 m/z, isolation window of 0.7 m/z and dynamic exclusion of 45 s.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 Software (Thermo Scientific). Peptide identification was performed with the Sequest HT search engine against Ae. aegypti (genome version/assembly ID: INSDC: GCA_002204515.1), ZIKV, and Wolbachia databases provided by VectorBase (10.1093/nar/gku1117), ViPR (10.1093/nar/gkr859), and UniProt (The UniProt Consortium, 2019) (https://doi.org/10.1093/nar/gky1049) respectively. Searches were performed with peptide mass tolerance of 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance of 0.1 Da, tryptic cleavage specificity, two maximum missed cleavage sites allowed, fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (Cys) and variable modification of iTRAQ 4-plex (Tyr, Lys and peptide N-terminus), phosphate (Ser, Thr and Tyr) and oxidation (Met); peptides with high confidence were considered. False discovery rates (FDR) were obtained using Target Decoy PSM selecting identifications with a q-value equal or to less than 0.01. Data of all technical replicates were log2-transformed and normalized by subtracting the column median. Relative iTRAQ quantification analysis was carried out in the Perseus software, version 1.6.12.0 (https://doi.org/10.1038/nmeth.3901), based on the intensity of the fragmented reporter peaks in MS / MS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Zikv, Head, Wolbachia, Aedes aegypti

### Affiliations
Proteomics Unit, Biochemistry Department, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro

### Submitter
Luis Felipe Ramos

### Lab Head
Dr Magno Junqueira
Proteomics Unit, Biochemistry Department, Chemistry Institute, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.


