### Accession
PXD025659

### Title
Evaluation of different protein extraction protocols to study human gut microbiota.

### Description
The link between the gut microbiota and the human physiological state has been demonstrated in recent years. High gut microbiota diversity has been linked to many beneficial functions necessary or human health, while dysbiosis has been correlated to different pathological states. In this context, the study of the gut microbiota results of high relevance been necessary the development of different techniques capable of characterizing this complex ecosystem. Metaproteomics has been proved useful in the characterization of complex protein samples becoming a suitable tool for the study of these microbial communities. However, due to the complexity of these samples, protein extraction protocols may affect metaproteomics results. In this context, we evaluated stool sample processing (SSP) and microbial cell disruption, assessing the impact of different protocol modifications in the number of peptides and proteins identified. We compared different stool processing conditions and microbial cell disruption methods in terms of protein and peptide identifications and taxonomic profiles.

### Sample Protocol
A stool sample from a healthy individual was used. Six protocols combining different stool samples processing (SSP) and microbial cell disruption methods (CDM) were modified from previous works (Tanca, Palomba, Pisanu, Addis, & Uzzau, 2015; Zhang et al., 2018) in order to optimized the metaproteomic study of human fecal samples. Each protocol was performed in triplicate. Briefly, 10 mL of PBS was added to 0.5 g of stool sample and either shaken for 45 min at 4 ºC in a tube rotator or vortexed 5 min with ten 2.5-mm glass beads (SSP1 and SSP2, respectively). The samples were then centrifuged at 500 g, 4 ºC for 5 min. Supernatant was collected and this process was repeated twice. All three collected supernatants were centrifuged at 14 000 g, 4º for 20 min and washed three times with PBS (centrifugation 14 000 g, 4ºC for 20 min). The pellet was resuspended in 500 μL lysis buffer (4 % SDS, 50 mM Tris HCl pH 8.0) and incubated 10 min at 95 ºC. From this point on, three different CDM were carried out: - CDM1: 0.3 g glass beads (0.5-0.75 mm) were added to the lysate and 3 rounds of bead beating were carried out at a speed of 6.5 ms ^-1 for 90 s (3 rounds 30 s each with 5 min interval on ice) or 150 s (5 rounds 30 s each with 5 min interval on ice) if SSP1 or SSP2 is used, respectively - CDM2: two different sizes of glass beads were used (0.5-0.75 mm and 0.125-0.2 mm) and 5 rounds of bead beating were carried out with the same conditions described previously. - CDM3: four ultrasonications were carried out prior 5 rounds of bead beating using 0.3 g glass beads (0.5-0.75 mm) with the same conditions described previously. Six protocols (A-F) were carried out using a combination of the 2 SSP and the 3 CDM: - Protocol A: SSP1 + CDM1. - Protocol B: SSP1 + CDM2. - Protocol C: SSP1 + CDM3. - Protocol D: SSP2 + CDM1. - Protocol E: SSP2 + CDM2. - Protocol F: SSP2 + CDM3. Cell debris and beads were removed by centrifugation at 16 000 g, 4ºC for 10 min and finally, the supernatant was subjected to another centrifugation (16 000 g, 4 ºC for 10 min). Proteins were in-gel digested using trypsin. Peptides were loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap 100 Trapping column (75 μm i.d. x 20 mm, 3 μm C18 resin with 100 Å pore; Thermo Scientific) using a 250 nL/ min flow rate, and then separated onto a C18 analytical column (75 μm i.d. x 500 mm, 2 µm and 100 Å pore size. Thermo Scientific Easy Spray Column) using a 240 min gradient (2-40% Buffer B (0.1 % FA in 100 % ACN) in Buffer A (0.1 % FA). Mass spectra were acquired in a Q-Exactive HF hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) in a Full-MS data-dependent acquisition (DDA) in a positive mode with Xcalibur 4.1 software. MS scans were acquired at m/z range of 350 to 2000 Da followed by data-dependent MS/MS scan (with a threshold of 0.01) of the 15 most abundance precursors with charges of 2-4 in MS scans for high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 10 s and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 20.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra (.raw files) were processed using Metalab version 2.0 (Cheng et al., 2017)  using the human microbial gene catalog (available on http://meta.genomics.cn/) (Li et al., 2014) to generate a reduced, sample-specific protein database. MaxQuant version 1.6.17.0 was used for characterization (using Andromeda search engine) and quantitative analysis (using maxLFQ algorithm) of microbial peptides. For human peptide identification, Uniprot (UniProt., 2018) human database was downloaded (downloaded 02.18.20 with 74 451 entries) and used as ‘Host database’ in Metalab search. Search parameters included carbamidomethylation of cysteines as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed.

### Publication Abstract
The use of metaproteomics for studying the human gut microbiota can shed light on the taxonomic profile and the functional role of the microbial community. Nevertheless, methods for extracting proteins from stool samples continue to evolve, in the pursuit of optimal protocols for moistening and dispersing the stool sample and for disrupting microbial cells, which are two critical steps for ensuring good protein recovery. Here, we evaluated different stool sample processing (SSP) and microbial cell disruption methods (CDMs). The combination of a longer disintegration period of the stool sample in a tube rotator with sonication increased the overall number of identified peptides and proteins. Proteobacteria, Bacteroidetes, Planctomycetes, and Euryarchaeota identification was favored by mechanical cell disruption with glass beads. In contrast, the relative abundance of Firmicutes, Actinobacteria, and Fusobacteria was improved when sonication was performed before bead beating. Tenericutes and Apicomplexa identification was enhanced by moistening the stool samples during processing and by disrupting cells with medium-sized glass beads combined with or without sonication. Human protein identifications were affected by sonication. To test the reproducibility of these gut metaproteomic analyses, we examined samples from six healthy individuals using a protocol that had shown a good taxonomic diversity and identification of proteins from Proteobacteria and humans. We also detected proteins involved in microbial functions relevant to the host and related mostly to specific taxa, such as B12 biosynthesis and short chain fatty acid (SCFA) production carried out mainly by members in the <i>Prevotella</i> genus and the Firmicutes phylum, respectively. The taxonomic and functional profiles obtained with the different protocols described in this work provides the researcher with valuable information when choosing the most adequate protocol for the study of certain pathologies under suspicion of being related to a specific taxon from the gut microbiota.

### Keywords
Microbiota, Cell disruption, Metaproteomics, Comparison, Protein extraction, Processing

### Affiliations
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain
UCM

### Submitter
Concha Gil

### Lab Head
Dr Concha Gil
Departamento de Microbiología II, Facultad de Farmacia, Universidad Complutense de Madrid, Madrid, Spain


