### Accession
PXD034601

### Title
Similar skeletal properties yet different components - A comparison between distinct stony corals

### Description
DEtermination of the skeletal protein composition of two stony coral species.

### Sample Protocol
O. patagonica skeletal protein samples were sequenced at the De Botton Protein Profiling Institute at the Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel. Skeletal protein samples were dissolved in 5% SDS and digested with trypsin using the S-trap method overnight at room temperature. The resulting peptides were analyzed using a nanoflow ultra-performance liquid chromatography (nanoAcquity) coupled to a high resolution, high mass accuracy mass spectrometer (Fusion Lumos). The sample was trapped on a Symmetry C18 0.18*20 mm trap column (Waters, Inc) and separated on an HSS T3 0.075*250 mm column (Waters, Inc.) using a gradient of 4–28% (80% acetonitrile, 0.1% Formic acid) for 150 min. The spray voltage was set to +2kV. The data were acquired in the Fusion Lumos using a Top Speed Data-Dependent Acquisition method using a cycle time of 3s. A mass spectrometry (MS) 1 scan was performed in the Orbitrap at 120,000 resolutions with a maximum injection time of 60ms. The data were scanned between 300 and 1800 m/z. MS2 was selected using a monoisotopic precursor selection set to peptides, peptide charge states set to +2 to +8 and dynamic exclusion set to 30s. MS2 was performed using Higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) fragmentation scanned in the Orbitrap, with the first mass set to 130 m/z at a resolution of 15,000. Maximum injection time was set to 60ms with automatic gain control of 5×10−4 ions as a fill target.

### Data Protocol
The resulting data were searched against the predicted proteins of O. patagonica (Zaquin et al., 2019) and a common contaminants database using the Byonic search engine (Protein Metrics Inc.). A first search was carried out without any false discovery rate (FDR) filtering to generate a focused database for a second search. The second search was set to 1% FDR, allowing fixed carbamidomethylation on C and variable oxidation on molecular weight, deamidation on NQ and protein N-terminal acetylation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms/ms protein sequencing, In-vitro calcification, Stylophora pistillata, Overgrowth, Oculina patagonica

### Affiliations
Weizmann institute
Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 3498838, Israel

### Submitter
David Morgenstern

### Lab Head
Dr Tali Mass
Department of Marine Biology, Leon H. Charney School of Marine Sciences, University of Haifa, Mount Carmel, Haifa, 3498838, Israel


