### Accession
PXD028583

### Title
Frequency of change determines effectiveness of microbial response strategies in sulfidic stream microbiomes

### Description
Chemostat incubations were established and inoculated with sediments collected from Canyon Creek, Calgary, Alberta, Canada. The chemostats experienced oxic-anoxic change of different frequency, High-frequency, Medium-frequency and Low-frequency. 18 samples were collected at the end of the final oxic phase and the final anoxic phase in the triplicated chemostats for metagenomic and metaproteomic analysis. 26 genomes were assembled from metagenomes. Proteomes were used to investigate translational regulation of each population associated with a genome.

### Sample Protocol
For protein extraction, 50mL culture pellets were transferred to lysing matrix bead tubes A (MP Biomedicals) with the addition of SDT-lysis buffer (0.1M DTT) in a 10:1 ratio. Matrix tubes were bead-beated in an OMNI Bead Ruptor 24 for 45 s at 6m s1 and then incubated at 95 °C for 10 min. Peptides were isolated from pellets by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) (Wisniewski et al., 2009, Nat. Meth. 6(5)). A Qubit 2.0 Fluorometer (Invitrogen, CA) was used to check protein concentrations. For proteomics, peptides were first separated on a 50 cm × 75 ¼m analytical EASY-Spray column by an an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano Liquid Chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) according to Kleiner et al. (2017, Nat. Comm. 8(1558)). Eluting peptides were analyzed in a QExactive Plus hybrid quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA).

### Data Protocol
Expressed proteins were identified and quantified with Proteome Discoverer version 2.0.0.802 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, CA, USA), using the Sequest HT node. The Percolator Node and FidoCT were used to estimate false discovery rates (FDR) at the peptide and protein level, respectively. Peptides and proteins with FDR >5% were discarded. Relative abundance of proteins was estimated based on normalized peptide-spectral matches (PSMs). The identification database was prepared based on predicted protein sequences of all binned and unbinned contigs. Redundant proteins (>95% amino acid identity) were removed by cd-hit (Li et al., 2006, Bioinformatics, 22(13)), while giving preference to proteins from binned contigs. In total, 2,216,073 MS/MS spectra were acquired, yielding 616,029 PSMs, 20,928 identified proteins and 10,655 proteins of at least medium confidence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metagenome-assembled-genomes, Metaproteomics, Metaproteome, Chemostat incubation

### Affiliations
University of Calgary

### Submitter
Angela Kouris

### Lab Head
Dr Marc Strous
University of Calgary


