### Accession
PXD014064

### Title
TMX2 is a key regulator of cellular redox state and its dysfunction causes severe brain developmental abnormalities.

### Description
The redox state of the neural progenitors regulates physiological processes such as neuronal differentiation, dendritic and axonal growth. The relevance of ER-associated oxidoreductases in these processes is largely unexplored. We describe a severe neurological disorder caused by biallelic loss of function variants in the Thioredoxin (TRX)-Related Transmembrane-2 (TMX2) gene, detected by exome sequencing in ten affected individuals from seven unrelated families presenting with congenital microcephaly, cortical polymicrogyria and other migration disorders. TMX2 encodes one of the five TMX proteins of the Protein Disulfide Isomerase family and is the first to be linked to human brain disease. Our mechanistic studies on protein function show that TMX2 localizes to the ER Mitochondria-Associated-Membranes (MAMs), is involved in posttranslational modification and protein folding and undergoes physical interaction with the MAM associated and ER folding chaperone calnexin and ER calcium pump SERCA2. These interactions are functionally relevant because TMX2-deficient fibroblasts show decreased mitochondrial respiratory reserve capacity and compensatory increased basal glycolytic activity. Intriguingly, under basal conditions TMX2 occurs in both reduced and oxidized monomeric form, while it forms a stable dimer under treatment with hydrogen peroxide, recently recognized as signaling molecule in neural morphogenesis and axonal pathfinding. Exogenous expression of the pathogenic TMX2 variants or of variants with in vitro mutagenized TRX domain induces a constitutive TMX2 polymerization, mimicking increased oxidative state. Altogether these data uncover TMX2 as a sensor in the MAM-regulated redox state and identify it as a key adaptive regulator of neuronal proliferation, migration and organization in the developing brain.

### Sample Protocol
SDS-PAGE gel lanes were cut into 2-mm slices and subjected to in-gel reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoaceta¬mide and digested with trypsin. Nanoflow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (nLC-MS/MS) was performed on an EASY-nLC coupled to an Orbitrap Lumos Fusion Tribid mass spectrometer (Thermo). Peptides were separated on a ReproSil-C18 reversed-phase column during 90 min at a rate of 200 nl/min. The elution was directly sprayed into the electrospray ionization (ESI) source of the mass spectrometer. Spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode by HCD.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were acquired in continuum mode; fragmentation of the peptides was performed in data-dependent mode. Peak lists were automatically created from raw data files using the Mascot Distiller software (version 2.3; MatrixScience). The Mascot search algorithm (version 2.2, MatrixScience) was used for searching against the IPI fasta protein sequence database (version IPI_mouse_20100210.fasta). The peptide tolerance was set to 10 ppm and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 0.8 Da. A maximum number of 2 missed cleavages by trypsin were allowed and carbamidomethylated cysteine and oxidized methionine were set as fixed and variable modifications, respectively.

### Publication Abstract
The redox state of the neural progenitors regulates physiological processes such as neuronal differentiation and dendritic and axonal growth. The relevance of endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated oxidoreductases in these processes is largely unexplored. We describe a severe neurological disorder caused by bi-allelic loss-of-function variants in thioredoxin (TRX)-related transmembrane-2 (TMX2); these variants were detected by exome sequencing in 14 affected individuals from ten unrelated families presenting with congenital microcephaly, cortical polymicrogyria, and other migration disorders. TMX2 encodes one of the five TMX proteins of the protein disulfide isomerase family, hitherto not linked to human developmental brain disease. Our mechanistic studies on protein function show that TMX2 localizes to the ER mitochondria-associated membranes (MAMs), is involved in posttranslational modification and protein folding, and undergoes physical interaction with the MAM-associated and ER folding chaperone calnexin and ER calcium pump SERCA2. These interactions are functionally relevant because TMX2-deficient fibroblasts show decreased mitochondrial respiratory reserve capacity and compensatory increased glycolytic activity. Intriguingly, under basal conditions TMX2 occurs in both reduced and oxidized monomeric form, while it forms a stable dimer under treatment with hydrogen peroxide, recently recognized as a signaling molecule in neural morphogenesis and axonal pathfinding. Exogenous expression of the pathogenic TMX2 variants or of variants with an in&#xa0;vitro mutagenized TRX domain induces a constitutive TMX2 polymerization, mimicking an increased oxidative state. Altogether these data uncover TMX2 as a sensor in the MAM-regulated redox signaling pathway and identify it as a key adaptive regulator of neuronal proliferation, migration, and organization in the developing brain.

### Keywords
Redox state, Tmx2, Brain developmental abnormalities

### Affiliations
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands
Proteomics Center, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Jeroen Demmers

### Lab Head
Dr Jeroen Demmers
Proteomics Center, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands


