### Accession
PXD039169

### Title
Integrated proteomics and transcriptomics profiling reveals distinct aspects of kidney stone related genes in calculi rats

### Description
We conducted a calculi rat model, applied for an integrated proteomic and transcriptomic analysis to characterize the distinct gene expression profiles in calculi oxalate stone formation and its related kidney injury. Six distinct gene clusters were identified according to the consistency of transcriptome and proteome. Gene Ontology and KEGG pathway enrichment was performed to analyze the functions of each sub-group differentially expressed genes. Results showed that the calculi rat kidney was increased expression of injured & apoptotic markers and immune-molecules, and decreased expression of solute carriers & transporters and many metabolic related factors. The present proteotranscriptomic study provided a data resource and new insights for better understanding of the pathogenesis of nephrolithiasis, will hopefully facilitate the future development of new strategies for the recurrence prevention and treatment in patients with kidney stone disease.

### Sample Protocol
In short, fresh samples were grinded into fully powder with liquid nitrogen. After lysis and centrifuge at 4 ℃, 12000 g for 10 min, protein supernatant was collected for BCA quantification and SDS-PAGE electrophoresis. Take equal amount protein of each sample, and adjust to equal volume with lysis buffer for enzymatic hydrolysis. The proteins were enzymolysised using a combination of ultra-high performance liquid chromatography system capillary ion source timsTOF Pro mass spectrometry, followed by data acquisition and sequence-similarity database scanning.

### Data Protocol
Differential expression analysis of the two groups was performed using the DESeq2 R package. The resulting P-values were adjusted using the Benjamini and Hochberg’s approach for controlling the false discovery rate. Genes with an adjusted P <0.01 found by DESeq2 were assigned as differentially expressed. Gene Ontology (GO) and KEEG enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) was implemented by the GOseq R package, in which gene length bias was corrected. GO terms with corrected P < 0.05 were considered significantly enriched by DEGs. We used KOBAS software to test the statistical enrichment of DEGs in KEGG pathways.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Calcium oxalate; kidney stone; proteomics; transcriptomics; urolithiasis

### Affiliations
Southern Medical University
Department of Urology, People’s Hospital of Longhua Shenzhen, Southern Medical University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518109, P.R. China

### Submitter
Zhu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Zhu WANG
Department of Urology, People’s Hospital of Longhua Shenzhen, Southern Medical University, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518109, P.R. China


