### Accession
PXD020689

### Title
Affinity Purification Trigger with mTPP

### Description
We have applied a BASIL-like approach to increase the signal of low abundance peptides to the study of protein complexes. To accomplish this, we incorporated an affinity purified cleavage and polyadenylation factor (CPF) complex as a “trigger” into our mTPP workflow at a trigger sample to lowest heat-treated mTPP sample ratio of ~1:8 and ~1:50. We saw a significant increase in the abundance of CPF complex members, including those that were not readily identified without the trigger. Importantly, addition of a trigger into our mTPP workflow does not appear to have a significant impact on the melt temperature (Tm) calculation of proteins detected both with and without the trigger. Use of purified protein complex trigger channels in TPP studies, and potentially other global proteomics applications, will improve the ability to perform proteomic analysis of low abundance protein complexes. As many biologically-relevant, as well as disease-relevant, protein complexes are of relatively low abundance in the cell, improving the detection of such proteins in proteomics experiments would be beneficial to increasing our under-standing of the critical cellular processes these complexes play roles in.

### Sample Protocol
Nano-LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Wal-tham, MA) coupled to an EASY-nLC HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). 18 μL of the resus-pended fractions were loaded onto an in-house prepared reversed phase column using 600 bar as applied maximum pressure. Each reversed phase column was prepared by pull-ing a 100 μm fused- silica column to a 5 μm tip for the nanospray using a P-2000 laser puller, and then packing the capillary with C18 reverse phase resin (particle size: 3 μm diameter; Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH, Ammerbuch, Germa-ny). The peptides were eluted using a 180-minute gradient increasing from 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. The peptides were eluted using a 180- minute gradient increasing from 95% buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 25% buffer B at a flow rate of 400 nL/min. Nano-LC mobile phase was introduced into the mass spectrometer using a Nanospray Flex Source (Proxeon Biosystems A/S, Denmark). During peptide elu-tion, the heated capillary temperature was kept at 275°C and ion spray voltage was kept at 2.6 kV. The mass spec-trometer method was operated in positive ion mode for 180 minutes having a cycle time of 3 seconds for MS/MS ac-quisition. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent acquisition method that was programmed to have 2 data dependent scan events following the first survey MS scan. During MS1, using a wide quadrupole isolation, survey scans were obtained with an Orbitrap resolution of 120 k with vendor defined parameters―m/z scan range, 375-1500; maximum injection time, 50; AGC target, 4E5; mi-cro scans, 1; RF Lens (%), 30; “DataType”, profile; Polari-ty, Positive with no source fragmentation and to include charge states 2 to 7 for fragmentation. Dynamic exclusion for fragmentation was kept at 60 seconds. During MS2, the following vendor defined parameters were assigned to iso-late and fragment the selected precursor ions. Isolation mode = Quadrupole; Isolation Offset = Off; Isolation Win-dow = 0.7; Multi-notch Isolation = False; Scan Range Mode = Auto Normal; FirstMass = 120; Activation Type = CID; Collision Energy (%) = 35; Activation Time = 10 ms; Activation ; Activation Q = 0.25; Multistage Activation = False; De-tector Type = IonTrap; Ion Trap Scan Rate = Turbo; Maxi-mum Injection Time = 50 ms; AGC Target = 1E4; Micros-cans = 1; DataType = Centroid. During MS3, daughter ions selected from neutral losses (e.g. H2O or NH3) of pre-cursor ion CID during MS2 were subjected to further frag-mentation using higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) to obtain TMT reporter ions and peptide specific fragment ions using following vendor defined parameters. Isolation Mode = Quadrupole; Isolation Window =2; Multi-notch Isolation = True; MS2 Isolation Window (m/z) = 2; Num-ber of notches = 3; Collision Energy (%) = 65; Orbitrap Resolution = 50k; Scan Range (m/z) = 100- 500; Maxi-mum Injection Time = 105 ms; AGC Target = 1E5; DataType = Centroid. The data were recorded using Thermo Scientific Xcalibur (4.1.31.9) software (Copyright 2017 Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc.).

### Data Protocol
Resulting RAW files were analyzed using Proteome Dis-covererTM 2.4 (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA). The SEQUEST HT search engine was used to search against a yeast protein database from the UniProt sequence database (December 2015) containing 6,279 yeast protein and com-mon contaminant sequences. Specific search parameters used were: trypsin as the proteo-lytic enzyme, peptides with a max of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, and a fragment mass tolerance of 0.02 Da. Static modifications used for the search were, 1) carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues; 2) TMTsixplex label on lysine (K) residues and the N-termini of peptides. Dynamic modifications used for the search were oxidation of methionine and acetylation of N-termini Percolator False Discovery Rate was set to a strict setting of 0.01 and a relaxed setting of 0.05. Values from both unique and razor peptides were used for quantification. No normalization setting was used for protein quantification.

### Publication Abstract
The study of low-abundance proteins is a challenge to discovery-based proteomics. Mass spectrometry (MS) applications, such as thermal proteome profiling (TPP), face specific challenges in the detection of the whole proteome as a consequence of the use of nondenaturing extraction buffers. TPP is a powerful method for the study of protein thermal stability, but quantitative accuracy is highly dependent on consistent detection. Therefore, TPP can be limited in its amenability to study low-abundance proteins that tend to have stochastic or poor detection by MS. To address this challenge, we incorporated an affinity-purified protein complex sample at submolar concentrations as an isobaric trigger channel into a mutant TPP (mTPP) workflow to provide reproducible detection and quantitation of the low-abundance subunits of the cleavage and polyadenylation factor (CPF) complex. The inclusion of an isobaric protein complex trigger channel increased detection an average of 40&#xd7; for previously detected subunits and facilitated detection of CPF subunits that were previously below the limit of detection. Importantly, these gains in CPF detection did not cause large changes in melt temperature (<i>T</i><sub>m</sub>) calculations for other unrelated proteins in the samples, with a high positive correlation between <i>T</i><sub>m</sub> estimates in samples with and without isobaric trigger channel addition. Overall, the incorporation of an affinity-purified protein complex as an isobaric trigger channel within a tandem mass tag (TMT) multiplex for mTPP experiments is an effective and reproducible way to gather thermal profiling data on proteins that are not readily detected using the original TPP or mTPP protocols.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Tpp, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Indiana University School of Medicine
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN

### Submitter
Sarah Peck Justice 

### Lab Head
Dr Amber L. Mosley
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN


