### Accession
PXD027323

### Title
PLA2G4A promotes right-sided colorectal cancer progression by inducing CD39+γδ Tregs polarization

### Description
Here, we discovered that the frequency of CD39+γδ Tregs, which positively correlated with poor prognosis, was significantly higher in right-sided colorectal cancer (RSCRC) than in the left-sided CRC (LSCRC). To explore the molecular mechanism leading to the difference of CD39+γδ Tregs derived from RSCRC and LSCRC, we collected fresh tissue samples of RSCRC with high expression of CD39+γδ Tregs and the LSCRC with low expression of CD39+γδ Tregs detected by flow cytometry and identified differential proteins by LC-MS based quantitative proteomic analysis with tandem mass tag (TMT)

### Sample Protocol
We selected 6 samples of CD39+ γδ TregsHigh RSCRC and CD39+ γδ TregsLow LSCRC for proteomic characterization using TMT (Thermo Fisher Scientific). After protein extraction, the whole protein in tissue cells was obtained. The whole protein was hydrolyzed into peptides by trypsin, and all peptides were labeled by TMT reagent. The labeled peptides of each group were mixed and graded by Agilent 1260 infinity II HPLC system. Buffer A was 10 mm hcoonh4, 5% ACN, pH 10.0, and buffer B was 10 mm hcoonh4, 85% ACN, pH 10.0. The chromatographic column was equilibrated with liquid A. Samples were loaded into the chromatographic column by the manual automatic injector for separation. The flow rate was 1ml/min. Collect the eluting components. Lyophilized and then redissolved samples with 0.1% FA. Each sample was separated by Easy nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and then analyzed by Q Exactive plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Proteome discoverer 2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) software transformed the original atlas file generated by Q Exactive plus into a .mgf file, which was submitted to the MASCOT2.6 server for database retrieval through the built-in tool of the software. Then the database search file formed on the MASCOT server was sent back to the software through the proteome discoverer 2.1, and the data was filtered according to the FDR < 0.01 standard to obtain highly reliable qualitative results. The database used in this study was: Uniprot_HomoSapiens_20386_20180905.

### Publication Abstract
The &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cell is a promising candidate cell in tumor immunotherapy. However, &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells polarize to CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Tregs upon colorectal cancer (CRC) induction, and the underlying mechanism remains unclear. Here, we show that the frequency of CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Tregs, which positively correlated with poor prognosis, was significantly higher in right-sided CRC (RSCRC) than in the left-sided CRC (LSCRC). Interestingly, CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Tregs from RSCRC showed stronger immunosuppressive phenotype and function than LSCRC. Furthermore, the quantitative mass spectrometry data show that CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Treg polarization was related to the abnormal activation of the Phospholipase a2-IVa/Arachidonic acid (PLA2G4A/AA) metabolic pathway in RSCRC. Using an in vitro coculture system and an orthotopic murine model of CRC, we show that the overexpression of Pla2g4a in CT26 cells induced CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Tregs, inhibiting the antitumor immune response. Finally, we found that the overall survival of the PLA2G4Ahi group was significantly shortened compared with PLA2G4Alo RSCRC, while the survival of LSCRC showed the opposite. Collectively, RSCRC with abnormal PLA2G4A expression educates &#x3b3;&#x3b4; T cells into CD39+&#x3b3;&#x3b4; Tregs to promote tumor progression and metastasis. Our work highlights the interaction between cancer cells and immune cells by distinguishing the primary tumor site and deepens the understanding of the tumor microenvironment and immunosuppression.

### Keywords
Human, Colorectal cancer, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Department of colorectal cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital
Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital

### Submitter
Yang Zhan

### Lab Head
Dr Yang Zhan
Department of colorectal cancer, Tianjin Medical University Cancer Institute and Hospital


