### Accession
PXD011843

### Title
LDL Profile; a new protocol for isolation and characterization of  low density lipoproteins.

### Description
This poject describe a new fast method for the LDL isolation.

### Sample Protocol
An SDS-PAGE polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was previously performed on a gradient gel of 4-15% (Bio Rad, 456-1083) with a voltage of 120 volts for 18 h. The band was manually cut (40 mm X 1 cm), reduced with 10 mM DTT, alkylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide and faded with 50 mM ACN: NH4HCO3 (50:50 v / v). Protein digestion was carried out for 18 hours at 37°C with trypsin (Promega V528A). The peptides obtained from the digestion (ACN: H2O: formic acid 50: 45: 5 v / v) were extracted, the volume of the sample was reduced in a concentrator (Eppendorf, 5301) and the sample was desalted using a C18 column (ZipTipC18). Subsequently, the sample was placed six times on the plate using an α-cyan matrix and analyzed in a MALDI TOF / TOF (MALDI TOF / TOF AB SCIEX 4800PLUS ANALYZER).

### Data Protocol
The MS data were compared with the Homo sapiens database  using the Protein PilotTM software (version 2.0.1) and the Mascot method. The search was performed with the enzyme specificity of trypsin and one missed cleavage was allowed. Biological modifications and amino acid substitutions were used as modifications. The detected protein threshold used in the present study was 90%, and the precursor mass tolerance was 0.5 to 1 Da.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Microscopy, Ldl, Size, Isolation, Lipoprotein, Spectrophotometry

### Affiliations
National Institute of Genomic Medicine
INMEGEN

### Submitter
Juan Pablo Reyes Grajeda

### Lab Head
Dr Juan Pablpo Reyes-Grajeda
National Institute of Genomic Medicine


