### Accession
PXD007618

### Title
Definition of a high-confidence mitochondrial proteome at quantitative scale_submitochondrial profiling

### Description
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism and signaling and their malfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative, quantitative MS-based experimental approach to define the high confidence proteome of yeast mitochondria and to identify new mitochondrial proteins. The analysis includes protein abundance under fermentable and non-fermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein analysis and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified novel mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS) and coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster as well as new mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high confidence source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast were grown in SILAC medium (0.67% [w/v] yeast nitrogen base without amino acids, 3% [v/v] glycerol, selected amino acids and nucleobases) containing either 'heavy' arginine (13C6/15N4) and lysine (13C6/15N2) or the respective 'light' amino acids. Mitochondria of high purity were prepared by sucrose density gradient centrifugation as described (Meisinger et al., Anal. Biochem. 287, 2000). Gradient-purified mitochondria (100 µg per replicate) obtained from heavy SILAC-labeled (replicates 1 and 3) or unlabeled cells (replicate 2) were treated with (i) protease only (sample S1), (ii) protease following rupture of the outer membrane (OM) using digitonin (S2), and (iii) protease following lysis of mitochondria using Triton X-100 (S3). Same amounts of mitochondria from differently SILAC-labeled cells remained untreated (M; control). For the perforation of OM, mitochondria were incubated with 0.1% (w/v) digitonin for 3 min at 4°C. Membrane perforation was stopped by adding the 14-fold volume of SEM buffer (250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM MOPS-KOH, pH 7.2). To lyse mitochondria, Triton X-100 was added to a final concentration of 1% (w/v) and samples were incubated for 10 min at 4°C. Volumes of all samples were adjusted with SEM buffer to the volume of S2. For digestion of accessible proteins in S1, S2, and S3, trypsin and proteinase K were added (5 µg/ml each) and samples were incubated for 15 min at 4°C. Proteases were inactivated by adding PMSF (1 mM final concentration) and incubation for 15 min at 4°C. Mitochondria (M, S1) and mitoplasts (S2) were collected by centrifugation (10 min, 12,000 x g, 4°C), layered with SEM buffer/1 mM PMSF to inactivate residual protease activity, and recollected by centrifugation. Pellets were resuspended in 100 µl SDS sample buffer and boiled for 20 min at 94°C. Proteins in S3 were collected by TCA. To this end, TCA [15% (w/v), final concentration] was added and samples were incubated for 30 min at 4°C followed by centrifugation (15 min, 14,000 x g, 4°C). The resulting pellets were washed with 80% ice-cold acetone (v/v) and centrifuged again. Supernatants were carefully removed, pellets were resuspended in 100 µl SDS sample buffer and boiled for 20 min at 94°C. S1, S2, and S3 were each mixed with equal amounts of M and loaded (25 µg of mixed treated and untreated mitochondria per gel lane) onto a 4-12% NuPAGE Bis-Tris gradient gel. Following visualization of proteins using colloidal Coomassie Blue, lanes were cut into 24 slices of equal size. Slices were washed and destained by alternatingly incubating them with 10 mM NH4HCO3 and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN)/10 mM NH4HCO3. Cysteine residues were reduced (10 mM DTT/10 mM NH4HCO3, 30 min at 56°C) and alkylated (50 mM iodoacetamide/10 mM NH4HCO3; 30 min at RT in the dark) followed by protein digestion using trypsin (60 ng per slice; overnight at 37°C). Peptides were eluted with 0.05% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA)/50% (v/v) ACN, dried in vacuo and resuspended in 15 µl 0.1% TFA prior to LC-MS analysis. Peptides were analyzed by nano-HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using an Orbitrap Elite or a Q Exactive (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled to an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano HPLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany). Peptides were washed and concentrated on PepMap C18 precolumns and separated using AcclaimPepMap RSLC columns (Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 250 nl/min and 40°C. Solvent systems for peptide elution consisted of (i) 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA)/4% (v/v) DMSO (A) and 0.1% (v/v) FA/4% (v/v) DMSO/48% (v/v) methanol/30% (v/v) ACN (B) (Orbitrap Elite) or (ii) 0.1% (v/v) FA (A') and 0.1% (v/v) FA/86% (v/v) ACN (B') (Q Exactive). Peptides were eluted with a gradient ranging from 1-65% B in 70 min, 65-95% B in 5 min, and 5 min 95% followed by MS analysis at the Orbitrap Elite (replicate 1, 2) or with 4-40% B' in 50 min, 40-95% B' in 5 min and 5 min at 95% B' (Q Exactive; replicate 3).  MS instruments were externally calibrated using standard compounds. The Orbitrap Elite was operated with the following parameters: MS survey scans ranging from m/z 370 - 1,700 were acquired in the orbitrap at a resolution (R) of 120,000 (at m/z 400). Automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 10E6 ions and the maximum injection time (IT) to 200 ms. A TOP20 method was used for low energy collision-induced dissociation (CID) of multiply charged precursor peptides in the linear ion trap applying a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35%, an activation q of 0.25, an activation time of 10 ms, an AGC of 5 x 10E3, and a max. IT of 150 ms. The dynamic exclusion time (DE) for previously fragmented precursors was set to 45 s. For analyses at the Q Exactive, the following parameters were applied: MS scans, m/z 375-1,700; R, 70,000 (at m/z 200); AGC, 3 x 10E6 ions; max. IT, 60 ms; TOP12 method for higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD)  of precursor peptides (z≥2) in the orbitrap; NCE, 28%; AGC, 10E5 ions, max. IT, 120 ms; DE, 45 s.

### Data Protocol
For peptide/protein identification and quantification, MS raw data were processed using the MaxQuant software package (version 1.5.3.12) with its integrated search engine Andromeda. MS/MS data were searched against a custom-made protein database containing all entries of the Saccharomyces Genome Database (SGD; http://www.yeastgenome.org/, downloaded  02/04/2016; 6,726 entries) and 47 entries for putative small open reading frames reported by Smith et al. (Cell Reports 7, 2014). Data were also correlated with a list of common contaminants provided by MaxQuant. Database searches were performed with mass tolerances of 4.5 ppm for precursor and 0.5 Da (CID data) or 20 ppm (HCD data) for fragment ions and tryptic specificity (trypsin/P ) allowing three missed cleavages. Acetylation of protein N-termini and oxidation of methionine were considered as variable and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. Arg10 and Lys8 were set as heavy labels. The option 'requantify' was enabled, 'match between runs' and 'iBAQ' were disabled. Each gel slice (n=24 per replicate; 3 replicates) was defined as individual 'experiment' in the experimental design template. Proteins were identified based on at least one unique peptide with a length of six amino acids and a maximum mass of 4,600 Da. Lists of peptides and proteins identified by MaxQuant were filtered applying a false discovery rate of 0.01. For SILAC-based protein quantification, at least one unique peptide and a minimum ratio count of one were required.  The setup of the MaxQuant analysis enabled the quantification of each protein in each of the 24 gel slices per replicate. For each protein, the slice with the highest intensity for M (i.e., untreated mitochondria) was determined and the SILAC ratio for this slice was used for further data processing. In case a protein was missing from treated mitochondria in S1, S2, and S3 due to digestion by the proteases added to the sample and, thus, an S/M protein ratio could not be calculated for a slice, the ratio for this protein was set to 0.01. Mean SILAC ratios across all replicates (n=2-3) were determined. For this, only ratios from adjacent gel slices were taken into account. For further bioinformatics analyses, proteins were required to exhibit ratios for all three experimental conditions in at least two replicates. Data used to analyze the topology of membrane proteins were derived from the MaxQuant peptides.txt results file. Putative membrane proteins were determined based on TMHMM predictions. For each peptide of these proteins, the intensities for each S1, S2, S3, and M across all gel slices were summed up and mean S/M intensity ratios per replicate were determined. In case a peptide intensity was given for M but missing for S, the S/M ratio was set to 0.01. For peptides quantified in at least two replicates, mean S/M intensity ratios across replicates were calculated.  Data obtained in this experiment were subjected to k-means clustering to group proteins showing similar characteristics and low variance in the respective experiment. Clustering analysis was based on S/M SILAC ratios. Only proteins of class 1 (see pM/cM experiment) that had ratios for all three experimental conditions (i.e., S1 - S3) in at least two replicates were considered. Furthermore, proteins were required to (i) exhibit mean S/M ratios ≤ 1.1 (since due to the experimental design S/M ratios should not exceed a value of 1) and (ii) be decreased in abundance with increasing protease-accessibility of proteins (S3 > S2 > S1) with a tolerance of ± 0.2. A total of 624 proteins met all criteria and were subjected to k-means clustering into 5 clusters, which was determined to be the optimal cluster number for this dataset based on the Davies-Bouldin index. Clusters were further clustered by hierarchical clustering using the mean ratio of each cluster. For each cluster, a Gene Ontology (GO) term enrichment analysis was performed based on GO terms retrieved from the SGD using an in-house developed script and all proteins quantified in the dataset as background. The two-sided Fisher's exact test was used to calculate mid p-values. Raw mid p-values were corrected for multiple testing by Benjamini-Hochberg adjustment and GO terms with a corrected mid p-value of < 0.05 were considered enriched.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondria perform central functions in cellular bioenergetics, metabolism, and signaling, and their dysfunction has been linked to numerous diseases. The available studies cover only part of the mitochondrial proteome, and a separation of core mitochondrial proteins from associated fractions has not been achieved. We developed an integrative experimental approach to define the proteome&#xa0;of yeast mitochondria. We classified &gt; 3,300 proteins of mitochondria and mitochondria-associated fractions and defined 901 high-confidence mitochondrial proteins, expanding the set of mitochondrial proteins by 82. Our analysis includes&#xa0;protein abundance under fermentable and nonfermentable growth, submitochondrial localization, single-protein&#xa0;experiments, and subcellular classification of mitochondria-associated fractions. We identified mitochondrial interactors of respiratory chain supercomplexes, ATP synthase, AAA proteases, the mitochondrial contact site and cristae organizing system (MICOS), and the coenzyme Q biosynthesis cluster, as well as mitochondrial proteins with dual cellular localization. The integrative proteome provides a high-confidence&#xa0;source for the characterization of physiological and pathophysiological functions of mitochondria and their integration into the cellular environment.

### Keywords
Silac, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, (sub)organellar proteomics

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany
Universität Freiburg, Warscheid Lab

### Submitter
Christian D. Peikert

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


