### Accession
PXD047655

### Title
Transcriptome fine-mapping in Fusobacterium nucleatum reveals FoxJ, a new σE-dependent small RNA with unusual mRNA activation activity

### Description
The oral commensal Fusobacterium nucleatum can spread to extra-oral sites where it is associated with diverse pathologies including pre-term birth and cancer. Due to the evolutionary distance of F. nucleatum to other model bacteria, we lack a deeper understanding of RNA regulatory networks that allow this bacterium to adapt to its various niches. As a first step in that direction, we recently showed that F. nucleatum harbors a global stress response governed by the extracytoplasmic function sigma factor σE, which displays a striking functional conservation with Proteobacteria and includes a noncoding arm in the form of a regulatory small RNA (sRNA), FoxI. To search for putative additional σE-dependent sRNAs, we comprehensively mapped 5’- and 3’-ends of transcripts in the model strain ATCC 23726. This enabled the discovery of FoxJ, a ~156 nucleotide sRNA previously misannotated as the 5’ UTR of ylmH. FoxJ is tightly controlled by σE and activated by the same stress conditions as FoxI. Both sRNAs act as mRNA repressors of the abundant porin FomA, but FoxJ also regulates genes that are distinct from the target suite of FoxI. Moreover, FoxJ differs from most other σE-dependent sRNAs in that it also positively regulates genes at the post-transcriptional level. We provide preliminary evidence for a new mode of sRNA-mediated mRNA activation, which involves the targeting of intra-operonic terminators. Overall, our study provides an important resource through the comprehensive annotation of 5’- and 3’ UTRs in F. nucleatum and expands our understanding of the σE-response in this evolutionarily distant bacterium.

### Sample Protocol
The NanoLC-MS/MS analysis was carried out at the technology platform mass spectrometry of the Rudolf Virchow Center for mass spectrometric analyses. Quantification of the single upregulated protein band upon FoxJ overexpression (Fig. 4) was done following the procedure described in (23). After separation on a denaturing SDS gel, the band of interested was excised for independent biological duplicates. After destaining in a solution of 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate containing 30% acetonitrile, the samples were then dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile prior to trypsin digestion (using 0.1 µg trypsin in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate, overnight at 37 °C). The samples were diluted in 5% formic acid.  In the case of total protein analysis (Fig. 5), the samples were reduced in 50 mM DTT for 10 min at 70 °C and subsequent alkylated with 120 mM iodoacetamide for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. Following this, the proteins were precipitated using acetone overnight at −20 °C. The precipitate was washed with acetone and then dissolved in 50 µl of 8 M urea, 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Protein digestion into peptides was carried out using Lys-C (Wako) for 2 hours at 30 °C, followed by an overnight digestion with trypsin. The resulting peptides were eluted with 60% acetonitrile/0.3% formic acid and stored at −20 °C until LC-MS/MS analysis.   In both cases, measurements were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion ETD (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and a nEASY- LC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
In both cases, measurements were carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion ETD (Thermo Scientific) equipped with a PicoView Ion Source (New Objective) and a nEASY- LC1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Scientific). The resulting data were analyzed using MaxQuant (v.1.5.7.4) with integrated Andromeda comparing it against the Uniprot database for F. nucleatum subsp. nucleatum ATCC 23726 merged with that of the plasmid pFP421 (p.FoxJ). For the analysis of Fig. 5, all proteins were required to average label-free quantification (LFQ) values ≥ 1x106 for either the control samples or those of the FoxJ-overexpression in order to be considered detected.

### Publication Abstract
The bacterium that causes syphilis, <i>Treponema pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i>, has now been cultured <i>in vitro</i> continuously for periods exceeding 3 years using a system consisting of coculture with Sf1Ep rabbit epithelial cells in TpCM-2 medium and a low-oxygen environment. In addition, long-term culture of several other syphilis isolates (SS14, Mexico A, UW231B, and UW249B) and the <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>endemicum</i> Bosnia A strain has been achieved. During <i>in vitro</i> passage, <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> exhibited a typical bacterial growth curve with logarithmic and stationary phases. Sf1Ep cells are required for sustained growth and motility; however, high initial Sf1Ep cell numbers resulted in reduced multiplication and survival. Use of Eagle's minimal essential medium as the basal medium was not effective in sustaining growth of <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> beyond the first passage, whereas CMRL 1066 or M199 supported long-term culture, confirming that additional nutrients present in these more complex basal media are required for long-term culture. <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> growth was dependent upon the presence of fetal bovine serum, with 20% (vol/vol) being the optimal concentration. Omission of reactive oxygen species scavengers dithiothreitol, d-mannitol, or l-histidine did not dramatically affect survival or growth. Additionally, <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> can be successfully cultured in a Brewer jar instead of a specialized low-oxygen incubator. Phosphomycin or amphotericin B can be added to the medium to aid in the prevention of bacterial or fungal contamination, respectively. These results help define the parameters of the <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> culture system that are required for sustained, long-term survival and multiplication.<b>IMPORTANCE</b> Syphilis is caused by the bacterium <i>Treponema pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> Until recently, this pathogen could only be maintained through infection of rabbits or other animals, making study of this important human pathogen challenging and costly. <i>T. pallidum</i> subsp. <i>pallidum</i> has now been successfully cultured for over 3 years in a tissue culture system using a medium called TpCM-2. Here, we further define the growth requirements of this important human pathogen, promoting a better understanding of the biology of this fastidious organism.

### Keywords
Fusobacterium; srna; sigma e;post-transcriptional regulation

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany Institute of Molecular Infection Biology, University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany  RNA Biology Group, Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany

### Submitter
Falk Ponath

### Lab Head
Dr Jörg Vogel
Helmholtz Institute for RNA-based Infection Research (HIRI), Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research (HZI), D-97080 Würzburg, Germany  RNA Biology Group, Institute for Molecular Infection Biology (IMIB), University of Würzburg, D-97080 Würzburg, Germany


