### Accession
PXD007079

### Title
HTRA1 dependent cell cycle proteomics

### Description
The HTRA1 gene encoding an evolutionary conserved protein quality control factor can be epigenetically silenced or inactivated by mutation under pathologic conditions such as cancer. Recent evidence suggests that loss of HTRA1 function causes multiple phenotypes including acceleration of cell growth, delayed onset of senescence, centrosome amplification and polyploidy suggesting an implication in the regulation of the cell cycle. To address this model, we performed a large-scale proteomics study to correlate the abundance of proteins and HTRA1 levels in various cell cycle phases using label-free quantification mass spectrometry. These data indicate that the levels of 4723 proteins fluctuated in a cell cycle-dependent, 2872 in a HTRA1-dependent and 1530 in a cell cycle- and HTRA1-dependent manner. The large number of proteins affected by the modulation of HTRA1 levels support its general role in protein homeostasis. Moreover, the detected changes in protein abundance in combination with pull down data implicate HTRA1 is in numerous cell cycle events such as DNA replication, chromosome segregation and cell cycle dependent apoptosis. These results highlight the wide implications of HTRA1 in cellular physiology

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were either generated according to the Complex Proteome and In-Solution Digest (CP-ISD) protocol or the HTRA1 Affinity Enrichment and In-Solution Digest (AE-ISD) protocol. For details please see materials and Methods section of the publication.  All peptide samples were cleaned on 2 disc StageTips After elution from the StageTips, samples were dried using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf) and the peptides were taken up in 10 µL 0.1% formic acid solution LC-MS/MS Analysis - Experiments were performed on an Orbitrap Elite instrument (Thermo, (9)) that was coupled to an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography (LC) system (Thermo). The LC was operated in the one-column mode. The analytical column was a fused silica capillary (OD 360 µm, ID 75 µm × 42 cm for CP-ISD and OD 360 µm, ID 75 µm × 38 cm for AE-ISD) with an integrated PicoFrit emitter (New Objective) packed in-house with Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm resin (Dr. Maisch). The analytical column was encased by a column oven (Sonation) and attached to a nanospray flex ion source (Thermo). The column oven temperature was adjusted to 45°C during data acquisition and in all other modi at 30°C. The LC was equipped with two mobile phases: solvent A (0.1% formic acid, FA, in water) and solvent B (0.1% FA in acetonitrile, ACN). All solvents were of UHPLC (ultra high performance liquid chromatography) grade (Sigma). Peptides were directly loaded onto the analytical column with a maximum flow rate that would not exceed the set pressure limit of 980 bar (usually around 0.4 – 0.6 µL/min). Peptides from CP-ISD experiments were subsequently separated on the analytical column by running a 240 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 220 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 10 min and 100% B for 10 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides from AE-ISD experiments were separated on the analytical column by running a 90 min gradient of solvent A and solvent B (start with 7% B; gradient 7% to 35% B for 80 min; gradient 35% to 100% B for 5 min and 100% B for 5 min) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated using Xcalibur software (version 2.2 SP1.48). The mass spectrometer was set in the positive ion mode. Precursor ion scanning was performed in the Orbitrap analyzer (FTMS; Fourier Transform Mass Spectrometry) in the scan range of m/z 300-1800 and at a resolution of 60000 with the internal lock mass option turned on (lock mass was 445.120025 m/z, polysiloxane) (10). Product ion spectra were recorded in a data dependent fashion in the ion trap (ITMS; Ion Trap Mass Spectrometry) in a variable scan range and at a rapid scan rate. The ionization potential (spray voltage) was set to 1.8 kV. Peptides were analyzed using a repeating cycle consisting of a full precursor ion scan (3.0 × 106 ions or 50  ms) followed by 12 (AE-ISD) or 15 (CP-ISD) product ion scans (1.0 × 104 ions or 50 ms) where peptides are isolated based on their intensity in the full survey scan (threshold of 500 counts) for tandem mass spectrum (MS2) generation that permits peptide sequencing and identification. CID (collision-induced dissociation) collision energy was set to 35% for the generation of MS2 spectra. During MS2 data acquisition dynamic ion exclusion was set to 60 seconds with a maximum list of excluded ions consisting of 500 members and a repeat count of one. Ion injection time prediction, preview mode for the FTMS, monoisotopic precursor selection and charge state screening were enabled. Only charge states higher than 1 were considered for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Data Analysis - RAW spectra were submitted to an Andromeda (11) search in MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.30) using the default settings (12). Label-free quantification and match-between-runs was activated (13). MS/MS spectra data were searched against the UniProt reference H. sapiens database (UP000005640_9606.fasta; 70244 entries). All searches included a contaminants database (as implemented in MaxQuant, 267 sequences). The contaminants database contains known MS contaminants and was included to estimate the level of contamination. Andromeda searches allowed oxidation of methionine residues (16 Da) and acetylation of protein N-terminus (42 Da) as dynamic modification and the static modification of cysteine (57 Da, alkylation with iodoacetamide). Enzyme specificity was set to “Trypsin/P”. The instrument type in Andromeda searches was set to Orbitrap and the precursor mass tolerance was set to ±20 ppm (first search) and ±4.5 ppm (main search). The MS/MS match tolerance was set to ±0.5 Da. The peptide spectrum match FDR and the protein FDR were set to 0.01 (based on target-decoy approach). Minimum peptide length was 7 amino acids. For protein quantification unique and razor peptides were allowed. Modified peptides were allowed for quantification. The minimum score for modified peptides was 40. Resulting data sets were analyzed using PERSEUS computational platform (version 1.5.6.0.) (14). Proteins identified as contaminants, present in the reversed database or only by site were excluded from analysis. Proteins identified in at least 3 out of four replicates and in at least one cell cycle phase were kept, to not omit proteins that change their abundance in only one cell cycle phase. Imputation of LFQ intensities was performed according to a normal distribution and intensities were logarithmized (base 2). Statistical analysis was performed with Perseus as indicated. GO-term analysis was performed with Perseus software or the GOrilla online tool (15).

### Publication Abstract
The HTRA1 gene encoding an evolutionary conserved protein quality-control factor can be epigenetically silenced or inactivated by mutation under pathologic conditions such as cancer. Recent evidence suggests that the loss of HTRA1 function causes multiple phenotypes, including the acceleration of cell growth, delayed onset of senescence, centrosome amplification, and polyploidy, suggesting an implication in the regulation of the cell cycle. To address this model, we performed a large-scale proteomics study to correlate the abundance of proteins and HTRA1 levels in various cell cycle phases using label-free-quantification mass spectrometry. These data indicate that the levels of 4723 proteins fluctuated in a cell-cycle-dependent manner, 2872 in a HTRA1-dependent manner, and 1530 in a cell-cycle- and HTRA1-dependent manner. The large number of proteins affected by the modulation of HTRA1 levels supports its general role in protein homeostasis. Moreover, the detected changes in protein abundance, in combination with pull-down data, implicate HTRA1 in various cell cycle events such as DNA replication, chromosome segregation, and cell-cycle-dependent apoptosis. These results highlight the wide implications of HTRA1 in cellular physiology.

### Keywords
Cell cycle, Htra1, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
University Duisburg-Essen
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany

### Submitter
Farnusch Kaschani

### Lab Head
Dr Farnusch Kaschani
Analytics Core Facility Essen (ACE), Chemische Biologie, Universität Duisburg-Essen, ZMB, Germany


