### Accession
PXD011163

### Title
Proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics of CVB3 infected cells

### Description
Viruses are obligate intracellular parasites that reshape the ultrastructure, composition and metabolism of host cells to suit their specific needs, although disparate viruses may modify their host in different ways. Such changes may be specifically induced by the virus to support the infection or be part of cellular antiviral responses or stress responses. Here, using state-of-the-art quantitative (phospho)proteomics, we reveal the unique proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics that occur in the host cells infected with the enterovirus coxsackievirus B3 (CVB3).

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed, reduced, and alkylated in lysis buffer (1% SDC, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, and 100 mM TRIS, pH 8.0) supplemented with complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor mixture and phosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor mixture. Cells were heated for 5 min at 95 °C, sonicated with a Bioruptor Plus, and diluted 1:10 with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0. Proteins were digested overnight at 37 °C with trypsin and Lys-C (enzyme:substrate ratio of 1:50 and 1:75). SDC was precipitated by acidification to 5% of formic acid. Samples were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges and directly subjected to phosphopeptide enrichment. Samples for proteome analysis were instead dried down and stored at -80 °C until nLC-MS analysis. Phosphopeptides enrichment was performed using Fe(III)-NTA in an automated fashion using the AssayMAP Bravo Platform. Reversed phase nLC-MS/MS analysis was performed with an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer, or Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer for the phosphoproteome analysis. The UHPLC was equipped with a double frit trapping column (Reprosil C18, 3 µm, 2 cm × 100 µm) and a single frit analytical column (Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 µm, 50 cm × 75 µm). Trapping was performed in solvent A (0.1% FA in water) at 5 µL/min, while for the elution the flow rate was passively split to 300 nL/min. The linear gradient was as follows: 13-40% solvent B (0.1% FA in 80% ACN) in 220 min, or 8-32% in 95 min for phosphopeptide analysis. Total analysis time was 235 min for the proteome samples and 110 min for the phosphoproteome samples. The mass spectrometers were operated in data-dependent mode. The Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375-1600 were acquired at a resolution of 35000 (FWHM) after accumulation to a target value of 3e6. Up to 10 most intense precursor ions were selected for fragmentation, with the isolation window set to 1.5 m/z. HCD fragmentation was performed at normalized collision energy of 25% after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 17500 (FWHM). The Orbitrap Fusion full-scan MS spectra from m/z 375-1500 were acquired at a resolution of 120000 (FWHM) after accumulation to a target value of 4e5. The most intense peptide ions fitting within a 3 s cycle were selected for HCD fragmentation, with the isolation window set to 1.6 m/z, and a normalized collision energy of 30%, after the accumulation to a target value of 5e4. MS/MS was acquired at a resolution of 30000 (FWHM).

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using MaxQuant (version 1.5.8.0). The database search was performed against the human Swiss-Prot database (version November, 2015 - 20,193 entries) supplemented with CVB3 proteins sequences (21 entries), and against a common contaminants database (245 entries). Default settings were used, with the following minor changes: methionine oxidation, protein N-term acetylation, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine as variable modifications. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages and a minimum peptide length of 7 amino acids. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied at the protein, peptide, and modification level. A site localization probability of at least 0.75 was used as thresholds for the localization of phosphorylated residues (class I phosphosites). Label-free quantification via MaxLFQ algorithm was performed, and match between runs feature was enabled.

### Publication Abstract
The group of enteroviruses contains many important pathogens for humans, including poliovirus, coxsackievirus, rhinovirus, as well as newly emerging global health threats such as EV-A71 and EV-D68. Here, we describe an unbiased, system-wide and time-resolved analysis of the proteome and phosphoproteome of human cells infected with coxsackievirus B3. Of the ~3,200 proteins quantified throughout the time course, a large amount (~25%) shows a significant change, with the majority being downregulated. We find ~85% of the detected phosphosites to be significantly regulated, implying that most changes occur at the post-translational level. Kinase-motif analysis reveals temporal activation patterns of certain protein kinases, with several CDKs/MAPKs immediately active upon the infection, and basophilic kinases, ATM, and ATR engaging later. Through bioinformatics analysis and dedicated experiments, we identify mTORC1 signalling as a major regulation network during enterovirus infection. We demonstrate that inhibition of mTORC1 activates TFEB, which increases expression of lysosomal and autophagosomal genes, and that TFEB activation facilitates the release of virions in extracellular vesicles via secretory autophagy. Our study provides a rich framework for a system-level understanding of enterovirus-induced perturbations at the protein and signalling pathway levels, forming a base for the development of pharmacological inhibitors to treat enterovirus infections.

### Keywords
Virus, Hela, Cvb3, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Mass spectrometry, Mtor

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


