### Accession
PXD012534

### Title
Phosphorus-mediated alleviation of aluminum toxicity revealed by iTRAQ technique in Citrus grandis roots

### Description
Citrus grandis seedlings were irrigated with nutrient solutions containing two levels of aluminium (Al; 0 mM and 1.2 mM AlCl3•6H2O) and two levels of phosphorus (P; 0 μM and 200 μM KH2PO4) combinations for 18 weeks, respectively. The proteome profile of Citrus root submitted to different P-Al interactions were investigated by using isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ).

### Sample Protocol
Different protein samples were reduced, alkylated and labeled according to iTRAQ 8-plex kits (AB Sciex Inc., MA, USA) manufacturer’s manual. Twenty fractions were garnered after fractionation by strong cation exchange (SCX) chromatography. Each fraction was resuspended in buffer A (5% ACN, 0.1%FA) and centrifuged at 20000g for 10 min, the final concentration of peptide was about 0.5 μg/μl  on average. Ten μl supernatant was loaded on a LC-20AD nanoHPLC (Shi madzu, Kyoto, Japan) by the autosampler onto a 2cm C18 trap column. Data acquisition was performed with a TripleTOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, Concord, ON) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, Woburn, MA).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files acquired from the Orbitrap were converted into MGF files using Proteome Discoverer 1.2 (PD 1.2, Thermo), [5600 msconverter] and the MGF file were searched. Proteins identificati on were performed by using Mascot search engine (Matrix Science, London, UK; version 2.3.02) against C. clementina database (JGI version 0.9, www.phytozome.org/clementine, 35976 sequences). Protein identification and quantification were performed using MASCOT (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science Inc, Boston, MA). The following search settings were used: peptide tolerance was set at 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set as 0.05 Da; MS/MS fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.1 Da; threshold set-off at 0.05 Da in the ion-score cut-off; tryptic peptides with ≤1 missed cleavage site; pyrophosphorylation of glutamine and variable oxidation of methionine and iTRAQ labeling of tyrosine were set as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iTRAQ labeling of lysine and the N-terminal amino group of peptides were set as fixed modification. Peptide change was set Mr, and monoisotopic mass were chosen. iTRAQ 8plex was chosen for quantification during the search simultaneously. The search results were passed through additional filters before exporting the data. For protein identification, the filters were set as follows: significance threshold p < 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and ion score or expected cutoff less than 0.05 (with 95% confidence). For protein quantitation, the filters were set as follows: “median” for protein ratio type; minimum precursor charge was set to 2+ and minimum peptides was set to 2. Median intensities were set as normalization, and outliers were removed automatically. The search results were passed through additional filters before exporting the data. For protein identification, the filters were set as follows: significance threshold P, 0.05 (with 95% confidence) and ion score or expected cutoff less than 0.05 (with 95% confidence).

### Publication Abstract
Citrus grandis seedlings were irrigated with nutrient solutions with four Al-P combinations [two Al levels (0 mM and 1.2 mM AlCl3&#xb7;6H2O) &#xd7; two P levels (0 &#x3bc;M and 200 &#x3bc;M KH2PO4)] for 18 weeks. Al dramatically inhibited the growth of C. grandis seedlings, as revealed by a decreased dry weight of roots and shoots. Elevating P level could ameliorate the Al-induced growth inhibition and organic acid (malate and citrate) secretion in C. grandis. Using a comparative proteomic approach revealed by the isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) technique, 318 differentially abundant proteins (DAPs) were successfully identified and quantified in this study. The possible mechanisms underlying P-induced alleviation of Al toxicity in C. grandis were proposed. Furthermore, some DAPs, such as GLN phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate amidotransferase 2, ATP-dependent caseinolytic (Clp) protease/crotonase family protein, methionine-S-oxide reductase B2, ABC transporter I family member 17 and pyridoxal phosphate phosphatase, were reported for the first time to respond to Al stress in Citrus plants. Our study provides some proteomic details about the alleviative effects of P on Al toxicity in C. grandis, however, the exact function of the DAPs identified herein in response to Al tolerance in plants must be further investigated.

### Keywords
Citrus grandis, Aluminum, Phosphorus, Proteomic analysis, Itraq

### Affiliations
Fujian Agricultural and Forestry University
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University

### Submitter
Lin-Tong Yang

### Lab Head
Dr Lin-Tong Yang
College of Resources and Environment, Fujian Agriculture and Forestry University


