### Accession
PXD005022

### Title
Quantitative proteomics of bloodstream infection

### Description
We have performed LC-MS based plasma proteomics of twenty febrile patients coming in at Peijas Hospital, Helsinki University Hospital (Vantaa, Finland). At the same time, blood culture was performed to classify the patients to blood culture positive and negative for bloodstream infections. Blood culture negative patients served as controls for the positive ones and these two groups were used for identifying protein profile changes occurring in positive patients. We have subsequently performed various statistical analyses such as principal component analysis as well as pathway analysis by two different methods. We show, in the current study, proteins significantly differing in these two groups as well as dysregulated pathways. These changes seem not to depend on bacterial species as different patients had different blood stream infections. Further, we statistically analyzed the proteomic dataset to find the potential biomarkers which can classify the two classes of patients.

### Sample Protocol
Plasma samples from febrile patients were albumin-depleted and proteins were trypsinised. peptides were analysed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The data was acquired in DIA (data independent acquisition) fashion using HDMSE-mode with Synapt G2-S HDMS. Raw files were imported into Progenesis QI for proteomics software using lock mass correction with 785.8426 m/z, corresponding to doubly charged Glu1-Fibrinopeptide B. The software facilitated the peptide identification with Protein Lynx Global Server and label-free quantification. The peptide identification was done against Uniprot human FASTA sequences (UniprotKB Release 2015_09, 20205 sequence entries) with (CLPB_ECOLI (P63285)), ClpB protein sequence inserted for label-free quantification. Modifications used were as follows: fixed at cysteine (carbamidomethyl) and variable in methionine (oxidation). Trypsin was used as digesting agent and one missed cleavage was allowed. Fragment and peptide error tolerances were set to auto and FDR to less than 4%. One or more ion fragments per peptide, three or more fragments per protein and one or more peptides per protein were required for ion matching. The proteins were grouped according to parsimony principle. Protein abudnaces were analysed with Anova across all the samples.

### Publication Abstract
Blood culture is the primary diagnostic test performed in a suspicion of bloodstream infection to detect the presence of microorganisms and direct the treatment. However, blood culture is slow and time consuming method to detect blood stream infections or separate septic and/or bacteremic patients from others with less serious febrile disease. Plasma proteomics, despite its challenges, remains an important source for early biomarkers for systemic diseases and might show changes before direct evidence from bacteria can be obtained. We have performed a plasma proteomic analysis, simultaneously at the time of blood culture sampling from ten blood culture positive and ten blood culture negative patients, and quantified 172 proteins with two or more unique peptides. Principal components analysis, Orthogonal Projections to Latent Structures Discriminant Analysis (OPLS-DA) and ROC curve analysis were performed to select protein(s) features which can classify the two groups of samples. We propose a number of candidates which qualify as potential biomarkers to select the blood culture positive cases from negative ones. Pathway analysis by two methods revealed complement activation, phagocytosis pathway and alterations in lipid metabolism as enriched pathways which are relevant for the condition. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD005022.

### Keywords
Bloodstream infection, Sepsis, Mse

### Affiliations
Helsinki University
Transplantation Laboratory, University of Helsinki & HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.

### Submitter
Sakari Joenväärä

### Lab Head
Dr Risto Renkonen
Transplantation Laboratory, University of Helsinki & HUSLAB, Helsinki University Hospital, Helsinki, Finland.


