### Accession
PXD006127

### Title
Analysis of the splicing factor LUC7 in Arabidopsis

### Description
Characterization of an U1 snRNP component (LUC7) in plants through transcriptome analysis of luc7 Arabidopsis mutant and AP-MS for detecting LUC7 interacting partners

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation: LUC7A immunoprecipitation was performed using a complemented line LUC7A::LUC7A-eYFP (line 20.3.1) and as controls  wild type (WT) plants and WT plants expressing 35S::GFP were employed. Four independent biological replicates were performed. Seedlings (4g) were ground in N2 liquid and 1V of extraction buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0,5% Triton X-100, 5% Glycerol, 1mM PMSF, 100 µM MG132, Complete Protease Inhibitor Cocktail EDTA-free and Plant specific protease Inhibitor, Sigma P9599) was added. After defrosting, samples were incubated on ice for 30 min and centrifuged at 3220 rcf for 30 min at 4°C. Remaining debris were removed by filtering the extracts through two layers of Miracloth. For each immunoprecipitation, 20 µl of GFP-trap (gtma-20,  Chromotek) in a 5 ml tube was washed twice with 1 ml of washing buffer (50 mM Tris-Cl pH 7.5, 100 mM NaCl, 0,2% Triton X-100) and once with 0,5 ml of IP buffer. The same amount of extract (~5 ml) was then transferred to the washed GFP-trap and samples were incubated for 3 hours in a rotating wheel at 4°C. After this incubation time, tubes were centrifuged at 800 rcf for 1-2 min and supernatant discarded. The beads were ressuspended in 1 ml of washing buffer (above) and transferred to a 1,5 ml tube, where beads were washed 4 to 5 times with washing buffer using magnetic separation. At the end, beads were ressuspended in 30-40 µl of 2x Laemmili Buffer containing 200mM DTT and incubated at 80°C for 10min.  Protein in-gel digestion: Eluted protein samples were purified on as SDS PAGE.  Coomassie-stained gel pieces were digested using Trypsin. Extracted peptides were desalted using C18 Stage tips and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Mass spectrometry: LC-MS/MS analyses were performed on an Easy nano-LC (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Orbitrap XL or LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) as decribed elsewhere (Franz-Wachtel et al, 2012). The peptide mixtures were separated using a 87 min or 127 minute segmented gradient from to 5–33-50-90% of HPLC solvent B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid) in HPLC solvent A (0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. For measurement on Orbitrap XL the 10 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented in each scan cycle using collision-induced dissociation (CID), whereas in Orbitrap Elite mesurements top 20 most intense precursor ions were sequentially fragmented using higher energy collisional dissociation (HCD). In all measurements, sequenced precursor masses were excluded from further selection for 90 s in Orbitrap XL, for 60 s in Orbitrap Elite measurements. The target values for MS/MS fragmentation were 5000 charges in Orbitrap XL, or 40000 charges for Orbitrap Elite measurements. For MS scans 106 charges were set as target values in both instruments.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data processing: The MS data were processed with MaxQuant software suite v.1.5.2.8 (Cox & Mann, 2008). Database search was performed using the Andromeda search engine (Cox et al, 2011), which is integrated in MaxQuant. MS/MS spectra were searched against a target-decoy Uniprot database consisting of 33,431 protein entries from A. thalinana and 285 commonly observed contaminants. In database search, full specificity was required for trypsin. Up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionine, and acetylation of protein N-terminuns were set as variable modifications. Initial mass tolerance was set to 4.5 parts per million (ppm) for precursor ions and 0.5 dalton (Da) for fragment ions. Peptide, protein and modification site identifications were reported at a false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.01, estimated by the target/decoy approach (Elias and Gygi, 2007). The iBAQ algorithm was enabeled to estimate quantitative values by dividing the sum of peptide intensities of all detected peptides by the number of theoretically observable peptides of the matched protein (Schwanhäusser et al., 2011).

### Publication Abstract
Introns are removed by the spliceosome, a large macromolecular complex composed of five ribonucleoprotein subcomplexes (U snRNPs). The U1 snRNP, which binds to 5' splice sites, plays an essential role in early steps of the splicing reaction. Here, we show that <i>Arabidopsis thaliana</i> LETHAL UNLESS CBC7 (LUC7) proteins, which are encoded by a three-member gene family in Arabidopsis, are important for plant development and stress resistance. We show that LUC7 is a U1 snRNP accessory protein by RNA immunoprecipitation experiments and LUC7 protein complex purifications. Transcriptome analyses revealed that LUC7 proteins are not only important for constitutive splicing, but also affect hundreds of alternative splicing events. Interestingly, LUC7 proteins specifically promote splicing of a subset of terminal introns. Splicing of LUC7-dependent introns is a prerequisite for nuclear export, and some splicing events are modulated by stress in a LUC7-dependent manner. Taken together, our results highlight the importance of the U1 snRNP component LUC7 in splicing regulation and suggest a previously unrecognized role of a U1 snRNP accessory factor in terminal intron splicing.

### Keywords
Splicing, Arabidopsis, Luc7, Plants, U1 snrnp

### Affiliations
Institute for Biology and Environmental Science, Dep. Evolutionary Genetics of Plants, Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg
Tuebingen University

### Submitter
Nicolas Nalpas

### Lab Head
Dr Sascha Laubinger
Institute for Biology and Environmental Science, Dep. Evolutionary Genetics of Plants, Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg


