### Accession
PXD013425

### Title
Human serum interactome of snake-derived antimicrobial peptide Ctn[15-34]

### Description
The affinity purification/MS identification methodology reported here can be viewed as a routine pharmacoproteomic approach to investigate the serum interactome of peptide drugs, identifying proteins affecting bioavailability and thus assisting the peptide drug development process. The specific results described here enlighten the serum stability issues of peptide Ctn[15-34] and ratifiy its promising future as an anti-infective lead.

### Sample Protocol
AP-captured serum proteins were digested in solution with trypsin. Briefly, samples were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 ºC for 60 min, alkylated with 20 mM iodoacetamide at 25 ºC for 30 min, diluted up to 1M urea with 0.2 M NH4HCO3 and digested with trypsin (ratio 1:10 enzyme:substrate) at 37 ºC overnight. The digests were desalted in an UltraMicroSpin column, evaporated to dryness and diluted to 10 l with 0.1% FA in H2O. 45% of the digest was analyzed in an LTQ-Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Acquired data were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer software (v1.4.1.14, Thermo), and the Mascot search engine (v2.5.1, Matrix Science[20]) was used for peptide identification. Data were searched against the Homo sapiens protein database plus the most common contaminants. A precursor ion mass tolerance of 7 ppm at the MS1 level was used, and up to three missed cleavages for trypsin were allowed. Fragment ion mass tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Met oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set as variable and Cys carbamidomethylation as fixed modifications. A 5% false discovery rate (FDR) filter was applied to all identified peptides.

### Publication Abstract
The inherent propensity to enzymatic degradation of most peptides remains a bottleneck in their therapeutic development. Efficient, early screening methods are necessary for in vitro characterization of the molecular events occurring when peptides get in contact with biological fluids such us plasma. Herein we present an affinity purification/MS approach for mapping peptide serum interactors. We have applied this methodology to identify the serum partners of antibiotic peptide Ctn [15-34], aiming to ascertain the molecular interactions underlying its unusually long half-life (~ 12&#x202f;h) in human serum. From 42 proteins captured in pull-downs with biotinylated Ctn [15-34] as bait, five are of special interest for their transport/binding properties hence alleged peptide arresting potential. The subset contains two members of the albumin superfamily, two apolipoproteins and a globulin. All five share a binding ability for hydrophobic species, and also bind Ctn [15-34], presumably via its C-terminal hydrophobic section, with affinities in the &#x3bc;M range as shown by surface plasmon resonance. Additionally, our functional enrichment reveals several significant immune-related processes suggesting an immunomodulatory role of Ctn [15-34]. Taken together, this study exemplifies how pharmacoproteomics can be used to analyze bioavailability issues and shed light on the serum interactors ultimately conferring protection to Ctn [15-34] against proteolytic events. SIGNIFICANCE: The affinity purification/MS identification methodology reported here can be viewed as a routine pharmacoproteomic approach to investigate the serum interactome of peptide drugs, identifying proteins affecting bioavailability and thus assisting the peptide drug development process. The specific results described here enlighten the serum stability issues of peptide Ctn [15-34] and ratify its promising future as an anti-infective lead.

### Keywords
Human serum, Peptide proteolytic resistance, Lc-ms/ms, Antimicrobial peptide

### Affiliations
Departament of Experimental and Health Sciences, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain
Pompeu Fabra University

### Submitter
Clara Pérez-Peinado

### Lab Head
Dr David Andreu
Departament of Experimental and Health Sciences, Pompeu Fabra University, Barcelona, Spain


