### Accession
PXD001606

### Title
California sea lion plasma chronic DAT biomarkers via 2D-GE

### Description
Domoic acid toxicosis (DAT) in California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) is caused by exposure to the marine biotoxin domoic acid and has been linked to massive stranding events and mortality. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs in addition to the presence of domoic acid in body fluids. Chronic DAT further is characterized by reoccurring seizures progressing to status epilepticus. Diagnosis of chronic DAT is often slow and problematic, and minimally invasive tests for DAT have been the focus of numerous recent biomarker studies. The goal of this study was to retrospectively profile plasma proteins in a population of sea lions with chronic DAT and those without DAT using two dimensional gel electrophoresis in an effort to discover whether individual, multiple, or combinations of protein and clinical data could be utilized to identify sea lions with DAT. 49 spots were excised, digested and analyzed by MS/MS. These are the data.

### Sample Protocol
Gel pieces are washed with 50:50 acetonitrile (ACN) ammonium bicarbonate (AmBic) three times for 30 min each time, then allowed to dry at 37 °C for 30 min. Next, 250 ng of trypsin gold (Promega) was added and incubated at 37 °C overnight. Peptide solutions were removed and the gel pieces were washed twice with 50% ACN 2% formic acid for 30 min each time. The collected supernatents were dried in a speedvac. The resulting pellet was reconstituted in 20 µL of mobile phase A [MPA; 2% acetonitrile (v/v), 0.1% formic acid (v/v)].

### Data Protocol
Resulting raw files were converted to peak lists using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter (v. 1.1 beta, July 2011). Protein identifications were made using Mascot (v. 2.3.02) searching against a custom database made for searching sea lion proteins. This database was a combined UniProt SwissProt, SwissProt varsplic, and TrEMBL database (release 2012_3) using the following species (with common name and UniProt taxonomy identifier in parentheses): Ailuropoda melanoleuca (Giant Panda; 9646), Canis lupus familiaris (Dog; 9615), Homo sapiens (Human; 9606), Sus scrofa (Pig; 9823), Bos taurus (Bovine; 9913), Mus musculus (Mouse; 10090), and Zalophus californianus (California sea lion; 9704). The final parsed database was comprised of 44,953 entries from SwissProt, 282,269 entries from TrEMBL, and 23,966 entries from SwissProt varsplic. Additionally, this database contained the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins database (cRAP; 2012.01.01; 107 sequences; the Global Proteome Machine). The data was searched using the following parameters: trypsin was selected as the enzyme and 2 missed cleavages were allowed; carbamidomethylation (C) was specified as a fixed modification; deamidation (NQ) and oxidation (M) were specified as variable modifications; a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.5 Da; instrument type was ESI-QUAD-TOF.

### Publication Abstract
Domoic acid toxicosis (DAT) in California sea lions (Zalophus californianus) is caused by exposure to the marine biotoxin domoic acid and has been linked to massive stranding events and mortality. Diagnosis is based on clinical signs in addition to the presence of domoic acid in body fluids. Chronic DAT further is characterized by reoccurring seizures progressing to status epilepticus. Diagnosis of chronic DAT is often slow and problematic, and minimally invasive tests for DAT have been the focus of numerous recent biomarker studies. The goal of this study was to retrospectively profile plasma proteins in a population of sea lions with chronic DAT and those without DAT using two dimensional gel electrophoresis to discover whether individual, multiple, or combinations of protein and clinical data could be utilized to identify sea lions with DAT. Using a training set of 32 sea lion sera, 20 proteins and their isoforms were identified that were significantly different between the two groups (p&lt;0.05). Interestingly, 11 apolipoprotein E (ApoE) charge forms were decreased in DAT samples, indicating that ApoE charge form distributions may be important in the progression of DAT. In order to develop a classifier of chronic DAT, an independent blinded test set of 20 sea lions, seven with chronic DAT, was used to validate models utilizing ApoE charge forms and eosinophil counts. The resulting support vector machine had high sensitivity (85.7% with 92.3% negative predictive value) and high specificity (92.3% with 85.7% positive predictive value). These results suggest that ApoE and eosinophil counts along with machine learning can perform as a robust and accurate tool to diagnose chronic DAT. Although this analysis is specifically focused on blood biomarkers and routine clinical data, the results demonstrate promise for future studies combining additional variables in multidimensional space to create robust classifiers.

### Keywords
Plasma, Depletion, 2d-ge, Apoe, Sea lion

### Affiliations
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA

### Submitter
Benjamin Neely

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Gregory Janech
Department of Medicine, Division of Nephrology, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA


