### Accession
PXD018704

### Title
Use of the Polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4) inhibitor centrinone to investigate intracellular signaling networks using SILAC-based phosphoproteomics_C4PR

### Description
Polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4) is the master regulator of centriole duplication in metazoan organisms. Catalytic activity and protein turnover of PLK4 are tightly coupled in human cells, since changes in PLK4 concentration and catalysis have profound effects on centriole duplication and supernumerary centrosomes, which are associated with aneuploidy and cancer. Recently, PLK4 has been targeted with a variety of small molecule kinase inhibitors exemplified by centrinone, which induces inhibitory effects on PLK4 and can lead to on-target centrosome depletion. Despite this, relatively few PLK4 substrates have been identified unequivocally in human cells, and the extent of PLK4 signalling remains poorly characterised. We report an unbiased mass spectrometry-based quantitative analysis of cellular protein phosphorylation in stable PLK4-expressing human cells exposed to the small molecule inhibitor centrinone. PLK4 phosphorylation was itself sensitive to brief exposure to centrinone, resulting in PLK4 stabilization. A drug-resistant PLK4 mutant (G95R) confirmed several on-target effects of the compound towards PLK4. Using this experimental system, we report hundreds of centrinone-regulated phosphoproteins in U2OS cells, including centrosomal and cell cycle proteins and a variety of likely non cell-cycle substrates. Surprisingly, sequence interrogation of ~300 significantly downregulated phosphoproteins reveals an extensive network of centrinone-sensitive [Ser/Thr]Pro phosphorylation target sequence motifs, which based on our analysis might be either direct or indirect targets of PLK4. In addition, we confirm NMYC and PTPN12 as new PLK4 substrates, both in vitro and in human cells. Our findings suggest that PLK4 catalytic output directly controls the phosphorylation of a diverse set of cellular proteins, including Pro-directed targets that are likely to be important in PLK4-mediated cell signalling.

### Sample Protocol
Cell culture and generation of stable cell lines U2OS T-Rex parental Flp-in cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL), streptomycin (100 U/mL) and L-glutamine (2 mM), at 37 °C, 5% CO2. Stable cells were generated based on published protocols [2, 7]. Briefly, tetracycline-inducible lines expressing either MYC or FLAG-tagged PLK4 were initially generated by transfection of parental T-Rex cells (A kind gift of Dr Gopal Sapkota, University of Dundee). Stable U2OS clonal populations containing either FLAG-WT PLK4, FLAG G95R PLK4, MYC-WT PLK4, or MYC-G95R PLK4 were established by selection for 2-3 weeks with 1 μg/ml  G418 (Invitrogen) and 100 μg/ml  Hygromycin B, as described in other U2OS models [54, 56-58], and FLAG-PLK4 or MYC-Plk4 expression was induced by the addition of 1 g/ml tetracycline. Cells were maintained in cultured and split at 80 % confluence, when cells were washed with PBS, trypsinised (0.05 % (v/v)) and harvested by centrifugation at 220 xg SILAC labelling  U2OS T-Rex Flp-in cells stably transfected with FLAG-WT PLK4 or FLAG-G95R PLK4 were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% (v/v) dialysed fetal bovine serum, penicillin (100 U/mL) and streptomycin (100 U/mL). Once 80 % confluency was reached, cells were split in to DMEM containing ‘heavy’ labelled, 15N213C6-lysine (Lys8) and 15N413C6-arginine (Arg10) for ~seven cell doublings to permit full incorporation of the label. At 80 % confluence, cells were washed with PBS, released with trypsin (0.05 % (v/v)) and centrifuged at 220 xg.  Cell lysis For immunoblotting, cells were lysed in 1% (v/v) NP-40, 1% SDS in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, and 150 mM NaCl, supplemented with Roche protease inhibitor cocktail tablet. The lysate was sonicated briefly and centrifuged at 15,000 xg (4 °C) for 20 min. Proteins were quantified with Bradford assay (BioRad). For co-immunoprecipitation (IP) experiments, cells were lysed in 50 mM Tris pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% NP-40, 1 mM DTT, 2 mM MgCl2, and benzonase supplemented with a 1X protease inhibitor (Roche) cocktail tablet. After 30 min, cell lysate was clarified by centrifugation (15,000 xg, 4 °C, 20 min). For LC-MS/MS analysis, cells were lysed with an MS compatible buffer (0.25% (v/v) RapiGest SF (Waters) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, supplemented with PhosStop inhibitor (Roche). Lysates were sonicated briefly to shear DNA and centrifuged (15,000 xg, 4 °C, 20 min).   Sample preparation for (phospho)proteome analysis SILAC-labelled protein lysates (1 μg) were mixed with an equal amount of unlabelled protein lysate prior to sample preparation for LC-MS/MS analysis. Proteins were reduced, alkylated, digested with trypsin and desalted using standard procedures [59]. For high pH reversed-phase (RP) HPLC, tryptic peptides were resuspended in 94.5% buffer A (20 mM NH4OH, pH 10), 5.5% buffer B (20 mM NH4OH in 90% acetonitrile) and loaded on to a Extend C18 (3.5 μm, 3 mm x 150 mm) Agilent column. Peptides were eluted with increasing buffer B: to 30% over 25 min, then 75% B over 12 min, at a flow rate of 0.5 mL/min. Sixty 500 μL fractions were collected, partially dried by vacuum centrifugation and concatenated to twelve pools. Aliquots (5 μg) were removed from each pool for total proteomic analysis, with the rest being subjected to TiO2-based phosphopeptide enrichment as previously described [59].   LC-MS/MS  Reversed-phase capillary HPLC separations were performed using an UltiMate 3000 nano system (Dionex) coupled in-line with a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) as described [59]. For proteome analysis, full scan MS1 spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap (120k resolution at m/z 200) using a top-speed approach (3 s cycle time) to perform for HCD-mediated fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of 32%. MS2 spectra were acquired in the ion trap. Phosphopeptide analysis was performed [59] using the HCD orbitrap method, where both MS1 and MS2 spectra were acquired in the orbitrap (60k resolution for MS1, 30k resolution for MS2).

### Data Protocol
Phosphopeptide data from the MS acquisition method optimization study were processed using Andromeda with PTM-score implemented within MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16) [60]. MS/MS spectra were searched against a database containing the human UniProt database (downloaded December 2015; 20,187 sequences). Trypsin was set as the digestion enzyme and two missed cleavages were permitted. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as a fixed modification. Variable modifications were set as oxidation (M), phospho (STY). Default instrument parameters and score thresholds were used: MS1 first search peptide tolerance of 20 ppm and main search tolerance of 4.5 ppm; FTMS MS2 tolerance of 20 ppm; ITMS MS2 tolerance of 0.5 Da. A false discovery rate of 1% for peptide spectrum matches (PSM) and proteins was applied. For processing of SILAC data, Thermo files (raw. Format) were loaded in to MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.16). Total proteomics (protein expression data) and phosphoproteomics experiments were processed separately. The experimental template design separated individual bioreplicates into separate experiments, linking the experiment to the relevant fractions. MaxQuant parameters were as described above, with the following additions: ‘multiplicity’ was set to 2 and Arg10/Lys8 were selected as labels. For proteomics datasets, the variable modifications oxidation (M), acetyl (protein N-term) were included. Both ‘requantify’ and ‘match between runs’ were enabled. Two peptides were required for protein quantification. Post processing was performed using Perseus (version 1.6.0.7). For proteingroups.txt output files, Perseus was used to filter out contaminants, reverse decoy hits and those ‘matched only by site’. Additionally, data were filtered to include proteins identified in ≥3 (out of 4) bioreplicates and Log2 transformed. For phosphosites(STY).txt output files, data were filtered as above. In addition, ‘expand site table’ feature was used to separate individual phosphosites, and a phosphosite localisation cut-off of ≥0.75 was applied. Ratios were Log2 transformed. Statistical analysis was then performed using the LIMMA package in R with Benjamini-Hochberg multiple corrections to generate adjusted p-values.

### Publication Abstract
Polo-like kinase 4 (PLK4) is the master regulator of centriole duplication in metazoan organisms. Catalytic activity and protein turnover of PLK4 are tightly coupled in human cells, since changes in PLK4 concentration and catalysis have profound effects on centriole duplication and supernumerary centrosomes, which are associated with aneuploidy and cancer. Recently, PLK4 has been targeted with a variety of small molecule kinase inhibitors exemplified by centrinone, which rapidly induces inhibitory effects on PLK4 and leads to on-target centrosome depletion. Despite this, relatively few PLK4 substrates have been identified unequivocally in human cells, and PLK4 signalling outside centriolar networks remains poorly characterised. We report an unbiased mass spectrometry (MS)-based quantitative analysis of cellular protein phosphorylation in stable PLK4-expressing U2OS human cells exposed to centrinone. PLK4 phosphorylation was itself sensitive to brief exposure to the compound, resulting in PLK4 stabilisation. Analysing asynchronous cell populations, we report hundreds of centrinone-regulated cellular phosphoproteins, including centrosomal and cell cycle proteins and a variety of likely 'non-canonical' substrates. Surprisingly, sequence interrogation of &#x223c;300 significantly down-regulated phosphoproteins reveals an extensive network of centrinone-sensitive [Ser/Thr]Pro phosphorylation sequence motifs, which based on our analysis might be either direct or indirect targets of PLK4. In addition, we confirm that NMYC and PTPN12 are PLK4 substrates, both in vitro and in human cells. Our findings suggest that PLK4 catalytic output directly controls the phosphorylation of a diverse set of cellular proteins, including Pro-directed targets that are likely to be important in PLK4-mediated cell signalling.

### Keywords
Centrinone; phosphoproteomics, Plk4, Inhibitor, Mass spectrometry, Phosphorylation; substrate

### Affiliations
University of Liverpool
Centre for Proteome Research University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB

### Submitter
Philip Brownridge

### Lab Head
Dr Claire E Eyers
Centre for Proteome Research University of Liverpool Liverpool L69 7ZB


