### Accession
PXD011938

### Title
2D gel-based proteomics of primary human peritoneal mesothelial cells derived from omentum

### Description
Peritoneal mesothelial cells are harmed by peritoneal dialysis fluids (PDF) used in renal replacement therapy with peritoneal dialysis. The mechanisms of the cellular damage are not yet described in detail. Primary human peritoneal mesothelial cells derived from omentum of five donors were independently exposed to peritoneal dialysis fluids. The extent of cell damage was assessed using lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release in the cell culture supernatant and cells were lysed in order to extract mRNA and proteins. Transcriptional changes induced by PDF were analyzed using gene expression microarrays and changes of the proteome were analyzed using 2D-electrophoresis.

### Sample Protocol
2D-difference gel electrophoresis (2D-DiGE): An internal pooled standard (IPS) containing material of all individual samples (n=120; 5 cultures of different donors with 6 different exposure settings with 4 technical replicates) was prepared and used in all gels. 50 µg of total protein of individual samples (n=20; pools of technical replicates of cells exposed to control or icodextrin PDF, both with 0 or 10 mM LiCl, was labeled with 0.2 nmol G-Dye200 (Refraction-2D Labeling Kit, NH DyeAGNOSTICS GmbH, Halle, Germany) and IPS was labeled with 0.2 nmol G-Dye300 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. 50 µg of labeled sample protein and 50 µg of labeled IPS were mixed and further sample preparation, including IPG-strip preparation (ReadyStrip IPG Strips 24 cm pH 3-10 non-linear (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Inc., Hercules, CA, USA)) and isoelectric focusing were performed as described before (Kratochwill, Nephrol Dial Transplant, 2012, doi:10.1093/ndt/gfr459). The second-dimension SDS-PAGE was performed using horizontal pre-cast gels (HPE Large Gel NF 12.5% Kit, Serva Electrophoresis GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany) on a HPE-FlatTop Tower (Serva) according to the manufacturer’s manual. Fluorescent signals using recommended excitation and emission wavelengths for G-Dye200 and G-Dye300 (G-Dye200: ex/em 554/575 nm; G-Dye300: ex/em 648/663 nm) were detected (Typhoon Trio laser scanner, GE Healthcare) and the gel images were analyzed with group-wise image alignment and spot detection on the resulting fused image (Delta2D Version 4.7.3 Software, Decodon GmbH, Greifswald, Germany). The detected protein pattern of IPS was used to guide alignment of all proteins in each gel by warping. Spot detection was carried out on a fused image of all gels. Fluorescence values of all detected spots were normalized to the IPS.  Mass spectrometric protein identification: All protein spots with significantly altered abundance between different treatments were subjected to protein identification, therefore preparative gels with 250 µg of IPS were prepared as described above. Gels were stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue as described before (Kratochwill, J Proteome Res, 2009, doi:10.1021/pr800916s), protein spots were automatically excised (EXQuest Spot Cutter; BioRad). Gel plugs were fully destained and sequentially reduced with 10 mM DTT and alkylated with 55 mM IAA. Following a washing step (100 mM NH4HCO3 and acetonitrile) the proteins were digested (0.39 µg trypsin in 50mM NH4HCO3; overnight/37°C). The peptides were eluted from the gel plugs (acetonitrile/ H2O /trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) - 50:45:5), dried by vacuum centrifugation, redissolved (0.1% TFA) and desalted (C18-ZipTip columns (Millipore; Billerica, MA, USA). Peptides were eluted onto two spots with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (10 mg/ml; CHCA; LaserBio Labs, Sophia-Antipolis Cedex, France) in acetonitrile/0.1% TFA.  Mass spectrometric (MS) analyses were performed on a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The instrument was operated in positive mode. MS spectra were acquired in a mass range from 600 - 4000 m/z with a resolution setting of 100 000 at 400 m/z. Acquisition parameters were: automated spectrum filter off, automated gain control on, crystal positioning system on and 5 scans/step. For tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) the mass spectrometer was operated in a data-dependent mode. Utilized parameters included precursor ion isolation in the linear ion trap, 3 mass units isolation width, 3 normalized collision energies (CID; 30%, 35%, 40%) and activation q of 0.25. The 15 most prominent ions were sequentially isolated for CID fragmentation in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
The acquired raw MS data files were processed (Mascot Distiller 2.7.1.0; Matrix Science, London, UK) and searched against the human SwissProt database (Mascot). Additional search parameters were: enzyme: trypsin/P; allowed missed cleavages: 2; fixed modifications: carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications: oxidation (M); peptide tolerance: 5 ppm; MS/MS tolerance: 0.8 Da; peptide charge: 1+, 2+ and 3+. The ions score was set to 10 and standard scoring was chosen. Single peptide identifications, which were not supported by another spot, were checked manually. Following criteria were used: molecular weight and pI, length of peptide, score and annotation of b- and y-ions. Four proteins in total were excluded from the dataset since they didn’t fulfill the criteria. All spots with more than one accession were checked manually whereas all proteins with only one peptide or without unique peptides or wrong molecular weight/pI were excluded from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Life-saving renal replacement therapy by peritoneal dialysis (PD) is limited in use and duration by progressive impairment of peritoneal membrane integrity and homeostasis. Preservation of peritoneal membrane integrity during chronic PD remains an urgent but long unmet medical need. PD therapy failure results from peritoneal fibrosis and angiogenesis caused by hypertonic PD fluid (PDF)-induced mesothelial cytotoxicity. However, the pathophysiological mechanisms involved are incompletely understood, limiting identification of therapeutic targets. We report that addition of lithium chloride (LiCl) to PDF is a translatable intervention to counteract PDF-induced mesothelial cell death, peritoneal membrane fibrosis, and angiogenesis. LiCl improved mesothelial cell survival in a dose-dependent manner. Combined transcriptomic and proteomic characterization of icodextrin-based PDF-induced mesothelial cell injury identified &#x3b1;B-crystallin as the mesothelial cell protein most consistently counter-regulated by LiCl. In vitro and in vivo overexpression of &#x3b1;B-crystallin triggered a fibrotic phenotype and PDF-like up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), CD31-positive cells, and TGF-&#x3b2;-independent activation of TGF-&#x3b2;-regulated targets. In contrast, &#x3b1;B-crystallin knockdown decreased VEGF expression and early mesothelial-to-mesenchymal transition. LiCl reduced VEGF release and counteracted fibrosis- and angiogenesis-associated processes. &#x3b1;B-crystallin in patient-derived mesothelial cells was specifically up-regulated in response to PDF and increased in peritoneal mesothelial cells from biopsies from pediatric patients undergoing PD, correlating with markers of angiogenesis and fibrosis. LiCl-supplemented PDF promoted morphological preservation of mesothelial cells and the submesothelial zone in a mouse model of chronic PD. Thus, repurposing LiCl as a cytoprotective PDF additive may offer a translatable therapeutic strategy to combat peritoneal membrane deterioration during PD therapy.

### Keywords
Human, Maldi, 2d-dige, Peritoneal dialysis

### Affiliations
Medical University of Vienna

### Submitter
Klaus Kratochwill

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Klaus Kratochwill
Medical University of Vienna


