### Accession
PXD000540

### Title
Wheat leaf phosphoproteome -  Integrative Network Analysis of the Signaling Cascades in Seedling Leaves of Bread Wheat by Large-Scale Phosphoproteomic Profiling

### Description
In this study, we performed a large-scale leaf phosphoproteomic analysis of two wheat  genotypes HX10 and NC47 to explore the complex protein phosphorylation network of signaling and regulatory events affecting rapid vegetative growth in wheat. We used TiO2 affinity chromatography combined with LC-MS/MS and Maxquant software to identify phosphopeptides and phosphorylated sites. Finally, 2,336 phosphopeptides containing 2,734 phosphorylation sites were  identified from the two wheat genotypes HX10 and NC47 in our study.

### Sample Protocol
Seeds of HX10 and NC47 bread wheat cultivars, which are recently released elite bread wheat cultivars in Northern China, were surface-sterilized in 5% sodium hypochlorite for 5 min and rinsed four times in sterile distilled water. After submersion in water for 12 h at room temperature, the seeds were transferred to a wet filter paper to germinate at room temperature (22–25 °C) for 24 h. For each of the two bread wheat cultivars, 300 uniformly germinated seeds were selected and grown in each of the three plastic pots containing Hoagland’s solution, which was changed every 2 d. Wheat seedlings were cultured with three biological replicates. At the three-leaf stage, all three leaves of the seedlings were collected and frozen at −80 °C prior to analysis.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.2.2.5) and searched against the wheat protein database (77 037 entries) concatenated with a decoy consisting of reversed sequences. The following parameters were used for database searches: cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as a fixed modification; methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation, and phosphorylation on Ser, Thr, and Tyr were selected as variable modifications. Up to two missing cleavage points were allowed. The precursor ion mass tolerances were 7 ppm, and the fragment ion mass tolerance for the MS/MS spectra was 0.5 Da. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to <1.0% for both peptide and protein identifications, and the minimum peptide length was set to 6.

### Publication Abstract
Here, we conducted the first large-scale leaf phosphoproteome analysis of two bread wheat cultivars by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Altogether, 1802 unambiguous phosphorylation sites representing 1175 phosphoproteins implicated in various molecular functions and cellular processes were identified by gene ontology enrichment analysis. Among the 1175 phosphoproteins, 141 contained 3-10 phosphorylation sites. The phosphorylation sites were located more frequently in the N- and C-terminal regions than in internal regions, and &#x223c;70% were located outside the conserved regions. Conservation analysis showed that 90.5% of the phosphoproteins had phosphorylated orthologs in other plant species. Eighteen significantly enriched phosphorylation motifs, of which six were new wheat phosphorylation motifs, were identified. In particular, 52 phosphorylated transcription factors (TFs), 85 protein kinases (PKs), and 16 protein phosphatases (PPs) were classified and analyzed in depth. All the Tyr phosphorylation sites were in PKs such as mitogen-activated PKs (MAPKs) and SHAGGY-like kinases. A complicated cross-talk phosphorylation regulatory network based on PKs such as Snf1-related kinases (SnRKs), calcium-dependent PKs (CDPKs), and glycogen synthase kinase 3 (GSK3) and PPs including PP2C, PP2A, and BRI1 suppressor 1 (BSU1)-like protein (BSL) was constructed and was found to be potentially involved in rapid leaf growth. Our results provide a series of phosphoproteins and phosphorylation sites in addition to a potential network of phosphorylation signaling cascades in wheat seedling leaves.

### Keywords
Regulatory  network, Growth, Phosphoproteome, Leaf, Wheat

### Affiliations
College of Life Sciences
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China

### Submitter
Dong-Wen Lv

### Lab Head
Dr Yue-Ming Yan
College of Life Science, Capital Normal University, Beijing 100048, China


