### Accession
PXD011879

### Title
MS-based identification of AcP10 interaction partners.

### Description
In times of cellular stress, such as during virus infections, the integrated stress response (ISR) blocks translation initiation through phosphorylation of the essential translation initiation factor eIF2. Phosphorylated eIF2 (p-eIF2) sequesters the eIF2-specific guanidine exchange factor (GEF) eIF2B, thereby preventing eIF2 recycling. Here we describe the first example of a viral ISR antagonist that inhibits the ISR at its most central step: the interplay between p-eIF2 and eIF2B. Using AP-MS, we determine that BW10 binds eIF2B. There, it selectively displaces eIF2B’s inhibitor p-eIF2 without affecting the association of its substrate eIF2. By this mechanism, BW10 renders cellular translation immune to regulation by eIF2 phosphorylation. Thus, under stress conditions BW10 creates the unprecedented situation of high levels of p-eIF2 coinciding with unimpaired translation.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were transfected with plasmids encoding tandem affinity purification (TAP) tagged BW10 or controls using polyethyleneimine I (PEI). Cells were released by trypsin treatment and lysed in lysis buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40). Cell debris was spun down and TAP tagged proteins in the supernatant were bound to streptactin beads (IBA Lifesciences) for 2 hours at 4˚C. Subsequently, beads were washed 4 times in wash buffer (40 mM Tris-HCl pH7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA), and protein was eluted from beads in Laemmli sample buffer. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and subjected to in-gel digestion, using trypsin as enzyme. Resulting peptides were analyzed by nLC–MS/MS analysis using an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system coupled to an Orbitrap Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer. The Agilent systems was equipped with a trap column (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) and an analytical column (Agilent Poroshell EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). The mass spectrometer was operated in data- dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 375 to 1600) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 35,000 at m/z 400. The 10 most intense ions within the survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation with normalized collision energy set to 25%. The MS/MS AGC target value was set to 5e4 with a maximum ion injection time of 120 ms.

### Data Protocol
Raw data file were processed with Proteome Discoverer (version 2.1), and searched against a Swissprot human database (version 2016 03, 20,199 sequences) supplemented with the Beluga whale coronavirus SW1 B2BW43 sequence (obtained from UniProt) using Mascot software (version 2.5.1). Trypsin/P was chosen as the protease, cysteine carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine as variable modifications. Precursor and fragments mass tolerance were 20 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. All peptide-spectrum matches (PSM) were validated with 1% false discovery rate using Percolator. PSMs with a minimum length of 6 amino acid were kept.

### Publication Abstract
Eukaryotic cells, when exposed to environmental or internal stress, activate the integrated stress response (ISR) to restore homeostasis and promote cell survival. Specific stress stimuli prompt dedicated stress kinases to phosphorylate eukaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2). Phosphorylated eIF2 (p-eIF2) in turn sequesters the eIF2-specific guanine exchange factor eIF2B to block eIF2 recycling, thereby halting translation initiation and reducing global protein synthesis. To circumvent stress-induced translational shutdown, viruses encode ISR antagonists. Those identified so far prevent or reverse eIF2 phosphorylation. We now describe two viral proteins-one from a coronavirus and the other from a picornavirus-that have independently acquired the ability to counteract the ISR at its very core by acting as a competitive inhibitor of p-eIF2-eIF2B interaction. This allows continued formation of the eIF2-GTP-Met-tRNAi ternary complex and unabated global translation at high p-eIF2 levels that would otherwise cause translational arrest. We conclude that eIF2 and p-eIF2 differ in their interaction with eIF2B to such effect that p-eIF2-eIF2B association can be selectively inhibited.

### Keywords
Eif2, Ap-ms, Interactome, Bw10, Eif2b

### Affiliations
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Piero Giansanti

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J. R. Heck
Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry and Proteomics, Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research and Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands Netherlands Proteomics Centre, Padualaan 8, 3584 CH Utrecht, The Netherlands


