### Accession
PXD045298

### Title
ApoE4-dependent lysosomal cholesterol accumulation impairs mitochondrial homeostasis and oxidative phosphorylation in human astrocytes

### Description
Recent developments in genome sequencing have expanded the knowledge of genetic factors associated with late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (AD). Among them, genetic variant e4 of the APOE gene (ApoE4) confers the greatest disease risk. Dysregulated glucose metabolism is an early pathological feature of AD. Using isogenic ApoE3 and ApoE4 astrocytes derived from human-induced pluripotent stem cells, we find that ApoE4 increases glycolytic activity but impairs mitochondrial respiration in astrocytes. Ultrastructural and autophagic flux analyses show that ApoE4-induced cholesterol accumulation impairs lysosome-dependent removal of damaged mitochondria. Acute treatment with cholesterol-depleting agents restores autophagic activity, mitochondrial dynamics, and associated proteomes, and extended treatment rescues mitochondrial respiration in ApoE4 astrocytes. Taken together, our study provides a direct link between ApoE4-induced lysosomal cholesterol accumulation and abnormal oxidative phosphorylation.

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution digestion, cells were dissolved in 0.2% ProteaseMAX (Promega) in 40 mM ammonium bicarbonate (NH4HCO3). After sonication at 30% amplitude for 3 sec on, 10 sec off, 10 times, the cell lysates were 4-fold diluted with 40 mM ABC. After 20 min incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56 °C, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) was added and incubated for 20 min at room temperature in the dark. After estimation of protein amounts by the BCA protein assay, a 1:50 ratio of trypsin Lys-C mixture (Promega) was added to 100 µg of protein for 4 h at 50 °C. After centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 10 s at 4 °C, the supernatant was collected. The cells were treated with 0.5% trifluoroacetic acid (Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 5 min at 25 °C to stop the reaction. After drying, the peptides were applied to C18 spin column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and the eluents were dried.

### Data Protocol
The peptides were analyzed using a Q ExactiveTM Plus Hybrid Quadrupole–Orbitrap Mass Spectrometer interfaced with an EASY-SprayTM source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Chromatographic separation of peptides was achieved using an UltiMateTM 3000 RSLCnano system (Thermo Fisher Scientific), equipped with an Acclaim™ PepMap™ 100 C18 HPLC Column (75 µm × 2 cm, 3 µm nanoviper; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as the loading column and an EASY-Spray PepMap RSLC C18 Column (75 µm × 50 cm, 2 µm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) as the separation column. Peptides were loaded from the RS auto-sampler and separated with a linear gradient of acetonitrile (ACN)/water, containing 0.1% formic acid, at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The liquid chromatography eluent was electrosprayed directly from the analytical column, and a voltage of 2.0 kV was applied via the liquid junction of the nanospray source. Peptide mixtures were separated with a gradient of 10–50% ACN for 80 min. The analysis method consisted of a full MS scan with a range of 350–2000 m/z and data-dependent MS/MS on the ten most intense ions from the full MS scan. The mass spectrometer was programmed to the data-dependent acquisition mode. Mass spectrometer calibration was performed using the proposed calibration solution, according to the manufacturer’s instructions.   To perform the database search, tandem mass spectra were processed using Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) version 2.41. The spectral data were searched against the Human Uniprot database (release version 2022_06). All identified proteins had a false discovery rate of ≤1%, which was calculated at the peptide level. Search parameters allowed for a tryptic specificity of up to two missed cleavages, with methylthio-modifications of cysteine as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine as a dynamic modification. The mass search parameters for +1, +2, and +3 ions included mass error tolerances of 20 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. To calculate quantitative changes in the identified proteins among experimental groups, we used LFQ analysis sequence of Proteome Discoverer.

### Publication Abstract
Recent developments in genome sequencing have expanded the knowledge of genetic factors associated with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Among them, genetic variant &#x3b5;4 of the APOE gene (APOE4) confers the greatest disease risk. Dysregulated glucose metabolism is an early pathological feature of AD. Using isogenic ApoE3 and ApoE4 astrocytes derived from human induced pluripotent stem cells, we find that ApoE4 increases glycolytic activity but impairs mitochondrial respiration in astrocytes. Ultrastructural and autophagy flux analyses show that ApoE4-induced cholesterol accumulation impairs lysosome-dependent removal of damaged mitochondria. Acute treatment with cholesterol-depleting agents restores autophagic activity, mitochondrial dynamics, and associated proteomes, and extended treatment rescues mitochondrial respiration in ApoE4 astrocytes. Taken together, our study provides a direct link between ApoE4-induced lysosomal cholesterol accumulation and abnormal oxidative phosphorylation.

### Keywords
Glucose metabolism, Lysosomal cholesterol accumulation, Human astrocytes, Apoe4, Mitophagy

### Affiliations
Department of Brain Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science & Technology
DGIST

### Submitter
Jinsoo Seo

### Lab Head
Dr Jinsoo Seo
Department of Brain Sciences, Daegu Gyeongbuk Institute of Science & Technology


