### Accession
PXD024438

### Title
Switch in Cytochrome C Oxidase Composition Provides Host Protection during Acute Infection

### Description
Mitochondria play integral roles in the control of inflammation. Mito-SEPs are small open reading frame-encoded peptides that localize to the mitochondria to regulate oxidative metabolism. Motivated by our observation that mito-SEPs are negatively associated with inflammation, we performed a proteo-genomic mito-SEP screen in human aortic endothelial cells to find mito-SEPs that promote resolution of inflammation. Here, we report the discovery of MOCCI (Modulator of Cytochrome C oxidase during Inflammation), an Interleukin-1β-induced mito-SEP encoded by the C15ORF48 gene. MOCCI is a paralog of NADH:Ubiquinone Oxidoreductase Complex Assembly Factor 4 (NDUFA4), the 14th subunit of the mitochondrial respiratory chain Complex IV (CIV). During inflammation, MOCCI displaces NDUFA4 in CIV, aided by repression of NDUFA4 mRNA by a microRNA miR-147b encoded within the 3’ untranslated region of C15ORF48. MOCCI lowers membrane potential and ROS production with overall cyto-protective and anti-inflammatory effects. In parallel, miR-147b exerts a strong anti-viral effect by enhancing RIG-I/MDA-5 pathway of viral recognition and induction of the interferon response. Our findings demonstrate how the coding and non-coding functions of C15ORF48 coordinate to regulate the composition and activity of Complex IV to limit pathogen replication and host inflammation during acute infection. We propose that Complex IV modulation via MOCCI-miR147b is a potential strategy for ameliorating viral-induced hyper-cytokinemia and host immunopathology.

### Sample Protocol
Isolated heart mitochondria from three individual mice treated with MOCCI overexpression and control GFP were solubilized in 1% (w/v) SDC and 100mM HEPES pH 8.1, sonicated for 30 min in water bath sonicator and normalized using the Pierce Protein Assay Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific). Protein pellets (20ug) were reduced and alkylated with 40mM chloroacetamide (Sigma) and 10 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine hydrochloride (TCEP; BondBreaker, ThermoFisher Scientific) for 5 min at 99°C with 1500 rpm shaking. Proteins were digested with trypsin (ThermoFisher Scientific) at a 1:50 trypsin:protein ratio overnight at 37°C. Peptides were labelled with 6plex Tandem Mass Tags (TMT) (ThermoFisher Scientific) in 8:1 label:protein ratio as per manufacturer instructions. Isopropanol 99% (v/v) and 1% (v/v) TFA was added to the supernatant was transferred to PreOmics cartridges (PreOmics GmbH) before centrifugation at 3000 g at room temperature. Cartridges were washed first with isopropanol (99%) and TFA (1%) solution and then subjected to an additional wash containing 0.2% (v/v) TFA. Peptides were eluted in 80 % (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) and 1% (w/v) NH 4 OH, and then acidified to a final concentration of 1% TFA prior to drying in a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco). Samples were fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (ThermoFisher Scientific) as per manufacturer’s instructions with additional fractions containing 14% and 16% ACN to a total of 10 fractions. Individual fractions were dried using a CentriVap Benchtop Vacuum Concentrator (Labconco) and reconstituted in in 0.1 % TFA and 2 % ACN for mass spectrometry. Liquid chromatography (LC) coupled MS/MS was carried out on an Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher Scientific) with a nanoESI interface in conjunction with an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nanoHPLC (Dionex Ultimate 3000). The LC system was equipped with an Acclaim Pepmap nano-trap column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 2 cm) and an Acclaim Pepmap RSLC analytical column (Dionex-C18, 100 Å, 75 µm x 50 cm). The tryptic peptides were injected into the trap column at an isocratic flow of 5 µL/min of 0% (v/v) ACN containing 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for 5 min applied before the trap column was switched in-line with the analytical column. The eluents were 5% DMSO in 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent A) and 5% DMSO in 100% v/v CH3CN and 0.1% v/v formic acid (solvent B). The flow gradient was (i) 0-6min at 0% B, (ii) 6-65 min, 3-23% B (iii) 65-75min 23-40% B (iv) 75- 80min, 40-80% B (v) 80-85min, 80-80% B (vi) 85-85.1min, 80-3% and equilibrated at 3% B for 10 minutes before the next sample injection. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive-ionization mode with spray voltage set at 1.9 kV and source temperature at 275°C. The mass spectrometer was operated in the data-dependent acquisition mode MS spectra with APD mode on and scanning from m/z 375-1500 at 120k resolution with AGC target of 4e5. The “top speed” acquisition method mode (3 sec cycle time) on the most intense precursor was used whereby peptide ions with charge states ≥2-7 were isolated with isolation window of 1.6 m/z and fragmented with high energy collision (HCD) mode with stepped collision energy of 35 ±5%. Fragment ion spectra were acquired in Orbitrap at 15k resolution. Dynamic exclusion was activated for 30s.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were processed using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.6.10.43) and searched against UniProt mouse database with canonical and isoforms (November 2019) using default settings for a TMT 6plex experiment with applied correction values for TMT isotopes and “label min. ratio count” set to “1”. The proteinGroups.txt output from the search was processed in Perseus (version 1.6.10.43) (REF). Briefly, log2-transformed TMT reporter intensity corrected values were grouped into three technical replicates of MOCCI or Control (GFP). Positive entries for “potential contaminant”, “reverse” and “only identified by site” were removed from the dataset and normalized by subtraction of known mitochondrial entries from mouse known and predicted IMPI database (2017) matched by gene name. A two-sided t-test was performed for MOCCI vs Control GFP with significance determined by p-value = 0.05 and volcano plots generated using scatter plot function in Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, Lc-ms/ms, Tmt

### Affiliations
The University of Melbourne
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia

### Submitter
David Stroud

### Lab Head
Dr David Stroud
Department of Biochemistry and Pharmacology, The Bio21 Molecular Science & Biotechnology Institute, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Australia


