### Accession
PXD007564

### Title
Plasmodium falciparum PHIL1 LC-MS/MS

### Description
Plasmodium falciparum sexual-stage parasites expressing an epitope-tagged PHIL1 protein were analysed by co-IP and subsequent LC-MS/MS as

### Sample Protocol
Purified gametocytes were harvested and washed for co-immunoprecipitation experiments. Parasites were solubilized using 1% TX-100/PBS (in 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris, 2 mM EDTA) plus CompleteTM protease inhibitors (Roche) on ice for 30 min, re-suspending every 10 min. Insoluble material was pelleted by centrifugation 16,000 x g for 10 min at 4 °C. The supernatant was also re-pelleted to remove any residual insoluble material. The soluble fraction was incubated with 50 µL of Pierce TM Protein A Agarose beads for 30 min at 4 °C to remove non-specific binding proteins. The resin was pelleted by centrifugation at 3,421 x g for 2 min and supernatant was incubated for 2 hr with 25 µL GFP-TRAP A (Chromotek) or anti-HA Agarose (Sigma) depending on parasite cell line, at 4 °C. After pelleting the resin at 3421 x g, 2 min the beads were washed five times with 1% TX-100. Proteins were then either eluted using SDS and analysed via western blotting or the beads were washed two times with 1 mM Tris and analysed via mass spectrometry. For mass spectrometry protein was eluted from beads with 5 µL trifluroethanol and 20 µL 0.1% formic acid (pH 2.5) and incubated at 50 °C for 5 min. Beads were pelleted at 3421 x g for 2 min and 20 µL of the supernatant collected. The sample was neutralized with the addition of 1 µL of 1 M tetraethylammonium bromide and to reduce disulphide bonds 0.2 µL of tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (final concentration of 5 mM) was added to the supernatant and then the solution was incubated at 70 °C for 10 min. Proteins were digested with trypsin overnight at 37 °C. Mass spectrometry was performed using Thermo NanoLC/ OrbiTRAP ELITE ETD for GFP-TRAP samples, and Thermo NanoLC/ Q Exactive Plus for the anti-HA Agarose samples.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were searched in MASCOT (Matrix Science) against a custom database comprised of P. falciparum (PlasmoDB) and H. sapiens (UniProt) non-redundant proteomes. Protein hits were considered significant if they present in two biological replicates, had ≥2 significant peptide ms/ms spectra, and were at least 5 times enriched compared to a 3D7 control.

### Publication Abstract
Transmission of malaria parasites relies on the formation of a specialized blood form called the gametocyte. Gametocytes of the human pathogen, Plasmodium falciparum, adopt a crescent shape. Their dramatic morphogenesis is driven by the assembly of a network of microtubules and an underpinning inner membrane complex (IMC). Using super-resolution optical and electron microscopies we define the ultrastructure of the IMC at different stages of gametocyte development. We characterize two new proteins of the gametocyte IMC, called PhIL1 and PIP1. Genetic disruption of PhIL1 or PIP1 ablates elongation and prevents formation of transmission-ready mature gametocytes. The maturation defect is accompanied by failure to form an enveloping IMC and a marked swelling of the digestive vacuole, suggesting PhIL1 and PIP1 are required for correct membrane trafficking. Using immunoprecipitation and mass spectrometry we reveal that PhIL1 interacts with known and new components of the gametocyte IMC.

### Keywords
Plasmodium falciparum, Gametocyte, Inner membrane complex, Phil1

### Affiliations
University of Melbourne

### Submitter
Emma McHugh

### Lab Head
Dr Leann Tilley
University of Melbourne


