### Accession
PXD043047

### Title
Therapeutic Effects of Valeriana jatamansi on Ulcerative Colitis: Insights into Mechanisms of Action through Metabolomics and Microbiome Analysis

### Description
Ulcerative colitis (UC), belonging to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is a chronic and relapsing inflammatory disorders of the gastrointestinal tract, which is not completely cured so far. Valeriana jatamansi is a Chinese medicine used clinically to treat "diarrhea", which is closely related to UC. This study was to elucidate the therapeutic effects of V. jatamansi extract (VJE) on dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC in mice and its underlying mechanism. In this work, VJE effectively ameliorate the symptoms, histopathological scores and reduce the production of inflammatory factors of UC mice. The colon untargeted metabolomics analysis and 16S rDNA sequencing showed remarkable differences in colon metabolite profiles and intestinal microbiome composition between the control and DSS groups, and VJE intervention can reduce these differences. Thirty-two biomarkers were found and modulated the primary pathways including pyrimidine metabolism, arginine biosynthesis and glutathione metabolism. Meanwhile, twelve significant taxa of gut microbiota were found. Moreover, there is a close relationship between endogenous metabolites and intestinal flora. These findings suggested that VJE ameliorates UC by inhibiting inflammatory factors, recovering intestinal maladjustment, and regulating the interaction between intestinal microbiota and host metabolites. Therefore, the intervention of V. jatamansi is a potential therapeutic treatment for UC.

### Sample Protocol
The colon (100 mg) samples were loaded in 1.5 mL tubes with two small steel beads, and containing 20 μL L-2-chlorophenylalanine (0.3 mg·mL-1) and 1.0 mL methanol-water (v:v=4:1) and then frozen at ‒80 ℃ for 2 min. These samples were homogenized at 60 Hz for 2 min. Then, they were centrifuged for 15 min (13000 rpm, 4 °C) to obtain the supernatant. The supernatants (900 μL) were freeze dried and the powder was resolved in 500 μL methanol-water (v:v=1:4) solution and centrifuged again. Next, the resulting supernatant was filtered through a 0.22 μm microporous membrane prior to UPLC-MS/MS analysis. The quality control (QC) sample was obtained by mixing 5 μL of each sample.UHPLC-Q-Orbitrap MS/MS was used for the analysis of colon untargeted metabolomics. ACQUITY UPLC® HSS T3 column (1.8 μm, 2.1 × 100 mm) was used for chromatographic separation. The column temperature was 40 °C. The mobile phase was a mixture of water containing 0.1% formic acid (A) and acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid (B). Gradient elution was used: phase B from 5% to 20% in 2 min; from 20% to 25% in 2 min; from 25% to 60% in 5 min; from 60% to 100% in 8 min; 100% for 2 min. The elution was introduced Q-Orbitrap MS/MS equipment with an electrospray ionization (ESI) under positive and negative ion modes. The key mass parameters including spray voltage (3.5 kV), sheath gas flow rate (35 arb), aux gas flow rate (10 arb) and capillary temp (300 ℃). The MS/MS secondary scan using the data-dependent acquisition model. m/z collection range is from 100 Da to 1500 Da. In order to ensure the repeatability and stability of the system, QC sample was analyzed in every ten runs.

### Data Protocol
The Compound Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used for the raw data processing. After peak detection, alignment, a data matrix involving m/z values, retention time, molecular weight, and peak intensity was extracted. The data were analyzed using the orthogonal to partial least squares-discriminate analysis (OPLS-DA) method in SIMCA-P (version 14.1) statistical package. The VIP-plots (VIP > 1) were generated from OPLS-DA, the fold change (|FC| > 2) or p value (p < 0.05) were obtained from the MetaboAnalyst platform (5.0 version, http://www.metaboanalyst.ca/), which were regarded as candidate biomarkers. The candidate biomarkers were identified by matching spectral library search with the exact molecular weight, MS/MS fragmentations and scores. These main screening databases include mzcloud (https://www.mzcloud.org), Human Metabolome Database (http://www.hmdb.ca) and massbank (http://www.massbank.jp/) databases. The metabolic pathways of the biomarkers were mapped by MetaboAnalyst platform.

### Publication Abstract
Ulcerative colitis (UC), belonging to inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), is a chronic and relapsing inflammatory disorder of the gastrointestinal tract, which has not been completely cured in patients so far. <i>Valeriana jatamansi</i> is a Chinese medicine used clinically to treat "diarrhea," which is closely related to UC. This study was to elucidate the therapeutic effects of <i>V. jatamansi</i> extract (VJE) on dextran sodium sulfate (DSS)-induced UC in mice and its underlying mechanism. In this work, VJE effectively ameliorates the symptoms and histopathological scores and reduces the production of inflammatory factors in UC mice. The colon untargeted metabolomics analysis and 16S rDNA sequencing showed remarkable differences in colon metabolite profiles and intestinal microbiome composition between the control and DSS groups, and VJE intervention can reduce these differences. Thirty-two biomarkers were found and modulated the primary pathways including pyrimidine metabolism, arginine biosynthesis, and glutathione metabolism. Meanwhile, twelve significant taxa of gut microbiota were found. Moreover, there is a close relationship between endogenous metabolites and intestinal flora. These findings suggested that VJE ameliorates UC by inhibiting inflammatory factors, recovering intestinal maladjustment, and regulating the interaction between intestinal microbiota and host metabolites. Therefore, the intervention of <i>V. jatamansi</i> is a potential therapeutic treatment for UC.

### Keywords
Valeriana jatamansi, Gut microbiota, Metabolites, Correlation analysis, Ulcerative colitis

### Affiliations
Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine
Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, Pharmacy College, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611137, P. R. China

### Submitter
lilxia wang

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhu Tan
Key Laboratory of Southwestern Chinese Medicine Resources, Pharmacy College, Chengdu University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Chengdu 611137, P. R. China


