### Accession
PXD031068

### Title
Secretome analysis of basidiomycetous yeast Tausonia pullulans growing on glucose and starch

### Description
We performed the genomic sequencing, assembly and annotation of T. pullulans strain CRUB 1754 (Perito Moreno glacier, Argentina), a gene survey of Carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes); and analyzed its secretome by Liquid-Chromatography coupled to tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) after growth in glucose (GLU) or starch (STA) as main carbon sources.

### Sample Protocol
Yeast were grown on YNB medium supplemented with 1% glucose or 0.3% glucose and 0.7% starch, on Erlenmeyer flasks with 20 ml culture at 20°C 180 rpm during 96 h (three independent cultures for each condition). Cells were separated from culture supernatants by gentle centrifugation and subsequent filtration with 0.22 um filters. Extracellular cell free proteins were concentrated using 10 kDa Protein Concentration filters (Pierce). Proteins were quantified using Bradford reagent. For PNGase F treatment 6 ug of total protein were denatured with 0.02% SDS and 10 mM 2-mercaptoethanol and heated for 10 min at 100 °C. After denaturation 0.5 U of PNGase F (Sigma) were added and tubes were incubated for 2 h at 37 °C. Reactions were stopped by heating at 100 °C for 5 min. Prior to LC-MS, proteins were run on 1 cm long 12% SDS polyacrylamide gels. In-gel Cys alkylation was performed by incubation with 10 mM dithiothreitol for 1 h at 56 °C followed by incubation with 50 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 45 min. In-gel digestion of protein bands was performed overnight at 37 °C by incubation with trypsin (Sequencing grade, Promega). Peptide extraction was performed with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) in 60% acetonitrile. Samples were vacuum-dried, resuspended in 0.1% TFA, and desalted using C18 OMIX tips (Agilent). Tryptic peptides were separated using a nano-HPLC (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptide mixtures were injected into an Acclaim® PepMap C18 nano-trap column (75 μm × 2 cm, Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 50 μm × 150 mm C18 Easy spray column (PepMap® RSLC, 2 μm, 100 Ǻ) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. Peptide elution was achieved with a 100 min gradient from 5% to 55% of mobile phase B (A: 0.1% formic acid; B: 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). Online MS analysis was carried out in a data dependent mode (full scan followed by MS/MS of the top 10 m/z in each segment) using a dynamic exclusion list (exclusion duration 45 s).

### Data Protocol
Patternlab v4.0 was used for proteomics data analysis (http://www.patternlabforproteomics.org). An in-house built T. pullulans protein database was used for identification. A target-reverse database was generated using PatternLab’s database generation tool. Thermo raw file were searched against the database using the integrated Comet search engine with the following parameters: precursor mass tolerance m/z (ppm): 800; enzyme: trypsin; enzyme specificity: fully-specific; missed cleavages: 1; variable modifications: methionine oxidation and deamidation by PNGase F; fixed modifications: carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Peptide spectrum matches were filtered using PatternLab’s Search Engine Processor (SEPro) module to achieve a list of identifications with less than 1% of false discovery rate (FDR) at the protein level. Results were post-processed to only accept peptides with six or more residues, proteins with at least two peptide spectrum matches.

### Publication Abstract
Basidiomycetous yeasts remain an almost unexplored source of enzymes with great potential in several industries. Tausonia pullulans (Tremellomycetes) is a psychrotolerant yeast with several extracellular enzymatic activities reported, although the responsible genes are not known. We performed the genomic sequencing, assembly and annotation of T. pullulans strain CRUB 1754 (Perito Moreno glacier, Argentina), a gene survey of carbohydrate-active enzymes (CAZymes), and analyzed its secretome by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) after growth in glucose (GLU) or starch (STA) as main carbon sources. T. pullulans has 7210 predicted genes, 3.6% being CAZymes. When compared to other Tremellomycetes, it contains a high number of CAZy domains, and in particular higher quantities of glucoamylases (GH15), pectinolytic enzymes (GH28) and lignocellulose decay enzymes (GH7). When the secretome of T. pullulans was analyzed experimentally after growth in starch or glucose, 98 proteins were identified. The 60% of total spectral counts belonged to GHs, oxidoreductases and to other CAZymes. A 65&#xa0;kDa glucoamylase of family GH15 (TpGA1) showed the highest fold change (tenfold increase in starch). This enzyme contains a conserved active site and showed extensive N-glycosylation. This study increases the knowledge on the extracellular hydrolytic enzymes of basidiomycetous yeasts and, in particular, establishes T. pullulans as a potential source of carbohydrate-active enzymes. KEY POINTS: &#x2022; Tausonia pullulans genome harbors a high number of genes coding for CAZymes. &#x2022; Among CAZy domains/families, the glycoside hydrolases are the most abundant. &#x2022; Secretome analysis in glucose or starch as main C sources identified 98 proteins. &#x2022; A 65 kDa GH15 glucoamylase showed the highest fold increase upon culture in starch.

### Keywords
Starch, Secretome, Glucose, Tausonia

### Affiliations
CRELTEC, IPATEC (UNCO-CONICET), ARGENTINA
IPATEC-CONICET

### Submitter
Andrea Trochine

### Lab Head
Dr Andrea Trochine
CRELTEC, IPATEC (UNCO-CONICET), ARGENTINA


