### Accession
PXD007107

### Title
N-linked glycosylation of recombinant Porcine Delta Coronavirus spike protein ectodomain from drosophila S2 cells

### Description
Recombinant PDCoV spike glycoprotein was produced from Drosophile S2 cells for structural characterization by cryo electron microscopy and mass spectrometry. MS was used to assess the N-linked glycosylation profile of the purified material. We used a multiple protease digestion in combination with RP-LC-MS/MS, EThcD fragmentation on Orbitrap Fusion to characterize intact glycopeptides.

### Sample Protocol
250 pmol of PDCoV S was incubated in a freshly prepared solution containing 100mM Tris pH 8.5, 2% sodium deoxycholate, 10mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine, and 40mM iodoacetamide at 95°C for five minutes followed by 25°C for thirty minutes in the dark. 80 pmol of denatured, reduced, and alkylated PDCoV S was then diluted into freshly made 50mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated for 14 hours at 37°C either with 1:75 (w:w) trypsin (Sigma Aldrich), chymotrypsin (Sigma Aldrich) or alpha lytic protease (Sigma Aldrich). Formic acid was then added to a final concentration of 2% to precipitate the sodium deoxycholate in the samples, followed by centrifugation at 14,000 rpm for 20 minutes. The supernatant containing the (glyco)-peptides was collected and spun again at 14,000 rpm for 5 min immediately before sample analysis.

### Data Protocol
For each sample 8 µL was injected on a Thermo Scientific Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer. A 35-cm analytical column and a 3-cm trap column filled with ReproSil-Pur C18AQ 5 μm (Dr. Maisch) beads were used. Nanospray LC-MS/MS was used to separate peptides over a 110-min gradient from 5% to 30% acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. A positive spray voltage of 2,100 was used with an ion-transfer-tube temperature of 350 °C. An electron-transfer/higher-energy collision dissociation ion-fragmentation scheme (Frese et al., 2013) was used with calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters and supplemental higher-energy collision dissociation energy of 0.15. A resolution setting of 120,000 with an AGC target of 2 × 10^5 was used for MS1, and a resolution setting of 30,000 with an AGC target of 1 × 10^5 was used for MS2. Data was searched with Protein Metrics Byonic software (Bern et al., 2012), using a small custom database of recombinant protein sequences including several coronavirus spike proteins, other viral glycoproteins and the proteases used to prepare the glycopeptides. Reverse decoy sequences were also included in the search. Specificity of the search was set to C-terminal cleavage at R/K (trypsin), F/W/Y/M/L (chymotrypsin) or T/A/S/V (alpha lytic protease) allowing up to two missed cleavages, with EThcD fragmentation (b/y- and c/z-type ions). We used a precursor mass and product mass tolerance of 12 ppm and 24 ppm respectively. Carbamidomethylation of cyteines was set as fixed modification, methionine oxidation as variable modification, and all four software provided N-linked glycan databases were combined into a single non-redundant list used to identify glycopeptides. All glycopeptide hits were manually inspected and only those with quality peptide sequence information are reported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Virus; n-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
Utrecht University
University of Washington, Department of Biochemistry

### Submitter
Joost Snijder

### Lab Head
Dr David Veesler
University of Washington, Department of Biochemistry


