### Accession
PXD045488

### Title
Glycosylation of somatic extracts and secretome in the infective stage of the helminth Fasciola hepatica

### Description
Fasciola hepatica is a global helminth parasite of humans and their livestock. The invasive stage of the parasite, the newly excysted juvenile (NEJs), relies on glycosylated excretedsecreted (ES) products and surface/somatic molecules to interact with host cells and tissues and to evade the host's immune responses. Here, we employed glycoproteomic and proteomic analyses to determine the glycosylation profile of proteins within the NEJs’ somatic (Som) and ES extracts.

### Sample Protocol
NEJs ES and Som samples were processed using the modified filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Freeze-dried NEJs were homogenized using the lysis matrix B on the FastPrep®-24 instrument (MP Biomedicals) in lysis buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB), 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate), and protein concentration determined using the BCA assay. NEJs Som (500 μg) and ES (80 μg) extracts were reduced with 100 mM dithiothreitol at 60°C for 30 min, transferred to 30 kDa MWCO Pall Nanosep centrifugation filters (Sigma-Aldrich). Two individual filters were used for Som extract, resulting in total amount of 250 μg per filter. All filters were washed several times with 8 M urea and once with digestion buffer (DB, 50 mM TEAB, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate (SDC)) prior to alkylation with 18 mM Iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. Samples were digested with trypsin (Pierce MS grade Trypsin, Thermo Fisher Scientific, ratio 1:100) at 37°C overnight, followed by an extra trypsin addition (ratio 1:100) and 2 hr reaction at 37°C. The resulting proteolytic peptides were collected by centrifugation and filters were additionally washed with 50 mM TEAB to ensure all material eluted from the filters. SDC was removed by acidification with 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subsequent centrifugation for 20 min at 21,000 x g. The supernatant was further purified using Pierce peptide desalting spin columns according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The bound peptides were eluted with 80% acetonitrile (ACN) in 1% TFA and directly loaded onto in-house prepared hydrophilic interaction liquid chromatography (HILIC) spin columns (20 mg ZIC-HILIC resins per column, SeQuant # 2942) for glycopeptide enrichment. Both HILIC flow-through and eluates were collected and evaporated prior to further analysis. For glycoproteomic analysis, the HILIC eluate were reconstituted in 2% ACN and 0.2% formic acid (FA). Once the global N-glycoproteomic analysis was finalized, the remaining material was lyophilized and subjected to PNGase F digestion prior to O-glycoproteomic analysis.   All preparations were analyzed on a QExactive HF mass spectrometer interfaced with the Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptides were trapped on an Acclaim Pepmap 100 C18 trap column (100 μm x 2 cm, particle size 5 μm, Thermo Fischer Scientific) and separated on an in-house packed analytical column (75 μm x 300 mm, particle size 3 μm, Reprosil-Pur C18, Dr. Maisch). Solvent A was 0.2% FA and solvent B was 80% ACN in 0.2% FA. The HILIC eluate preparations, enriched for glycopeptides, were analyzed using a 90 min gradient: from 3% to 35% solvent B over 75 min, followed by an increase to 100% B for 125 min at a flow of 300 nL/min. To facilitate glycosylated peptide characterization, triplicate injections were acquired, all with the precursor detection in the 600-2,000 m/z range at a resolution of 120,000 with different settings for the normalized higher-energy collision dissociation (HCD) energies. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode, where the 10 most intense ions with charge states 2 to 6 were selected for fragmentation using HCD at collision energy settings of either 20, 28 or 38. The isolation window was set to 3 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm for 20 s. For O-glycosylated peptides analysis, the PNGase F treated preparations were analyzed using the same LC gradient. Double injections were acquired, both with the precursor detection in the 375-1,500 m/z range at a resolution of 120,000. MS/MS analysis was performed in a data-dependent mode. The 10 most intense ions with charge states 2 to 5 were selected for fragmentation using HCD at collision energy settings of either 20 or 28. The isolation window was set to 1.2 m/z and dynamic exclusion set to 10 ppm for 20 s.

### Data Protocol
The Byonic software (v2.10.21, Protein Metrics) was used as a node within Proteome Discoverer (v2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for the identification of N- and O-glycopeptides. The N-glycan database contained 200 compositions including oligomannose, sialylated complex biantennary as well as phosphatidylethanolamine (PE)- and phosphorylcholine (PC)- containing structures. The O-glycan database contained 53 compositions ranging from HexNAc(1) to HexNAc(8)Hex(8), including a number of Xyl, PE and PC containing glycan structures. The LC-MS/MS datasets were searched against F. hepatica entries in two libraries, (a) the UniProt database (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000230066), and (b) an internal database (1629 proteins) generated from previous F. hepatica NEJs proteomic analyses, corresponding to 13 gene models identified in the F. hepatica genome available at WormBase ParaSite and NCBI/ENA: PRJEB6687 and PRJEB25283. Trypsin was specified as the cleavage enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set at 20 ppm in a first search and 5 ppm in the main search. The mass tolerance for fragment ions was set to 30 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on the cysteine residue was specified as a fixed modification, and oxidation of methionine was defined as a variable modification. Variable modification of Asn to Asp was included in the O-glycopeptide analysis due to the PNGase F treatment. Further identity criteria, included glycopeptide matches, were manually verified to contain 1) the correct peptide ion and/or peptide+HexNAc ion with respect to the assigned glycan-peptide combination, 2) to contain the expected profile of saccharide oxonium ions, for instance m/z 163.06 and m/z 145.05 for oligomannose; and m/z 184.07 and m/z 534.20 for PC-glycans and 3) to include at least two b- and/or y-ions for at least one of the identified glycoforms.

### Publication Abstract
Fasciola hepatica is a global helminth parasite of humans and their livestock. The invasive stage of the parasite, the newly excysted juvenile (NEJs), relies on glycosylated excreted-secreted (ES) products and surface/somatic molecules to interact with host cells and tissues and to evade the host's immune responses, such as disarming complement and shedding bound antibody. While -omics technologies have generated extensive databases of NEJs' proteins and their expression, detailed knowledge of the glycosylation of proteins is still lacking. Here, we employed glycan, glycopeptide, and proteomic analyses to determine the glycan profile of proteins within the NEJs' somatic (Som) and ES extracts. These analyses characterized 123 NEJ glycoproteins, 71 of which are secreted proteins, and allowed us to map 356 glycopeptides and their associated 1690 N-glycan and 37 O-glycan forms to their respective proteins. We discovered abundant micro-heterogeneity in the glycosylation of individual glycosites and between different sites of multi-glycosylated proteins. The global heterogeneity across NEJs' glycoproteome was refined to 53 N-glycan and 16 O-glycan structures, ranging from highly truncated paucimannosidic structures to complex glycans carrying multiple phosphorylcholine (PC) residues, and included various unassigned structures due to unique linkages, particularly in pentosylated O-glycans. Such exclusive glycans decorate some well-known secreted molecules involved in host invasion, including cathepsin B and L peptidases, and a variety of membrane-bound glycoproteins, suggesting that they participate in host interactions. Our findings show that F.&#xa0;hepatica NEJs generate exceptional protein variability via glycosylation, suggesting that their molecular portfolio that communicates with the host is far more complex than previously anticipated by transcriptomic and proteomic analyses. This study opens many avenues to understand the glycan biology of F.&#xa0;hepatica throughout its life-stages, as well as other helminth parasites, and allows us to probe the glycosylation of individual NEJs proteins in the search for innovative diagnostics and vaccines against fascioliasis.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Glycosylation, Orbitrap, Parasites

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facility, University of Gothenburg
Molecular Parasitology Lab - Centre for One Health and Ryan Institute, School of Natural Science, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Republic of Ireland.

### Submitter
Jonas Nilsson

### Lab Head
Dr John Dalton
Molecular Parasitology Lab - Centre for One Health and Ryan Institute, School of Natural Science, National University of Ireland Galway, Galway, Republic of Ireland.


