### Accession
PXD029366

### Title
Comparative Analysis Reveals Genotype-specific Lyisne Malonylation of Toxoplasma gondii

### Description
Toxoplasma gondii is a protozoan parasite which can infect a wide range of animals, including humans. According to virulence, it is generally divided into three different strains, namely type I (RH strain), type II (PRU strain) and type III (VEG strain). Lysine malonylation (Kmal) is a new type of post-translational modification (PTM), which has been reported to regulate diverse biological pathways in various organisms, including T. gondii. However, there is no knowledge about whether lysine malonylation regulates the virulence of different strains in T. gondii. In this study, for the first time, we identified and quantified lysine malonylation level in three strains of T. gondii. In total, 111 proteins and 152 sites were up-regulated, 17 proteins and sites were down-regulated in RH compared with PRU strains, respectively; 50 proteins and 59 sites were up-regulated, 50 proteins and 53 sites were down-regulated in RH strain compared with VEG strains; 72 proteins and 90 sites were up-regulated, 7 proteins and 8 sites were down-regulated in VEG strain compared with PRU strains. Further analysis indicates that these proteins are involved in many important biological processes and regulating virulence-related functions of T. gondii. These findings provide novel and important resource for the role of lysine malonytion in virulence of T. gondii and provide a new direction for the research of vaccine in T. gondii.

### Sample Protocol
Parasite culture  RH strain (type I), PRU strain (type II) and VEG strain (type III) were used in this study, which were maintained in our laboratory by serial passage in human foreskin fibroblast (HFF) cells (ATCC, Manassas, VA, USA). Cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium (DMEM), which was supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (FBS, Gibco, USA), 100 U/ml antibiotics (penicillin-streptomycin solution). Then, the parasites and cells were cultured at 37 °C in 5% CO2 humidified incubator. The mixture was washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and centrifuged at 2000g several times. Parasites were passed through 25-gauge syringe needles. A 3 μm membrane filters (Millipore) was used to purify the parasites by filtrating the cell debris, the purified parasite pellets were stored at –80 °C until use.  Protein extraction  Total protein was extracted from RH, PRU and VEG strain (~ 3× 109), parasites were removed from –80 °C freezer and thawed at room temperature. Lysis buffer (1% dodecyl sulfate, sodium salt (SDS), 1% protease inhibitor cocktail, 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 3 μM trichostatin A (TSA) and 50 mM nicotinamide (NAM)) was added to parasites and the crude lysate was soniacated three times on ice. Clear supernatant was obtained by centrifugation at 4 ℃ for 10 min to remove cell debris and transferred to a new centrifuge tube. BCA kit was used to determine the protein concentration.  Trypsin digestion  Same quantity of protein from each sample was taken and concentration was adjusted by adding blank lysis accordingly. TCA slowly added to each sample to reach a final concentration of 20%, and the mixture was mixed by vortexing, and precipitated at 4 ℃ for 2 h. Protein pellet was obtained by centrifugation at 4, 500 x g, for 5 min, supernatant was discarded and precipitate was washed with precooled acetone for 2-3 times. After protein pellets were dried by air, 200mM TEAB was added to each sample to resuspend protein pellet by ultrasound sonication, and then trypsin was added at the ratio of 1:50 (protease: protein, M / M) for digest overnight. Dithiothreitol (DTT) was added to make the final concentration at 5 mM. Protein reduction was performed at 56 ℃ for 30 min followed by alkylation by adding iodoacetamide (IAA) at final concentration of 11 mM and incubating for 15 min at darkness at room temperature.  Modification enrichment  After trypsin digestion, resulting peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution (100 mM NaCl, 1 mm EDTA, 50 mm Tris HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0). The supernatant was transferred to the pre-washed pan anti-malonyllysine antibody resin (No. PTM-904, PTM Bio, Hangzhou). The peptide solution and antibody bead mixture were placed on a rotary shaker at 4 ℃, gently shaken and incubated overnight. After incubation, the resin was washed with IP buffer solution for four times and deionized water twice. Finally, the resin bound peptides were eluted with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid for three times. The eluent was collected and vacuum dried. After drying, peptides were desalted using C18 ziptips, and clean peptides were vacuum dried for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis  Enriched peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography mobile phase A and separated by nanoflow ultra-performance liquid chromatography system. The mobile phase A was aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 2% acetonitrile, the mobile phase B was aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 100% acetonitrile. The gradient was composed of an increase from 6 to 23% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 98% acetonitrile) over 26 min, 23 to 35% in 8 min, and climbing to 80% in 3 min and then holding at 80% for the last 3 min. The peptides were separated by ultra-high performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system, then ionized by capillary ion source and analyzed by tims-TOF Pro mass spectrometer. The ion source voltage was set at 2.0 kV, peptide parent ion and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed by high-resolution TOF mass analyzer. The scanning range of secondary mass spectrometry is set at 100-1700. The data acquisition mode is PASEF. After a first-order mass spectrometer collected, 10 times of PASEF mode was used to collect the second-order spectrum with the charge number of parent ions in the range of 0-5. The dynamic exclusion time of tandem mass spectrometry scanning was set to 30 s seconds to avoid repeated scanning of parent ions.  Database search  Raw mass spectrometry data was searched against T. gondii database ToxoDB 48 (8322 sequences) using MaxQuant (1.6.15.0) software. A reverse library was added to calculate the false positive rate (FDR) caused by random matching, and common contamination library was added to the database to eliminate contaminated protein in the identification results. Enzyme digestion method was set to trypsin / P, number of missing cut sites was set to 4, minimum length of peptide segment was set to 7 amino acid residues. Maximum modification number of peptide segment was set to 5. Mass error was set at 0 ppm and 20 ppm for the primary parent ion of search and main search, 20.0 ppm for the secondary fragment ion. Peptide quantification was done using label free quantification (LFQ) model in MaxQuant, FDR of protein identification and PSM identification was set at 1%.   Bioinformatics methods  Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of the proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/) and ToxoDB 48 database. Firstly, protein ID was converted to UniProt ID, UniProt ID was matched to GO ID, then corresponding information was extracted from UniProt-GOA database based on GO ID. If there was no protein information in UniProt Goa database, InterProScan was used to predict the GO function of the protein, which was an algorithm based on protein sequence. Then identified proteins were classified according to cell composition, molecular function and physiological process. InterProScan based on protein sequence and the corresponding InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) were used to annotate the protein domain. Online service tool KEGG Automatic Annotation Server (KAAS) of Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was used to annotate the submitted proteins, and then KEGG mapper was used to match the annotated proteins into the corresponding pathways in the database. Finally, wolfpsort (https://wolfpsort.hgc.jp/) was used to annotate the subcellular localization of the submitted proteins and CELLO was used to predict the subcellular structure of prokaryotes. Fisher's exact test was used to detect differentially expressed malonylated proteins of GO and KEGG annotation. InterPro (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) was used to analyze the enrichment of functional domains of differentially expressed proteins. P-value < 0.05 was considered to be significant. The selected P-value matrix was transformed by -log10, the hierarchical clustering (Euclidean distance, average connection clustering) method was used for one-sided clustering analysis. The clustering relationship is visualized by the heat map drawn by the function Heatmap. 2 in R language package gplots. MoMo (http://meme-suite.org/tools/momo) was used to analyze the motif characteristics of modification sites. When the number of peptides in a specific sequence is more than 20 and P-value < 0.000001, it was considered that the specific sequence is a motif of modified peptide. Differentially expressed malonylated proteins screened from different comparison groups were mapped in protein-protein interaction (PPI) network database of STRING (v.10.5) (http://string-db.org/), the protein interaction relationship was extracted according to the confidence score > 0.7 (high confidence). R package "network D3" was used to visualize the PPI network.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lysine malonylation, Toxoplasma gondii, Genotype, Differentially expressed proteins (deps)

### Affiliations
 State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China

### Submitter
Lan-Be Nie

### Lab Head
Dr xing-quan zhu
State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR China


