### Accession
PXD004082

### Title
Data in support of Circulating neutrophil extracellular trap components including cell-free DNA are associated with neonatal sepsis and necrotizing enterocolitis in newborn, immature infants, pigs and mice

### Description
Preterm infants are highly susceptible to late-onset sepsis (LOS) and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) but specific biomarkers for diagnosis and effective treatment are lacking. Neutrophil extracellular traps (NETs) are related to sepsis in adults but not investigated in infant conditions. This is the first proteome study to document that circulating NETs are involved in neonatal LOS and NEC. cfDNA and NET proteins may provide new potential diagnostic markers for these diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Thirteen NEC and suspected sepsis-diagnosed pigs and fifteen randomly chosen preterm pigs without intestinal lesion (CON) were selected for plasma proteomics. Plasma was mixed in 5% sodium deoxycholate in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, heated at 95oC for 5 min and determined total protein content by NanoDrop 1000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific). Thereafter, 100 µg plasma protein was reduced, alkylated, trypsin-digested overnight before peptide elution and dried in a vacuum centrifuge (31). Dry peptide samples were resuspended in 20 µL of 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and the peptide concentration was determined. Then 5 µg peptides were analyzed by UPLC-MS by a nano-UPLC system coupled online to a Q-Exactive mass HF spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) .

### Data Protocol
Peptide signaling intensities from full MS scans were imported in MaxQuant 1.5.2.6 software  to calculate relative protein quantities by label-free quantitation (LFQ). The tandem MS scans were searched against Uniprot Sus Scrofa (UPID000008227) protein reference proteome databases  (Uniprot, Jan 2016) and in-house compiled database optimized for a novel highly optimized PeptideAtlas database for Sus scrofa. Peptide spectrum match and protein identification were filtered by a target-decoy approach at a false discovery rate (FDR) of below 1%. Relative label-free quantification was performed by MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant (35). For further analysis, data from MaxQuant was loaded into Perseus software (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=:perseus:start). The LFQ intensities were log2 transformed and filtered to remove proteins identified in less than 2 peptides and maintain a minimum of 3 samples per group for improved LFQ values. RAW data sample information is provided in the search output.

### Publication Abstract
Preterm infants are highly susceptible to late-onset sepsis (LOS) and necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC), but disease pathogenesis and specific diagnostic markers are lacking. Circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) and immune cell-derived proteins are involved in multiple immune diseases in adults but have not been investigated in preterm neonates. We explored the relation of circulating neutrophil-associated proteins and cfDNA to LOS and/or NEC. Using a clinically relevant preterm pig model of spontaneous LOS and NEC development, we investigated neutrophil-associated proteins and cfDNA in plasma, together with cytokines in gut tissues. The changes in cfDNA levels were further studied in preterm pigs and neonatal mice with induced sepsis, and in preterm infants with or without LOS and/or NEC. Fifteen of 114 preterm pigs spontaneously developed both LOS and NEC, and they showed increased intestinal levels of IL-6 and IL-1&#x3b2; and plasma levels of cfDNA, neutrophil-associated proteins, and proteins involved in platelet-neutrophil interaction during systemic inflammation. The abundance of neutrophil-associated proteins highly correlated with cfDNA levels. Further, Staphylococcus epidermidis challenge of neonatal mice and preterm pigs increased plasma cfDNA levels and bacterial accumulation in the spleen. In infants, plasma cfDNA levels were elevated at LOS diagnosis and 1-6&#x2009;d before NEC. In conclusion, elevated levels of plasma cfDNA and neutrophil proteins are associated with LOS and NEC diagnosis.

### Keywords
Neutrophil extracellular traps, Necrotizing enterocolitis, Sepsis, Preterm neonates

### Affiliations
Laboratory for Medical Massspectroemtry
Aalborg University

### Submitter
Allan Stensballe

### Lab Head
Dr Allan Stensballe
Laboratory for Medical Massspectroemtry


