### Accession
PXD018140

### Title
Pharmacological and Phosphoproteomic Approaches to Roles of Protein Kinase C in Kappa Opioid Receptor-Mediated Effects in Mice

### Description
KOR agonists possess adverse dysphoric and psychotomimetic effects, thus limiting their applications as anti-pruritic and non-addictive analgesic agents. Here, we showed that protein kinase C (PKC) inhibition preserved the KOR agonist induced beneficial antinociceptive and antipruritic effects, and attenuated the adverse condition placed aversion (CPA), sedation, and motor incoordination in mice. Using a large-scale mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics of KOR-mediated signaling in the brain, we observed at 5 minutes PKC-dependent modulation of G protein-coupled receptor kinases and Wnt pathways, and at 30 minutes modulation of stress signaling, cytoskeleton, mTOR signaling and receptor phosphorylation, including cannabinoid receptor CB1. We further demonstrated that inhibition of CB1 attenuated KOR-mediated CPA. Our results demonstrated the feasibility of in vivo biochemical dissection of signaling pathways that lead to side effects.

### Sample Protocol
Mice were pretreated with water or CHL (5mg/kg, s.c.) for 1 hr followed by saline or U50,488H (5 mg/kg, s.c.) for 5 min and 30 min. Brains were removed and brains regions (cortex, striatum and hippocampus) were dissected, frozen immediately, solubilized in 4% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl buffer (pH7.4) and stored at -20°C until analysis.   Proteins in the tissue lysate were precipitated with cold acetone (v/v 80%) and stored overnight in a -20°C room. The cold acetone/protein precipitate mixtures were spun down at the top speed in the tabletop centrifuge mentioned above for 20 minutes. The supernatant was then removed and the pellets were wash with 80% cold acetone. Subsequent steps of the protocol were followed closed as the published Easyphos protocol18. Briefly, pellets were re-dissolved in 250μl 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) buffer, which contains TCEP and chloroacetamide. After sonication, reduction and alkylation, the lysates were transferred to equal amount of distilled water inside a 96-well plate.  After protein quantification, equal amounts (~2mg) of samples were digested by trypsin and lysC overnight. Digested phosphopeptides were then enrich as described previously using the TiO2 matrix (Gl Sciences, Japan)18,48. Samples were then measured through top10 data-dependent acquisition mode in Thermo Scientific Qxactive HF orbitrap, and processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.5.2)49, with the same setting described previously14,15.

### Data Protocol
The resulted data table was processed bioinformatically using statistic software R and Perseus (version 1.5.2.17)50. Two-way ANOVA analysis of the phosphoproteomic data was performed within the Perseus environment. P-value <0.05 of the second factor (U50,488H vs rest) was chosen for significance cut off at each time point. The motif annotation was based on consensus of PhosphoSite Plus51, PhosphoMotif finder51,52, activity-based phosphorylation networks53 and other references. We used KEGG pathway54 and Gene ontology55 annotations from the standard annotation database of Perseus. We performed all statistical analysis including Fisher’s exact test within the Perseus environment unless stated otherwise. Individual phosphosites and their two-way ANOVA analysis followed by post-hoc Sidak’s test were performed using GraphPad Prism8 (La Jolla, CA). For network analysis, we entered the gene names into the online string database (https://string-db.org/) to map interactions of proteins. We used all available resources and used the default interaction score (0.4). The interaction was subsequently exported into text files for plotting in Cytoscape 3.7.2.

### Publication Abstract
Kappa opioid receptor (KOR) agonists possess adverse dysphoric and psychotomimetic effects, thus limiting their applications as non-addictive anti-pruritic and analgesic agents. Here, we showed that protein kinase C (PKC) inhibition preserved the beneficial antinociceptive and antipruritic effects of KOR agonists, but attenuated the adverse condition placed aversion (CPA), sedation, and motor incoordination in mice. Using a large-scale mass spectrometry-based phosphoproteomics of KOR-mediated signaling in the mouse brain, we observed PKC-dependent modulation of G protein-coupled receptor kinases and Wnt pathways at 5&#xa0;min; stress signaling, cytoskeleton, mTOR signaling and receptor phosphorylation, including cannabinoid receptor CB1 at 30&#xa0;min. We further demonstrated that inhibition of CB1 attenuated KOR-mediated CPA. Our results demonstrated the feasibility of in vivo biochemical dissection of signaling pathways that lead to side effects.

### Keywords
Brain, Kappa opioid receptor, Pkc, Phosphoproteomic

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany

### Submitter
Jeffrey Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, 82152 Martinsried, Germany


