### Accession
PXD009436

### Title
Differentially abundant proteins associated with heterosis in the primary roots of popcorn

### Description
Although heterosis has significantly contributed to increases in worldwide crop production, the molecular mechanisms regulating this phenomenon are still unknown. In the present study, we used a comparative proteomic approach to explore hybrid vigor via the proteome of both the popcorn L54 ♀ and P8 ♂ genotypes and the resultant UENF/UEM01 hybrid cross. To analyze the differentially abundant proteins involved in heterosis, we used the primary roots of these genotypes to analyze growth parameters and extract proteins. The results of the growth parameter analysis showed that the mid- and best-parent heterosis were positive for root length and root dry matter but negative for root fresh matter, seedling fresh matter, and protein content. The comparative proteomic analysis identified 1343 proteins in the primary roots of hybrid UENF/UEM01 and its parental lines; 220 proteins were differentially regulated in terms of protein abundance. A total of 62 regulated proteins were classified as non-additive, of which 53.2% were classified as high-parent abundance (+), 17.8% as above high-parent abundance (+ +), 16.1% as below low-parent abundance (- -), and 12.9% as low-parent abundance (-). A total of 22 biological processes were associated with non-additive proteins; processes involving translation, ribosome biogenesis, and energy-related metabolism represented 45.2% of the non-additive proteins. Our results suggest that heterosis in the popcorn hybrid UENF/UEM01 at an early stage of plant development is associated with an up-regulation of proteins related to synthesis and energy metabolism

### Sample Protocol
For the proteomic analysis, the primary roots of popcorn were sampled at 5th DAS. Protein extracts were prepared from three different biological samples (each sample contained 0.3 g of RFM) using the 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA)/acetone precipitation method. Briefly, the samples were ground under liquid nitrogen and suspended in 1 mL of chilled extraction buffer containing 10% (w/v) TCA in acetone with 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT). The mixtures were maintained at -20°C for one hour and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 30 minutes at 4°C. The resulting pellets were washed three times with cold acetone containing 20 mM DTT and subsequently air dried. The pellets were resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1% DTT, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonide, and 2% Triton X-100, vortexed for 30 minutes, and then centrifuged at 16000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C. The supernatants were then recovered, and their protein concentrations were determined using a 2-D Quant Kit. Protein digestion Total protein samples (100 μg from each biological replication) were first precipitated using the methanol/chloroform method and then resuspended in buffer containing 7 M urea and 2 M thiourea. Afterward, the samples were desalted on Amicon Ultra 3-kDa centrifugal filters.  For digestion, 25μL of 0.2% (v/v) RapiGest® surfactant was added to each sample. The resultant mixtures were briefly vortexed and incubated in an Eppendorf Thermomixer® at 80°C for 15 minutes. Afterward, 2.5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added, and the samples were then incubated at 60°C for 30 minutes. Following the incubation, 2.5 μL of 300 mM iodoacetamide was added, after which the samples were incubated in the dark for 30 minutes at 25°C. Afterward, 5 μL of 100 mM DTT was added to quench the excess iodoacetamide. Protein digestion was carried out by adding 20 μL of trypsin (50 ng µL-1) in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate per sample, followed by incubation for 15 hours at 37°C. Afterward, 10 μL of 5% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added for RapiGest® precipitation and trypsin activity inhibition, after which the samples were incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes followed by centrifugation at 16000 g for 20 minutes. The peptide mixtures were ultimately transferred to a total recovery vials for direct use in a Synapt G2-Si mass spectrometer. Nano-LC-ESI-MS/MS analyses Nano-LC-electrospray ionization (ESI)-MS/MS analysis was carried out using a nanoAcquity UPLC coupled to a Synapt G2-Si HDMS mass spectrometer. The peptide mixtures were separated by liquid chromatography by loading 2 μL of digested samples (one μg of digested protein) onto a nanoAcquity UPLC 5 μm C18 trap column (180 μm×20 mm; Waters) followed by loading onto a nanoAcquity HSS T3 1.8 μm analytical column (75 μm×150 mm) at a rate of 400 nL min-1 and a temperature of 45°C. For peptide elution, the binary gradient consisted of MS water (Tedia, Fairfield, Ohio, USA) and 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase A and of acetonitrile (Tedia) and 0.1% formic acid as mobile phase B. The gradient elution started at 7% of solution B, increased to 40% of solution B for 91.12 minutes, increased to 99.9% of solution B until 92.72 minutes, persisted at 99.9% of solution B until 106 minutes, decreased to 7% of solution B until 106.1 minutes, and then persisted at 7% of solution B until the end of the run, at 120 minutes. Mass spectrometry was performed both in positive and resolution (V) modes, with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) value of 35000 and ion mobility, and in data-independent acquisition (DIA) mode. The ion mobility separation (IMS) used an IMS wave velocity of 600 m s-1 (HDMSE); the transfer collision energy increased from 19 V to 55 V in high-energy mode; the cone and capillary voltages were 30 V and 2750 V, respectively; and the source temperature was 70°C. For time-of-flight (TOF) parameters, the scan time was set to 0.5 seconds in continuum mode, and the mass range was 50-2000 Da. The human [Glu1] fibrinopeptide B at 100 fmol.µL-1 was used as an external calibrant, and lock mass acquisition was performed every 30 seconds. Mass spectrum acquisition was performed by MassLynx v.4.0 software

### Data Protocol
Spectrum processing and database querying were performed using Progenesis QI for Proteomics v.2.0 software with the following parameters: Apex3D of 150 counts for the low-energy threshold, 50 counts for the elevated energy threshold, and 750 counts for the intensity threshold; a missed cleavage of one; a minimum fragment ion per peptide equal to two, a minimum fragment ion per protein equal to five, and a minimum peptide per protein equal to two; fixed modifications of carbamidomethyl (C) and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and phosphoryl (STY) groups; a default maximum false discovery rate of 4%; a peptide score greater than four; and maximum mass errors of 10 ppm. Using the Z. mays protein sequence database, we queried candidate proteins against the UniprotKB database (www.uniprot.org). Label-free relative quantitative analyses were performed based on the ratio of protein ion counts. After the data were processed, only the proteins present in all 3 runs were considered. Based on the results of the ANOVA (p<0.05), differentially abundant proteins were considered up-regulated if their fold change (FC) was greater than 1.5 but down-regulated if their FC was less than 0.667. A Venn diagram of the identified proteins was constructed, and functional classification was performed using Blast2GO v.4.1 software

### Publication Abstract
Although heterosis has significantly contributed to increases in worldwide crop production, the molecular mechanisms regulating this phenomenon are still unknown. In the present study, we used a comparative proteomic approach to explore hybrid vigor via the proteome of both the popcorn L54 &#x2640; and P8 &#x2642; genotypes and the resultant UENF/UEM01 hybrid cross. To analyze the differentially abundant proteins involved in heterosis, we used the primary roots of these genotypes to analyze growth parameters and extract proteins. The results of the growth parameter analysis showed that the mid- and best-parent heterosis were positive for root length and root dry matter but negative for root fresh matter, seedling fresh matter, and protein content. The comparative proteomic analysis identified 1343 proteins in the primary roots of hybrid UENF/UEM01 and its parental lines; 220 proteins were differentially regulated in terms of protein abundance. The mass spectrometry proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier "PXD009436". A total of 62 regulated proteins were classified as nonadditive, of which 53.2% were classified as high parent abundance (+), 17.8% as above-high parent abundance (+ +), 16.1% as below-low parent abundance (- -), and 12.9% as low parent abundance (-). A total of 22 biological processes were associated with nonadditive proteins; processes involving translation, ribosome biogenesis, and energy-related metabolism represented 45.2% of the nonadditive proteins. Our results suggest that heterosis in the popcorn hybrid UENF/UEM01 at an early stage of plant development is associated with an up-regulation of proteins related to synthesis and energy metabolism.

### Keywords
Nano-lc-esi-ms/ms, Progenesis, Synapt g2 si, Non-additive effect, Shotgun proteomics, Popcorn, Heterosis

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil
UNIVERSIDADE ESTADUAL DO NORTE FLUMINENSE

### Submitter
Vanildo Silveira

### Lab Head
Dr Vanildo Silveira
Laboratório de Biotecnologia, Centro de Biociências e Biotecnologia (CBB), Universidade Estadual do Norte Fluminense Darcy Ribeiro (UENF), Av. Alberto Lamego, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil. Unidade de Biologia Integrativa, Setor de Genômica e Proteômica, UENF, Campos dos Goytacazes, RJ, Brazil


