### Accession
PXD005042

### Title
Global lysine acetylome analysis of Picea asperata somatic  1 embryos during partial desiccation

### Description
By the combination of affinity enrichment and high-resolution LC-MS/MS analysis, large-scale lysine acetylome analysis was performed in picea asperata. Altogether, 1,360 lysine acetylation sites in 717 protein groups were identified. Intensive bioinformatic analysis was then carried out to annotate those lysine acetylated targets, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment, etc.

### Sample Protocol
Somatic embryos of P. asperata were obtained from the embryogenic cell line 1931, which was initiated from an immature zygotic embryos in the National Spruce  Germplasm Bank of China. The embryos were maturated on solidified half-strength  Litvay medium (½ LM) (Litvay et al., 1985) supplemented with 30 µM (±)-abscisic  acid (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, USA), 0.1% (w/v) casein hydrolysate (Sigma, St.  Louis, MO, USA), 3% (w/v) sucrose (Beijing Chemical Works, Beijing, PR China), 5%   (w/v) polyethylene glycol 4000 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) and 0.5% (w/v) gellan   gum (Sigma). Prior to autoclaving (121 °C, 20 min), the pH was adjusted to 5.8±0.01.  In the end, filter-sterilized (0.2-µm filter, Pall Corp., Port Washington, NY, USA)  L-glutamine (Sigma) was added into this autoclaved and cooled medium for a final  concentration of 0.05 %. Embryo maturation cultures were kept in darkness at   24±1 °C. After two months of culturing, the mature embryos with well-developed  cotyledons were selected and transferred onto two layers dry sterile filter paper   (Whatman TM  2, Kent, UK) to experience PDT under 16-h photoperiod with low light   density of 15 µmol m -2 s -1 (LED fluorescent tubes) at 24±1 °C for 0 (D0), 7 (D7), 14 (D14) and 21 days (D21). Finally, the desiccated embryos were collected and frozen   immediately in liquid nitrogen, and stored at -80 °C until use.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data was processed using MaxQuant with integrated Andromeda search engine (v.1.4.2). Tandem mass spectra were searched against target database (26,437 sequences) database concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 5 modifications per peptide and 5 charges. Mass error was set to 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on Cys was specified as fixed modification and oxidation on Met, acetylation on Lys and acetylation on protein N-terminal were specified as variable modifications. False discovery rate (FDR) thresholds for protein, peptide and modification site were specified at 1%. Minimum peptide length was set at 7. All the other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values. The site localization probability was set as > 0.75. GO Annotation The Gene Ontology, or GO, is a major bioinformatics initiative to unify the representation of gene and gene product attributes across all species. More specifically, the project aims to: 1. Maintain and develop its controlled vocabulary of gene and gene product attributes; 2. Annotate genes and gene products, and assimilate and disseminate annotation data; 3. Provide tools for easy access to all aspects of the data provided by the project. The ontology covers three domains: 1. Cellular component: A cellular component is just that, a component of a cell, but with the proviso that it is part of some larger object; this may be an anatomical structure (e.g. rough endoplasmic reticulum or nucleus) or a gene product group (e.g. ribosome, proteasome or a protein dimer). 2. Molecular function: Molecular function describes activities, such as catalytic or binding activities, that occur at the molecular level. GO molecular function terms represent activities rather than the entities (molecules or complexes) that perform the actions, and do not specify where or when, or in what context, the action takes place. 3. Biological process: A biological process is series of events accomplished by one or more ordered assemblies of molecular functions. It can be difficult to distinguish between a biological process and a molecular function, but the general rule is that a process must have more than one distinct steps. Gene Ontology (GO) annotation proteome was derived from the UniProt-GOA database (www. http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/). Firstly, Converting identified protein ID to UniProt ID and then mapping to GO IDs by protein ID. If some identified proteins were not annotated by UniProt-GOA database, the InterProScan soft would be used to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotationbased on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function.KEGG Pathway Annotation KEGG connects known information on molecular interaction networks, such as pathways and complexes (the "Pathway" database), information about genes and proteins generated by genome projects (including the gene database) and information about biochemical compounds and reactions (including compound and reaction databases). These databases are different networks, known as the "protein network", and the "chemical universe" respectively. There are efforts in progress to add to the knowledge of KEGG, including information regarding ortholog clusters in the KEGG Orthology database. KEGG Pathways mainly including: Metabolism, Genetic Information Processing, Environmental Information Processing, Cellular Processes, Rat Diseases, Drug development. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG)database was used to annotate protein pathway. Firstly, using KEGG online service tools KAAS to annotated protein’s 20 / 21 Confidential and Proprietary PTM-Biolabs (HangZhou) Co., Ltd No.452, 6th Street, No. 2, 15 floor Area A, Hangzhou Eco & Tech Developmental Area, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China, 310018 KEGG database description. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper.

### Publication Abstract
Partial desiccation treatment (PDT) promotes the germination capacity of conifer somatic embryos. Lysine acetylation (LysAc) is a dynamic and reversible post-translational modification that plays a key role in many biological processes including metabolic pathways and stress response. To investigate the functional impact of LysAc in the response of <i>Picea asperata</i> somatic embryos to PDT, we performed a global lysine acetylome analysis. Here, combining antibody-based affinity enrichment and high-resolution mass spectrometry, we identified and validated 1079 acetylation sites in 556 acetylated proteins from <i>P. asperata</i> somatic embryos during PDT. These data represent a novel large-scale dataset of lysine-acetylated proteins from the conifer family. Intensive bioinformatics analysis of the Gene Ontology of molecular functions demonstrated that lysine-acetylated proteins were mainly associated with binding, catalytic activities, and structural molecular activities. Functional characterization of the acetylated proteins revealed that in the desiccated somatic embryos, LysAc is mainly involved in the response to stress and central metabolism. Accordingly, the majority of these interacting proteins were also highly enriched in ribosome, proteasome, spliceosome, and carbon metabolism clusters. This work provides the most comprehensive profile of LysAc for a coniferous species obtained to date and facilitates the systematic study of the physiological role of LysAc in desiccated somatic embryos of <i>P. asperata</i>.

### Keywords
Picea asperata, Acetylome, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Key Laboratory of Tree Breeding and Cultivation of State Forestry Administration, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing, PR China.
 State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Key Laboratory of Tree
6
Breeding and Cultivation of State Forestry Administration,  7
Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing, PR China. 

### Submitter
Xia yan

### Lab Head
Dr Wang junhui
State Key Laboratory of Tree Genetics and Breeding, Key Laboratory of Tree Breeding and Cultivation of State Forestry Administration, Research Institute of Forestry, Chinese Academy of Forestry, Beijing, PR China.


