### Accession
PXD015239

### Title
Epigenetic contributions to hemisphere asymmetry in healthy brain, aging, and Parkinson’s disease

### Description
Hemispheric asymmetry in neuronal processes is a fundamental feature of the human brain and drives symptom lateralization in Parkinson's disease (PD), but its molecular determinants are unknown. Here, we determine epigenetic changes and genes involved in hemispheric asymmetry in the healthy and PD brain. Neurons of healthy individuals exhibit numerous hemispheric differences in DNA methylation, affecting genes implicated in neurodegenerative diseases. In PD patients, hemispheric asymmetry in DNA methylation is even greater and involves many PD risk genes. Moreover, the lateralization of clinical PD symptoms involves epigenetic, transcriptional, and proteomic differences across hemispheres that affect neurodevelopment, immune activation, and synaptic transmission. In aging, healthy neurons demonstrate a progressive loss of hemisphere asymmetry in epigenomes that is amplified in PD. For PD patients, a long disease course is associated with retaining more hemispheric asymmetry in neuronal epigenomes. Hemispheric differences in epigenetic gene regulation are prevalent in neurons and may affect the progression and symptoms of PD.

### Sample Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis of prefrontal cortex samples (~30 mg tissue) was performed by the Integrated Mass Spectrometry Unit at Michigan State University. Briefly, protein lysate (20 mg) was denatured using 25mM ammonium bicarbonate/80% acetonitrile and incubated at 37⁰C for 3 h. The samples were dried and reconstituted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate/50% acetonitrile/trypsin solution and incubated overnight at 37⁰C. The resulting peptides were dried and reconstituted in 25mM ammonium bicarbonate/4% acetonitrile. Samples were loaded on to a C18 column (2 mm particles, 25 cm x 75 mm ID) and eluted using a 2 h acetonitrile gradient into a Q-Exactive HF-X mass spectrometer. Each sample was run in triplicate to account for technical variance. The mass spectra from each technical replicate were searched against the Uniprot human database using LFQ method in Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.2.0.388, 2017).

### Data Protocol
The technical replicates from each biological sample were pooled and group comparisons (controls vs. PD, PD-matched vs PD-unmatched) were performed using a non-nested test. Only proteins with abundances recorded in at least two samples per group were considered. Proteins with log fold change between groups exceeding ±0.2 were considered as altered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hemisphere asymmetry, Enhancer, Neurons, Epigenetics, Aging, Parkinson’s disease

### Affiliations
Van Andel Research Institute

### Submitter
PEIPEI LI

### Lab Head
Dr Viviane Labrie
Van Andel Research Institute


