### Accession
PXD025209

### Title
Structure of the phosphoinositide 3-kinase p110-p101 complex reveals molecular mechanism of GPCR activation

### Description
The class IB phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), PI3K, is a master regulator of immune cell function, and is a promising drug target for both inflammatory diseases and cancer. Critical to PI3K function is the association of the p110 catalytic subunit  to either a p101 or p84 regulatory subunit, which mediates regulation by G-protein coupled receptors (GPCRs). Here, we report the first structure of a heterodimeric PI3K complex, p110-p101. This structure revealed a unique mode of assembly of catalytic and regulatory subunits distinct from that of other class I PI3K complexes. Multiple oncogenic mutations mapped to these novel interfaces led to increased activation by G. p101 mediates activation through its G binding domain, recruiting the complex to the membrane and allowing for engagement of a secondary site in p110. A nanobody that specifically binds to this p101-G  interface blocks activation providing a novel tool to study p101-specific signaling events in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
For HDX reactions comparing p110 alone and p110 in complex with p101, exchange was carried out in a 50µl reaction containing 20 picomoles of protein, either p110 or p110/p101. To initiate hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 1.5µL of either protein was incubated with 48.5µL of D2O buffer solution (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl, 94.3% D2O) for five time points (3s on ice, 3s, 30s, 300s, 3000s at room temperature) to give a final concentration of 91.5% D2O.  HDX reactions comparing full length p110 and ABD truncated p110 were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final p110 amount of 15  pmol. Exchange was carried out for four time points (3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at room temperature). To initiate hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 1.2µL of either protein was incubated with 48.8µL of D2O buffer solution (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl, 94.3% D2O) to give a final concentration of 92% D2O.  HDX reactions comparing p110/p101 with and without nanobody were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final p110 amount of 16  pmol and a final nanobody amount of 7 pmol. Exchange was carried out for two time points (3s and 300s at room temperature). To initiate hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 1µL of p110/p101 and 1µL of nanobody was incubated with 48µL of D2O buffer solution (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl, 94.3% D2O) to give a final concentration of 90.5% D2O.  HDX reactions comparing wild-type p110/p101, R472C p110/p101, and E347K p110/p101 were conducted in 50µl reaction volumes with a final protein amount of 12.5 pmol. Exchange was carried out for five time points (3s on ice, 3s, 30s, 300s and 3000s at room temperature). To initiate hydrogen-deuterium exchange, 2µL of protein was incubated with 48µL of D2O buffer solution (20mM HEPES pH 7.5, 100mM NaCl, 94.3% D2O) to give a final concentration of 90.5% D2O. All exchange reactions were terminated by the addition of ice-cold quench buffer to give a final concentration 0.6M guanidine-HCl and 0.9% formic acid and samples were frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C. All experiments were carried out in independent triplicate.   Protein samples were rapidly thawed and injected onto an integrated fluidics system containing a HDx-3 PAL liquid handling robot and climate-controlled chromatography system (LEAP Technologies), a Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system, as well as an Impact HD QTOF Mass spectrometer (Bruker). The protein was run over either one (at 10°C) or two (at 10°C and 2°C) immobilized pepsin columns (Applied Biosystems; Poroszyme Immobilized Pepsin Cartridge, 2.1 mm x 30 mm; Thermo-Fisher 2-3131-00; Trajan; ProDx protease column, 2.1 mm x 30 mm PDX.PP01-F32) at 200 mL/min for 3 minutes. The resulting peptides were collected and desalted on a C18 trap column (Acquity UPLC BEH C18 1.7mm column (2.1 x 5 mm); Waters 186003975). The trap was subsequently eluted in line with a C18 reverse-phase separation column (Acquity 1.7 mm particle, 100 x 1 mm2 C18 UPLC column, Waters 186002352), using a gradient of 5-36% B (Buffer A 0.1% formic acid; Buffer B 100% acetonitrile) over 16 minutes. Mass spectrometry experiments acquired over a mass range from 150 to 2200 m/z using an electrospray ionization source operated at a temperature of 200C and a spray voltage of 4.5 kV.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified from the non-deuterated samples of p110 alone or p110/p101 using data-dependent acquisition following tandem MS/MS experiments (0.5 s precursor scan from 150-2000 m/z; twelve 0.25 s fragment scans from 150-2000 m/z). MS/MS datasets were analysed using PEAKS7 (PEAKS), and peptide identification was carried out by using a false discovery based approach, with a threshold set to 1% using a database of purified proteins and known contaminants. The search parameters were set with a precursor tolerance of 20 ppm, fragment mass error 0.02 Da, charge states from 1-8, leading to a selection criterion of peptides that had a -10logP score of 21 HD-Examiner Software (Sierra Analytics) was used to automatically calculate the level of deuterium incorporation into each peptide. All peptides were manually inspected for correct charge state, correct retention time, appropriate selection of isotopic distribution, etc. Deuteration levels were calculated using the centroid of the experimental isotope clusters. The results for these proteins are presented as the raw percent deuterium incorporation, as shown in Supplemental Data, with the only correction being applied correcting for the deuterium oxide percentage of the buffer utilised in the exchange (91.5%, 92%, and 90.5% in the order listed above). No corrections for back exchange that occurs during the quench and digest/separation were applied. Attempts to generate a fully deuterated class I PI3K sample were unsuccessful, which is common for large macromolecular complexes. Therefore, all deuterium exchange values are relative.  Differences in exchange in a peptide were considered significant if they met all three of the following criteria: : ≥5% change in exchange, ≥0.4 Da difference in exchange, and a p value <0.01 using a two tailed student t-test. The raw HDX data are shown in two different formats.

### Publication Abstract
The class IB phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K), PI3K&#x3b3;, is a master regulator of immune cell function and a promising drug target for both cancer and inflammatory diseases. Critical to PI3K&#x3b3; function is the association of the p110&#x3b3; catalytic subunit to either a p101 or p84 regulatory subunit, which mediates activation by G protein-coupled receptors. Here, we report the cryo-electron microscopy structure of a heterodimeric PI3K&#x3b3; complex, p110&#x3b3;-p101. This structure reveals a unique assembly of catalytic and regulatory subunits that is distinct from other class I PI3K complexes. p101 mediates activation through its G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-binding domain, recruiting the heterodimer to the membrane and allowing for engagement of a secondary G&#x3b2;&#x3b3;-binding site in p110&#x3b3;. Mutations at the p110&#x3b3;-p101 and p110&#x3b3;-adaptor binding domain interfaces enhanced G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; activation. A nanobody that specifically binds to the p101-G&#x3b2;&#x3b3; interface blocks activation, providing a novel tool to study and target p110&#x3b3;-p101-specific signaling events in vivo.

### Keywords
Cryo-em, Gpcr, Hdx, Pik3g

### Affiliations
University of Victoria

### Submitter
John Burke

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. John E Burke
University of Victoria


