### Accession
PXD002012

### Title
Proteome-wide analysis of the amino terminal status of Escherichia coli proteins at the steady-state and upon deformylation inhibition

### Description
A proteome-wide analysis was performed in Escherichia coli to identify the impact on protein N-termini of the antibiotic actinonin specifically inhibiting peptide deformylase (PDF). A new strategy and tool suite (SILProNaQ) was employed to provide large scale N-terminus acetylation yield quantitation. In control conditions, more than 1000 N-termini could be identified with 56 % Met removal, and additional modifications involving partial or complete N-acetylation (10%) and formyl retention (5%). Among the proteins undergoing these N-terminal modifications, some translocated membrane proteins were highlighted. The early time-course impact of actinonin was followed after the addition of bacteriostatic concentrations of the drug immediately slowing down the growth rate. Under these conditions, 25% of all proteins remain formylated after 10 min, a value reaching more than 60% of all characterized proteins after 40 min of treatment. The N-formylation rate on individual proteins increased with the same trend. Upon PDF inhibition, we finally show that two major categories of proteins retain their formyl group: a large number of inner membrane proteins and proteins involved in protein synthesis including many factors assisting the nascent chains in co-translational events.

### Sample Protocol
E. coli tolC CAG12184 cells were grown in 2YT medium at 37°C under 180 rpm agitation. Cell growth was monitored by OD measurement at 600 nm. When the OD600 reached 0.5, 1 µg/ml of actinonin (4 MIC) was added. Cells were harvested and collected by centrifugation to determine the impact of actinonin treatment. Cells were disrupted by grinding and extraction buffer was added to the cell lysate. After centrifugation at 210 g at 4°C for 30min, the protein concentration in the supernatant was determined by Bradford protein assay. For N-terminus enrichment, 1 mg of proteins was denaturated and reduced before cysteine alkylation using iodoacetamide. To favour d3-acetylation of the proteins N-terminus, 25 µmol of N-acetoxy-[2H3]-succinimide in DMSO per mg of protein were added to the alkylated proteins resuspended in 50 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7.5. This reaction. After 90 min at 30°C, potential O-acetylation of Ser, Thr, and Tyr side-chains were reversed by adding 10 µl of 50% of hydroxylamine (v/v) and incubated for 20 min at room temperature. The sample was acetone precipitated to remove chemical reagent before trypsin digestion. The protein pellet was resuspended in 50 mM ammonium hydrogenocarbonate and digested by the addition of 1/100 (w/w) of TPCK treated porcine trypsin for 1.5 h at 37°C twice. Peptides were desalted by Sep-Pak™ solid phase extraction and the retained material was eluted with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA followed by evaporation to dryness. The collected material was resuspended in SCX-LC buffer A (5 mM KH2PO4, 30% ACN and 0.05% formic acid) and injected into Summit LC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA) equipped with Polysulfoethyl A 200 x 2.1 mm 5 µm 200 Å column (PolyLC, Colombia, MD). Peptides were eluted with a KCl gradient (SCX-LC Buffer B: 350 mM KCl in SCX-LC Buffer A; 0 - 5 min, 0% B; 15 - 40 min, 5 - 26% B; 40 - 45 min, 26 - 35% B). Fractions eluted from SCX chromatography were resuspended in 0.1% FA, 5% AcN and loaded onto a pre-column followed by an analytical separation using a Nikkyo Technos capillary column. The nano-RP-LC is coupled to an Orbitrap™ Velos (Thermo scientific). The survey scan was acquired by Fourier-Transform MS scanning 400-2000 Da at 30,000 resolution using internal calibration. The 20 most intense ions were subject to high collision dissociation MS (Top-20 CID) with 20 seconds exclusion time for the precursor acquired. Raw data were extracted and exported with Proteome Discoverer. MS/MS spectra with parent ion signal higher than 1 counts and with a signal over noise ratio higher than 1.5 are extracted and saved in *.mgf text file.

### Data Protocol
Exported *.mgf files were submitted for protein identification and co- or post-translational modification characterisation to Mascot 2.4 software. The database used was the reference proteome for E. coli K12 strain extracted from UniProtKB (Version 112). The parent and fragment mass tolerance were defined to 10 ppm and 0.7 Da respectively with carbamidomethylcysteine and d3-acetyl on Lys as fix modifications. Few variable modifications were used including Met-Ox, N-terminus Pyro-glutamylation (Q), protein N-Fo and protein d0 or d3-N-terminal acetylation (NTA) using trypsin/P. All data were filtered at 1% protein FDR and only peptides with score higher than 30 were retained for the final data treatment.

### Publication Abstract
A proteome wide analysis was performed in Escherichia coli to identify the impact on protein N-termini of actinonin, an antibiotic specifically inhibiting peptide deformylase (PDF). A strategy and tool suite (SILProNaQ) was employed to provide large-scale quantitation of N-terminal modifications. In control conditions, more than 1000 unique N-termini were identified with 56% showing initiator methionine removal. Additional modifications corresponded to partial or complete N&#x3b1;-acetylation (10%) and N-formyl retention (5%). Among the proteins undergoing these N-terminal modifications, 140 unique N-termini from translocated membrane proteins were highlighted. The very early time-course impact of actinonin was followed after addition of bacteriostatic concentrations of the drug. Under these conditions, 26% of all proteins did not undergo deformylation any longer after 10 min, a value reaching more than 60% of all characterized proteins after 40 min of treatment. The N-formylation ratio measured on individual proteins increased with the same trend. Upon early PDF inhibition, two major categories of proteins retained their N-formyl group: a large number of inner membrane proteins and many proteins involved in protein synthesis including factors assisting the nascent chains in early cotranslational events. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifiers PXD001979, PXD002012 and PXD001983 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001979, http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD002012 and http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD001983).

### Keywords
Post-translational modifications, Antibiotics, Acetylation, Formylation, Actinonin

### Affiliations
CNRS
I2BC, CNRS, Gif/Yvette France

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Willy V. Bienvenut
I2BC, CNRS, Gif/Yvette France


