### Accession
PXD026948

### Title
Doxycycline treated cytotoxic T lymphocytes

### Description
Recent work in immunometabolism has emphasised the role of mitochondria in both the innate and adaptive immune system. Mitochondria are important in T cell development and differentiation, but less is known about their role in CD8+ effector T cells (CTLs). We found that CTLs that lack the mitochondrial deubiquitinase USP30 undergo promiscuous mitophagy, destroying most of the cellular mitochondria.  Surprisingly, this results in a markedly diminished killing capacity, while motility, signalling and secretion remain intact. This study uses quantitative DIA proteomics to measure the impact of USP30 deficiency on the global proteome of IL-2 maintained, 4.5 h TCR retriggered and 4.5 h TCR retriggered + cycloheximide CTL. We also measured the impact of pharmacologically inhibiting mitochondrial translation by performing Quantitative DIA proteomics on IL2 maintained or TCR retriggered CTL treated with the mitochondrial translation inhibitor doxycycline for 4.5 hrs. Unexpectedly, inhibition of mitochondrial translation, through genetic or pharmacologic methods, was the mechanism by which CTL killing was impaired. Reduced mitochondrial translation triggered attenuated cytosolic translation which precluded replenishment of secreted effector molecules thereby limiting the capacity of CTLs to serially kill multiple targets. Thus, mitochondria emerge as a previously unappreciated homeostatic regulator of protein translation required for serial CTL killing.

### Sample Protocol
1.5 µg peptide was analysed per sample. Samples were injected onto a nanoscale C18 reverse-phase chromatography system (UltiMate 3000 RSLC nano, Thermo Scientific) then electrosprayed into an Orbitrap Exploris 480 (Thermo Scientific). For liquid chromatography buffers were as follows:  buffer A (0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v)) and buffer B (80% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in Milli-Q water (v/v). Sample were loaded at 10 μL/min onto a trap column (100 μm × 2 cm, PepMap nanoViper C18 column, 5 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) equilibrated in 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The trap column was washed for 3 min at the same flow rate with 0.1% TFA then switched in-line with a Thermo Scientific, resolving C18 column (75 μm × 50 cm, PepMap RSLC C18 column, 2 μm, 100 Å). The peptides were eluted from the column at a constant flow rate of 300 nl/min with a linear gradient from 3% buffer B to 6% buffer B in 5 min, then from 6% buffer B to 35% buffer B in 115 min, and finally to 80% buffer B within 7 min. The column was then washed with 80% buffer B for 4 min and re-equilibrated in 3% buffer B for 15 min. Two blanks were run between each sample to reduce carry-over. The column was kept at a constant temperature of 50oC.   The data was acquired using an easy spray source operated in positive mode with spray voltage at 2.445 kV, and the ion transfer tube temperature at 250oC. The MS was operated in DIA mode. A scan cycle comprised a full MS scan (m/z range from 350-1650), with RF lens at 40%, AGC target set to custom, normalised AGC target at 300, maximum injection time mode set to custom, maximum injection time at 20 ms and source fragmentation disabled.   MS survey scan was followed by  MS/MS DIA scan events using the following parameters: multiplex ions set to false, collision energy mode set to stepped, collision energy type set to normalized, HCD collision energies set to 25.5, 27 and 30, orbitrap resolution 30000, first mass 200, RF lens 40, AGC target set to custom, normalized AGC target 3000, maximum injection time 55 ms.   The inclusion list (DIA windows) and windows widths are shown in table S4.   Data for both MS and MS/MS scans were acquired in profile mode. Mass accuracy was checked before the start of samples analysis.

### Data Protocol
The data were processed, searched and quantified with Spectronaut (Bruderer et al., 2015) 14 using the directDIA option. Cleavage Rules were set to Trypsin/P, Peptide maximum length was set to 52 amino acids, Peptide minimum length was set to 7 amino acids and Missed Cleavages set to 2. Calibration Mode was set to Automatic. Search criteria included carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification, as well as oxidation of methionine, deamidation of asparagine and glutamine and acetylation (protein N-terminus) as variable modifications.  The FDR threshold was set to 1% Q-value at both the Precursor and Protein level. The single hit definition was to Stripped sequence.  The directDIA data were searched against a hybrid database from databases in July 2019 Uniprot release. This consisted of all manually annotated mouse SwissProt entries, combined with mouse TrEMBL entries with protein level evidence available and a manually annotated homologue within the human SwissProt database.  The Major Group Quantity was set to the Sum of peptide quantity and the Minor Group Quantity was set to the Sum of the precursor quantity, Cross Run Normalization was disabled. Protein copy number quantification was performed in the Perseus software package, version 1.6.6.0. Mean copy number per cell was calculated using the “proteomic ruler’ plugin as described (Wisniewski et al., 2014).  References: Bruderer, R., Bernhardt, O.M., Gandhi, T., Miladinovic, S.M., Cheng, L.Y., Messner, S., Ehrenberger, T., Zanotelli, V., Butscheid, Y., Escher, C., et al. (2015). Extending the limits of quantitative proteome profiling with data-independent acquisition and application to acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues. Mol Cell Proteomics 14, 1400-1410. Wisniewski, J.R., Hein, M.Y., Cox, J., and Mann, M. (2014). A "proteomic ruler" for protein copy number and concentration estimation without spike-in standards. Mol Cell Proteomics 13, 3497-3506.

### Publication Abstract
T cell receptor activation of na&#xef;ve CD8<sup>+</sup> T lymphocytes initiates their maturation into effector cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs), which can kill cancer and virally infected cells. Although CTLs show an increased reliance on glycolysis upon acquisition of effector function, we found an essential requirement for mitochondria in target cell&#x2013;killing. Acute mitochondrial depletion in USP30 (ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase 30)&#x2013;deficient CTLs markedly diminished killing capacity, although motility, signaling, and secretion were all intact. Unexpectedly, the mitochondrial requirement was linked to mitochondrial translation, inhibition of which impaired CTL killing. Impaired mitochondrial translation triggered attenuated cytosolic translation, precluded replenishment of secreted killing effectors, and reduced the capacity of CTLs to carry out sustained killing. Thus, mitochondria emerge as a previously unappreciated homeostatic regulator of protein translation required for serial CTL killing.

### Keywords
Mitochondria, Mouse, T cell, Doxycycline, Ctl, Dia, Protein translation

### Affiliations
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, CB2 0XY, UK
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
Julia Marchingo

### Lab Head
Dr Gillian M. Griffiths
Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, CB2 0XY, UK


