### Accession
PXD033191

### Title
Label-free quantitative proteomics analysis of Drosophila melanogaster lethal giant larvae mutants reveals potential therapeutic effects of melatonin

### Description
The present study is a pioneering investigation that has been carefully designed to study proteomic effects of specific cancer-related mutation using the lgl mutant of D. melanogaster that has not been well characterised thus far. Recent findings concerning the D. melanogaster cancer models suggest that this model is well suited for study of cancer mechanisms and therapeutic interventions, especially in the brain and intestines (Mirzoyan et al., 2019). In addition, the integration of circadian biology into cancer research offers new insights into the implications of optimal timing for cancer treatment that could potentially reduce undesirable side effects and enhance prognosis (Ballesta et al., 2017). As a result, label free quantitative mass spectrometry was employed to investigate tissue-specific protein expression in head and intestinal tissues of D. melanogaster lgl mutants which was collected at 6-hours intervals throughout the 24-hour period. Furthermore, the efficacy of melatonin as an anticancer agent at the proteome level was also investigated. Together, the resulting information could potentially identify malfunctioning signalling pathways and circadian rhythm-dependent protein markers during tumorigenesis, as well as the mechanism of actions of melatonin on these processes, post-treatment

### Sample Protocol
The adult flies collected at each interval were dissected to isolate the head and intestinal tissues. The head and intestinal tissues were then homogenised and proteins were purified using trichloroacetic acid/acetone percipitation method, as previously reported (Jessie et al., 2008). In-solution tryptic digestion was carried out according to Gundry et al. (2009) with minor modifications. Briefly, precipitated proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at 37 °C for 30 minutes and subsequently alkylated with 55 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature away from light for 30 minutes. Then, the proteins were digested with trypsin at 37 °C, overnight. The digested peptides were lyophilised by SpeedVac speed vacuum concentrator (LaboGene, Lillerød, Denmark), resuspended in 0.1% formic acid (FA), and desalted using ZipTip C18 column (MilliporeSigma, Massachusetts, USA). Finally, the desalted peptides were lyophilised using SpeedVac speed vacuum concentrator and reconstituted in 0.1% FA prior to analysis by mass spectrometry. The tryptic-digested desalted peptides were separated using EASY-Spray ES802 C18 column (2 µm, 25 cm × 75 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a pre-column (3 µm, 20 mm × 75 μm; Thermo Fisher Scientific) at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. The gradient used was from 5 – 32% solvent B for 80 minutes followed by 30 – 80% solvent B from 80 to 90 minute, using 0.1% formic acid FA in water (LC-MS grade, Thermo Fisher Scientific) as solvent A and 0.1% FA in 100% ACN as solvent B. The eluted peptides were analysed using Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer according to Nie et al. (2016).

### Data Protocol
The peptide identification and quantification were carried out using MaxQuant software version 2.0.1.0 (http://www.maxquant.org) (Munich, Germany). The acquired mass spectrometric data were searched using the built-in Andromeda search engine against the reviewed reference of D. melanogaster proteome in the UniProtKB database (July 2020, UP000000803, 23524 entries, https://www.uniprot.org). Protein identification was carried out via the search parameters described as follows: enzyme — trypsin, missed cleavage — 1, fixed modification — carbamidomethylation of cysteine, variable modification — oxidation of methionine and N-terminal protein acetylation, maximum precursor mass tolerance for initial and main search — 20 ppm and 6 ppm, and fragment mass tolerance — 20 ppm (Cox et al., 2011, Tyanova et al., 2016a). A false discovery rate of 0.01 was applied for peptide and protein identification (Murugaiyan et al., 2017). Following protein identification, data for label-free quantification (LFQ) was analysed based on the MaxLFQ algorithm (Cox et al., 2014). Data were further processed using Perseus software version 1.6.15.0 (https://maxquant.net/perseus/) according to Tyanova et al. （2016b). This includes filtration, transformation, and missing value imputation. Briefly, the data were filtered for reverse identifications (false positives), contaminants, and proteins “only identified by site”. The data were log2 transformed and filtered with at least two valid values in each group and for all time points. The remaining missing values were imputed by random values drawn from a normal distribution. Lastly, proteins with at least two unique peptides were retained and subsequently used for statistical analysis (Cuoto et al., 2021).

### Publication Abstract
Mutation in the Drosophila melanogaster lethal giant larvae (lgl), a tumor suppressor gene with a well-established role in cellular polarity, is known to results in massive cellular proliferation and neoplastic outgrowths. Although the tumorigenic properties of lgl mutant have been previously studied, however, little is known about its consequences on the proteome. In this study, mass spectrometry-based label-free quantitative proteomics was employed to investigate the changes in the head and intestinal tissues proteins of Drosophila melanogaster, due to lgl mutation and following treatment with melatonin. Additionally, to uncover the time-influenced variations in the proteome during tumorigenesis and melatonin treatment, the rhythmic expression of proteins was also investigated at 6-h intervals within 24-h clock. Together, the present study has identified 434 proteins of altered expressions (p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.05 and fold change &#xb1;1.5) in the tissues of flies in response to lgl mutation as well as posttreatment with melatonin. Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analysis of differentially expressed proteins revealed that lgl mutation had significantly affected the biological functions, including metabolism, and protein synthesis and degradation, in flies' tissues. Besides, melatonin had beneficially mitigated the deleterious effects of lgl mutation by reversing the alterations in protein expression closer to baseline levels. Further, changes in protein expression in the tissues due to lgl mutation and melatonin treatment were found rhythmically orchestrated. Together, these findings provide novel insight into the pathways involved in lgl-induced tumorigenesis as well as demonstrated the efficacy of melatonin as a potential anticancer agent. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD033191.

### Keywords
Label-free quantitative proteomics, Circadian proteome, Melatonin., Lethal giant larvae, Drosophila melanogaster

### Affiliations
University of Malaya
Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia

### Submitter
Jaime Jayapalan

### Lab Head
Dr Jaime Jacqueline Jayapalan
Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Universiti Malaya, 50603, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia


