### Accession
PXD035503

### Title
The E3 ubiquitin ligase HECTD1 contributes to cell proliferation through an effect on mitosis

### Description
Mechanistic studies of how protein ubiquitylation regulates the cell cycle, in particular during mitosis, have provided unique insights which have contributed to the emergence of the ‘Ubiquitin code’. In contrast to RING E3 ubiquitin ligases such as the APC/c ligase complex, the contribution of other E3 ligase families during cell cycle progression remains less well understood. Similarly, the roles of ubiquitin chain types beyond homotypic K48 chains in S-phase or branched K11/K48 chains during mitosis, also remains to be fully determined. Our recent findings that HECTD1 ubiquitin ligase activity assembles branched K29/K48 ubiquitin linkages prompted us to evaluate its function during the cell cycle. We used transient knockdown and genetic knockout to show that HECTD1 depletion in HEK293T and HeLa cells decreases cell number and we established that this is mediated through loss of ubiquitin ligase activity. Interestingly, we found that HECTD1 depletion increases the proportion of cells with aligned chromosomes (Prometa/Metaphase) and we confirmed this molecularly using phospho-Histone H3 (Ser28) as a marker of mitosis. Time-lapse microscopy of NEBD to anaphase onset established that HECTD1-depleted cells take on average longer to go through mitosis. To explore the underlying mechanisms, we used proteomics and identified the interactome of endogenous HECTD1 in cells synchronized in mitosis and validated the Mitosis Checkpoint Complex protein BUB3 as a novel HECTD1 interactor. In line with this, we found that HECTD1 depletion reduces the activity of the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint. Overall, our data suggests a novel role for HECTD1 ubiquitin ligase activity during mitosis.

### Sample Protocol
HEK293T cells were synchronised in late G2 and mitosis as described above. Four μg of IgG or of a HECTD1 antibody (Ab101992) were coated onto Dynabead magnetic beads and incubated with either lysates from G2 or M-phase synchronised cells for 1 hr at RT prior to washes, and denaturation in 2xLDS sample buffer/100 mM DTT at 95°C for 5 min. Samples were then loaded onto a 4-12% Bis-Tris SDS polyacrylamide gel which was then stained with Imperial Protein Stain (ThermoFisher Scientific). Gel lanes were sliced into of 1-2 mm2 pieces and processed by in-gel trypsin digestion. Liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) using an LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 nano-ultra performance liquid chromatography (UPLC) system (Dionex, Sunnyvale, CA, USA). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using a Top10 method and a 32-minute liquid chromatography gradient. The MS1 survey scans were acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 and an m/z range of 300-2,000. MS2 data were acquired in the Ion Trap and precursor ion isolation was performed with an isolation width of 2.0 Da and CID activation with a normalised collision energy of 35.

### Data Protocol
The LC-MS/MS data were searched with the MASCOT search algorithm [1]. Mascot distiller was used to produce Mascot compatible (.mgf) files from the raw LC-MS/MS data. Mascot (Matrix Science, algorithm version 2.2.04) was used to perform database searches of the Uniprot database without taxonomy restriction (14,423,061 entries). Variables were set to: 2+ and 3+ ions, peptide mass tolerance 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance 0.8 Da, number of missed cleavages: one, instrument type: ESI-TRAP, variable modifications: Carbamidomethylation (Cys), Oxidation (Met). N-terminal pyroglutamate (Gln->pyroGly), phosphorylation (Ser, Thr, Tyr). MS/MS data were further validated using Scaffold (http://www.proteomesoftware.com).  [1] Perkins, D. N., Pappin, D. J., Creasy, D. M. & Cottrell, J. S. (1999) Probability-based protein identification by searching sequence databases using mass spectrometry data., Electrophoresis. 20, 3551-3567.

### Publication Abstract
The cell cycle is tightly regulated by protein phosphorylation and ubiquitylation events. During mitosis, the multi-subunit cullin-RING E3 ubiquitin ligase APC/c functions as a molecular switch which signals for one cell to divide into two daughter cells, through the ubiquitylation and proteasomal degradation of mitotic cyclins. The contributions of other E3 ligase families during cell cycle progression remain less well understood. Similarly, the roles of ubiquitin chain types beyond homotypic K48 chains in S-phase or branched K11/K48 chains during mitosis, also remain to be fully determined. Our recent findings that HECTD1 ubiquitin ligase activity assembles branched K29/K48 ubiquitin linkages prompted us to evaluate HECTD1 function during the cell cycle. We used transient knockdown and genetic knockout to show that HECTD1 depletion in HEK293T and HeLa cells decreases cell number and we established that this is mediated through loss of ubiquitin ligase activity. Interestingly, we found that HECTD1 depletion increases the proportion of cells with aligned chromosomes (Prometa/Metaphase) and we confirmed this molecularly using phospho-Histone H3 (Ser28) as a marker of mitosis. Time-lapse microscopy of NEBD to anaphase onset established that HECTD1-depleted cells take on average longer to go through mitosis. In line with this data, HECTD1 depletion reduced the activity of the Spindle Assembly Checkpoint, and BUB3, a component of the Mitosis Checkpoint Complex, was identified as novel HECTD1 interactor. BUB3, BUBR1 or MAD2 protein levels remained unchanged in HECTD1-depleted cells. Overall, this study reveals a novel putative role for HECTD1 during mitosis and warrants further work to elucidate the mechanisms involved.

### Keywords
Ubiquitin, Cell proliferation, Trabid, Hectd1, Cell cycle, E3 ubiquitin ligase

### Affiliations
MRC London Institute of Medical Sciences
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London, NW1 1AT United Kingdom

### Submitter
Holger Kramer

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Skehel
The Francis Crick Institute 1 Midland Road London, NW1 1AT United Kingdom


