### Accession
PXD043796

### Title
Analysis of small EV proteomes reveals unique functional protein networks regulated by VAP-A

### Description
VAP-A regulates extracellular vesicle biogenesis at ER-membrane contact sites. Proteomic analysis of purified small extracellular vesicles from control (Sc) and VAP-A-KD (KD1 and KD2) DKs-8 cells were conducted.

### Sample Protocol
20 ug of protein from vesicle preps were first partially resoled approximately 1.5 cm using a 10% Novex precast gel. The region was excised and subjected to in-gel tryptic digestion to recover peptides.  Resulting peptides were analyzed by a top-15 data dependent LC-MS/MS strategy using a QExactive plus mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher).  Briefly, peptides were autosampled onto a 200 mm by 0.1 mm (Jupiter 3 micron, 300A), self-packed analytical column coupled directly to the mass spectrometer via a nanoelectrospray source and resolved using an aqueous to organic gradient with a 2-hour acquisition time.  Both the intact masses (MS) and fragmentation patterns (MS/MS) of the peptides were collected utilizing dynamic exclusion to maximize depth of coverage.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched against a the canonical human Uniprot database with SEQUEST and results filtered and collated using Scaffold. Additionally, data were searched using MaxQuant LFQ.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vap-a, Small extracellular vesicles, Proteomics, Endoplasmic reticulum membrane contact sites

### Affiliations
Vanderbilt University
Vanderbilt University Medical Center

### Submitter
Marisol Ramirez

### Lab Head
Dr Alissa Weaver
Vanderbilt University


