### Accession
PXD017778

### Title
Triggered offset fragmentation allows massively multiplexed target profiling on quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers

### Description
Parallel reaction monitoring (PRM) on quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers has a limited multiplexing capacity which depends heavily on the reproducibility of peptide retention times. To overcome these limitations, we aimed to establish a data acquisition mode that allows retention-time-independent massive multiplexing on quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers. The presented method is based on data-dependent acquisition and is called pseudo-PRM. In principle, high-intensity stable isotope-labeled peptides are used to trigger the repeated fragmentation of the corresponding light peptides. In this way, pseudo-PRM data can be analyzed like normal PRM data with Skyline. We tested pseudo-PRM for the target detection from yeast, human cells, and serum, and assessed the quantification accuracy/precision and sensitivity. Moreover, we analyzed multiplexing of more than 1,000 targets in a single pseudo-PRM run. Finally, we applied pseudo-PRM to quantify vaccinia virus proteins during infection, verifying that pseudo-PRM presents an alternative method for multiplexed target profiling on quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometers.

### Sample Protocol
Proof-of-concept (PRTC/DIGESTIF): We spiked 500 fmol of Peptide Retention Time Calibration (PRTC) Mixture (Pierce) in 500 ng of MS-compatible yeast digest (Promega) Additionally, 200 ng of heavy-labeled DIGESTIF (Promise Proteomics) were spiked in 1 µL (20 µg) of certified human reference serum (ERM) and prepared for MS analysis using Sample Preparation by Easy Extraction and Digestion (SPEED). Quantification/Sensitivity: Different amounts (3, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.1 and 0.05 µL) of MSQC1 (Sigma Aldrich) were spiked in 500 ng of yeast digest.  Multiplexing capacity: Hep-2 cells (ATCC# CCL-23) were isotopically labeled with lysine (+6 Da) and arginine (+6 Da), using the SILAC DMEM Lys6 Arg6 kit (Silantes). Labeling efficiency was confirmed after ten passages to be > 99% for Lys6 and Arg6 peptides. For multiplexing experiments, cells were washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and prepared for MS analysis using SPEED. For SILAC target peptide selection, labeled and unlabeled peptides were mixed in a ratio of 1:1and 1 µg was analyzed in triplicate with data-dependent acquisition (DDA). VACV kinetics: For trigger peptide generation, SILAC-labeled HEp-2 cells (Lys6, Arg6) were infected with VACV Western Reserve (VACWR) at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 0.1. Four days post infection (p.i.) cells were washed with PBS and prepared for MS analysis using SPEED. Triplicate DDA analysis confirmed a labeling efficiency of virus peptides of 100 %. To analyze the viral protein expression, light-labeled HEp-2 cells were infected with VACVWR at an MOI of 5. One h p.i., cells were washed with PBS and fresh medium was added. At 2, 4, 6, 8 and 10 p.i. samples were taken in triplicate and prepared by SPEED. For target peptide selection, SIL peptides were mixed equally with light peptides of the10-h p.i. time point and 1 µg of peptide mix was analyzed in triplicate in DDA mode.  LC-MS/MS ANALYSIS Prior to MS analysis, all peptides were desalted using StageTips.  Peptides were separated on a 200 cm μPAC™ column (PharmaFluidics) using an EASY-nLC1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a μPAC™ trapping column (PharmaFluidics). The flow rate was set to 300 nL/min and a stepped linear 160 min gradient was applied: 3-10% B in 22 min, 10-33%B in 95 min, 33-49% B in 23 min, 49-80% B in 10 min and 80% B for 10 min. Solvent A was 0.1% (v/v) formic acid (FA) in water, solvent B consisted of 80% (v/v) acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) FA. The column temperature was set to 50 °C. For pseudo-PRM analysis, the Q Exactive Plus operated in Full MS/dd-MS2 (Top N) mode. Trigger peptides were put on the inclusion list and inclusion (5 ppm) was enabled. Full MS spectra were acquired in a scan range of 300 to 1,650 m/z at a resolution of 35,000 with an AGC target value of 3×106. The maximum injection time was set to 55 ms. MS2 scans were acquired in a scan range between 200 to 2,000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500 with an AGC target value of 1×106 and 55 ms maximum injection time. The minimum AGC target value for fragmentation was 104. Depending on the number of targets, the topN precursors were allowed for fragmentation with normalized collision energy (NCE) of 25, using an isolation window of 1.4 m/z. For multiplexing and VACV kinetics, we applied a dynamic exclusion of 1 or 2 s. The isolation offset was set according to the mass shift of trigger peptides. To account for the different heavy isotopic labels (Lys8 and Arg10) and for different charge states (2+ and 3+), pseudo-PRM methods included two scan events.

### Data Protocol
For SILAC and viral peptide target identification, DDA data was analyzed using MaxQuant (v1.6.1.0/v1.6.7.0). Briefly, raw files were searched against a human database (UniProt; 70,956 entries) or a VACV database (232 entries).  Raw files acquired in pseudo-PRM mode were converted to .mzmL using Proteome Discoverer v2.4.0.305 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The MS order was set to “any” and the other parameters were left as default. MzmL files were analyzed in Skyline (v.4.2.0.18305) using spectral libraries generated with Prosit.

### Publication Abstract
Parallel-reaction monitoring (PRM) using high resolution, accurate mass (HR/AM) analysis on quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometers, like the Q Exactive, is one of the most promising approaches for targeted protein analysis. However, PRM has a limited multiplexing capacity, which depends heavily on the reproducibility of peptide retention times. To overcome these limitations, we aimed to establish an easily applicable data acquisition mode that allows retention-time-independent massive multiplexing on Q Exactive mass spectrometers. The presented method is based on data-dependent acquisition and is called pseudo-PRM. In principle, high-intensity stable isotope-labeled peptides are used to trigger the repeated fragmentation of the corresponding light peptides. In this way, pseudo-PRM data can be analyzed like normal PRM data. We tested pseudo-PRM for the target detection from yeast, human cells, and serum, showing good reproducibility and sensitivities comparable to normal PRM. We demonstrated further that pseudo-PRM can be used for accurate and precise quantification of target peptides, using both precursor and fragment ion areas. Moreover, we showed multiplexing of more than 1000 targets in a single run. Finally, we applied pseudo-PRM to quantify vaccinia virus proteins during infection, verifying that pseudo-PRM presents an alternative method for multiplexed target profiling on Q Exactive mass spectrometers.

### Keywords
Multiplexing, Targeted proteomics, Quantification, Lc-ms/ms, Prm

### Affiliations
Proteomics and Spectroscopy (ZBS6), Robert Koch-Institute
Robert Koch Institute Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens: Highly Pathogenic Viruses (ZBS1)

### Submitter
Joerg Doellinger

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Nitsche
Robert Koch Institute Centre for Biological Threats and Special Pathogens: Highly Pathogenic Viruses (ZBS1)


