### Accession
PXD006731

### Title
Quantitative Proteome-level Analysis of Paulownia Witches’ Broom Disease with Methyl Methane Sulfonate Assistance Reveals Diverse Metabolic Changes During the Infection and Recovery Processes

### Description
A total of 2358 proteins were identified. We investigated the proteins profiles in PF vs. PFI (infected process) and PFI-20 vs. PFI-60 (recovered process), and further found that many of the MMS-response proteins mapped to “photosynthesis” and “ribosome” pathways. Based on our comparison scheme, 36 PaWB-related proteins were revealed.

### Sample Protocol
The extracted proteins were digested and labeled as described by Qiao et al (Qiao et al. 2012). The labeled proteins were extracted from the PF, PFI, PFI-20 and PFI-60. The labeled peptide mixtures were pooled for strong cation-exchange (SCX) chromatography and then dried by vacuum centrifugation. The SCX chromatography was completed as described by Dong et al.

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were converted into MGF files using the Proteome Discoverer software to generate a peak list (Lin et al. 2013). Proteins were identified and quantified using the Mascot 2.3.02 search engine (Matrix Science, London, United Kingdom) and compared against the transcriptome database of 67,177 unigene sequences.

### Publication Abstract
Paulownia witches' broom (PaWB) disease caused by phytoplasma is a fatal disease that leads to considerable economic losses. Although there are a few reports describing studies of PaWB pathogenesis, the molecular mechanisms underlying phytoplasma pathogenicity in Paulownia trees remain uncharacterized. In this study, after building a transcriptome database containing 67,177 sequences, we used isobaric tags for relative and absolute quantification (iTRAQ) to quantify and analyze the proteome-level changes among healthy <i>P. fortunei</i> (PF), PaWB-infected <i>P. fortunei</i> (PFI), and PaWB-infected <i>P. fortunei</i> treated with 20 mg L<sup>-1</sup> or 60 mg&#xa0;L<sup>-1</sup> methyl methane sulfonate (MMS) (PFI-20 and PFI-60, respectively). A total of 2,358 proteins were identified. We investigated the proteins profiles in PF <i>vs</i>. PFI (infected process) and PFI-20 <i>vs</i>. PFI-60 (recovered process), and further found that many of the MMS-response proteins mapped to "photosynthesis" and "ribosome" pathways. Based on our comparison scheme, 36 PaWB-related proteins were revealed. Among them, 32 proteins were classified into three functional groups: (1) carbohydrate and energy metabolism, (2) protein synthesis and degradation, and (3) stress resistance. We then investigated the PaWB-related proteins involved in the infected and recovered processes, and discovered that carbohydrate and energy metabolism was inhibited, and protein synthesis and degradation decreased, as the plant responded to PaWB. Our observations may be useful for characterizing the proteome-level changes that occur at different stages of PaWB disease. The data generated in this study may serve as a valuable resource for elucidating the pathogenesis of PaWB disease during phytoplasma infection and recovery stages.

### Keywords
Quantitative proteomic, Triple tof 5600, Paulownia

### Affiliations
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan, P.R. China, 450002,
ptm-biolab

### Submitter
zhou lianqi

### Lab Head
Dr Guoqiang Fan
Institute of Paulownia, Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou, Henan, P.R. China, 450002,


