### Accession
PXD017260

### Title
Deciphering the immunogenic potential of wheat flour: A reference map of the salt-soluble proteome from the U.S. wheat Butte 86

### Description
Within the complex wheat flour proteome, the gluten proteins have attracted most of the attention because of their importance in determining the functional properties of wheat flour doughs and their roles in human health conditions such as celiac disease and food allergies. However, certain non-gluten proteins also trigger immunological responses but may be present in flour in low amounts or obscured by the more abundant gluten proteins in two-dimensional gels of total protein preparations. Non-gluten proteins were preferentially extracted from the flour with a dilute salt solution and separated by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Proteins in 172 gel spots were identified by tandem mass spectrometry after cleavage with trypsin or chymotrypsin. Fifty-seven different types of non-gluten proteins were identified, including 14 types that are known or suspected immunogenic proteins. The predominant proteins in 18 gel spots were gluten proteins. Transgenic wheat lines in which specific groups of gluten proteins were suppressed by RNA interference were used to estimate the amount of carry-over of gluten proteins in the salt-soluble protein fraction. Analysis of salt-soluble proteins from a transgenic line missing omega-1,2 gliadins demonstrated that certain omega-1,2 gliadins were present in large amounts in the salt-soluble fraction and obscured relatively small amounts of beta-amylase and protein disulfide isomerase. In comparison, analysis of a transgenic line in which alpha gliadins were absent revealed that glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate dehydrogenase was a moderately abundant protein that co-migrated with several alpha gliadins. The proteomic map of the non-gluten protein fraction of wheat flour developed in this study complements a proteomic map of the total flour proteins developed previously for the same cultivar. Knowing the identities of low abundance proteins in the flour as well as proteins that are hidden by some of the major gluten proteins on two-dimensional gels is critical for studies aimed at assessing the immunogenic potential of wheat flour and determining how the growth conditions of the plants affect the levels of specific immunogenic proteins in the flour.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were extracted from wheat flour from the US spring wheat cultivar Butte 86 with a buffer containing 100mM KCl as described in Hurkman and Tanaka (J. Cereal Sci 40:295-299. 2004), quantified using a modified Lowry assay and analyzed on 2-D gels as described in detail in Dupont et al. (Proteome Science 9,10. 2011). Protein spots were excised from replicate 2-D gels, placed in 96-well plates and digested separately with trypsin and chymotrypsin using a DigestPro according to the directions of the manufacturer (Intavis, Koeln, Germany). Samples were analyzed using an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, San Jose CA) as described in as described in Vensel et al. (Proteome Science 12, 8. 2014).

### Data Protocol
Spectral data was searched against a database containing all Triticeae sequences from NCBI downloaded on 02/07/2018, full-length sequences from the cultivar Butte 86 reported by Dupont et al. (Proteome Science 9,10. 2011), full length gluten protein sequences from the cultivar Chinese Spring reported by Huo et al. (Scientific Reports 8, 5181. 2018; Frontiers in Plant Science 9,673. 2018) and common MS contaminant sequences contained in the common Repository of Adventitious Proteins (cRAP) database (ftp://ftp.thegpm.org/fasta/cRAP/crap.fasta). Two search engines were used for analysis, Mascot (www.matrixscience.com) and XTandem! (https://www.thegpm.org/TANDEM/). Twenty-one spots that contained evidence of gluten proteins in this analysis were excised from replicate gels, digested with thermolysin, and analyzed by MS/MS. Spectral data from all analyses were combined and validated in Scaffold Version 4.8.4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/) using a protein threshold of 99%, peptide threshold of 95% and 30 ppm mass error, and a minimum of 4 peptides.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Allergens, Celiac disease, Non-celiac wheat sensitivity, Lc-ms/ms, Albumins/globulins, Wheat flour proteome

### Affiliations
Western Regional Research Center,  United States Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service,  Albany, CA, United States,
Hamburg School of Food Science, Hamburg University

### Submitter
Annamaria Simon-Buss

### Lab Head
Dr dr. Susan B. Altenbach
Western Regional Research Center,  United States Department of Agriculture - Agricultural Research Service,  Albany, CA, United States,


