### Accession
PXD019253

### Title
Protein Interaction Patterns in Arabidopsis thaliana Leaf Mitochondria Change in Response to Illumination

### Description
Light is the most important cue for plant metabolism since its presence enables photosynthesis. Mitochondria respond to light conditions by adjusting flow through the citric acid cycle and the respiratory chain to support photosynthesis in the light and provide the cell with ATP in the light and in the dark. The data presented here serve in identifying changes in protein:protein interactions (PPIs) of Arabidopsis thaliana leaf mitochondria in response to illumination and pave the way towards an understanding how PPIs affect and regulate mitochondrial metabolism.

### Sample Protocol
Arabidopsis thaliana mitochondria were isolated in the dark (5 replicates: dark_I, dark_II, dark_III, dark_IV, dark_V) and in the light (5 replicates: light_I, light_II, light_III, light_IV, light_V) and submitted to a complexome profiling strategy. Protein complexes were first separated according to molecular mass in large-pore blue native (lpBN) gels. Gel lanes were subsequently cut into 46 - 48 fractions and, after in gel-digestion with trypsin, submitted to data-dependent shotgun mass spectrometry as outlined in Rugen et al. 2019 (Complexome profiling reveals association of PPR proteins with ribosomes in the mitochondria of plants. Mol. Cell. Proteomics 18: 1345-1362).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files of every gel fraction were processed using MaxQuant (V1.6.4.0) and searched against an in-house Arabidopsis thaliana database (including RNA-edited variants of organelle-encoded proteins and common contaminations) using a FDR of 0.01 and the ‘match between runs’ option enabled. IBAQ values for the identified proteins in each fraction were then used to build a complexome heatmap for each organelle isolation (5x for the ‘dark’ mitochondria, 5x for the ‘light’ mitochondria) using the NOVA software (Giese et al. 2015. NOVA: a software to analyze complexome profiling data. Bioinformatics 31: 440–441).  For further analyses, the individual heatmaps were aligned to compensate for technical variation by fitting a cubic regression spline of gel position based on the monotonously increasing (log10-transformed) protein abundance yielded by adding the iBAQ value of the following fraction to the added total iBAQ values of the previous ones. This was performed for the ‘light’ and ‘dark’ samples individually. Based on this alignment, average ‘light’ and ‘dark’ heatmaps were produced. A differential heatmap displaying the differences between the two conditions was produced by subtracting average ‘light’ intensities form the ‘dark’ intensities for every protein at every aligned position. The obtained values were then displayed graphically using the NOVA software tool (Giese et al. 2015). Statistical significance was determined by T-Test.

### Publication Abstract
Mitochondrial biology is underpinned by the presence and activity of large protein assemblies participating in the organelle-located steps of respiration, TCA-cycle, glycine oxidation, and oxidative phosphorylation. While the enzymatic roles of these complexes are undisputed, little is known about the interactions of the subunits beyond their presence in these protein complexes and their functions in regulating mitochondrial metabolism. By applying one of the most important regulatory cues for plant metabolism, the presence or absence of light, we here assess changes in the composition and molecular mass of protein assemblies involved in NADH-production in the mitochondrial matrix and in oxidative phosphorylation by employing a differential complexome profiling strategy. Covering a mass up to 25&#xa0;MDa, we demonstrate dynamic associations of matrix enzymes and of components involved in oxidative phosphorylation. The data presented here form the basis for future studies aiming to advance our understanding of the role of protein:protein interactions in regulating plant mitochondrial functions.

### Keywords
Tca-cycle, Plant mitochondria, Complexome profiling, Diurnal cycle, Oxphos, Protein complexes

### Affiliations
Leibniz Universtät Hannover
Leibniz University Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics

### Submitter
Holger Eubel

### Lab Head
Dr Holger Eubel
Leibniz University Hannover Institute of Plant Genetics


