### Accession
PXD006102

### Title
Dendrobium officinale seed symbiotic germination iTRAQ

### Description
Mycorrhizal fungi colonize orchid seed and induce the germination. This so-called symbiotic germination is a critical developmental process in the lifecycle of all orchids. However, the molecular changes taking place during the orchid seed symbiotic germination still remains largely unknown. To better understand the molecular mechanism of orchid seed germination, we performed comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis on Chinese traditional medicinal orchid plants, Dendrobium officinale to explore protein expression change at the different developmental stages between asymbiotic and symbiotic germination and identify the key proteins regulated symbiotic germination of orchid seeds. iTRAQ analysis from 8 samples identified 2256 plant proteins, of which, 308 proteins were differentially expressed across three developmental stages within asymbiotic or symbiotic accession and 229 proteins are differentially expressed in the symbiotic germination compared to asymbiotic germination. 32 proteins are co-upregulated in both proteomic and transcriptomic level for symbiotic germination compared to asymbiotic germination. Our results revealed that symbiotic germination of D. officinale seeds probably shares the common signal pathway with asymbiotic germination during the early germination stage.

### Sample Protocol
Protein was extracted from eight samples using Plant total protein extraction kit (PE0230, Sigma) following the manufactures’ procedure. 200 mg seeds were ground in liquid nitrogen to a fine powder, re-suspended in 1.5 ml methanol solution with 1% cocktail and incubated for 30 minutes at −20 °C. After centrifuged, the precipitate was then washed three times with 1.5 ml acetone for 30 min at −20 °C, then vacuum-dried and stored at −80 °C.  Protein powder was re-solubilized 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea and 4% (w/v) CHAPS, 65 mM DTT.Each 75 μg protein sample was reduced using 2 μL of manufacturer supplied reducing agent and incubated at 60 °C for 1 h (iTRAQ Reagent 8-plex kit, AB Sciex). Cysteine residues were blocked using methyle methanethiosulfonate (MMTS) at room temperature for 10min followed by trypsin digestion (modified trypsin, Promega) at 37°C for 16h. Before labelling, the reagents were dissolved in 50 μL of isopropanol, the contents of one vial were transferred to individual sample tubes, and it was ensured at pH 7.5. Total eight samples were labelled with iTRAQ tags 113-121 using iTRAQ 8-plex kits (Applied biosystems, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Table S1 in the supporting information).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS/MS data was converted into MGF format by ProteoWizard tool msConvert, and the exported MGF files were searched using Mascot (v2.3.02) against our RNA-seq transcriptomic database of D. officinale seeds (PRJNA279934, 119681 sequences).29 The Mascot Search Parameters were listed in the Table S2.  Quantitatively analyzing the labelled peptides with isobaric tags was performed using the software IQuant.30 The main IQuant quantitation parameters were listed in Table S3. Proteins with 1.2 fold change and Q-value less than 0.05 were determined as differentially expressed protein.

### Publication Abstract
Mycorrhizal fungi colonize orchid seeds and induce germination. This so-called symbiotic germination is a critical developmental process in the lifecycle of all orchid species. However, the molecular changes that occur during orchid seed symbiotic germination remain largely unknown. To better understand the molecular mechanism of orchid seed germination, we performed a comparative transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of the Chinese traditional medicinal orchid Dendrobium officinale to explore the change in protein expression at the different developmental stages during asymbiotic and symbiotic germination and identify the key proteins that regulate the symbiotic germination of orchid seeds. Among 2256 identified plant proteins, 308 were differentially expressed across three developmental stages during asymbiotic and symbiotic germination, and 229 were differentially expressed during symbiotic germination compared to asymbiotic development. Of these, 32 proteins were coup-regulated at both the proteomic and transcriptomic levels during symbiotic germination compared to asymbiotic germination. Our results suggest that symbiotic germination of D. officinale seeds shares a common signaling pathway with asymbiotic germination during the early germination stage. However, compared to asymbiotic germination, fungal colonization of orchid seeds appears to induce higher and earlier expression of some key proteins involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism and thus improves the efficiency of utilization of stored substances present in the embryo. This study provides new insight into the molecular basis of orchid seed germination.

### Keywords
Mycorrhizal symbiosis, Orchidaceae seed, Itraq

### Affiliations
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Juan Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Biotechnological Center
Institute of Medicinal Plant Development, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College


