### Accession
PXD002861

### Title
Discovery Proteomics Identifies a Molecular Link between the Coatomer Protein Complex I and Androgen Receptor-dependent Transcription

### Description
Aberrant activation of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcriptional programs is a hallmark of human prostate cancers. At the molecular level, ligand-mediated AR activation is coordinated through spatial and temporal protein-protein interactions (PPIs) involving AR-interacting proteins, which we designate the “AR-interactome”. Despite many years of research, the ligand-sensitive protein complexes involved in ligand-mediated AR activation in prostate-tumor cells has not been clearly defined. Here, we describe the development, characterization, and utilization of a novel human LNCaP prostate-tumor cell line, N-AR, which stably expresses wild-type AR containing the streptavidin-binding peptide epitope tagged at its N-terminus (SBP-AR). A bioanalytical workflow involving streptavidin-chromatography and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry was used to identify SBP-AR and associated ligand-sensitive proteins/protein complexes functionally linked to AR activation in the cytosol of N-AR cells. Functional studies verified that ligand-sensitive streptavidin-copurified proteins encoded modulators of AR-mediated transcription, suggesting that these novel proteins were putative SBP-AR-interacting proteins in N-AR cells. This was supported by biochemical associations between recombinant SBP-AR and the ligand-sensitive COPI retrograde trafficking complex in vitro. Extensive biochemical and molecular experiments showed that the COPI-retrograde complex regulates ligand-mediated AR transcriptional activation through the mobilization of Golgi-localized ARA160 coactivator into the nuclear compartment of prostate-tumor cells. Collectively, this study provides a bioanalytical strategy to validate the AR-interactome and define novel AR-interacting proteins involved in ligand-mediated AR activation in prostate-tumor cells. Moreover, we describe a cellular system to study how compartment-specific AR-interacting proteins influence AR activation and contribute to aberrant AR-dependent transcription that underlies the majority of human prostate cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Streptavidin affinity chromatography N-AR cells were grown in androgen-depleted medium for 96 hrs and treated with vehicle (ethanol, AD) or androgen (100nM R1881, AS) for 1 hr. The cells were then harvested and incubated in hypotonic solution (10 mM Hepes, 1.5 mM MgCl2, and 10 mM KCl, pH 7.9) with 5 mM DTT and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail (PIC, Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 10 min, and subjected to nitrogen cavitation at 100 psi for 5 min. Lysed samples were centrifuged at 600 x g for 20 min at 4 °C to pellet the nuclei, and the resulting supernatant was centrifuged at 100,000 x g for 3 hrs at 4 °C to remove the microsomes (pellet) from the cytosolic proteins. 10 mg of cytosolic proteins were used for the affinity purification of AR protein complexes by incubating overnight with 250 μl bed volume of UltraLink Plus Streptavidin Beads (Thermo Scientific Pierce) in AR purification buffer (50 mM Tris, 100 mM KCl, 20% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM ZnCl2) with 5 mM DTT (Sigma), 1x PIC (Thermo Scientific Pierce), 5 mM ATP (Sigma), and 0.025% NP-40 (Sigma) with the addition of vehicle (ethanol) or androgen (100 nM R1881) for AD and AS samples respectively  at 4 °C. The next day, samples were centrifuged at 500 x g for 1 min to cluster the beads, which were then washed 3 times with 1 ml of wash buffer (AR purification buffer with 5 mM DTT, 1x PIC, and 0.025% NP-40). Proteins were eluted with 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris, 1% SDS, 10 mM DTT, and 5 mM Biotin, pH 8.5 at room temperature for 1 hr. The samples were dialyzed against 8 M Urea, 50 mM Tris, and 100 mM β-mercaptoethanol, pH 8.5 with 10 kD cutoff dialysis cassettes (Thermo Scientific Pierce) to remove detergent prior to mass spectrometry analysis. To measure purification efficiency, 1% of the input, void (unbound proteins), wash, and elute were analyzed by western blotting with antibodies to SBP and AR.  Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Samples were first reduced in 10 mM DTT (Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 1 hr at 37 °C, alkylated in 55 mM iodoacetamide (Thermo Scientific Pierce) for 1 hr at room temperature in the dark, and then digested with trypsin (1:50 trypsin to protein ratio, Promega) in 0.5 M Urea. Next, each sample was spiked with a tryptic-digest of bovine serum albumin (BSA) containing iodoacetic acid alkylated cysteine residues (Michrom Bioresources, Auburn, CA) at a 1:75 BSA to protein molar ratio. Samples were acidified prior to being desalted on Vydac C18 spin-columns (The Nest Group, Southborough, MA) and then subjected to strong-cation exchange (SCX) fractionation on polysulfoethyl A packed spin columns (The Nest Group). Briefly, desalted samples were dissolved into SCX buffer A (5 mM KHPO4, 25% acetonitrile (ACN)) and loaded onto SCX spin-columns. Peptides were eluted from the SCX spin-columns using a 6-step (20, 30, 40, 50, 60, 120 mM) KCl elution gradient developed from a mixture of buffer A and buffer B (5 mM KHPO4, 25% ACN, 350 mM KCl). Salt-bumped, eluted fractions were desalted, dried, and re-dissolved in mass spectrometry loading buffer (1% acetic acid, 1% ACN).   Mass spectrometry analysis The samples were analyzed by nanoliquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry using an Agilent 6520 Accurate-Mass Quadropole Time-of-Flight mass spectrometer interfaced with an HPLC Chip Cube. The samples were loaded onto an Ultra High Capacity Chip (500 nL enrichment column, 75 μm x 150 mm analytical column). LC-MS/MS analysis was performed using a 180-minute gradient ranging from 8 % to 35% buffer B (100% acetonitrile, 0.8% acetic acid). Full MS (MS1) data was acquired with a mass range of 400 – 1250 m/z and acquisition rate of 1 spectra/second. From this data, an ion preferred list was generated with Agilent MassHunter Qualitative Software with the settings of 400-1250 m/z, 2+ and 3+ charge states, and spectra with 2 or more ions. The directed Mass Spectrometry (dMS) was performed with the following settings: a maximum of 10 ions per cycle, a narrow isolation width (~ 1.3 atomic mass units), precursor masses dynamically excluded for 30 seconds after 8 MS/MS in a 30-second time window, and use of the preferred ion list. Mass spectrometry capillary voltage and capillary temperature settings were set to 1800 V and 330°C, respectively. The infused reference mass of 1221.9906 was used to correct precursor m/z masses each LC-MS/MS experiment.

### Data Protocol
The raw.d files were searched against the UniProt human database using SpectrumMill Software version B.04.00.127 and the following settings: precursor mass tolerance of 25 parts per million (ppm), product mass tolerance of 200 ppm, and a maximum of two trypsin miss cleavages. Search modifications included a static carbamidomethylation on cysteine residues (C = 57.02146 AMU), differential modifications for oxidized methionine (M = 15.9949 AMU), phosphorylated serine, threonine, tyrosine (STY = 79.9663 AMU), and ubiquitinated lysine (K = 114.0429 AMU) were used for post-translational modifications. A false discovery rate (FDR) of < 1% was accepted for this analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcription is a hallmark of human prostate cancers. At the molecular level, ligand-mediated AR activation is coordinated through spatial and temporal protein-protein interactions involving AR-interacting proteins, which we designate the "AR-interactome." Despite many years of research, the ligand-sensitive protein complexes involved in ligand-mediated AR activation in prostate tumor cells have not been clearly defined. Here, we describe the development, characterization, and utilization of a novel human LNCaP prostate tumor cell line, N-AR, which stably expresses wild-type AR tagged at its N terminus with the streptavidin-binding peptide epitope (streptavidin-binding peptide-tagged wild-type androgen receptor; SBP-AR). A bioanalytical workflow involving streptavidin chromatography and label-free quantitative mass spectrometry was used to identify SBP-AR and associated ligand-sensitive cytosolic proteins/protein complexes linked to AR activation in prostate tumor cells. Functional studies verified that ligand-sensitive proteins identified in the proteomic screen encoded modulators of AR-mediated transcription, suggesting that these novel proteins were putative SBP-AR-interacting proteins in N-AR cells. This was supported by biochemical associations between recombinant SBP-AR and the ligand-sensitive coatomer protein complex I (COPI) retrograde trafficking complex in vitro Extensive biochemical and molecular experiments showed that the COPI retrograde complex regulates ligand-mediated AR transcriptional activation, which correlated with the mobilization of the Golgi-localized ARA160 coactivator to the nuclear compartment of prostate tumor cells. Collectively, this study provides a bioanalytical strategy to validate the AR-interactome and define novel AR-interacting proteins involved in ligand-mediated AR activation in prostate tumor cells. Moreover, we describe a cellular system to study how compartment-specific AR-interacting proteins influence AR activation and contribute to aberrant AR-dependent transcription that underlies the majority of human prostate cancers.

### Keywords
Androgen, Transcription, Intracellular trafficking, Androgen receptor, Golgi membrane, Prostate cancer, Mass spectrometry-based proteomics, Protein trafficking

### Affiliations
University of Iowa
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department, Wright Lab, University of Iowa, USA

### Submitter
Jordy Hsiao

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Eugene Wright
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department, Wright Lab, University of Iowa, USA


