### Accession
PXD042182

### Title
Multi-omics analysis of mutagenized S. rimosus reveals synergistic changes that drive oxytetracycline production towards industrial efficiency and opens a new route to heterologous polyketides

### Description
The present work provides a multi-omics systems-wide view on S. rimosus. Using genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolomics, we compared the wild type with an OTC-overproducing derivative, previously obtained by classical mutagenesis. The integration of the data provided a deep insight into the underlying metabolic and regulatory networks that mediate high-level OTC formation. Strikingly, the overproducer revealed a synergistically activated supply of acetyl-CoA and malonyl CoA and increased abundance of various CoA thioesters.

### Sample Protocol
For protein isolation and processing a single-tube preparation protocol was applied (Wang et al., 2005). Bacterial cells were resuspended in 200 µl 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and transferred into a tube containing glass beads. The suspension was mixed in three cycles for 20 seconds, where samples were allowed to cool down between the cycles. 100 µl of trifluoroethanol and 5 µl 200 mM of the reducing agent dithiothreitol (DTT) were mixed with 100 µl of cell lysate and incubated for 60 min at 60 °C. Alkylation of cysteines was done by addition of 20 µl 200 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 90 minutes at RT in the dark. Alkylation was stopped by adding 5 µl 200 mM DTT and incubation for 60 min at RT. For tryptic digestion samples were diluted 1:10 with 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate. Digestion took place at 37 °C overnight (Trypsin Gold, Promega). Digested peptides were purified using SepPak columns (Waters, Milford, United States). Peptide quantification was performed using nanodrop 2000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany).  The peptides were analyzed via LC-MS/MS using a nanoLC (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) coupled to an ESI-Orbitrap MS/MS (QExactive Plus, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany). The gradient length of the Acclaim™ PepMap™ C18 2UM 75UMx250MM (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) analytical column was adjusted to 67 min from 4 to 50% of 80% ACN and 0.08% FA at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. ESI-Orbitrap mass spectrometry measurements were carried out in data dependent top 10 acquisition mode. All samples were measured in full MS mode using a resolution of 70.000 (AGC target of 3e6 and 64 ms maximum IT). For the dd-MS2 a resolution of 17.500, AGC target of 2e5 and a maximum IT of 100 ms was used.

### Data Protocol
The database search was done with MaxQuant version 1.6.14.0 (Cox et al., 2008). For the variable modifications, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were set. The fixed modifications were set for the carbamidomethylation of cysteine. For digestion, trypsin was selected with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. Label free quantification was set to LFQ and fast LFQ was enabled. The database from .... of .... was used for the database search, which contained .... entries. Only unique peptides were used for quantification. For the FDR calculation the decoy mode was set to random. The remaining settings were set to default. The statistical analysis of the database search with MaxQuant was performed in Perseus 1.6.14.0 (Tyanova et al., 2016). The data were transformed using the log2(x) equation. The proteins that were found by MaxQuant as “Only identified by side”, “Reverse” and “Potential contamination” were filtered out. In addition, the proteins with less than two unique peptides were filtered out, as well as proteins that do not have in total at least 3 valid values. The imputation of missing values was performed with a width of 0.3 and a down shift of 1.8 for each column separately.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Streptomyces rimosus, Rnaseq, Lc-msms

### Affiliations
CeBiTec, Bielefeld University

### Submitter
Christian Rückert-Reed

### Lab Head
Dr Jörn Kalinowski
CeBiTec, Bielefeld University


