### Accession
PXD044004

### Title
Skeletal muscle cell protein dysregulation highlights the pathogenesis mechanism of myopathy-associated p97/VCP R155H mutations

### Description
p97/VCP, a hexametric member of the AAA-ATPase superfamily, has been associated with a wide range of cellular protein pathways, such as proteasomal degradation, the unfolding of polyubiquitinated proteins, and autophagosome maturation. Autosomal dominant p97/VCP mutations cause a rare hereditary multisystem disorder called IBMPFD/ALS (Inclusion Body Myopathy with Paget's Disease and Frontotemporal Dementia/Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis), characterized by progressive weakness and subsequent atrophy of skeletal muscles, and impacting bones and brains, such as Parkinson's disease, Lewy body disease, Huntington's disease, and amyotrophic lateral ALS. Among all disease-causing mutations, Arginine 155 to Histidine (R155H/+) was reported to be the most common one, affecting over 50% of IBMPFD patients, resulting in disabling muscle weakness, which might eventually be life-threatening due to cardiac and respiratory muscle involvement. Induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) offer an unlimited resource of cells to study pathology's underlying molecular mechanism, perform drug screening, and investigate regeneration. Using R155H/+ patients' fibroblasts, we generated IPS cells and corrected the mutation (Histidine to Arginine, H155R) to generate isogenic control cells before differentiating them into myotubes. The further proteomic analysis allowed us to identify differentially expressed proteins associated with the R155H mutation. Our results showed that R155H/+ cells were associated with dysregulated expression of several proteins involved in skeletal muscle function, cytoskeleton organization, cell signaling, intracellular organelles organization and function, cell junction, and cell adhesion. Our findings provide molecular evidence of dysfunctional protein expression in R155H/+ myotubes and offer new therapeutic targets for treating IBMPFD/ALS.

### Sample Protocol
Myotubes from each Group were lysed using a lysis buffer (10M Urea, 40 mM HEPES pH 7.5, 200 mM NaCl) containing a Protease & Phosphatase Inhibitor Cocktail (Fisher #78440) and 10 mM MG132. Proteins were digested in MS buffer (0.1 M Tris-HCl, Boston BioProducts #BT-P-920) containing  0.5 M TCEP (Fisher #20491, prepared in MS buffer), 0.5 M 2-chloroacetamide (MP Biomedicals #ICN15495580), 0.25 μg/μL Lys-C (FujiFilm Wako Chemicals USA Corporation #125-05061, prepared in MS grade water), incubated at 37 °C for 4 hours with shaking at 750 rpm; 100 mM CaCl2 and 0.5 μg/μL Trypsin (Fisher #90058) were added to the samples and incubated at 37°C for 20 hours with shaking at 750 rpm. The digested samples were then desalted using C18 columns (Fisher #89870) and dried using a vacuum centrifuge. Before running mass spec samples, samples were dissolved in 0.2% FA solution, and peptide concentration was tested through Pierce Quantitative Fluorometric Peptide Assay (Fisher #23290). LC-MS/MS experiments were performed using an EASY-nLC 1000 connected to a Q Exactive Orbitrap Mass Spectrometers (Fisher). 0.25 μg sample was loaded onto an Easy Spray Column (25 cm x 75 µm, 2 µm C18, ES802, Fisher) and separated over 195 min at a flow rate of 0.5 μL/min with the following gradient: 2-35% B (180 min), 35-85% B (5 min), and 85% B (10 min). Solvent A consisted of 99.9% H2O and 0.1% formic acid, and solvent B consisted of 19.9% H2O, 80% ACN, and 0.1% formic acid. A full MS scan was acquired at 70,000 resolutions with a scan range of 350-2000 m/z, the AGC target was 1 x 106, and the maximum injection time was 100 ms. MS2 scan was acquired at 17,500 resolutions with a scan range of 200-2000 m/z, the AGC target was 5 x 104, the maximum injection time was 64 ms, and the isolation window was 2.0 m/z. System control and data collection were performed by Xcalibur software.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data processing was performed through Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Fisher) using the Uniprot human database and the Sequest HT Search Engine. The search allowed for a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm, a minimum peptide length of 6, and a minimum peptide sequence number of 1. Upon identification of dysregulated protein expression levels from the control sample and correction for false discovery rate (t-test <0.05), we analyzed interaction protein using the STRING program.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ipscs, Ibmpfd/als, Vcp/p97, R155h mutation., Skeletal muscle, Myopathy

### Affiliations
Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125, United States
Caltech

### Submitter
Ting-Yu Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tsui-Fen Chou
Division of Biology and Biological Engineering, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, 91125, United States


