### Accession
PXD038584

### Title
Synovial microenvironment-influenced mast cells promote the progression of rheumatoid arthritis

### Description
Mast cells are phenotypically and functionally highly heterogeneous, and their state is possibly controlled by their local microenvironment. Therefore, concrete analyses are needed to understand whether mast cells act as powerful motivators or dispensable bystanders in specific diseases. Here, we evaluated the correlation between synovial mast cells and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) disease severity, and the efficacy of therapeutic interventions against mast cells. We showed that degranulation of mast cells in inflammatory synovial tissues of RA patients was induced via MAS-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MRGPRX2), and the expression of MHC class II (MHC II) and costimulatory molecules on mast cells were upregulated. These unique signaling response led to mast cell activation and promoted T cell responses, resulting in the progression of RA. Collagen-induced arthritis mouse models treated with a combination of anti-IL-17A and cromolyn sodium, a mast cell membrane stabilizer, showed significantly reduced clinical severity and decreased bone erosion. The findings of the present study suggest that synovial microenvironment-influenced mast cells contribute to RA and may provide a novel mast cell-targeting therapy for RA.

### Sample Protocol
Fat was removed from the synovium and the synovium was cut into small pieces using sterile scissors. The synovium was then incubated in RPMI 1640 medium (Thermo Scientific) containing 1 mg/mL collagenase 1 (Sigma), and 0.1 mg/mL DNase I (Roche). Enzymatic digestion was carried out for 1 h at 220 rpm rotation at 37°C, after which the suspension was filtered through gauze and centrifuged at 450×g for 10 min. Pellets were washed with MACS buffer (PBS containing 5% FBS and 2 mM EDTA), and then filtered through a 100 m and 70 m cell strainer (Jet Biofil) to obtain a single-cell suspension. CD117-positive cells were isolated from synovial single-cell suspensions using a human CD117 microbead kit according to manufacturer’s instructions (Miltenyi Biotec). The sorted cells were used only when their viability was determined by trypan blue exclusion staining and their purity determined by tryptase staining was > 90%.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS ion spectra were analyzed using PEAKS 10.0 for processing, de novo sequencing, and database searches. The resulting sequences were analyzed using the UniProt human proteomic database. For all experiments, an FDR <1% at the peptide spectrum match level was considered. Proteins sharing significant peptide evidence were grouped into clusters and further analyzed using Perseus software.

### Publication Abstract
Mast cells are phenotypically and functionally heterogeneous, and their state is possibly controlled by local microenvironment. Therefore, specific analyses are needed to understand whether mast cells function as powerful participants or dispensable bystanders in specific diseases. Here, we show that degranulation of mast cells in inflammatory synovial tissues of patients with rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is induced via MAS-related G protein-coupled receptor X2 (MRGPRX2), and the expression of MHC class II and costimulatory molecules on mast cells are upregulated. Collagen-induced arthritis mice treated with a combination of anti-IL-17A and cromolyn sodium, a mast cell membrane stabilizer, show significantly reduced clinical severity and decreased bone erosion. The findings of the present study suggest that synovial microenvironment-influenced mast cells contribute to disease progression and may provide a further mast cell-targeting therapy for RA.

### Keywords
Ra • synovial microenvironment • mast cells • mrgprx2

### Affiliations
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai Institute of Immunology

### Submitter
Yunxuan Lei

### Lab Head
Dr Guangjie Chen
Department of Immunology and Microbiology, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine


