### Accession
PXD000763

### Title
Identification of inositol 1,4,5-trisphosphate-binding proteins by heparin-agarose affinity purification and LTQ ORBITRAP MS in Oryza sativa

### Description
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosohate (IP3) and its receptors play a pivotal role in calcium signal transduction in mammals. Some fractions of tonoplast and endoplasmic reticulum membranes have high affinity binding activity for IP3, and IP3 can induce Ca2+ release in several plants. However, no homologues of mammalian IP3 receptors have been found in plants. In this study, we isolated the microsomal fractions from rice cells in suspension culture and further obtained putative IP3-binding proteins by heparin-agarose affinity purification. The IP3 binding activities of these protein fractions were determined by [3H]IP3 binding assay. SDS-PAGE and MS analysis were then performed to characterise these proteins. We have identified 297 proteins from the eluates of heparin-agarose column chromatography, which will provide insight into the IP3 signalling pathways in plants.

### Sample Protocol
Materials and Methods Plant cell culture and maintenance Rice cells were cultured in suspension at 28°C with shaking (120 rpm/min) in 250-ml conical flasks with NB liquid medium (PhytoTechnology Laboratories). Aliquots were transferred into fresh medium every 7 days to ensure that cells were maintained in the logarithmic growth phase. The cells were collected by vacuum filtration and stored at –80°C. Preparation of membrane protein extracts To isolate sufficient quantities of membrane protein from rice culture, samples of ~300 g of cells were homogenised in a mortar in the presence of liquid nitrogen. The powders were transferred into homogenisation buffer containing 50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 5 mM EGTA, 5 mM DTT and plant protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) and incubated on ice for 30 min. The homogenate was centrifuged at 10,000 × g for 15 min at 4°C. The supernatant was then collected and recentrifuged at 100,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellet was resuspended in suspension buffer A (50 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 5 mM DTT, protease inhibitor cocktail) and centrifugation was then performed twice at 100,000 × g for 30 min at 4°C. The pellet was then solublised for 30 min in buffer B (25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 1% (w/v) Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail). The solubilised membranes were centrifuged at 100,000  g for 30 min, and the supernatant was collected for purification. Heparin-agarose affinity purification Heparin-agarose resin (Sigma) was used to purify the IP3-binding proteins as described previously with modifications [1]. The membrane protein extraction was passed over a 3-ml Heparin-agarose column equilibrated in buffer B. The column was washed with 20 ml of buffer C (25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 250 mM NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 1% (w/v) Triton X-100, protease inhibitor cocktail) and eluted with 3 ml of 25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 1.5 M NaCl, 5 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100. The eluate was dialysed overnight in buffer D (25 mM Tris, pH 8.0, 5 mM DTT, 0.1% Triton X-100) and stored for binding assay and SDS-PAGE for MS analysis. All operations were carried out at 4°C. IP3 binding assay [3H]IP3 binding to rice membrane proteins was detected as described previously with minor modifications [1]. Aliquots of ~200 µg of eluted protein sample in buffer D were incubated with different concentrations of [3H]IP3 (Perkin Elmer) in the presence of 1 µM unlabelled IP3 in a total volume of 300 µl for 10 min at 4°C, then loaded onto 2-ml Zeba Spin Desalting Columns (Thermo Scientific) and centrifuged at 1,000 × g for 2 min. Then, 5 ml of liquid scintillation mixture (Sigma) were added to the void volume of these columns and the radioactivity was detected with a liquid scintillation spectrometer (Perkin Elmer). BSA was used as a negative control for the binding assay. This assay was replicated at least three times. Data presented are from a typical experiment. Mass spectrometric analysis Protein bands separated by SDS-PAGE were de-stained and subjected to in-gel digestion with sequencing grade trypsin (10 ng/μl trypsin, 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.0) overnight at 37°C. Peptides were extracted sequentially with 5% formic acid/50% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid/75% acetonitrile and then concentrated to ~20 μl. The extracted peptides were separated by an analytical capillary column (50 μm  10 cm) packed with 5-μm spherical C18 reversed-phase material (YMC). A Waters nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters) was used to generate the following HPLC gradient: 0–30% A in 60 min, 30–70% B in 15 min (A = 0.1% formic acid in water, B = 0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile). The eluted peptides were sprayed into a LTQ ORBITRAP Velso mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-ESI ion source. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS scan followed by four CID (Collision Induced Dissociation) and four HCD (High-energy Collisional Dissociation) MS/MS scans for each cycle. Database searches were performed on an in-house MASCOT server (Matrix Science Ltd.) against the IPI (International Protein Index) rice protein database. The search parameters were: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.7-Da mass tolerance for product ions; two missed cleavage sites were allowed for trypsin digestion. Methionine oxidation was set as variable modification. The search results were filtered with both peptide significance threshold and expectation value to be below 0.05.

### Data Protocol
Data annotation Proteins identification was performed using MASCOT with the UniProt Swiss-Prot database (http://www.matrixscience.com/). Proteins with MASCOT scores ≥ 40 and with ≥ 3 peptide matches were considered to be positively identified. Two independent assays for MS analysis were necessary. The proteins detected in both assays were used in the subsequent analysis. Functional annotation and subcellular location of the identified proteins were determined using the online tools of the Rice Genome Annotation Project Database (http://rice.plantbiology.msu.edu/downloads_gad.shtml). The transmembrane domains of detected proteins were predicted with TMHMM Server v. 2.0 (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TMHMM/).

### Publication Abstract
Inositol 1,4,5-trisphosohate (IP3 ) and its receptors play a pivotal role in calcium signal transduction in mammals. However, no homologs of mammalian IP3 receptors have been found in plants. In this study, we isolated the microsomal fractions from rice cells in suspension culture and further obtained putative IP3 -binding proteins by heparin-agarose affinity purification. The IP3 -binding activities of these protein fractions were determined by [(3) H] IP3 -binding assay. SDS-PAGE and MS analysis were then performed to characterize these proteins. We have identified 297 proteins from the eluates of heparin-agarose column chromatography, which will provide insight into the IP3 signaling pathways in plants. All MS data have been deposited in the ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD000763 (http://proteomecentral.proteomexchange.org/dataset/PXD000763).

### Keywords
Oryza sativa, Ip3 binding protein, Ltq orbitrap ms, Ip3, Heparin-agarose

### Affiliations
Beijing Normal University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Gene Resource and Molecular Development, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing China

### Submitter
Shengcheng Han

### Lab Head
Dr Shengcheng Han
Beijing Key Laboratory of Gene Resource and Molecular Development, College of Life Sciences, Beijing Normal University, Beijing China


