### Accession
PXD020139

### Title
Genetic mechanisms of cardiac sex diparities

### Description
Male and female disease states differ in their prevalence, treatment responses, and survival rates. In cardiac disease, women almost uniformly fare far worse than men1-3. Though sex plays a critical role in cardiac disease, the mechanisms underlying sex differences in cardiac homeostasis and disease remain unexplained. Here, we reveal sex-specific cardiac transcriptomes and proteomes and show that cardiac sex differences are predominately controlled via post-transcriptional mechanisms. Using a quantitative proteomics-based approach, we characterize differential sex-specific enriched cardiac proteins, protein complexes, and biological sex processes in the context of global genetic diversity of the Collaborative Cross. We show that differences in cardiac protein expression are established by both hormonal and genetic mechanisms  and define two additional pathways, one that is SRY dependent and one that is SRY-independent. We also determined the onset of sex-biased protein expression and discovered that sex disparities in heart tissue occur at the earliest stages of heart development, during the period preceding primary mammalian sex determination. This may explain why congenital heart disease, a leading cause of death whose origin is often developmental, is sex biased. Our results reveal the molecular foundations for the differences in cardiac tissue that underlie sex disparities in health, disease, and treatment outcomes.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 48 founder strain hearts (8 found strains, 3 male and 3 female replicates for each strain), 12 FCG hearts (4 FCG genotypes, 3 replicates for each genotype), and 6 e9.5 hearts (3 male and 3 female replicates, 10 pooled hearts for each) were prepared for mass spectrometry analysis with either TMT 10-plex labeling (founder strain hearts and FCG hearts) or with label-free quantitation (e9.5). Samples were prepared with or without subcellular fractionation with appropriate cell lysis buffers (Supplemental Methods). Samples were reduced with 25 mM TCEP and alkylated with 50 mM CAM for 20 min at 70°C, and were then  methanol/chloroform precipitated, dried briefly in a vacuum centrifuge. Samples were then resuspended in 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.2, and a BCA assay was performed to estimate protein concentration, and 50 µg of protein was digested with trypsin at an enzyme-to-protein ratio of 1:50 at 37°C for 14 hours. Samples were concentrated in a vacuum centrifuge to generate 50 mM HEPES, pH 8.2, adjusted to 20% ACN, and labeled with 10 µL of 15.4 µg/µL of the corresponding TMT 10-plex reagent (founder and FCG strains) for 1 hour at room temperature with shaking at 1000 rpm. The labeling reaction was quenched with 7 µL of 5% hydroxylamine. Each set of TMT 10-plex set (5 total for founder line, 2 total for FCG) were mixed and desalted with StageTips and an Empore C18 filter (3M)1 as previously described2. The full labeling schemes for the founder strains and the FCG strains are shown in the supplementary tables. For e9.5 tryptic digests, peptides were not labeled with a TMT reagent, but were directly desalted and fractionated by basic reverse-phase fractionation. Each TMT mix was separated with StageTips and an Empore C18 filter (3M)1 as previously described2. Briefly, samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 1% TFA. C18 filter disks were packed into a pipette tip, and were first charged with 100% ACN, equilibrated with 1% TFA, and then samples were applied to the disks. For test mix TMT runs, samples were washed with 0.5% FA with 5% ACN in UHPLC water and eluted with 0.5% FA with 70% ACN in UHPLC water. For quantitative TMT samples, appropriate amounts of each TMT channel were mixed according to the derived quantitative values, and these mixtures were dried in a vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 1% TFA, and then desalted and fractionated by StageTip fractionation. Disks were first charged with 100%, equilibrated with 1% TFA, samples were loaded onto disks, washed with 5% ACN in UHPLC water, and samples were fractionated. The twenty collected fractions were concatenated to 10 fractions by combining fraction 1 and 11, 2 and 12, etc. For the e9.5 hearts, no TMT labeling was performed, and desalting and fractionation was performed with Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kits (Thermo Scientific), as per the manufacturer’s protocol. All fractions were dried to near dryness in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 1% FA with 2% ACN in UHPLC water for liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
TMT labeled tryptic peptides (founder line strains and FCG strains) were separated with an EasyNano nLC1000 UHPLC (ThermoFisher Scientific) (running mobile phases: A (aqueous), 0.1% FA/H20; B (organic), 0.1% FA/97% ACN/2.9% H20) coupled online to an EASYSpray ion source and a Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher Scientific). Samples were separated on a nanocapillary reverse-phase PepMapC18 analytical column (75 µm by 500 mm; particle size 1.8 µm) (Thermo Scientific,) heated to 50°C with a 120-min linear gradient (6%-29% mobile phase B) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. MS1 spectra were acquired over the m/z range from 400-1800 at a resolution of 120,000, an AGC of 3x106, and a MIT of 30 ms. Data-dependent selection and fragmentation was performed on the top twenty most intense precursor ions by collision-induced dissociation and MS2 scans were acquired at a resolution of 45,000 with an AGC setting of 1x105, a MIT of 72 ms, and an isolation window of 0.8 m/z. Label-free analysis (e9.5 heart fractions) was performed in the same manner, except samples were separated with a 150-min gradient (5%-30% mobile phase B), and data-dependent acquisition was performed at a resolution of 15,000, with an AGC of 1x105, and a MIT of 150 ms. For the founder and FCG strains, Proteome Discover 2.3.0.523 was used to search the LC-MS/MS data utilizing a fully tryptic Byonic search node in the processing workflow, searching against a combined Uniprot database containing M. musculus canonical protein sequences with common contaminants (downloaded 2018_08). A max of 2 missed cleavages were allowed, and peptides were required to have 5 ppm precursor accuracy and 10 ppm fragment accuracy. Peptides modifications included static cysteine carbamidomethylation, dynamic methionine oxidation, dynamic N-terminal methionine loss with N-terminal acetylation, dynamic asparagine deamidation, dynamic phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues, and static TMT 10-plex labeling reagent on free peptide N-termini and on the Ɛ-nitrogen on lysine residues. The reporter ion quantifier node was utilized for TMT fragment ion quantitation.  For the e9.5 strains, Proteome Discoverer 2.4.305 was used to search the LC-MS/MS data utilizing a fully tryptic SequestHT search node in the processing workflow, searching against a combined Uniprot database containing M. musculus canonical protein sequences with common contaminants (downloaded 2018_08). A max of 2 missed cleavages were allowed and peptides were required to have 5 ppm precursor accuracy and 0.02 Da fragment ion accuracy. Peptides modifications included static cysteine carbamidomethylation, dynamic methionine oxidation, dynamic N-terminal methionine loss with N-terminal acetylation, dynamic asparagine deamidation, and dynamic phosphorylation of serine, threonine, and tyrosine residues.

### Publication Abstract
Sex disparities in cardiac homeostasis and heart disease are well documented, with differences attributed to actions of sex hormones. However, studies have indicated sex chromosomes act outside of the gonads to function without mediation by gonadal hormones. Here, we performed transcriptional and proteomics profiling to define differences between male and female mouse hearts. We demonstrate, contrary to current dogma, cardiac sex disparities are controlled not only by sex hormones but also through a sex-chromosome mechanism. Using Turner syndrome (XO) and Klinefelter (XXY) models, we find the sex-chromosome pathway is established by X-linked gene dosage. We demonstrate cardiac sex disparities occur at the earliest stages of heart formation, a period before gonad formation. Using these datasets, we identify and define a role for alpha-1B-glycoprotein (A1BG), showing loss of A1BG leads to cardiac defects in females, but not males. These studies provide resources for studying sex-biased cardiac disease states.

### Keywords
Mouse heart, Sex disparities

### Affiliations
Princeton University
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University

### Submitter
Xinlei Sheng

### Lab Head
Dr Ileana M. Cristea
Department of Molecular Biology, Princeton University


