### Accession
PXD029561

### Title
Monolaurin confers a protective effect against porcine epidemic diarrhea virus infection in piglets by regulating the interferon pathway

### Description
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) has reemerged as the main pathogen of piglets due to its high mutation feature. Monolaurin (ML) is a natural compound with a wide range of antibacterial and antiviral activities. However, the role of ML in PEDV infection is still unknown. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of ML on the growth performance, intestinal function, virus replication and cytokine response in piglets infected with PEDV, and to reveal the mechanism through proteomics analysis. Piglets were orally administrated with ML at a dose of 100 mg/kg·BW for 7 days before PEDV infection. Results showed that although there was no significant effect on the growth performance of piglets, ML administration alleviated the diarrhea caused by PEDV infection. ML administration promoted the recovery of intestinal villi, thereby improving intestinal function. Meanwhile, PEDV replication was significantly inhibited, and PEDV-induced expression of IL-6 and IL-8 were decreased with ML administration. Proteomics analyses showed that 38 proteins were differentially expressed between PEDV and ML+PEDV groups, and were significantly enriched in the interferon-related pathways. This suggests ML could promote the restoration of homeostasis by regulating the interferon pathway. Overall, the present study demonstrated ML could confer a protective effect against PEDV infection in piglets, and may be developed as a drug or feed additive to prevent and control PEDV disease.

### Sample Protocol
150 mg jejunum tissue were homogenized in T-PER lysis buffer containing protease inhibitors. The protein in the supernatant were obtained by centrifuge and quantified by the bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay. Next, 400 μg proteins were digested to generate peptides using filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, protein samples were diluted to 100 μl with 50mM ammonium bicarbonate, and disulfide bonds in protein were reduced by treating the sample with 2 μl of 500mM DL-dithiothreitol (DTT) in 100 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate for 150 min at 37◦C (the final concentration of DDT was 10 mM), and then alkylated with 14 μl of 500mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature (25◦C) for 40 min in the dark (the final concentration of IAA was 60mM). The detergent, DTT, and other low-molecular-weight components were removed by repeated dilution in 100mM Tris-HCl UA buffer (containing 8 M urea, pH 8.5), followed by filtration through 10-kDa ultrafiltration units (Pall Corporation, USA). The filters were washed three times with 100 μl of UA buffer, followed by twice washes with 100 μl of 50mM ammonium bicarbonate. Proteins were then digested using mass spectrometry-grade trypsin (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate by incubation overnight at 37◦C and 800 rpm. The enzyme:substrate ratio was 1:50. The effluent was collected after centrifugation at 10,000 × g for 15 min and filtered twice with 50 μl of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate. The effluent was combined and then acidified with 10% trifluoroacetate (TFA) to stop the reaction (the final concentration of TFA was 0.4%). The resulting peptides were desalted using a Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) and vacuum-dried. Prior to LC-MS/MS analysis, peptide samples were re-suspended in 40 μl of 0.1% v/v formic acid (FA) and 5% v/v acetonitrile (ACN) solution. The final peptides obtained by desalination and quantification were further subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis, which was performed on the Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA), coupled with the Easy-Nano Ultimate 3000 UPLC system (Dionex, Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA).

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant software was employed to process all the raw MS/MS spectra using the Sus scrofa database (22,191 sequences) downloaded from UniProtKB database on the November 10, 2018. The parameters were set as described previously [16]. False discovery rate (FDR) was set to 0.01. Minimum of 7 amino acids for each peptide and minimum of 2 peptides for each protein were required for reliable identification and quantification. Proteins with >1.5-fold change or < 0.67- fold change between two samples and FDR-adjusted p ≤ 0.05 were considered to be significant differentially expressed proteins (DEPs). DEPs lists were further processed with Gene Ontology (http://www.geneontology.org/, GO) and Reactome database (http://www.reactome.org) for GO term and pathway enrichment analysis. Cluster analysis was performed by MetaboAnalyst 5.0 (https://www.metaboanalyst.ca/faces/home.xhtml). The relationships among these DEPs were depicted in Venn diagrams (http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/).

### Publication Abstract
Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus (PEDV) has reemerged as the main pathogen of piglets due to its high mutation feature. Monolaurin (ML) is a natural compound with a wide range of antibacterial and antiviral activities. However, the role of ML in PEDV infection is still unknown. This study aimed to evaluate the effect of ML on the growth performance, intestinal function, virus replication and cytokine response in piglets infected with PEDV, and to reveal the mechanism through proteomics analysis. Piglets were orally administrated with ML at a dose of 100 mg/kg&#xb7;BW for 7 days before PEDV infection. Results showed that although there was no significant effect on the growth performance of piglets, ML administration alleviated the diarrhea caused by PEDV infection. ML administration promoted the recovery of intestinal villi, thereby improving intestinal function. Meanwhile, PEDV replication was significantly inhibited, and PEDV-induced expression of IL-6 and IL-8 were decreased with ML administration. Proteomics analyses showed that 38 proteins were differentially expressed between PEDV and ML+PEDV groups and were significantly enriched in the interferon-related pathways. This suggests ML could promote the restoration of homeostasis by regulating the interferon pathway. Overall, the present study demonstrated ML could confer a protective effect against PEDV infection in piglets and may be developed as a drug or feed additive to prevent and control PEDV disease.

### Keywords
Infection., Porcine epidemic diarrhea virus, Interferon, Monolaurin, Piglets

### Affiliations
Hubei Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan, China
Wuhan polytechnic university

### Submitter
Qian Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr YONGQING HOU
Hubei Key Laboratory of Animal Nutrition and Feed Science, Wuhan Polytechnic University, Wuhan, China


