### Accession
PXD040478

### Title
Phosphoproteomics measurement of clonal endocrine therapy sensitive and resistant breast cancer populations

### Description
Around two thirds of breast tumors are characterized by the expression of estrogen receptor α and are therapeutically treated by blocking estrogen signaling. First line endocrine therapeutics are Tamoxifen which displaces estrogen form its receptor preventing receptor activation and aromatase inhibitors which prevent the formation of estrogen and thereby hormone-deprive the tumors. Therapy resistance remains a major clinical problem, especially for patients with late-stage diagnoses. Tumor heterogeneity may promote therapy resistance either through the selection of pre-existing rare clones or by providing a repertoire of cells that may develop resistance over time. In order to study endocrine therapy resistance on a clonal level, we have developed barcoded (allowing the tracking of single cells) endocrine therapy sensitive and resistant breast cancer cell lines. From these complex cell pools, multiple single cells characterized by a specific barcode were isolated and grown out. We then subjected the clones to phosphoproteomics measurement by Mass spectrometry. Based on their phosphorylation pattern, the kinase activity profiles of endocrine therapy resistant clones were determined to identify differentially activated kinases with implications in therapy resistance.

### Sample Protocol
320 µg protein were precipitated according to Wessel and Flügge. Afterwards, the protein pellet was digested first by Lysyl endopeptidase (LysC, Fujifilm, Hong Kong, China) and then using trypsin. Peptides were desalted using Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA) and an Immobilized Metal Affinity Chromatography (IMAC) column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) charged with FeCl3 was used for the enrichment of phosphorylated peptides. The phospho-fraction was collected and vacuum centrifuged to dryness. Finally, the enriched phosphopeptides were dissolved in 0.1% TFA and desalted using Stop and Go Extraction tips (Supelco, Bellefonte, PA, USA). Peptides were separated by liquid chromatography (UltiMate 3000, Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to hydrophobicity with a linear gradient of 2-28% acetonitrile. Separated peptides were then ionized by electrospray ionization and subjected to MS/MS analysis (Exploris 480, Thermo Fisher Scientific). In DIA mode, MS1 scans were acquired at a resolution of 120K covering the range from 350 – 1400 m/z. Maximum injection time was 45 ms and the automated gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6. MS2 scans were acquired in 48 precursor isolation windows of variable width and 1 m/z overlap that covered the range from 400 – 1200 m/z. The orbitrap was operated at a resolution of 30K and a normalized collision energy of 26% was applied. Maximum injection time was 54 ms and the AGC target was set to 1e6.

### Data Protocol
Peptide and protein identification and quantification from DIA raw data was performed with Spectronaut software (version 15, Biognosys, Switzerland) using the built in identification and localization algorithm. Identified phosphorylated peptides were site-collapsed using the Perseus (version 1.6.2.3) plug-in PeptideCollapse with a localization cut-off at 0.95.

### Publication Abstract
Intratumoral heterogeneity impacts the success or failure of anti-cancer therapies. Here, we investigated the evolution and mechanistic heterogeneity in clonal populations of cell models for estrogen receptor positive breast cancer. To this end, we established barcoded models of luminal breast cancer and rendered them resistant to commonly applied first line endocrine therapies. By isolating single clones from the resistant cell pools and characterizing replicates of individual clones we observed inter- (between cell lines) and intra-tumor (between different clones from the same cell line) heterogeneity. Molecular characterization at RNA and phospho-proteomic levels revealed private clonal activation of the unfolded protein response and respective sensitivity to inhibition of the proteasome, and potentially shared sensitivities for repression of protein kinase C. Our in vitro findings are consistent with tumor-heterogeneity that is observed in breast cancer patients thus highlighting the need to uncover heterogeneity at an individual patient level and to adjust therapies accordingly.

### Keywords
Therapy resistance, Phosphoproteomics, Clonal deconvolution, Breast cancer

### Affiliations
DKFZ Heidelberg
Molekulare Genomanalyse (B050) Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Im Neuenheimer Feld 580 69120 Heidelberg Germany

### Submitter
Lukas Beumers

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stefan Wiemann
Molekulare Genomanalyse (B050) Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum Im Neuenheimer Feld 580 69120 Heidelberg Germany


