### Accession
PXD017462

### Title
Differential proteome between ejaculate and epididymal sperm represents a key factor for sperm freezability in wild small ruminants

### Description
The proteome of two sperm sources, epididymal and ejaculated sperm, was compared and associated with sperm freezing capacity using samples collected from three wild small ruminants species. Protein identification was performed using two databases separately (Ovis aries and Capra hircus NCBI) and results were later combined.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction Frozen-thawed sperm was pooled and centrifuged (700 × g, 15 min, 4 °C) to discard the seminal plasma and freezing extender. Samples were submitted to three washings with PBS (1:3 dilution; 900 × g, 15 min, 4 °C), divided in three aliquots and resuspended in 300µl of lysis buffer with the following composition: 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% DTT, 4% SDS and 1% (v/w) protease inhibitor cocktail (Sigma) (29). Two cell smears were obtained from each aliquot and stained by eosin-nigrosin or Hemacolor® (Merck Chemicals GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) for cell purity evaluation (200 sperm cells per slide were counted). Cells were disrupted by sonication (Branson sonifier 450, Danbury, USA): three cycles of 10 s sonication and 30 s ice incubation. Aliquots were centrifuged (15000 × g, 15 min, 4 °C) to discard insoluble material and collect the supernatant containing the proteins. Sperm protein concentration was assessed with the PierceTM 660 nm Protein Assay Kit and the accessory Ionic Detergent Compatibility Reagent (ThermoFisher Scientific, Rockford, USA). Protein samples were stored at -80 °C. Peptide preparation Cleared lysates were subjected to solution preparation of peptides on centrifugal filter units using a technique modified from previous studies (30–33). In brief, solutions containing 50 µg protein were loaded onto centrifugal filter units with a 10 kDa cutoff modified PES membrane (Pall Filtersystems, Crailsheim, Germany) and reduced with 20 mM DTT at 55°C for 30 min. Alkylation of thiol groups was done with 40 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. After another buffer exchange 1 µg trypsin was added in 20 mM TEAB, 0.5% SDC in a total volume of 50 µl. Digestion proceeded overnight at 37°C. Peptides were collected and SDC was precipitated with TFA (0.5% final). Remaining SDC was removed by phase transfer with equal volume of ethyl acetate. Peptides were vacuum concentrated, redissolved in 20 mM TEAB, and labeled with isobaric TMTsixplex reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Darmstadt, Germany). Redissolved and pooled peptides were desalted on Oasis HLB cartridges (Waters GmbH, Eschborn, Germany). Eluates containing 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid (FA) were dried and fractionated to 12 fractions by isoelectric point with an Offgel fractionator (Agilent Technologies, Waldbronn, Germany). Peptide fractions were dried and stored at -20°C. 2.8 Liquid chromatography - mass spectrometry measurements  Peptide separation was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano HPLC system (Dionex GmbH, Idstein, Germany). The autosampler was operated in μl-pickup mode. Peptides were dissolved in 10 µl 0.1% FA (solvent A). 1.5 µl were injected onto a C18 trap column (20 mm length, 100 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 5 µm, Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) made in-house. Bound peptides were eluted onto a C18 analytical column (200 mm length, 75 µm inner diameter, ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 µm). Peptides were separated during a linear gradient from 5% o 35% solvent B (90% acetonitrile, 0.1% FA) within 120 min at 300 nl/min. The nanoHPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptide ions between 330 and 1500 m/z were scanned in the Orbitrap detector every 3 seconds with a resolution of 1,2⋅105 (maximum fill time 50 ms, AGC target 4⋅10E5). Polysiloxane (445.120024 Da) was used for internal calibration (typical mass error ≤1.5 ppm). In a top-speed method peptides were subjected to collision induced dissociation for identification (CID: 0.7 Da isolation, threshold intensity 5000, normalized energy 35%) and fragments analyzed in the linear ion trap with target 10E4 and maximum fill time 50 ms. Fragmented peptide ions were excluded from repeat analysis for 20 s. Top 5 fragment ions were chosen for synchronous precursor selection and fragmented with higher energy CID (HCD: 1.3 Da isolation, 65% collision energy) for detection of reporter ions in the Orbitrap analyzer (resolution 50,000, maximum fill time 86 ms, target 10E5). All chemicals were purchased from Sigma unless otherwise noted.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification from MS data Raw data processing was performed using Proteome Discoverer software 2.3.0.523 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Peptide identification was done with an in house Mascot server version 2.6.1 (Matrix Science Ltd, London, UK). MS data were searched against sequences from NCBI database release 2017/10 and contaminant sequences from cRAP (common Repository of Adventitious Proteins at thegpm.org/crap/). In two separate analyses data were searched against Capra sequences (taxonomic ID 9922: 49,992 entries) or Ovis sequences (taxonomic ID 9935: 110,196 entries). Precursor Ion m/z tolerance was 10 ppm, fragment ion tolerance 0.5 Da (MS2). Tryptic peptides with up to two missed cleavage were searched. Propionamide on cysteines and TMT6-plex on N-termini and lysines were set as static modifications. Oxidation was allowed as dynamic modification of methionine. Mascot results were evaluated by the percolator algorithm (34) version 3.02.1 as implemented in Proteome Discoverer. Spectra with identifications below 1% q-value were sent to a second round of database search with semitryptic enzyme specificity (one missed cleavage allowed). Protein N-terminal acetylation, propionamide, and N-terminal TMT were then set as dynamic modifications. Actual FDR values were typically ≤ 0.7% (peptide spectrum matches), ≤ 1.2% (peptides), and < 8% (proteins). Reporter ion intensities were extracted from the MS3 level (most confident centroid). Co-Isolation of > 60% or SPS mass match < 65% led to exclusion of quantitation values. Data processing and statistical analysis  The statistical analysis of peptide spectrum matches (PSM)-level data was carried out with the R statistical software. The peptides which were shared between multiple proteins were filtered out from the analysis and proteins with only a single peptide were excluded. The peptide-level data were first variance-stabilized and transformed using the VSN method and then summarized (to) at the protein level by Tukey’s median polish procedure. The statistical analysis was done using the moderated t-test of the R package limma: P values were adjusted for multiple testing by Benjamini and Hochberg method. Cross species comparisons of the differentially expressed proteins were performed between Iberian ibex, Mouflon and Chamois and only the proteins that were differentially expressed in the three species were selected. The same procedure was performed using Capra hircus or Ovis aries NCBI databases separately for the three species. The databases from closely related species were needed due to the low number of annotated proteins in these wild species. Results obtained with both databases were combined to obtain a list of proteins positively or negatively correlated with sperm freezability across species. The average fold change values and adjusted P values between Capra hircus and Ovis aries were calculated (small differences between both databases).

### Publication Abstract
Epididymal sperm shows higher cryoresistance than ejaculated sperm. Although the sperm proteome seems to affect cell cryoresistance, studies aiming at identifying proteins involved in sperm freezing-tolerance are scarce. The aims of this study were to investigate differences of sperm freezability and proteome between epididymal and ejaculated sperm in three mountain ungulates: Iberian ibex, Mouflon and Chamois. Sperm samples were cryopreserved in straws by slow freezing. Tandem mass tag-labeled peptides from sperm samples were analyzed by high performance liquid chromatography coupled to a mass spectrometer in three technical replicates. The statistical analysis was done using the moderated t-test of the R package limma. Differences of freezability between both types of sperm were associated with differences of the proteome. Overall, epididymal sperm showed higher freezability than ejaculated sperm. Between 1490 and 1883 proteins were quantified in each species and type of sperm sample. Cross species comparisons revealed a total of 76 proteins that were more abundant in epididymal than in ejaculated sperm in the three species of study whereas 3 proteins were more abundant in ejaculated than epididymal sperm in the three species of study (adjusted P&#xa0;&lt;&#xa0;0.05; |log<sub>2</sub>| fold-change&#xa0;&gt;&#xa0;0.5). Many of the proteins that were associated with higher cryoresistance are involved in stress response and redox homeostasis. In conclusion, marked changes of sperm proteome were detected between epididymal and ejaculated sperm. This work contributes to update the sperm proteome of small ruminants and to identify candidate markers of sperm freezability.

### Keywords
Sperm, Cryopreservation, Germplasm bank, Cross-species, Proteomics, Sheep, Tmt, Goat, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical Faculty, University of Bonn
Department of Animal Reproduction, Spanish National Institute for Agricultural and Food Research and Technology (INIA), Avda. Puerta de Hierro km 5.9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Marc Sylvester

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Santiago-Moreno
Department of Animal Reproduction, Spanish National Institute for Agricultural and Food Research and Technology (INIA), Avda. Puerta de Hierro km 5.9, 28040 Madrid, Spain.


