### Accession
PXD010984

### Title
Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv treated with VC or not

### Description
The global protein expression of Mycobacterium tuberculosis H37Rv, responding to VC treatment (5 mM for 24 h), was monitored via tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis.

### Sample Protocol
Mycobacteria cell proteome samples preparation. In BSL3 laboratory, 100 ml H37Rv (OD ≈ 0.5), cultured in sealed 500 ml NalgeneTM Square Medium Bottle (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA), was treated with 5 mM VC for 24 h. The H37Rv control samples were without VC treatment. Then the strains were harvested by centrifugation (7,000 × g and 4 °C for 10 min). After triple washes of the strain pellets with PBS, the pellets were re-suspended in SDT buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM Tris/HCl pH7.6, 0.1 M DTT) (300 μl per 0.1 mg wet weight of strain pellets) and boiled for 10 min. Then the samples were removed from BSL3 for subsequent protein extraction as previously described (Wisniewski et al., 2009, Nat Methods 6(5), 359-362). The protein extraction and the subsequent proteomic analysis were performed at Applied Protein Technology Co., Ltd (Shanghai, China).  Tandem mass tag (TMT)-based quantitative proteomic analysis. The protein samples were digested following a reported FASP procedure (Wisniewski et al., 2009). Then the digested samples were desalted via EMPORETM SPE C18 Cartridge (standard density) (7 mm inner diameter, 3 ml volumes, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), freeze-dried, dissolved in 40 μl dissolution buffer (50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.5), and quantified spectrophotometrically at OD280. The resultant peptide samples (100 μg per sample) were then labeled using TMT Mass Tagging kit (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA). The three biological repeats of the H37Rv control samples were labeled with TMT-126, TMT-127, and TMT-128 respectively; and the three biological repeats of the VC-treated samples were labeled with TMT-129, TMT-130, and TMT-131 respectively. The labeled peptide samples were combined and fractionated via strong cation exchange chromatography using AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare, USA). To be detailed, the labeled peptide samples were pooled, dried via vacuum centrifugation, dissolved and acidified with 2 ml buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4, 25% acetonitrile, pH 3.0). The column (Reversed-Phase Fractionation Spin Column containing 20 mg resin, ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA) was pre-equilibrated with buffer A and loaded with the samples (flow rate 1 ml/min). The peptides were eluted (1 ml/min) with a gradient of 0 - 10% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% acetonitrile, pH 2.7) for 2 min, 10 - 20% buffer B for 10 min, 20 - 45% buffer B for 5 min, and 45 - 100% buffer B for 5 min. The eluted fractions were collected every 1 min via monitoring the absorbance at 214 nm. The collected fractions were combined into 15 pools and further desalted via EMPORETM SPE C18 Cartridge (standard density) (7 mm inner diameter, 3 ml volumes, Sigma-Aldrich, USA), concentrated via vacuum centrifugation, and dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid.  The samples were then performed on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFC, USA) coupled to an Easy nLC (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA). To be detailed, the samples were loaded onto AcclaimTM PepMapTM 100 C18 column (100 μm × 2 cm) (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (EASY column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3 μm resin, C18-A2, ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA) in 0.1% formic acid. The flow rate of linear gradient separation buffer (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) was 300 nl/min controlled by IntelliFlow technology over 140 min. The separated samples were then analyzed by Q-Exactive mass spectrometer, which was operated in positive ion mode. Data-dependent top10 method, which dynamically choose the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300 - 1800 m/z) for HCD (high-energy collisional dissociation) fragmentation, was used to acquire MS data. The target value (106) was determined based on predictive Automatic Gain Control (pAGC). Maximum inject time was 50 ms; dynamic exclusion was 60 s. The resolution to acquire survey scans (MS1) was set to 70,000 at 200 m/z. The resolution for HCD spectra (MS2) was set to 17,500 at 200 m/z, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV. The under-fill ratio specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum-fill time, and it was defined as 0.1%. The peptide recognition mode was enabled when running the instrument.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS spectra data were searched against the proteome of H37Rv from UniProt (https://www.uniprot.org/proteomes/UP000001584) using Mascot 2.2 (Matrix Science, UK) embedded into Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (ThermoFisher SCIENTIFIC, USA). The search criteria, as well as the calculation of normalized protein ratios, were exactly the same as in (Wei et al., 2018, J Proteomics 185, 39-50).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Vitamin c (vc), Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Ascorbate, H37rv

### Affiliations
Scientific Research Center, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Jinshan District, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Public Health Clinic Center

### Submitter
Jin Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Jin Wang
Scientific Research Center, Shanghai Public Health Clinical Center, Fudan University, Jinshan District, Shanghai, China


