### Accession
PXD019931

### Title
Ub-like SAMP1 and its associated proteins

### Description
Identifying proteins that associate with Ub like SAMP1 using an amino link column.

### Sample Protocol
The Ubl FHS coupled beads were equilibrated with 3 column volumes (6 ml) of high salt PBS buffer. Until application the cell lysate was kept at 4°C or on ice. The cell lysate prepared for pull-down assay was applied to the column (3 ml total) at room temperature and incubated for 4 h per each 2 ml application at 4°C with gentle rocking (Fisherbrand incubating rocker). Washes were done at 4°C or on ice. The column was washed with 40 ml high salt PBS buffer (the flow through was collected to determine the binding efficiency). Proteins bound to the column were eluted at room temperature by addition of 8 ml of 0.1 M glycine-HCl buffer at pH 2.5 and collection as 1 ml fractions in tubes with 50-µl neutralization buffer (1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Eluates were stored at -20°C or -80°C (long-term). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by staining with SYPRO Ruby. Cell lysate was similarly applied to the BSA coupled beads as a control for non-specific protein interactions. Regions of the gel with protein bands uniquely eluted from Ubl FHS (vs. BSA) beads were targeted for identification using a mass spectrometry (MS)-based approach.

### Data Protocol
The Ubl FHS coupled beads were equilibrated with 3 column volumes (6 ml) of high salt PBS buffer. Until application the cell lysate was kept at 4°C or on ice. The cell lysate prepared for pull-down assay was applied to the column (3 ml total) at room temperature and incubated for 4 h per each 2 ml application at 4°C with gentle rocking (Fisherbrand incubating rocker). Washes were done at 4°C or on ice. The column was washed with 40 ml high salt PBS buffer (the flow through was collected to determine the binding efficiency). Proteins bound to the column were eluted at room temperature by addition of 8 ml of 0.1 M glycine-HCl buffer at pH 2.5 and collection as 1 ml fractions in tubes with 50-µl neutralization buffer (1M Tris-HCl, pH 8.5). Eluates were stored at -20°C or -80°C (long-term). Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE and visualized by staining with SYPRO Ruby. Cell lysate was similarly applied to the BSA coupled beads as a control for non-specific protein interactions. Regions of the gel with protein bands uniquely eluted from Ubl FHS (vs. BSA) beads were targeted for identification using a mass spectrometry (MS)-based approach.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdc48a, Recj3/recj4 and rnasej, Samp1

### Affiliations
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer CE
Professor, Microbiology and Cell Science Department, University Of Florida, USA

### Submitter
Swathi Dantuluri

### Lab Head
Dr Julie Maupin-Furlow
Professor, Microbiology and Cell Science Department, University Of Florida, USA


