### Accession
PXD001821

### Title
Human Blood Serum LC-MS/MS -  Serological epithelial component proteins identify intestinal complications in Crohn's Disease

### Description
Quantitative proteome profiling was performed on Inflammatory (ICD), stricturing and fistulizing Crohn's Disease serums using label-free Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS).

### Sample Protocol
In-solution electrophoresis was used to partition the 1-25kDa protein component from serum samples as previously described.12 Briefly, protease inhibited serum samples were loaded onto a ProteomeSep electrophoresis instrument (NuSep, Sydney, Australia). Serum samples were separated into 1-25kDa, 26-45kDa, 46-65kDa, and 66-125kDa partitions and the 1-25kDa (low-mass) fraction was collected for LC-MS/MS .   Low-mass serum samples were desalted, trypsin digested and analyzed in triplicate on an LTQ-FT Ultra mass spectrometer (Thermo Electron, Bremen, Germany) connected online to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) operating in data-dependent acquisition mode covering a 350-1750 mass/charge ratio (m/z) range.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS/MS data were analyzed in Progenesis LC-MS v4.0 (Progenesis QI) (Waters, MA, USA) according to standard procedures.13, 14 Ions from each sample were normalized against a reference sample and quantified. A one-way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was used for quantitative comparisons (P <0.05 for significance) with type I errors controlled for by the False Discovery Rate (FDR) with an adjusted P-value (q-value) significance set at <0.01.15 Mass spectra were then searched against the Swiss-prot protein knowledgebase and peptide-sequence matches and protein inferences mapped back to quantitative data.

### Publication Abstract
Crohn's Disease (CD) is a relapsing inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract that affects a young working age population and is increasing in developing countries. Half of all sufferers will experience stricturing or fistulizing intestinal complications that require extensive surgical interventions and neither genes nor clinical risk factors can predict this debilitating natural history. We applied discovery and verification phase studies as part of an NCI-FDA modeled biomarker pipeline to identify differences in the low-mass (&lt;25kDa) blood-serum proteome between CD behavioral phenotypes. A significant enrichment of epithelial component proteins was identified in CD patients with intestinal complications using quantitative proteomic profiling with label-free Liquid Chromatography-Tandem Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). DAVID 6.7 (NIH) was used for functional annotation analysis of detected proteins and immunoblotting and multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) to verify <i>a priori</i> findings in a secondary independent cohort of complicated CD (CCD), uncomplicated inflammatory CD (ICD), Th1/17 pathway inflammation controls (rheumatoid arthritis), inflammatory bowel disease controls (ulcerative colitis), and healthy controls. Seventy-six high-confidence serum proteins were modulated in CCD <i>versus</i> ICD by LC-MS/MS (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.05, FDR <i>q</i>&lt;0.01), annotating to pathways of epithelial barrier homeostasis (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.01). In verification phase, a putative serology panel developed from discovery proteomics data consisting of desmoglein-1, desmoplakin, and fatty acid-binding protein 5 (FABP5) distinguished CCD from all other groups (<i>p</i> = 0.041) and discriminated complication in CD (70% sensitivity and 72.5% specificity at score &#x2265;1.907, AUC = 0.777, <i>p</i> = 0.007). An MRM assay secondarily confirmed increased FABP5 levels in CCD (<i>p</i> &lt; 0.001). In a longitudinal subanalysis-cohort, FABP5 levels were stable over a two-month period with no behavioral changes (<i>p</i> = 0.099). These studies along the biomarker development pipeline provide substantial proof-of-principle that a blood test can be developed specific to transmural intestinal injury. Data are available via the PRIDE proteomics data repository under identifier PXD001821 and PeptideAtlas with identifier PASS00661.

### Keywords
Human serum lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
The University of New South Wales
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, The University of New South Wales, AUSTRALIA

### Submitter
Yunki Yau

### Lab Head
Dr Mark Raftery
Bioanalytical Mass Spectrometry Facility, Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre, The University of New South Wales, AUSTRALIA


