### Accession
PXD032267

### Title
Proteome wide screening for ubiquitination, ISGylation and NEDDylation sites in wildtype and ISG15 knockout mouse hearts after transverse aortic constriction

### Description
Hearts(left ventricles) were harvested from control wildtype and ISG15 knockout mice and wildtype and ISG15 knockout mice 4 weeks after pressure overload induced by transverse aortic constriction. Nano LC-MS/MS analysis was performedon left ventricle tissue following protein extraction, trypsin digestion, peptide desalting, anti K-e-GG enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Fourteen milligrams of protein were used from each sample. After trypsin digestion, peptide purification was performed on C18 reversed-phase columns. Diglycine remnant containing peptides were enriched using anti-ubiquitin remnant motif (K-ε-GG) antibody conjugated agarose beads and were identified using Nano LC-MS/MS. The full scan was performed between 300-1,650 m/z at the resolution 60,000 at 200 m/z, the automatic gain control target for the full scan was set to 3e6. The MS/MS scan was operated in Top 20 mode using the following settings: resolution 15,000 at 200 m/z; automatic gain control target 1e5; maximum injection time 19ms; normalized collision energy at 28%; isolation window of 1.4 Th; charge state exclusion: unassigned, 1, > 6; dynamic exclusion 30 s.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS files were analyzed and searched against Mus musculus protein database based on the species of the samples using Maxquant (2.0.3.0). The parameters were set as follows: the protein modifications were Carbamidomethylation (C), oxidation (M) (variables), and GlyGly(K) (variables); the enzyme was set to trypsin; the maximum missed cleavage was set to 4; the precursor ion mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was 0.6 Da.

### Publication Abstract
Inflammation promotes adverse ventricular remodeling, a common antecedent of heart failure. Here, we set out to determine how inflammatory cells affect cardiomyocytes in the remodeling heart. Pathogenic cardiac macrophages induced an IFN response in cardiomyocytes, characterized by upregulation of the ubiquitin-like protein IFN-stimulated gene 15 (ISG15), which posttranslationally modifies its targets through a process termed ISGylation. Cardiac ISG15 is controlled by type I IFN signaling, and ISG15 or ISGylation is upregulated in mice with transverse aortic constriction or infused with angiotensin II; rats with uninephrectomy and DOCA-salt, or pulmonary artery banding; cardiomyocytes exposed to IFNs or CD4+ T cell-conditioned medium; and ventricular tissue of humans with nonischemic cardiomyopathy. By nanoscale liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry, we identified the myofibrillar protein filamin-C as an ISGylation target. ISG15 deficiency preserved cardiac function in mice with transverse aortic constriction and led to improved recovery of mouse hearts ex vivo. Metabolomics revealed that ISG15 regulates cardiac amino acid metabolism, whereas ISG15 deficiency prevented misfolded filamin-C accumulation and induced cardiomyocyte autophagy. In sum, ISG15 upregulation is a feature of pathological ventricular remodeling, and protein ISGylation is an inflammation-induced posttranslational modification that may contribute to heart failure development by altering cardiomyocyte protein turnover.

### Keywords
Heart, Ubiquitination, K-e-gg motif, Mouse, Isgylation, Tac

### Affiliations
St.Michael's Hospital
Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science and Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital.

### Submitter
Andrew Advani

### Lab Head
Dr Andrew Advani
Keenan Research Centre for Biomedical Science and Li Ka Shing Knowledge Institute, St. Michael's Hospital.


