### Accession
PXD024197

### Title
Pre and post ATRA/VP treatment proteomic and phophoproteomic profiling of AML responders and non-responders

### Description
Proteome and phosphoproteome raw files from AML patient samples obtained before and after 3 and 8 days of ATRA/valproic acid treatment

### Sample Protocol
FASP, high-pH reverse fractionation and IMAC for phosphopeptide enrichment

### Data Protocol
MaxQuant run for both proteomics and phosphoproteomics raw files in different groups followed by Perseus

### Publication Abstract
All-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) and valproic acid (VP) have been tried in the treatment of non-promyelocytic variants of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Non-randomized studies suggest that the two drugs can stabilize AML and improve normal peripheral blood cell counts. In this context, we used a proteomic/phosphoproteomic strategy to investigate the in vivo effects of ATRA/VP on human AML cells. Before starting the combined treatment, AML responders showed increased levels of several proteins, especially those involved in neutrophil degranulation/differentiation, M phase regulation and the interconversion of nucleotide di- and triphosphates (i.e., DNA synthesis and binding). Several among the differentially regulated phosphorylation sites reflected differences in the regulation of RNA metabolism and apoptotic events at the same time point. These effects were mainly caused by increased cyclin dependent kinase 1 and 2 (CDK1/2), LIM domain kinase 1 and 2 (LIMK1/2), mitogen-activated protein kinase 7 (MAPK7) and protein kinase C delta (PRKCD) activity in responder cells. An extensive effect of in vivo treatment with ATRA/VP was the altered level and phosphorylation of proteins involved in the regulation of transcription/translation/RNA metabolism, especially in non-responders, but the regulation of cell metabolism, immune system and cytoskeletal functions were also affected. Our analysis of serial samples during the first week of treatment suggest that proteomic and phosphoproteomic profiling can be used for the early identification of responders to ATRA/VP-based treatment.

### Keywords
Atra valproic acid aml

### Affiliations
University of Bergen

### Submitter
Maria Hernandez-Valladares

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Hernandez Valladares
University of Bergen


