### Accession
PXD018083

### Title
Immunoprecipitaiton of Rab27a from mouse melanoma cells

### Description
To identify the co-immunoprecipitating proteins of Rab27a following Rab27a pull down of B16-F1 mouse melanoma cells infected with adenovirus expressing GFP-hsSPIRE1.

### Sample Protocol
Immunoprecipitation of Rab27a. 8, 14 and 28x 10cm dishes of 80% confluent B16-F1 mouse melanoma cells, infected with adenovirus vectors expressing GFP, GFP-Mlph or GFP-hsSPIRE1 and cultured for a 10 days to allow expression of proteins. Cells were then washed with cold PBS, trypsinised to detach from plates, harvested by centrifugation and lyzed in 500 ml of buffer containing 20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 50mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1% CHAPS, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail 1 mM GTP. Lysates were centrifuged at 10,000g for 15 min and the supernatant was then incubated with goat anti-Rab27a polyclonal antibodies previously immobilized on 50 ml of protein A/G UltraLink Resin. After overnight incubation at 4C, the beads were precipitated by low speed centrifugation, washed with the same buffer and analysed using mass spectrometry to identify co-precipitating proteins. Each IP sample was washed in 200 µL 50 mM triethyl ammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) before centrifugation (3000 x g, 30 s) and careful removal of the supernatant. The samples were then resuspended in 100 µL 50 mM TEAB and were reduced with dithiothreitol (5 mM DTT, 56°C, 20 min) (Sigma, UK. Product #D9779) and alkylated using iodoacetamide (55 mM IAA, room temperature, 15 min in the dark). Tryptic digestion was performed as follows; 1 µg trypsin was added to each sample along with 1 % protease max (20 ng/uL) and each sample was incubated at 37°C in a thermomixer (650 rpm) for 2 h. After 2 h a further 1 µg of trypsin was added and incubation at 37°C in a thermomixer (650 rpm) continued for 16 h. A further 1 µg of trypsin was added to each sample after 16 h incubation and the samples were incubated at 47°C in a thermomixer (650 rpm) for 1 h. Samples were concentrated and de-salted using HyperSep C18 spin tips (10-200 µL size) using the manufacturers protocol. The samples were concentrated using a vacuum concentrator before resuspension in 5 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid. Each sample was analysed on a Sciex TripleTOF 6600 mass spectrometer coupled in line with a eksigent ekspert nanoLC 425 system running in micro flow (5 µL/min) mobile phase B (100 % acetonitrile + 0.1 % formic acid) over mobile phase A (0.1 % formic acid). Samples (4 uL) were injected and trapped onto a YMC Triart C18 pre-column (5 mm, 3 µm, 300 µm ID) (mobile phase A; 0.1 % formic acid, B; acetonitrile with 0.1 % formic acid) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min. The sample was then eluted off the pre-column onto the YMC Triart C18 analytical column (15 cm, 3 µm, 300 µm ID) in line to a Sciex TripleTOF 6600 Duospray Source using a 50 um electrode, positive mode +5500V. Samples were analysed in IDA (Information Dependent Acquisition) mode. The following linear gradient was used: mobile phase B increasing from 3 % to 30 % over 68 min; 30 % to 40 over 5 min, 40 % to 80 % for column wash and re-equilibration over 2 min (total run time 87 min).  IDA acquisition mode was used with a top 30 ion fragmentation (TOFMS m/z 400-1250; product ion 100-1500) followed by 15 sec exclusion using rolling collision energy, 250/50 ms accumulation time (TOFMS/product ion; 1.8 s cycle).

### Data Protocol
IDA data was searched using ProteinPilot 5.0.2 (iodoacetamide alkylation, thorough search with emphasis on biological modifications) against the SwissProt mouse database (January 2019) with the relevant human sequences adding in.

### Publication Abstract
Cell biologists generally consider that microtubules and actin play complementary roles in long- and short-distance transport in animal cells. On the contrary, using melanosomes of melanocytes as a model, we recently discovered that the motor protein myosin-Va works with dynamic actin tracks to drive long-range organelle dispersion in opposition to microtubules. This suggests that in animals, as in yeast and plants, myosin/actin can drive long-range transport. Here, we show that the SPIRE-type actin nucleators (predominantly SPIRE1) are Rab27a effectors that co-operate with formin-1 to generate actin tracks required for myosin-Va-dependent transport in melanocytes. Thus, in addition to melanophilin/myosin-Va, Rab27a can recruit SPIREs to melanosomes, thereby integrating motor and track assembly activity at the organelle membrane. Based on this, we suggest a model in which organelles and force generators (motors and track assemblers) are linked, forming an organelle-based, cell-wide network that allows their collective activity to rapidly disperse the population of organelles long-distance throughout the cytoplasm.

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Rab27a, Mouse melanoma cell line

### Affiliations
Nottingham Trent University

### Submitter
Amanda Miles

### Lab Head
Dr Amanda Miles
Nottingham Trent University


