### Accession
PXD011712

### Title
Hemiscolopendra marginata venom MS

### Description
MS analysis of tryptic digests of whole venoms from two individual of the centipede Hemiscolopendra marginata from Florida, USA.

### Sample Protocol
Quantification of venom protein samples was completed using a Qubit Protein Assay Kit and approximately 5 ug of whole venom was digested using the Calbiochem ProteoExtract All-in-One Trypsin Digestion Kit (Merch, Darmstadt, Germany) per manufacturer's instructions, resulting in approximately 4.3 ug of digested venom proteins. Digested proteinsamples were then frozen and dried using a SpeedVac.  Digested venom protein samples were resuspended in 0.1% formic acid to reach a final concentration of 250 ng/uL. Known concentrations of three highly-purified recombinant Escherichia coli proteins (Abcam) were mixed in specified proportions prior to digestion to yield final desired concentrations of 2,500 fmol of P31697 (Chaperone protein FimC), 250 fmol of P31658 (Protein deglycase 1), and 25 fmol of P00811 (Beta-lactamase ampC) per injection. The digested E. coli peptide mix was infused into venom samples prior to LC-MS/MS injection. A 2 uL aliquot of each sample was injected into an externally calibrated Thermo Q Exactive HF (high-resolution electrospray tandem mass spectrometer) in conjunction with Dionex UltiMate3000 RSLCnano System to perform LC-MS/MS analysis. Beginning with LC, samples were aspirated into a 50 uL loop and loaded onto the trap column (Thermo u-Precolumn 5 mm, with nanoViper tubing 30 um i.d.X10 cm), with a flow rate of 300 nL/min for separation on the analytical column (Acclaim pepmap RSLC 75 uMx 15 cm nanoviper). A 60 minute linear gradient from 3% to 45% B was performed using mobile phases A (99.9% H2O (EMD Omni Solvent) and 0.1% formic acid) and B (99.9% ACN and 0.1% formic acid). The LC eluent was directly nanosprayed into a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The Q Exactive HF was operated in a data-dependent mode and under direct control of the Thermo Excalibur 3.1.66 (Thermo Scientific) throughout the chromatographic separation. A data-dependent top-20 method was used for MS data acquisition, selecting the most abundant, not-yet-sequenced precursor ions from the survey scans (350-1700 m/z). Sequencing was performed using higher energy collisional dissociation fragmentation with a target value of 10^5 ions determined with predictive automatic gain control. Full scans (350-1700 m/z) were performed at 60,000 resolution in profile mode. MS2 were acquired in centroid mode at 15,000 resolution. A 15-second dynamic exclusion window was used and ions with a single charge, a charge more than seven, or an unassigned charge were excluded. All measurements were performed at room temperature, and each sample was run and measured in triplicate to facilitate lable-free quantification and account for any machine-related variability between samples.

### Data Protocol
The resulting raw files were searched with Proteome Discoverer 1.4 using SequestHT as the search engine, custom-generated FASTA databases, and percolator to validate peptides. The SequestHT search parameters used were: enzyme name = Trypsin, maximum missed cleavage = 2, minimum peptide length = 6, maximum peptide length = 144, maximum delta Cn = 0.05, precursor mass tolerance = 10 ppm, fragment mass tolerance = 0.2 Da, dynamic modifications,  carbamidomethyl +57.021 Da(C) and oxidation +15.995 Da(M). Protein and peptide identities were validated using Scaffold (version 4.3.4, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR, USA) software. Peptide identities were accepted based on a 1.0% false discovery rate (FDR) using the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identities were also accepted with an FDR of 1.0% and a minimum of one recognized peptide.

### Publication Abstract
Sexually dimorphic traits are widespread across metazoans and are often the result of sex-specific inheritance or sex-based differences in gene expression. Intersexual differences have even been observed in invertebrate venoms, although the identification of these differences has been limited to the more well-studied groups, such as scorpions and spiders, where sex-based differences in morphology and behavior are apparent. Recent studies on centipede venom have identified evidence of intraspecific variation, but intersexual differences have not been reported. To investigate the potential for sex-based differences in centipede venom composition, we performed reversed-phase high performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) analyses on five male and 15 female eastern bark centipedes (Hemiscolopendra marginata) from the Apalachicola National Forest in northern Florida. After detecting a significant sex-based difference in H. marginata venom composition, we completed a high-throughput venom-gland transcriptomic and venom proteomic analysis of one male and one female to determine the genetic basis for differences in venom composition. We identified 47 proteomically confirmed toxins and 717 nontoxin transcripts in H. marginata venom-glands. Of these proteomically confirmed toxins, the most abundantly expressed in the male venom included ion channel-modulating toxins and toxins so divergent from any characterized homologs that they could not be given a functional classification, whereas the most abundantly expressed in the female venom were &#x3b3;-glutamyl transferases and CAPs (cysteine-rich secretory proteins, antigen 5, and pathogenesis-related 1 proteins). These differences were then confirmed by performing replicate LC-MS/MS analyses on the venom from an additional three male and three female H. marginata. Our RP-HPLC and high-throughput transcriptomic and proteomic approach resulted in not only an in-depth characterization of H. marginata venom, but represents the first example of sex-based variation in centipede venoms.

### Keywords
Venom, Centipede

### Affiliations
Florida State University

### Submitter
Darin Rokyta

### Lab Head
Dr Darin R. Rokyta
Florida State University


