### Accession
PXD020268

### Title
DNAJC9 integrates heat shock molecular chaperones into the histone chaperone network

### Description
From biosynthesis to assembly into nucleosomes, histones are handed through a cascade of histone chaperones, which shield histones from non-specific interactions. Whether mechanisms exist to safeguard the histone fold during histone chaperone handover events or to release trapped intermediates is unclear. Using structure-guided and functional proteomics, we identify and characterize a histone chaperone function of DNAJC9, a heat shock co-chaperone that promotes HSP70-mediated catalysis. We elucidate the structure of DNAJC9, in a histone H3-H4 co-chaperone complex with MCM2, revealing how this dual histone and heat shock co-chaperone binds histone substrates. We show that DNAJC9 recruits HSP70-type enzymes via its J domain to fold histone H3-H4 substrates: upstream in the histone supply chain, during replication- and transcription-coupled nucleosome assembly, and to clean up spurious interactions. With its dual functionality, DNAJC9 integrates ATP-resourced protein folding into the his one supply pathway to resolve aberrant intermediates throughout the dynamic lives of histones.

### Sample Protocol
MCM2 (U2OS-FlpIn-Flag-HA-MCM2 WT and Y81A-Y90A) and TONSL (U2OS-FlpIn-eGFP-TONSL WT and N571A) cell lines were published previously (Huang, Strømme et al. 2015, Saredi, Huang et al. 2016) (exp. 1 and 2). Cell lines expressing histones from pLVX-TetOne-Puro constructs were created via lentiviral transduction of HeLa S3 suspension cells and Puromycin selection (exp. 4, 5, 6, and 7). Cell lines expressing pcDNA5-FRT-TO-DNAJC9 constructs in the U2OS Flp-In T-REx system were created by co-transfection with pOG44-Flp-recombinase and selection with Hygromycin B and Blasticidin (exp. 3, 8, and 9).  Unless stated otherwise cells were grown in DMEM with 10 % FBS and 1% pen/strep at 37 ˚C with 5 % CO2. HeLa S3 pLVX-TetOne-Puro cell lines were grown under Puromycin selection and protein expression induced with Doxycycline. U2OS Flp-In T-REx cells were grown under Blasticidin selection and additionally Hygromycin B for cell lines with pcDNA5-FRT-TO integration, protein expression was induced with Tetracycline. For SILAC experiments cells were grown in RPMI 1640 Medium for SILAC supplemented with dialyzed FBS, MEM non-essential amino acid mix, Glutamax and isotopically labelled arginine (316 µM) and lysine (547 µM). Double SILAC experimental conditions (exp. 1 and 2) employed heavy Lys8-Arg6 or light Lys0-Arg0 amino acid pairs and triple SILAC (exp. 3) employed heavy Lys8-Arg10, medium Lys4-Arg6 or light Lys0-Arg0. Amino acid pairs were swapped between biological replicates of SILAC experiments except the U2OS Flp-In T-REx control cell line for triple SILAC experiments which was cultured with light amino acids in both biological replicates. Isotope labelled amino acids sourced as follows: Arg0 and Lys0 (A6969 and L8662, Sigma); Arg6, Arg10, Lys4 and Lys8 (CNLM-2265-H1, CNLM-539-H1, DLM-2640-1 and CNLM-291-H-1, Cambridge Isotope Laboratories).  Protein concentrations were equalized with their equivalent final extraction buffer. Flag-HA-MCM2 (exp. 1), eGFP-TONSL (exp. 2), histones-Flag-HA (exp. 4, 5, 6, and 7) and DNAJC9-MYC-Flag (exp. 3, 8, and 9) extracts were incubated with the following beads: anti-HA (88836, Thermo Scientific), GFP-trap (GTMA-20, Chromotek), anti-HA (26181, Thermo Scientific) and anti-Flag M2 (A2220, Sigma), respectively and extensively washed.  Samples were digested using sequencing-grade modified trypsin, either in-gel (exp. 1, 2, and 3), in-solution, (exp. 6 and 7), or on-beads (exp. 4, 5, 8, and 9), according to standard procedures. Peptides were desalted and purified at low-pH (exp. 1, 2, 6, and 7) or high-pH (exp. 3, 4, 5, 8, and 9) on StageTips, assembled using four layers of C18 (punch-outs from 47mm C18 3M™ extraction discs, Empore). All buffers and samples were passed over StageTips by centrifugation at 1,500g. StageTips were activated using 100 μl methanol, followed by 100 μl of 80% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (low pH) or 200 mM ammonium (high pH). StageTips were equilibrated using 2× 100 μl of 0.1% formic acid (low pH) or 50 mM ammonium (high pH), after which samples were loaded, washed twice with 150 μl 0.1% formic acid or 50 mM ammonium, and eluted with 40 μl of 40% ACN in 0.1% formic acid (low pH) or 80 μl of 25% ACN in 50 mM ammonium (high pH). All samples were vacuum-dried to completion in LoBind tubes, using a SpeedVac at 60 °C for 2 h, dissolved by addition of 10 μl 0.1% formic acid, and stored at −20 °C until mass spectrometric measurement.  The majority of samples were analyzed on EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo), coupled to a Q Exactive™ HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ mass spectrometer (Thermo). Exceptions to instrumentation and settings used are listed in the included “MS_overview” file. Separation of peptides was performed using 15-cm columns (75 μm internal diameter) packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm beads (Dr. Maisch). Elution of peptides from the column was achieved using a gradient ranging from buffer A (0.1% formic acid) to buffer B (80% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid), at a flow of 250 nl/min. Gradient length was 100 min per sample, including ramp-up and wash-out, with an analytical gradient of 79 min with a buffer B ramp from 7% to 38% buffer B. The column was heated to 40°C using a column oven, and ionization was achieved using a Nanospray Flex™ Ion Source (Thermo). Spray voltage was set to 2 kV, ion transfer tube temperature to 275°C, funnel RF level to 40%, full scan range to 300-1,750 m/z, MS1 resolution to 60K, MS1 AGC target to 3,000,000, and MS1 maximum injection time to 60 ms. Precursors with charges 2-6 were selected for fragmentation using an isolation width of 1.3 m/z, and fragmented using higher-energy collision disassociation (HCD) using a normalized collision energy of 25. Precursors were excluded from re-sequencing by setting a dynamic exclusion of 100 s. MS2 resolution was set to 30,000, MS2 AGC target to 200,000, minimum MS2 AGC target to 20,000, MS2 maximum injection time to 58 ms, and loop count to 14.

### Data Protocol
All MS RAW data was analyzed using the freely available MaxQuant software, version 1.6.3.4. Default MaxQuant settings were used, with exceptions specified below. For generation of the theoretical spectral library, the human FASTA database was downloaded from Uniprot on the 13th of May, 2019. Label-free quantification was enabled. Stringent MaxQuant 1% FDR filtering was applied at all levels (default). Matching between runs and second peptide search were enabled. For SILAC samples, multiplicity was set to 2 (exp. 1 and 2) or 3 (exp. 3), with SILAC labels set to Arg0;Lys0 (light) and Arg6;Lys8 (heavy) or Arg0;Lys0 (light) and Arg6;Lys4 and Arg10;Lys8 (heavy), respectively.

### Publication Abstract
From biosynthesis to assembly into nucleosomes, histones are handed through a cascade of histone chaperones, which shield histones from non-specific interactions. Whether mechanisms exist to safeguard the histone fold during histone chaperone handover events or to release trapped intermediates is unclear. Using structure-guided and functional proteomics, we identify and characterize a histone chaperone function of DNAJC9, a heat shock co-chaperone that promotes HSP70-mediated catalysis. We elucidate the structure of DNAJC9, in a histone H3-H4 co-chaperone complex with MCM2, revealing how this dual histone and heat shock co-chaperone binds histone substrates. We show that DNAJC9 recruits HSP70-type enzymes via its J domain to fold histone H3-H4 substrates: upstream in the histone supply chain, during replication- and transcription-coupled nucleosome assembly, and to clean up spurious interactions. With its dual functionality, DNAJC9 integrates ATP-resourced protein folding into the histone supply pathway to resolve aberrant intermediates throughout the dynamic lives of histones.

### Keywords
Histone chaperone, Hsp70, Chaperone, Dnajc9, Hsp40, Heat shock

### Affiliations
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark

### Submitter
Ivo Hendriks

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Lund Nielsen
Proteomics program, Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark


