### Accession
PXD021889

### Title
Capillary zone electrophoresis-tandem mass spectrometry as an alternative to liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry for top-down proteomics of histones with the identification of over 1000 histone proteoforms

### Description
Top-down proteomics (TDP) is an ideal approach for deciphering the histone code and it routinely employs reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Here we present capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS via the electro-kinetically pumped sheath-flow CE-MS interface for large-scale top-down delineation of histone proteoforms. CZE-MS/MS identified 80% more proteoforms than RPLC-MS/MS (589 vs. 322) from a calf histone sample with more than 30-fold less sample consumption (75-ng vs. 3 µg), indicating its substantially higher sensitivity. The electrophoretic mobility (µef) of unmodified histone proteoforms can be predicted accurately (R2=0.98) with an optimized semi-empirical model based on our recent work, and we revealed that N-terminal acetylation had minimal effect on histone proteoforms’ µef. We identified 1108 histone proteoforms from the calf histone sample using two-dimensional size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)-CZE-MS/MS with less than 300-ng proteins consumed. We achieved delineation of histone proteoforms regarding post-translational modifications (PTMs) and their combinations, relative abundance among different proteoforms of the same protein, as well as the frequency of PTM occurrence on histone proteoforms. We identified histone proteoforms carrying various PTMs, e.g., acetylation, methylation (mono-, di-, and tri-), phosphorylation, and succinylation. We revealed that different histone proteins had drastically different patterns of PTMs. The results render CZE-MS/MS as a useful tool for deciphering the histone code in a proteoform-specific manner and on a global scale.

### Sample Protocol
Lyophilized calf thymus histone extract was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). A 4.6 mm i.d. × 50 mm length SEC guard column (Bio SEC-3, guard, Agilent) and a 4.6 mm i.d. × 300 mm length SEC separation column (Bio SEC-3, Agilent) were coupled for SEC fractionation. An Agilent Infinity II HPLC system was employed for the experiment. Mobile phase was 0.1 % formic acid (FA) in water.  Roughly 500 µg histone extract (10 µg/µL) was dissolved in mobile phase and then injected to the SEC columns for separation. The flow rate was set to 0.1 mL/min. Total 13 fractions were collected from 17 to 43 min (1 fraction/ 2 min). Then a small proportion of each fraction was subjected to Bicinchoninic acid (BCA) assay for the measurement of protein concentration. 20 µL of each fraction was lyophilized and re-dissolved in 30% (v/v) acetonitrile in water to roughly 1 µg/µL. Fractions 1 and 2, fractions 12 and 13 were combined into two fractions due to low protein concentration. Eventually, 11 fractions were subjected to CZE-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer 2.4 sp software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with the ProSight PD top-down nodes was used for database search (LeDuc et al. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004). The MS1 spectra were first averaged using the cRAWler algorithm in Proteome Discoverer. Then deconvolution was performed by the Xtract algorithm followed by database search against a Bos Taurus downloaded from http://proteinaceous.net/-database-warehouse-legacy/ in April 2018. The search was performed in three steps. First, a search was performed with a 10-ppm mass tolerance of absolute mass for both MS1 and MS2. Second, a search was performed with a 200-Da mass tolerance for MS1 and a 10-ppm mass tolerance for MS2 for matching unexpected PTMs. Last, a subsequence search was performed to find unreported truncated proteoforms with 10 ppm tolerance for both MS1 and MS2. The target-decoy strategy was employed for evaluating the false discovery rates (FDRs). The identified proteoform-spectrum matches (PrSMs), proteoforms and proteins were filtered using a 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Top-down proteomics (TDP) is an ideal approach for deciphering the histone code and it routinely employs reversed-phase liquid chromatography (RPLC)-tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). Because of the extreme complexity of histones regarding the number of proteoforms, new analytical tools with high-capacity separation and highly sensitive detection of proteoforms are required for TDP of histones. Here we present capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE)-MS/MS via the electro-kinetically pumped sheath-flow CE-MS interface for large-scale top-down delineation of histone proteoforms. CZE-MS/MS identified a comparable number of proteoforms to RPLC-MS/MS from a calf histone sample with more than 30-fold less sample consumption (75-ng vs. Three &#x3bc;g), indicating its substantially higher sensitivity. We identified about 400 histone proteoforms from the calf histone sample using two-dimensional size-exclusion chromatography (SEC)-CZE-MS/MS with less than 300-ng proteins consumed. We identified histone proteoforms carrying various tentative post-translational modifications (PTMs), for example, acetylation, methylation (mono-, di-, and tri-), phosphorylation, and succinylation. The electrophoretic mobility (&#x3bc;<sub>ef</sub>) of unmodified histone proteoforms can be predicted accurately (<i>R</i><sup>2</sup> = 0.98) with an optimized semiempirical model based on our recent work. The results render CZE-MS/MS as a useful tool for deciphering the histone code in a proteoform-specific manner and on a global scale.

### Keywords
Intact histone proteoforms/mobility prediction/top-down proteomics/ histone postlational modifications/calf histone

### Affiliations
Michigan State University 
Michigan State University

### Submitter
Liangliang Sun

### Lab Head
Dr Liangliang Sun
Michigan State University


