### Accession
PXD038398

### Title
Translation-coupled sensing and degradation of RNA-protein crosslinks

### Description
Reactive aldehydes are abundant cytotoxic metabolites, which challenge homoeostasis by crosslinking cellular macromolecules. Whether RNA damage contributes to the toxicity of aldehydes and whether cells possess mechanisms to resolve RNA-protein crosslinks (RPCs) in particular is unknown. Studying the specific consequences of aldehyde-induced RNA damage is challenging due to confounding induction of DNA damage. Here, we establish photoactivatable ribonucleosides as a tractable model system to study aldehyde-mimicking RNA damage in the absence of DNA damage. The aim of this phosphoproteome measurement is to elucidate the changes in phosphorylation sites upon RPC induction using the treatment with a photoactivatable-ribonucleoside-enhanced crosslinking (PAR-CL) by incubation with 4-thiouridine (4-SU) and subsequent crosslinking by UVA irradiation.

### Sample Protocol
1.5 x 107 HAP1 (AAVS1 or ZAK KO) cells were seeded into 15 cm dish with medium containing 4-SU (5µM, 16 h), followed by 10 ml PBS wash once prior to 6 kJ/m² UVA irradiation in additional 10 ml PBS to induce RPCs. Cells were then incubated for 0.5 h in medium at 37°C. To harvest, cells were washed once in 10 ml PBS and then scraped in 5 ml ice-cold PBS on ice, transferred to a 15 ml tube and spun down at 500g for 5 min at 4°C. Cell pellets were flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C until further processing. The following conditions were generated: HAP1 AAVS1 – untreated, HAP1 AAVS1 – 4-SU+UVA + 0.5 h, HAP1 ZAK KO – 4-SU+UVA +0.5 h. Each condition was performed in four biological replicates.  Cells were lysed in modified RIPA buffer (50 mM Tris pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 0.1% sodium deoxycholate) supplemented with protease inhibitors (Complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets, Roche Diagnostics), 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 5 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 5 mM sodium flouride (all from Sigma). Subsequently, lysates were cleared by centrifugation at 16,000 × g for 15 min and protein concentrations were estimated using QuickStart Bradford Protein assay (BioRad). The Phosphoproteome method was performed as described previously (Borisova et al., 2017). Proteins were precipitated in fourfold excess of ice-cold acetone and subsequently re-dissolved in a denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 10 mM HEPES pH 8.0). Cysteines were reduced with 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated with 5.5 mM chloroacetamide. Proteins were digested with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako Chemicals) and MS-approved trypsin (Serva). Protease digestion was stopped by the addition of TFA to 0.5% and precipitates were removed by centrifugation. Peptides were purified using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA. Peptides were resuspended in 150mM HEPES pH 8.5, 30% ACN. Subsequently, peptides were chemically labeled for 1h by tandem mass tag labeling. Hydroxylamine solution was added to 0.4% final concentration to stop the labeling reaction. 0.1% TFA was added to a point of the final concentration of ACN below 3%. Peptides were purified as described before using reversed-phase Sep-Pak C18 cartridges (Waters) and eluted using 50% ACN. Phosphopeptides were enriched by incubation with titanium dioxide spheres (GL Sciences) for 2 × 1h with rotation. They were eluted sequentially with 5% NH4OH and 10% NH4OH 25% ACN, and vacuum concentrated to remove NH4OH. Peptides were separated into 11 fractions using micro-column-based SCX and desalted on reversed phase C18 StageTips. Peptide fractions were analyzed on a quadrupole Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Orbitrap Exploris 480, Thermo Scientific) equipped with a UHPLC system (EASY-nLC 1000, Thermo Scientific) as described (Michalski et al., 2011; Kelstrup et al., 2012). Peptide samples were loaded onto C18 reversed-phase columns (15 cm length, 75 μm inner diameter, 1.9 μm bead size) and eluted with a linear gradient from 8 to 40% acetonitrile containing 0.1% formic acid in 2 h. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, automatically switching between MS and MS2 acquisition. Survey full scan MS spectra (m/z 300–1650) were acquired in the Orbitrap. The 10 most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) (Olsen et al., 2007). Peptides with unassigned charge states, as well as with charge state less than +2 were excluded from fragmentation. Fragment spectra were acquired in the Orbitrap mass analyzer.

### Data Protocol
For phosphoproteome analysis, only peptides with a localization probability >= 0.75 and no missing values were considered. TMT-reporter intensities were log2 transformed and quantile normalized between the replicates using the R package preprocessCore (version 1.56.0). Significantly regulated phosphorylation sites were identified by employing a moderated T test using limma with Benjamini-Hochberg FDR correction. Only sites with a log2-fold change > 1 and an FDR-adjusted p value ≤ 0.01 were considered significant. Phosphosite annotation and kinase-substrate relations were obtained from the PhosphoSitePlus database. For phosphosite identification the flanking sequence (+/- 7 aa) was used. Kinase activity was estimated using the KSEA App web application with a p value ≤ 0.01 and a minimum NetworKIN score cut-off of 2.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Translational stress, Ups, Formaldehyde, Rna-protein crosslinks, Rna damage

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Biology (IMB), Mainz, Germany
IMB Mainz, Germany

### Submitter
Petra Beli

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Beli
IMB Mainz, Germany


