### Accession
PXD016483

### Title
The β2-subunit of voltage-gated calcium channels inhibits cardiomyocyte hypertrophy through a channel-independent mechanism.

### Description
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (LTCCs) regulate crucial physiological processes in the heart. They are composed of the Cav1 pore-forming subunit and the accessory subunits Cav, Cav2 and Cav. Cav is a cytosolic soluble protein that regulates channel trafficking and activity, but it also exerts other LTCC-independent functions. Cardiac hypertrophy, a relevant risk factor for the development of congestive heart failure, depends on the activation of calcium-dependent pro-hypertrophic signaling cascades; however, the role of LTCCs in this pathology remains controversial. Here, by using shRNA-mediated Cav silencing, we demonstrate that Cav2 downregulation enhances 1-adrenergic receptor agonist-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy in an LTCC-independent manner. We report that a pool of Cav2 is targeted to the nucleus in cardiomyocytes and that the expression of this nuclear fraction decreases during in vitro and in vivo induction of cardiac hypertrophy. Moreover, the overexpression of nucleus-targeted Cav2 in cardiomyocytes inhibits in vitro-induced hypertrophy. Quantitative proteomic analyses showed that Cav2 knockdown leads to changes in the expression of diverse myocyte proteins, including reduction of calpastatin, an endogenous inhibitor of the calcium-dependent protease calpain. Accordingly, Cav2-deficient cardiomyocytes had a two-fold increase in calpain activity as compared to control cells. Furthermore, inhibition of calpain activity in Cav2-deficient cells abolished the enhanced 1-adrenergic receptor agonist-induced hypertrophy observed in these cells. Our findings indicate that in cardiomyocytes, a nuclear pool of Cav2 participates in cellular functions that are independent of LTCC activity. They also indicate that a downregulation of nuclear Cav2 during cardiac hypertrophy promotes the activation of calpain-dependent hypertrophic pathways.

### Sample Protocol
For MS analysis biological replicates of each condition were used, including condition 1: wild type NRCs (control), condition 2: NRCs transduced with scrambled shRNA (shRNAsc, negative control), condition 3: NRCs transduced with shRNA338 and condition 4: NRCs transduced with shRNA892. Total cell lysates (10 g in each lane) were separated by short gel SDS-PAGE. Afterwards, the protein bands were excised, hashed and destained by three times alternating 10-minute treatments with buffer A (10 mM ammonium bicarbonate, pH 8.3) and buffer B (buffer A + 100% acetonitrile from Merck Millipore in a ratio of 50:50 (v/v)). After the second incubation with Buffer A, samples were treated with 50 l of 10 mM DTT (AppliChem) for 1 hour at 56°C and with 50 l of 50 mM iodoacetamide (Merck Millipore) for 45 minutes at room temperature before continuing with the destaining protocol. Finally, gel pieces were dried in a vacuum concentrator (RVC2-25CD plus, Martin Christ Gefriertrocknungsanlagen). Digestion was initiated by adding 8 l of trypsin solution (0.015 g/l, Serva) and was performed overnight. The digestion was stopped, and the peptides were eluted by incubating the gel pieces two times during 15 minutes with 30 l of a 1:1 solution containing 100% acetonitrile and 0.1% (v/v) TFA (Merck Millipore) in an ice-cooled ultrasonic bath. Samples were dried in a vacuum concentrator and resuspended in 20 l of 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid. Afterwards, the peptide concentration was determined by amino acid analysis (AAA) as described (37). According to the AAA, 200 ng per sample were taken for MS analysis. Nano-HPLC-MS/MS was performed as previously described (38) by means of LC-MS/MS on an UltiMate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled online to an LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (both Thermo Fischer Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For protein identification via database searches, the raw files were analyzed with the Proteom Discoverer software (v. 1.4.1.14) (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using the Mascot search algorithm (version 2.5) (Matrix Science Ltd.) searching against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot database using rat taxonomy (released 2017_1,556,196 sequences entries in the whole database). The database search was performed with the following parameters: enzyme: trypsin (digestion mode specific); missed cleavages: 2; mass tolerance 5 ppm for precursor and 0.4 Da for fragment ions; modifications: methionine oxidation as dynamic and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed; FDR calculation was performed using target decoy PSM validator implemented in the Proteom Discoverer software and FDR threshold was set to <1%. Label-free quantification was performed by using the Progenesis QI software (Nonlinear Dynamics Ltd.). Raw files generated by the mass spectrometer were imported in the software and all runs were matched to the most suitable run among them (by automatic selection). Afterwards, the software generated a list of features including the m/z values of all measured peptides at a given retention time. The following filters were used at feature level: allowed charge state in the range 2+ and 5+, reject the features with two or less isotopes. The raw abundances of each feature were automatically normalized in order to correct experimental variations. Experimental setup was set to “between subjects” using three group comparison. Quantified features were then matched to peptide and protein identification by importing the search results generated by proteome discoverer (see protein identification). For quantification only proteins with at least two peptide counts for identification were used. Additionally, only unique peptides were used for quantification. An anova test was carried out for statistical evaluation, taking mean differences , the variance and also the sample size into account. To exclude regulation depending on transduced shRNA furthermore an additional comparison between wild type NRCs and shRNAsc NRCs was included. Differential proteins from this comparison were not considered as significant regulated proteins.

### Publication Abstract
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels (LTCCs) regulate crucial physiological processes in the heart. They are composed of the Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b1;<sub>1</sub> pore-forming subunit and the accessory subunits Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;, Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b1;<sub>2</sub>&#x3b4;, and Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b3;. Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2; is a cytosolic protein that regulates channel trafficking and activity, but it also exerts other LTCC-independent functions. Cardiac hypertrophy, a relevant risk factor for the development of congestive heart failure, depends on the activation of calcium-dependent pro-hypertrophic signaling cascades. Here, by using shRNA-mediated Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2; silencing, we demonstrate that Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> downregulation enhances &#x3b1;1-adrenergic receptor agonist-induced cardiomyocyte hypertrophy. We report that a pool of Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> is targeted to the nucleus in cardiomyocytes and that the expression of this nuclear fraction decreases during <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> induction of cardiac hypertrophy. Moreover, the overexpression of nucleus-targeted Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> in cardiomyocytes inhibits <i>in vitro</i>-induced hypertrophy. Quantitative proteomic analyses showed that Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> knockdown leads to changes in the expression of diverse myocyte proteins, including reduction of calpastatin, an endogenous inhibitor of the calcium-dependent protease calpain. Accordingly, Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-downregulated cardiomyocytes had a 2-fold increase in calpain activity as compared to control cells. Furthermore, inhibition of calpain activity in Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub>-downregulated cells abolished the enhanced &#x3b1;1-adrenergic receptor agonist-induced hypertrophy observed in these cells. Our findings indicate that in cardiomyocytes, a nuclear pool of Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> participates in cellular functions that are independent of LTCC activity. They also indicate that a downregulation of nuclear Ca<sub>v</sub>&#x3b2;<sub>2</sub> during cardiomyocyte hypertrophy promotes the activation of calpain-dependent hypertrophic pathways.

### Keywords
L-type voltage-gated calcium channels; cav-subunit; cardiac hypertrophy; calpain; cardiomyocytes; calpastatin

### Affiliations
Ruhr University Bochum
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Raum 2.250 Gesundheitscampus 4 44801 Bochum Germany

### Submitter
Katalin Barkovits

### Lab Head
Dr Katalin Barkovits
Ruhr-Universität Bochum Medizinisches Proteom-Center Raum 2.250 Gesundheitscampus 4 44801 Bochum Germany


