### Accession
PXD006922

### Title
A multiplex targeted mass spectrometry assay for one-shot flavivirus diagnosis

### Description
Targeted proteomic mass spectrometry is emerging as a salient clinical diagnostic tool to track protein biomarkers. Yet, its strong analytical properties have not been exploited in the diagnosis and typing of flavivirus. Here, we report the development of a highly sensitive and specific single-shot robust assay for flavivirus typing and diagnosis using targeted mass spectrometry technology. Our flavivirus parallel reaction monitoring assay (fvPRM) has the ability to track secreted flaviviral non-structural protein 1 (NS1) over a broad diagnostic and typing window with high sensitivity, specificity, extendibility and multiplexing capability. These features, pivotal and pertinent to efficient response towards flavivirus outbreaks, including newly emerging flavivirus strains, and circumvent the limitations of current diagnostic assays. fvPRM thus carries high potential in positioning itself as a forerunner in delivering early and accurate diagnosis for disease management.

### Sample Protocol
Four microliters of serum (~200 ug protein) was diluted 9x times in 9 M Urea /20 mM Hepes (pH 8) before reduction by 55 mM DTT (3.6 uL) and incubated at room temperature for 30 min, followed by addition of 120 mM iodoacetamide (3.6 uL) and incubated for 30 min at room temperature in the dark. 20 mM Hepes (pH 8) was added to dilute the sample to a concentration of 6 M urea before 2.75 ug of LysC (Wako 129-02451) was added to each sample and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The samples were further diluted to a concentration of ~1 M urea by adding appropriate amount of 20 mM Hepes (pH8) and 6 ug of sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) was added. After 4 hours of digestion at 37°C, 10% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to the peptide solution to achieve a final concentration of 0.5% TFA. The solution was allowed to stand at room temperature for 10 minutes for precipitation to occur. The supernatant was mixed with 0.5 mL 0.1% TFA and loaded onto a 1 mL EmporeTM C18-SD Cartridge (3M Empore), washed with 1.3 mL 0.1% TFA and eluted with 500 uL 50 % acetonitrile / 0.1 % TFA under gravity. The yield of the resultant peptide was measured using Nanodrop (Thermo Scientific).

### Data Protocol
DENV serotyping PRM data were analysed by SpectroDive using using a panel consists of peptides unique to each DENV serotype and Filamin A as shown in “SpectroDive Panel for DENV Serotyping”. The PRM raw files were imported into SpectroDive with the default setting. The results from SpectroDive, “Transition Group Report”, were obtained by exporting all the columns under the categories of “Experiment”, “Run”, “Elution Group” and “Transition Group” in SpectroDive Report after checking “No Significance Filter” in SpectroDive Report. The peptides were then filtered using EG.Qvalue < 0.02. The cut-off score / range for the EG.Cscore for each peptide is shown in Supplementary Table 5. Above the cut-off score / range, the peptide is a true positive and vice versa. If the EG.Cscore falls within the cut-off range, the peptide requires further validation. fvPRM data was analysed by SpectroDive using 2 panels (one panel for DENV serotype and Filamin A as well as one panel for ZIKV, YFV and KUNV) as shown in “SpectroDive Panels for fvPRM”). The panels were optimized by removing peptides that yield false positives.

### Publication Abstract
Targeted proteomic mass spectrometry is emerging as a salient clinical diagnostic tool to track protein biomarkers. However, its strong analytical properties have not been exploited in the diagnosis and typing of flaviviruses. Here, we report the development of a sensitive and specific single-shot robust assay for flavivirus typing and diagnosis using targeted mass spectrometry technology. Our flavivirus parallel reaction monitoring assay (<i>fv</i>PRM) has the ability to track secreted flaviviral nonstructural protein 1 (NS1) over a broad diagnostic and typing window with high sensitivity, specificity, extendibility, and multiplexing capability. These features, pivotal and pertinent to efficient response toward flavivirus outbreaks, including newly emerging flavivirus strains, circumvent the limitations of current diagnostic assays. <i>fv</i>PRM thus carries high potential in positioning itself as a forerunner in delivering early and accurate diagnosis for disease management.

### Keywords
Targeted proteomics, Dengue, Flavivirus.

### Affiliations
IMCB
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673

### Submitter
Sheena Wee

### Lab Head
Dr Jayantha Gunaratne
Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673


