### Accession
PXD020501

### Title
Mass-spectrometry analysis of the human pineal proteome during night and day and in autism.

### Description
Using mass spectrometry based proteomics and dedicated analysis tools, we identify proteins expressed in the human pineal gland and analyze systematically their variation with time of the throughout the day, and, compare these changes in the pineal proteome between control specimens and donors diagnosed with ASD.

### Sample Protocol
Detergent was removed from the lysates and the proteins were digested with Lys C and trypsin using the filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocol (Wisniewski et al, 2009) using spin ultrafiltration units of nominal molecular weight cut of 30 000 Da. Briefly, to YM-30 microcon filter units (Cat No. MRCF0R030, Millipore) containing protein concentrates, 200 μL of 8 M urea in 0.1 M Tris/HCl, pH 8.5 (UA), was added and samples were centrifuged at 14 000× g at 20 °C for 40 min. This step was performed twice. Then 100 μL of 0.05 M iodoacetamide in 8 M urea was added to the filters and the samples were incubated in darkness for 20 min. Filters were washed twice with 200 μL of 8 M UA. 40 µL of LysC in UA buffer was added to each sample and incubated overnight at 30 °C. Finally, trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) was added in 120μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 to each filter for 5h at 37 °C. The protein to enzyme ratio was 100:1. Released peptides were collected by centrifugation and multiple rincerinse of the filter in 50 mM NH4HCO3. A last wahswash in 5M NaCl was performed to disrupt any adsorbtionadsorption of peptide to the cellulose membrane.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digests were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC system (Dionex, Thermo-Scientific,) coupled to the nanoflow electrospray ion source of a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo-Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Each digest was loaded on a trapping precolumn (C-18 PepMap100, 5 µm, 100 Å, Dionex, Thermo-Scientific,) at a flow rate of 10 µL/min of solvent A (2 % Acetonitrile (ACN), 0.1 % Formic Acid (FA)). Peptides were desalted on the precolumn for 2 min and separation was performed using an in-house 50 cm long column (C18 resin, Reprosil Pur, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maish). Peptides were separated at a flow rate of 300 nL.min-1 using a gradient of 2% to 55% solvent B (80% ACN, 0.1% FA) for 180 min, followed by a 10 min washing step at 98% solvent B and a reconditioning step at 2% B for 40 min.  Mass spectrometry acquisition was done using XCalibur (v 2.0) in a data-dependent acquisition mode. Survey scan MS were acquired in the Orbitrap on the 300 – 2000 m/z range with the resolution set to a value of 70 000 at m/z = 400 in profile mode (AGC target at 1E6). The 15 most intense ions per survey scan were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 27), and the resulting fragments were analyzed in the Orbitrap at 17500 of resolution (m/z 400). Isolation of the parent ion was fixed at 2.5 m/z. Dynamic exclusion was employed within 20s.. All Data were acquired spectrum were acquired in profile mode.

### Publication Abstract
The human pineal gland regulates day-night dynamics of multiple physiological processes, especially through the secretion of melatonin. Using mass-spectrometry-based proteomics and dedicated analysis tools, we identify proteins in the human pineal gland and analyze systematically their variation throughout the day and compare these changes in the pineal proteome between control specimens and donors diagnosed with autism. Results reveal diverse regulated clusters of proteins with, among others, catabolic carbohydrate process and cytoplasmic membrane-bounded vesicle-related proteins differing between day and night and/or control versus autism pineal glands. These data show novel and unexpected processes happening in the human pineal gland during the day/night rhythm as well as specific differences between autism donor pineal glands and those from controls.

### Keywords
Pineal glands, Proteomics, Circadian

### Affiliations
Pasteur
Institut Pasteur

### Submitter
MARIETTE MATONDO 

### Lab Head
Dr MARIETTE MATONDO
Institut Pasteur


