### Accession
PXD040448

### Title
Characterization of the interactomes of YAP and TAZ in podocytes identifies a relation between YAP and TAZ and proteins of the nuclear shuttling machinery

### Description
The two effector proteins of the Hippo signaling pathway, YAP and TAZ, play a pivotal role in the cellular homeostasis of podocytes and in the pathogenesis of focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). We aim to unravel the unique and redundant functions of YAP and TAZ in the podocyte by identifying podocyte-specific interactors. We generated stable heat sensitive mouse podocytes (hsMPs) carrying a single copy integration of a transgenic construct expressing a flagged version of mouse Yap (3XFLAG.YAP), Taz (3XFLAG.TAZ) or Ruby (3XFLAG.RUBY) in the Rosa26 locus. To explore the interactome of YAP and TAZ in podocytes we immunoprecipitated the tagged proteins and characterized the co-immunoprecipitated protein complexes by mass spectrometry. Within the interactome analyses of the hsMPs, we identified shared and non-shared interacting proteins between YAP and TAZ. Among these identified proteins many well established interactors of YAP and TAZ were included, like proteins of the Tead family, different angiomotins or large tumor suppressor kinase 1 (Lats1). Strikingly, among the shared proteins were numerous proteins of the nuclear shuttling machinery, like importins (Ipo), exportins (Xpo), transportins (Tnpo) and nucleoporins (Nup) that form the nuclear pore complex (NPC), such as NUP107, NUP133, NUP205 and XPO5.

### Sample Protocol
Sample processing protocol: For each replicate of the experiments, 2×10-cm dishes (60% confluency) were used. Cells were harvested with ice-cold PBS. The harvested cells were lysed in modified RIPA Buffer (1% Igepal NP40, 50 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 0.25% NaDeoxycholate, and complete protease inhibitors without EDTA (PIM; Roche)). Cells were titruated 8 times with a 27-gauge needle. The cell suspension was incubated on ice for 15 min. After centrifugation at 20,000xg for 30 min at 4°C and ultracentrifugation at 125,000xg for 30 min at 4°C. The samples for mass spectrometry analysis were incubated with Dynabeads protein G that were precoupled with the M2-Flag-antibody (Sigma, F1804) at 4°C overnight. Before adding of the antibody-coupled-beads a small aliquot of each sample was preserved and diluted with 2×SDS-PAGE sample buffer for immunoblot analysis. The next day, the beads were washed 5 times and then resuspended in 50µl of 5 % SDS in PBS and boiled for 5 minutes. The magnetic beads were collected on a magnet and the eluate was processed for Mass Spectometry Analysis.  Data acquisition: Proteomics analysis were conducted at the CECAD Proteomics Facility, University of Cologne. All samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus (Thermo Scientific) mass spectrometer that was coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 or 1200 UPLC (Thermo Scientific). Samples were loaded onto an in-house packed analytical column (50 cm × 75 µm I.D., filled with 2.7 µm Poroshell EC120 C18, Agilent) that has been equilibrated in solvent A (0.1 % formic acid in water) and peptides were separated at a constant flow rate of 250 nL/min using a 50 min gradient followed by a 10 min wash with 95 % Solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 80% acetonitrile) for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode. MS1 survey scans were acquired from 300 to 1750 m/z at a resolution of 70,000. The top 10 most abundant peptides were isolated within a 1.8 Th window and subjected to HCD fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 27%. The AGC target was set to 5e5 charges, allowing a maximum injection time of 110 ms. Product ions were detected in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 35,000. Precursors were dynamically excluded for 10 s.

### Data Protocol
All mass spectrometric raw data were processed with Maxquant (version 1.5.3.8) using default parameters. Briefly, MS2 spectra were searched against the Mouse reference (downloaded at 16.6.2017), including a list of common contaminants. False discovery rates on protein and PSM level were estimated by the target-decoy approach to 1% (Protein FDR) and 1% (PSM FDR) respectively. The minimal peptide length was set to 7 amino acids and carbamidomethylation at cysteine residues was considered as a fixed modification. Oxidation (M) and Acetyl (Protein N-term) were included as variable modifications. The match-between runs option was enabled within replicate groups. LFQ quantification was enabled using default settings. Student´s T-tests were calculated in Perseus (version 1.6.1.1) after removal of decoys and potential contaminants. Data were filtered for at least 3 out of 3 values in at least one condition. Remaining missing values were imputed with random values from the lower end of the intensity distribution using Perseus defaults.

### Publication Abstract
Mutations in genes encoding nuclear pore proteins (NUPs) lead to the development of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome and focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS). However, the precise molecular mechanisms by which NUP dysfunction contributes to podocyte injury preceding FSGS remain unclear. The tightly regulated activity of Yes-associated protein (YAP) and WW-domain-containing transcription regulator 1 (TAZ), the transcriptional effectors of the Hippo pathway, is crucial for podocytes and the maintenance of the glomerular filter. In this study, we investigate the impact of NUPs on the regulation of YAP/TAZ nuclear import and activity in podocytes. In unbiased interactome studies using quantitative label-free mass spectrometry, we identify the FSGS disease gene products NUP107, NUP133, NUP205, and Exportin-5 (XPO5) as components of YAP and TAZ protein complexes in podocytes. Moreover, we demonstrate that NUP205 is essential for YAP/TAZ nuclear import. Consistently, both the nuclear interaction of YAP/TAZ with TEA domain transcription factor 1 and their transcriptional activity were dependent on NUP205 expression. Additionally, we elucidate a regulatory feedback mechanism whereby YAP activity is modulated in response to TAZ-mediated NUP205 expression. In conclusion, this study establishes a connection between the FSGS disease protein NUP205 and the activity of the transcriptional regulators and Hippo effectors YAP and TAZ and it proposes a potential pathological role of YAP/TAZ dysregulation in podocytes of patients with pathogenic NUP205 variants.

### Keywords
Podocyte, Hippo signaling, Wwtr1, Yes-associated protein 1, Fsgs, Yap, Taz

### Affiliations
CECAD Research Center
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Bernhard Schermer
Department II of Internal Medicine and Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, University of Cologne and University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany


