### Accession
PXD010510

### Title
A high throughput pipeline for antibody validation

### Description
Western blotting (WB) is widely used to test antibody specificity, but the assay has low throughput and precision. Here we show that an inverted version of WB allows parallel readout with antibody arrays, shotgun mass spectrometry (MS) and immunoprecipitation followed by MS (IP-MS). The pipeline provides means for large-scale implementation of concepts proposed by an international working group on antibody validation (IWGAV).

### Sample Protocol
Pipetting was performed in a laminar flow hood, and all solutions were made fresh to minimize keratin contamination. Ten microliters of Protein A/G beads (1% solids) were coupled with a saturating amount of a single antibody (monitored by staining with fluorochrome-conjugated anti-Ig antibodies and FCM). For mouse monoclonals, the beads were first coupled with Ig subclass-specific goat-anti-mouse IgG. Ten microliters of antibody-coupled beads suspended in PBS casein blocker solution (Thermo) and 25ul of PAGE-fraction was added to a PCR polypropylene microwell plate (Axygen cat no 732-0661) pre-filled with 200ul PBT. We selected proteins from cells that were labelled with medium and heavy amino acids (i.e. Jurkat, HeLa, A431 and RT4 cells).  Considering a total load of 150ug per well in the Gelfree 8100 cassettes, 12 fractions and the use of 1/6 fraction, the amount of sample per IP corresponds to approximately 2ug of cellular protein. The plates were capped and rotated overnight at 4oC. The beads were pelleted by centrifugation. The bead pellet was washed three times in PBT. An aliquot corresponding to 1% of the beads was labelled with Phycoerythrin-conjugated streptavidin and analyzed by flow cytometry to assess binding of biotinylated proteins. The remainder were washed twice with PBS with 0.1% dodecylmaltoside and resuspended in 10ul ammonium carbonate buffer with ProteaseMax. Trypsin (100ng) was added, and the beads were incubated at 22oC for 15 min under constant agitation. The conditions for digestion were optimized by measuring reduction in Phycoerythrin-streptavidin fluorescence on the beads at various time points during digestion by flow cytometry.  Peptides were purified as described under sample preparation for MS. In each MS analysis, one IP from SILAC heavy and light-labelled lysates were run simultaneously. The LC-gradient was 20 min per IP.

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were submitted to MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 for protein identification.  Parameters were set as follows: no fixed modification; protein N-acetylation and methionine oxidation as variable modifications. When applicable, the following SILAC labels were selected: Lys8; Arg11; Lys6; Arg6. First search error window of 20 ppm and mains search error of 6 ppm. Trypsin without proline restriction enzyme option was used, with two allowed miscleavages. Minimal unique peptides were set to 1, and FDR allowed was 0.01 (1%) for peptide and protein identification. The reviewed Uniprot human database was used (retrieved June 2015). Generation of reversed sequences was selected to assign FDR rates.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ip-ms, Lc-ms/ms, Antibody validation

### Affiliations
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway
K.G. Jebsen Center for Cancer Immunotherapy, Oslo, Norway

### Submitter
Krzysztof Sikorski

### Lab Head
Dr Fridtjof Lund-Johansen
Oslo University Hospital, Oslo, Norway


