### Accession
PXD027896

### Title
Cross-species analysis of viral nucleic acid interactors identifies TAOKs as immune regulators

### Description
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we used an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach revealed a conserved core of proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactants. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identified 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identified the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement in type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies led to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study reveals a by far larger interaction space between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Sample Protocol
For full proteome (FP) analysis, THP-1 cells with KO of TAOK1, -2, -3, STAT1 or NEG4 (control) were mock-treated or infected with SFV. Cell pellets of quadruplicates were lysed (6 M GdmCl, 10 mM TCEP, 40 mM CAA, 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8), boiled at 99 °C for 10 min and sonicated (15 min, 4 °C, 30 sec on, 30 sec off, high setting; Bioruptor Plus). Protein concentrations of cleared lysates were normalized to 50 µg and proteins were pre-digested with 1 μg LysC (37°C, 3 h) followed by a 1:10 dilution (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8) and overnight digestion with 1 μg trypsin at 30 °C. Peptide purification based on C18 Empore filter discs (3M) was carried out as described previously 56 and peptides were resuspended in buffer A* (0.2% TFA, 2% ACN) for LC–MS/MS analysis. Peptides were loaded on a C18 reversed-phase column (50 cm, 60 °C; 75 μm inner diameter; packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm silica beads; Dr. Maisch) and separated using an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a 5% to 30% acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 300 nl/min over a period of 120 min. Eluting peptides were directly analyzed on a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer via a nano-electrospray source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data-dependent acquisition included repeating cycles of one MS1 full scan (300–1650 m/z, resolution (R) of 60,000 at m/z 200) at an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 3×106, followed by 15 MS2 scans of the highest abundant isolated and higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmented peptide precursors (R of 15,000 at m/z 200). For MS2 scans, collection of isolated peptide precursors was limited by an AGC target of 1×105 and a maximum injection time of 25 ms. Isolation and fragmentation of the same peptide precursor was eliminated by dynamic exclusion for 20 s. The isolation window of the quadrupole was set to 1.4 m/z and HCD was set to a normalized collision energy (NCE) of 27 %. All data was acquired in profile mode using positive polarity.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were processed with MaxQuant (v.1.6.14.0) using the standard settings, label free quantitation (LFQ) and match between runs enabled. Spectra were searched against forward and reverse sequences of the reviewed human proteome including isoforms (Uniprot KB) as well as SFV (FP) protein sequences by the built-in Andromeda search engine. The MaxQuant output was further analyzed using Perseus (v1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
The cell intrinsic antiviral response of multicellular organisms developed over millions of years and critically relies on the ability to sense and eliminate viral nucleic acids. Here we use an affinity proteomics approach in evolutionary distant species (human, mouse and fly) to identify proteins that are conserved in their ability to associate with diverse viral nucleic acids. This approach shows a core of orthologous proteins targeting viral genetic material and species-specific interactions. Functional characterization of the influence of 181 candidates on replication of 6 distinct viruses in human cells and flies identifies 128 nucleic acid binding proteins with an impact on virus growth. We identify the family of TAO kinases (TAOK1, -2 and -3) as dsRNA-interacting antiviral proteins and show their requirement for type-I interferon induction. Depletion of TAO kinases in mammals or flies leads to an impaired response to virus infection characterized by a reduced induction of interferon stimulated genes in mammals and impaired expression of srg1 and diedel in flies. Overall, our study shows a larger set of proteins able to mediate the interaction between viral genetic material and host factors than anticipated so far, attesting to the ancestral roots of innate immunity and to the lineage-specific pressures exerted by viruses.

### Keywords
Ap-ms, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Virology, Technical University Munich
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany

### Submitter
Christian Urban

### Lab Head
Dr Andreas Pichlmair
Technical University of Munich, School of Medicine, Institute of Virology, 81675 Munich, Germany


