### Accession
PXD013919

### Title
The proteomes of oral cells alter during co-cultivation  with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Eikenella corrodens The proteomes of oral cells alter during co-cultivation  with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Eikenella corrodens

### Description
Although periodontitis is a widespread disease, its molecular mechanisms in human oral cells are not fully understood. Therefore, we established cell lines from the human oral cavity, including gingival keratinocytes (GK), osteoblastic lineage cells from the alveolar bone (OLAB), PDL fibroblasts (PDLF) and cementum cells (CC). Using label-free quantitative mass spectrometry, we investigated changes of the proteome of healthy human oral cells after co-cultivation with Aggregatibacter actinomycetemcomitans and Eikenella corrodens for 24 h, for the first time. Our findings show specific protein profiles for each of the human oral cell lines. This will help to understand pathologic mechanisms in periodontitis and related diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis, diabetes mellitus or atherosclerotic vascular diseases.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were resuspended in basic lysis buffer consisting of 25 mM TRIS at pH 7.4, 0.9% NP-40, 150 mM NaCl and protease inhibitors. Afterwards, cells were frozen with liquid nitrogen and melted 5 times. The protein concentration was determined with the aid of Pierce BCA Protein Assay Kit and Nanodrop 1000. The protein samples were precipitated with acetone at −20 °C for 12 h. 50 μg protein per sample were loaded onto a 4-12 % NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris Minigel and run into the gel for 1.5 cm. Following Coomassie staining, the protein areas were cut out, diced and subjected to reduction with dithiothreitol, alkylation with iodoacetamide and finally overnight digestion with trypsin. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel, the solution dried in a Speedvac and stored at -20 °C for further analysis. For generation of a peptide library, equal amount aliquots from each sample were pooled to a total amount of 80 μg, and separated into eight fractions using a reversed phase spin column. All samples were spiked with a synthetic peptide standard used for retention time alignment. Protein digests were analyzed on a nanoﬂow chromatography system (Eksigent nanoLC425) hyphenated to a hybrid triple quadrupole-TOF mass spectrometer (TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a Nanospray III ion source (Ionspray Voltage 2400 V, Interface Heater Temperature 150 °C, Sheath Gas Setting 12) and controlled by Analyst TF 1.7.1 software build 1163 (all AB Sciex). In brief, peptides were dissolved in loading buffer (2% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid in water) to a concentration of 0.3 μg/μl. For each analysis 1.5 μg of digested protein were enriched on a precolumn (0.18 mm ID x 20 mm, Symmetry C18.5 µm; 186000197; Waters) and separated on an analytical RP-C18 column (0.075 mm ID x 250 mm, HSS T3, 1.8 µm; 186003539; Waters) using a 90 min linear gradient of 5-35 % acetonitrile/0.1 % formic acid (v:v) at 300 nl/min. Qualitative LC/MS/MS analysis was performed using a Top25 data-dependent acquisition method with an MS survey scan of m/z 350–1250 accumulated for 350 ms at a resolution of 30,000 full width at half maximum (FWHM). MS/MS scans of m/z 180–1600 were accumulated for 100 ms at a resolution of 17,500 FWHM and a precursor isolation width of 0.7 FWHM, resulting in a total cycle time of 2.9 s. Precursors above a threshold MS intensity of 125 cps with charge states 2+, 3+, and 4+ were selected for MS/MS, the dynamic exclusion time was set to 30 s. MS/MS activation was achieved by CID using nitrogen as a collision gas and the manufacturer’s default rolling collision energy settings. Four technical replicates per reversed phase fraction and a single replicate of each cell co-culture were analysed to construct a spectral library. For quantitative SWATH analysis, MS/MS data were acquired using 65 variable size windows  across the 400-1,050 m/z range. Fragments were produced using rolling collision energy settings for charge state 2+, and fragments acquired over an m/z range of 350–1400 for 40 ms per segment. Including a 100 ms survey scan, this resulted in an overall cycle time of 2.8 s. Three replicate injections were acquired for each biological sample.

### Data Protocol
Protein identiﬁcation was achieved using ProteinPilot Software version 5.0 build 4769 (AB Sciex) at “thorough” settings. A total of 689,558 MS/MS spectra from the combined qualitative analyses were searched against the combined UniProtKB H. sapiens, A. actinomycetemcomitans and E. corrodens reference proteomes (revision 12-2018, 105,242 entries) augmented with a set of 52 known common laboratory contaminants to a False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1%. Spectral library generation and SWATH peak extraction were achieved in PeakView Software version 2.1 build 11041 (AB Sciex) using the SWATH quantitation microApp version 2.0 build 2003. Following retention time correction using the iRT standard, peak areas were extracted using information from the MS/MS library at an FDR of 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Pdl fibroblast, Osteoblastic lineage cell, Gingival keratinocyte, Bacteria, Proteome, Cementoblast

### Affiliations
Max Planck Institute for Biophysical Chemistry
University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Christof Lenz

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Lenz
University Medical Center Göttingen, Germany


