### Accession
PXD028519

### Title
Degradations of different processed Mg alloy implants lead to distinct foreign body reactions (FBRs)

### Description
Mg alloy is one of the lightest metals on earth and has the most similar mechanical properties to human bones. However, the active chemical properties and fast in vivo degrade speed significantly hinder its further employment as human implant. In this study, three different Mg alloys are employed to investigate the in vitro corrosion behavior including weight loss, pH value evolution and surface hardness and in vivo degradable speed and tissue compatibility. All three Mg alloys are well tolerated when implanted in SD rats, with minimal influence on hepato-and renal functions and vital organs. Compared to cold extruded AZ31 (CE AZ31) and pure Mg (PM) specimens, fully annealed AZ31 (FA AZ31) presents much stable surface asperity. Proteomics analysis of tissues near implant site showed that FA AZ31 activates few inflammation and immune associated signaling pathways; while the CE AZ31 and pure Mg led more significant inflammatory responses as confirmed by the cytokine array that pure Mg stimulate higher IL-1 production than FA AZ31. Further, FA AZ31 can activate pathways of cell organization and development that may improve the recovery of the injured tissues neighboring the implant sites. Besides, all three Mg alloys cannot inhibit a methicillin-resistant S. aureus growth if the implants are contaminated with this bacterium. FA AZ31 has a higher ratio of first-order pyramidal slips system (10-11) {10-1-2} than pure Mg and cold extruded AZ31 analysed by EBSD, suggesting the process of dynamic recovery may plays an important role in the improvement of mechanical properties, especially bio-properties including corrosion resistance and biocompatibility. In conclusion, FA AZ31 has better biocompatibilities and corrosion resistance, makes it a promising candidate of metal-based degradable implant and warrant further investigation.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion Samples were homogenised in the SDT buffer (4%SDS，100mM Tris-HCl，1mM DTT，pH7.6), and the lysate was clarified by centrifugation for 10 min (10000 rpm at 4 °C). The amount of protein was quantified with the BCA Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad, USA), from which 200 μg of proteins for each sample were subjected to trypsin digestion according to filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) procedure described elsewhere1. Briefly, the protein aliquots ware resuspended into the buffer containing 4% SDS, 100 mM DTT and 150 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). Low-molecular-weight components were removed using UA buffer (8 M Urea, 150 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0) by repeated ultrafiltration (Microcon units, 10 kD). Then, 100 mM iodoacetamide in UA buffer was added and the samples were incubated for 30 min in darkness. The filters were washed with UA buffer three times and then 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer twice. Finally, the protein suspensions were digested with 4 μg trypsin (Promega) in 25mM NH4HCO3 buffer overnight at 37 °C, and the resulting peptides were collected as a filtrate. The tryptic peptides were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), and lyophilised by vacuum centrifugation for TMT labelling.  TMT10plex labelling and Strong Cation Exchange (SCX) Fractionation 100 μg peptide mixture of each sample was labeled using TMT reagent according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Thermo Scientific). Labels 126, 127N and 127C were used for the control group, and labels 128N and 128C were used to label the samples embedded with pure Mg. The samples with cold drawn Mg were labelled using 129N and 129C, while the samples embedded with annealing Mg were labelled with 130N, 130C and 131.  Labelled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography using the AKTA Purifier system (GE Healthcare). The dried peptide mixture was reconstituted and acidified with buffer A (10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) and loaded onto a PolySULFOETHYL 4.6 x 100 mm column (5 µm, 200 Å, PolyLC Inc, Maryland, U.S.A.). The peptides were eluted at a flow rate of 1 ml/min with a gradient of 0% buffer B (500 mM KCl, 10 mM KH2PO4 in 25% of ACN, pH 3.0) for 25 min, 0–10% buffer B during 25-32 min, 10%-20%  buffer B during 32-42 min, 20-45% buffer B during 42-47 min, 45%–100% buffer B during 47-52 min, 100% buffer B during 52-60 min, and buffer B was reset to 0% after 60min. The elution was monitored by absorbance at 214 nm, and fractions were collected every 1 min. The collected fractions were desalted on C18 Cartridges (Empore™ SPE Cartridges C18 (standard density), bed I.D. 7 mm, volume 3 ml, Sigma), lyophilised and reconstituted in 40 µl of 0.1% (v/v) formic acid for LC-MS/MS analysis. nanoLC tandem Q-Exactive MS/MS analyses   The peptide samples were analysed using a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) coupled to Easy nLC (Proxeon Biosystems, now Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were loaded onto a reverse phase trap column (Thermo Scientific Acclaim PepMap100, 100 μm×2 cm, nanoViper C18) connected to the C18-reversed phase analytical column (Thermo Scientific Easy Column, 10 cm long, 75 μm inner diameter, 3μm resin) in buffer A (0.1% Formic acid) and separated with a linear gradient of buffer B (84% acetonitrile and 0.1% Formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in positive ion mode. MS data was acquired using a data-dependent top10 method dynamically choosing the most abundant precursor ions from the survey scan (300–1800 m/z) for HCD fragmentation. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6, and maximum inject time to 10 ms. Dynamic exclusion duration was 40.0 s. Survey scans were acquired at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z 200 and resolution for HCD spectra was set to 17,500 at m/z 200, and isolation width was 2 m/z. Normalized collision energy was 30 eV and the underfill ratio, which specifies the minimum percentage of the target value likely to be reached at maximum fill time, was defined as 0.1%. The instrument was run with peptide recognition mode enabled.

### Data Protocol
The MS/MS data was searched against Ensembl_Rattus_29107_20200311 (76,417 sequences, downloaded on Dec 12, 2014) database for protein identification using Mascot2.2 (Matrix Science, London, UK) and Proteome Discoverer1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) with the following search settings: enzyme trypsin; two missed cleavage sites; precursor mass tolerance 20 ppm; fragment mass tolerance 0.1 Da; fixed modifications: Carbamidomethyl (C), TMT 10plex (N-term),TMT10 plex (K); variable modifications: oxidation (M) , TMT 10plex (Y). The results of the search were further submitted to generate the final report using a cut-off of 1% FDR on peptide levels and only unique peptides were used for protein quantitation. All peptide ratios were normalised by the median protein ratio, and the median protein ratio was 1 after the normalisation. The protein showing a fold change≥1.2 (upregulation≥ 1.2 or downregulation ≤0.83) compared to the untreated group and the P-value<0.05 were considered significantly regulated by the treatment and included in further analysis.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Foreign body reactions, Rat, Tmt10plex, Mg alloy, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
University of the Sunshine Coast
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast

### Submitter
Tianfang Wang

### Lab Head
Dr Tianfang Wang
Genecology Research Centre, University of the Sunshine Coast


