### Accession
PXD017276

### Title
Proteomic dissection of human erythropoiesis reveals critical roles of kinases

### Description
Human erythropoiesis is exquisitely controlled at multiple levels and its dysregulation leads to anemias and many other diseases. We apply mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics to comprehensively investigate the protein and signaling dynamics of this process. Mapping the proteomes and phosphoproteomes of five defined stages from progenitors to erythrocytes, quantifies more than 7,400 protein groups and 27,000 distinct phosphorylation sites. Integration with a transcriptomic dataset reveals discordances that are biologically meaningful. Solute carriers are drastically remodeled and provide new stage-specific markers. Our data reveal an orchestrated network of erythropoietic kinases involving erythropoietin receptor and downstream MAPK signaling.  A subsequent CRIPR screen verified their functional roles in state specific transitions. In particular, the PIM1 kinase maintains proliferative capacity of erythroid progenitors and prevents premature differentiation. Our comprehensive resource thus provides conceptual insights into an important developmental process and a plethora of starting points for mechanistic studies in health and disease.

### Sample Protocol
Liquid chromatography-MS analysis Nanoflow LC-MS/MS measurements were carried out on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (ThermoFisher Scientific) combined with the latest generation linear quadrupole Orbitrap instrument (Q Exactive HF-X) coupled to a nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific). We always used a 50 cm HPLC column (75 μm inner diameter, in-house packed into the tip with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9 μm resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH)). Column temperature was kept at 60°C by a Peltier element containing in-house developed oven. 500ng peptides were analyzed with a 100 min gradient. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 80 min radient of 5-30% of buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) plus 0.1% FA (v/v)), followed by a 4 min increase to 60% of buffer B and a 4 min increase to 95% of buffer B, and a 4 min wash of 95% buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Buffer B concentration was decreased to 4% in 4 min and stayed at 4% for 4 min.  For the analysis of the fractions to build the project-specific spectral library, the instrument was operated in the DDA mode (Top12). The resolution of the Orbitrap analyzer was set to 60,000 and 15,000 for MS1 and MS2, with a maximum injection time of 20 ms and 60 ms, respectively. The mass range monitored in MS1 was set to 300–1,650 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 and 1e5 in MS1 and MS2, respectively. The fragmentation was accomplished by higher energy collision dissociation at a normalized collision energy setting of 27%. Dynamic exclusion was 20 sec.  For single shot samples, the instrument was operated in the DIA mode. Every MS1 scan (350 to 1650 m/z, 120,000 resolution at m/z 200, AGC target of 3e6 and 60 ms injection time) was followed by 33 MS2 windows ranged from 300.5 m/z (lower boundary of first window) to 1649.5 m/z (upper boundary of 33rd window). This resulted in a cycle time of 3.4 s. MS2 settings were an ion target value of 3 x 106 charges for the precursor window with an XCalibur-automated maximum injection time and a resolution of 30,000 at m/z 200. The fragmentation was accomplished by higher energy collision dissociation with stepped collision energies of 25.5, 27 and 30%. The spectra were recorded in profile mode. The default charge state for the MS2 was set to 3. Data were acquired with Xcalibur 4.0.27.10 and Tune Plus version 2.1 (Thermo Fisher). Phosphopeptides were analyzed with a 100 min gradient. Peptides were loaded in buffer A (0.1% formic acid (FA) (v/v)) and eluted with a linear 60 min gradient of 3-19 of buffer B (80% acetonitrile (ACN) plus 0.1% FA (v/v)), followed by a 30 min increase to 41% of buffer B and a 5 min increase to 90% of buffer B, and a 5 min wash of 90% buffer B at a flow rate of 350 nl/min. The instrument was operated in the DDA mode (Top10). The resolution of the Orbitrap analyzer was set to 60,000 and 15,000 for MS1 and MS2, with a maximum injection time of 120 ms and 50 ms, respectively. The mass range monitored in MS1 was set to 300–1,600 m/z. The automatic gain control (AGC) target was set to 3e6 and 1e5 in MS1 and MS2, respectively. The fragmentation was accomplished by higher energy collision dissociation at a normalized collision energy setting of 27%. Dynamic exclusion was 30 sec.

### Data Protocol
MS data analysis The fractions (DDA) and the single shot samples (DIA) were used to generate a DDA-library and direct-DIA-library, respectively, which were combined into a hybrid library in Spectromine version 1.0.21621.8.15296 (Biognosys AG). The hybrid spectral library was subsequently used to search the MS data of the single shot samples in Spectronaut version 12.0.20491.9.26669 (Biognosys AG) for final protein identification and quantification. All searches were performed against the Human UniProt FASTA database (2017, X entries). Carbamidomethylation was set as fixed modification and acetylation of the protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionines as variable modifications. Trypsin/P proteolytic cleavage rule was used with a maximum of two miscleavages permitted and a peptide length of 7-52 amino acids. When generating the spectral library generation, minimum and maximum of number of fragments per peptide were set to 3 and 6, respectively. A protein and precursor FDR of 1% were used for filtering and subsequent reporting in samples (Q-value mode).

### Publication Abstract
Human erythropoiesis is an exquisitely controlled multistep developmental process, and its dysregulation leads to numerous human diseases. Transcriptome and epigenome studies provided insights into system-wide regulation, but we currently lack a global mechanistic view on the dynamics of proteome and post-translational regulation coordinating erythroid maturation. We established a mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics workflow to quantify and dynamically track 7,400 proteins and 27,000 phosphorylation sites of five distinct maturation stages of in vitro reconstituted erythropoiesis of CD34<sup>+</sup> HSPCs. Our data reveal developmental regulation through drastic proteome remodeling across stages of erythroid maturation encompassing most protein classes. This includes various orchestrated changes in solute carriers indicating adjustments to altered metabolic requirements. To define the distinct proteome of each maturation stage, we developed a computational deconvolution approach which revealed stage-specific marker proteins. The dynamic phosphoproteomes combined with a kinome-targeted CRISPR/Cas9 screen uncovered coordinated networks of erythropoietic kinases and pinpointed downregulation of c-Kit/MAPK signaling axis as key driver of maturation. Our system-wide view establishes the functional dynamic of complex phosphosignaling networks and regulation through proteome remodeling in erythropoiesis.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Mapk, Human erythropoiesis, Epor, Signaling, Ckit, Red blood cells, Kinase, Systems biology, Proteomics, Development, Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany
Proteomics

### Submitter
Mario Oroshi

### Lab Head
Dr Matthias Mann
Department of Proteomics and Signal Transduction, Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany


