### Accession
PXD023115

### Title
Differential roles of MARCH1 and MARCH8 E3 Ub ligases in haemopoietic and non-haemopoietic cell types.

### Description
Using primary cells isolated from Marchf1-/- and Marchf8-/- mice, we have undertaken extensive analysis of MARCH1 and MARCH8 E3 Ub ligases in an array of primary haemopoietic and non-haemopoietic cell types including traditional and non-traditional antigen presenting cells (APCs). Using flow cytometry and proteomic analysis of plasma membrane (PM) and intracellular compartments (IC), we describe unique roles for MARCH1 and MARCH 8 in haemopoietic cells and non-haemopoietic cells respectively to redefine a panel of substrates for these E3 Ub ligases in primary immune cells.

### Sample Protocol
For proteomic analyses primary B cells and dendritic cells were purified from spleens of wild type, Marchf1-/- and Marchf8-/- mice and homogenized by mechanical disruption after surface labelling with fluorochrome conjugated monoclonal antibodies. Surface-labelled plasma membrane (PM) microsomes were isolated by magnetic immunoaffinity and the remaining compartment after retrieval of PM was termed “intracellular compartment” (IC). PM and IC fractions were prepared for mass spectrometry using FASP protein digestion method followed by nanoflow reverse-phase liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) on a nanoAcquity system coupled to a Q-Exactive mass spectrometer equipped with a nano-electrospray ion source for automated MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
High-resolution MS/MS spectra were processed with MaxQuant (version 1.6.7.0) for feature detection and protein identification using the Andromeda search engine. Extracted peak lists were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot Mus musculus reviewed only database (10/2019)  Protein relative quantitative analysis was performed in R using MaxQuant’s proteinGroups.txt and LFQ intensities.  GO term enrichment analysis was performed using the Bioconductor clusterProfiler package. Enrichment was calculated relative to all proteins identified in collected fractions.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Immunoreceptors, Ubiquitination, Plasma membrane proteostasis

### Affiliations
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.  Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia
WEHI

### Submitter
Giuseppe Infusini

### Lab Head
Dr Jose A. Villadangos
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Bio21 Molecular Science and Biotechnology Institute, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia.  Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Peter Doherty Institute for Infection and Immunity, The University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, Australia


