### Accession
PXD020025

### Title
Grad-Seq analysis of a photosynthetic bacterium rich in internal membrane systems

### Description
Here we analyzed the full ensemble of cellular RNAs and co-fractionating proteins using gradient profiling by sequencing (Grad-seq) in Synechocystis 6803, a cyanobacterium rich in internal membrane systems.

### Sample Protocol
Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803 cells from culturing in 400 mL BG11 medium under constant shaking and standard growth conditions (30 °C, 50 µE) were harvested in exponential phase (OD750 = 0.8). Cells were mixed with ice cold lysis buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5; 150 mM KCl; 1 mM MgCl2; 1 mM DTT; 0.2 % [v/v] Triton X-100; RiboLock RNase Inhibitor; DNase I; cOmplete Protease Inhibitor cocktail) and mechanically lysed with glass beads at 4 °C (Precellys). Unbroken cells were removed by a centrifugation step for 5 min at 4000 g and only the supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube. The membrane proteins were solubilized by incubating the samples under shaking for 60 min in the dark with n-dodecyl β-D-maltoside in a 3:1 ratio according to the protein content, measured by Bradford assay. Thylakoid membranes were removed by centrifugation at 30.000 g for 30 min and the supernatant was applied on top of a linear 10 - 40% sucrose gradient. Ultracentrifugation of the lysates was performed in a swing out rotor (Beckman SW40 Ti) for 16 h at 285,000 g. The fractionation of equal volumes (600 µL) was performed manually, resulting in 18 fractions, which were further split into samples for RNAseq and MS analysis (100 µL).  Subsequently, proteins were purified by acetone/methanol precipitation. Protein pellets were re-dissolved in 50 µL denaturation buffer (6 M urea, 2 M thiourea in 100 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5). Cysteine disulfide bonds were reduced and resulting thiol groups were alkylated as described before (see 10.1074/mcp.RA118.000699). Fractions were partially pooled (F14+15 and F16+17) due to low protein yields. Subsequently, proteins were pre-digested with Lys-C, further diluted with 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and digested with trypsin o.n., applying a protease:protein ratio of 1:100 for both enzymes. Resulting peptide solutions were acidified and purified following the stage tip protocol (Rappsilber et al, 2007). In total, three independent replicates were prepared, with a constant sample volume for all fractions of one replicate. Consequently, measured protein yields in MS-based proteome analysis were ranging between a defined maximum of 1000 ng in the fraction with the highest protein concentration and <100 ng in fractions with the lowest protein concentrations. For nanoLC-MS/MS based proteome measurements, purified samples were loaded onto an in-house produced C18 nanoHPLC column (20 cm PicoTip fused silica emitter with 75 µm inner diameter (New Objective, Woburn, USA), packed with 1.9 µm ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany)) on an EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Peptides were separated using a 49 min segmented linear gradient and eluting peptides were directly ionized in an on-line coupled electrospray ionization (ESI) source and analyzed on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany), operated in the positive-ion mode and data dependent acquisition. MS full scans were acquired with a mass-to-charge (m/z) range of 300 - 1650 at resolution 60,000. The 12 most intense multiple charged ions were subsequently selected for fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) and recorded in MS/MS scans at resolution 30,000. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced precursor ions was 30 s. Wash runs were performed after each three samples.

### Data Protocol
Acquired raw MS data of all three replicates were processed together using the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.5.2.8), with each file defined as an individual sample. The data processing was performed at default settings, apllying intensity based absolute quantification (iBAQ) and the following search criteria: trypsin was defined as a cleaving enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as a fixed modification and methionine oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were defined as variable modifications. MS/MS spectra were searched against a combined target-decoy database of Synechocystis, downloaded from Cyanobase (http://genome.microbedb.jp/cyanobase; version 06/2014) and the sequences of newly discovered small proteins (Mitschke et al, 2011; Kopf et al, 2014; Baumgartner et al, 2016), consisting of a total of 3,681 protein sequences plus 245 common contaminants. To promote the identification of low abundant proteins which were not selected for MS/MS sequencing in any fraction, ancillary measurements were performed for the first replicate with a constant protein yield of 1000 ng per fraction. These supporting measurements were included in the data processing as a resource to promote overall protein identifications via the matching between runs option. Reported protein and peptide false discovery rates were each limited to 1%. The reproducibility between the replicates was checked by comparing the distribution of the spearman correlation coefficient from the relative distribution of each protein within a replicate with the same protein in the other replicates.

### Publication Abstract
Although regulatory small RNAs have been reported in photosynthetic cyanobacteria, the lack of clear RNA chaperones involved in their regulation poses a conundrum. Here, we analyzed the full complement of cellular RNAs and proteins using gradient profiling by sequencing (Grad-seq) in Synechocystis 6803. Complexes with overlapping subunits such as the CpcG1-type versus the CpcL-type phycobilisomes or the PsaK1 versus PsaK2 photosystem I pre(complexes) could be distinguished, supporting the high quality of this approach. Clustering of the in-gradient distribution profiles followed by several additional criteria yielded a short list of potential RNA chaperones that include an YlxR homolog and a cyanobacterial homolog of the KhpA/B complex. The data suggest previously undetected complexes between accessory proteins and CRISPR-Cas systems, such as a Csx1-Csm6 ribonucleolytic defense complex. Moreover, the exclusive association of either RpoZ or 6S RNA with the core RNA polymerase complex and the existence of a reservoir of inactive sigma-antisigma complexes is suggested. The Synechocystis Grad-seq resource is available online at https://sunshine.biologie.uni-freiburg.de/GradSeqExplorer/ providing a comprehensive resource for the functional assignment of RNA-protein complexes and multisubunit protein complexes in a photosynthetic organism.

### Keywords
Rna-binding proteins, Ribonucleoprotein complexes, Cyanobacteria, Small regulatory rnas, Post-transcriptional regulation

### Affiliations
University Tuebingen Department of Quantitative Proteomics
Genetics and Experimental Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany

### Submitter
Philipp Spaet

### Lab Head
Dr Wolfgang R Hess
Genetics and Experimental Bioinformatics, Faculty of Biology, University of Freiburg, Schänzlestr. 1, 79104 Freiburg, Germany


