### Accession
PXD003110

### Title
Bovine milk proteome during involution

### Description
This project tested the hypothesis that drying off and involution is accompanied by similar changes among the low abundance proteins as mastitis, thereby presenting a possible alternative means of maximising yields of host-defence-associated bioactive proteins.

### Sample Protocol
A 50 µg portion of the D0 as well as the D3 and D8 sample pools were resolved by 1D SDS-PAGE using 12.5% (w/v) Bis-Tris pre-cast gels (Bio Rad, Hercules, CA, USA) and then stained with colloidal Coomassie G-250. Each lane was cut into 10 slices. The resulting 60 slices were then destained, the disulphide bonds reduced with dithiothreitol, the resulting free cysteines alkylated with iodoacetamide, the modified proteins digested in situ with trypsin, and the resulting peptides extracted from the gel pieces as previously described [10]. A 10 µL portion of each of the 60 peptide extracts was loaded onto a C18 precolumn (Varian Microsorb 300 µm i.d., 5 µm particles, 300 Å pore size) at a flow rate of 8 μL/min. The precolumn was then connected with the analytical column (Microsorb C18, 20 cm, 75 µm i.d., 5 µm particles, 300 Å pore size), and eluted at a flow rate of 150 nL/min, with a gradient from 2% to 55% solvent B in 50 min. Solvent A was HPLC-grade H2O (Fisher Scientific, USA) with 0.2% (v/v) formic acid, and solvent B was LC-MS-grade acetonitrile containing 0.2% (v/v) formic acid. The column outlet was directly connected by a nano-electrospray source to a Q-STAR Pulsar i mass spectrometer (Applied Biosystems, USA) which was programmed to acquire tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) traces of 1+, 2+, 3+, 4+ and 5+ ions.

### Data Protocol
The MASCOT software package (Matrix Science, UK) was used to extract peak lists from the data files. The top three precursor ions were selected and dynamic exclusion was enabled for 30 seconds after a repeat count of 2. The peak lists from all m/z segments of each sample were combined and imported into the ProteinScape v2.1 software package (Bruker) resulting in the collection of 55,366 spectra. The data was used to query the NCBI non-redundant database (release date, Jan. 2012) restricted to Bos taurus taxonomy using MASCOT. Search parameters for peptide and fragment mass tolerances were set to 100 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, with allowance made for one missed tryptic cleavage. Modification of cysteine through carbamidomethylation, was selected as a fixed modification, while oxidation on methionine, deamination of asparagine and glutamine, and phosphorylation of serine and tyrosine were selected as variable modifications. A significance threshold of less than 0.05 was selected and all searches were conducted using the peptide-decoy option selected within ProteinScape. This produced an average false discovery rate of 1.4%. The exponentially modified protein abundance index (EmPAI value), calculated by the MASCOT package, was retrieved for each protein that was detected.

### Publication Abstract
Here we provide data from three proteomics techniques; two-dimensional electrophoresis (2-DE) followed by identification of selected spots using PSD MALDI-TOF MS/MS, one-dimensional gel electrophoresis followed by LC-MS/MS analysis of gel slices (GeLC) and dimethyl isotopic labelling of tryptic peptides followed by Orbitrap MS/MS (DML), to quantify the changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins that occurs after drying off. We analysed skim milk and whey sampled at day 0 and either day 3 or day 8 after drying off. These analyses identified 45 spots by MALDI-TOF, 51 proteins by GeLC and 161 proteins by DML, for which the detailed data work-up is presented as three Excel files. The data supplied in this article supports the accompanying publication "Changes in the repertoire of bovine milk proteins during mammary involution" (Boggs et al., 2015) [1]. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifiers ProteomeXchange: PXD003110 and ProteomeXchange: PXD003011.

### Keywords
Involution, Bovine, Sds-page, Lc/msms, Milk

### Affiliations
Dairy Foods, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre
Wageningen University

### Submitter
Kasper Hettinga

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas T. Wheeler
Dairy Foods, AgResearch, Ruakura Research Centre


