### Accession
PXD013031

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana SWATH-MS -  Overexpression of a Monocot Acyl-CoA-Binding Protein Confers Broad-Spectrum Pathogen Protection in a Dicot

### Description
Plants are continuously infected by various pathogens throughout their lifecycle. Previous studies have reported that the expression of Class III acyl-CoA-binding proteins (ACBPs) such as the Arabidopsis ACBP3 and rice ACBP5 were induced by pathogen infection. Transgenic Arabidopsis AtACBP3-overexpressors (AtACBP3-OEs) displayed enhanced protection against the bacterial biotroph, Pseudomonas syringae, although they became susceptible to the fungal necrotroph Botrytis cinerea. A Class III ACBP from a monocot, rice (Oryza sativa) OsACBP5 was overexpressed in the dicot Arabidopsis. The resultant transgenic Arabidopsis lines conferred resistance not only to the bacterial biotroph P. syringae but to fungal necrotrophs (Rhizoctonia solani, B. cinerea, Alternaria brassicicola) and a hemibiotroph, (Colletotrichum siamense). Changes in protein expression in R. solani-infected Arabidopsis OsACBP5-overexpressors (OsACBP5-OEs) were demonstrated using proteomic analysis. Biotic stress-related proteins including cell wall-related proteins such as FASCILIN-LIKE ARABINOGALACTAN-PROTEIN10, LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT EXTENSIN-LIKE PROTEINS, XYLOGLUCAN ENDOTRANSGLUCOSYLASE/HYDROLASE PROTEIN4 and PECTINESTERASE INHIBITOR18; proteins associated with glucosinolate degradation including GDSL-LIKE LIPASE23, EPITHIOSPECIFIER MODIFIER1, MYROSINASE1, MYROSINASE2 and NITRILASE1; as well as a protein involved in jasmonate biosynthesis, ALLENE OXIDE CYCLASE2, were induced in OsACBP5-OEs upon R. solani infection. These results indicated that upregulation of these proteins in OsACBP5-OEs conferred protection against various plant pathogens.

### Sample Protocol
Sequential window acquisition of all theoretical mass spectra (SWATH-MS) proteomic analysis was carried out on necrotrophic fungal (R. solani)-infected transgenic Arabidopsis OsACBP5-OE line 7 using the vector-transformed line as a control. Proteins were extracted from Arabidopsis seedlings (500 mg fresh weight, consisting of ∼25 seedlings each) by the trichloroacetic acid/acetone method [47]. The protein pellet was dissolved with 2 mL urea buffer (6 M urea and 4 mM calcium chloride in 200 mM 3-(N-morpholino) propanesulfonic acid (MOPS), pH 8.0) [48]. An equal amount of protein (100 μg) was reduced using 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) and alkylated in 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in the dark. After alkylation, the mixture was diluted with 4 mM CaCl2 to reduce the concentration of urea to less than 2 M. Trypsin was added to digest the protein at a 1:20 ratio by incubation at 37oC overnight. Following trypsin digestion, the peptides were desalted utilising C18 SepPak reverse-phase cartridges and SWATH-MS analysis was performed.

### Data Protocol
Peptide analysis was performed using a Triple TOF 5600 mass spectrometer (SCIEX, USA) attached to an Eksigent NanoLC-2DPlus with a nanoFlex cHiPLC system equipped with 10 μm SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA). Two micrograms of plant samples were trapped on a cHiPLC trap (3 μm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 0.5 mm × 200 μm) with 95% solvent A (0.1% formic acid in water) and 5% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) at 500 nL/min for 15 min, which were then separated on a cHiPLC column (3 μm, ChromXP C18CL, 120 Å, 15 cm × 75 μm) in a linear gradient from 5−35% of solvent B at 300 nL/min for 120 min. A spray voltage of 2300 V was used to operate the mass spectrometer in positive ion mode. SWATHMS spectral ion library was obtained by performing data-dependent acquisition (DDA). The MS1 spectra were collected from a survey scan of 250 mass survey (ms) in the range 350−1250 m/z. The top 40 precursor ions selected for fragmentation contain charge state from +2 to +5 w with an accumulation time of 50 ms per MS/MS experiment for a total cycle time of 2.3 s, and MS/MS spectra were collected in the range 100−1800 m/z. Selected ions and their isotopes were dynamically excluded from further MS/MS fragmentation for 18 s. Based on their m/z and charge state, the ions were fragmented in the collision cell using rolling collision energy. In SWATH analysis, the same peptide samples were chromatographed using the same conditions and subjected to cyclic data-independent acquisition (DIA). A survey scan of 50 ms was performed, followed by fragmentation of all precursors. An accumulation time of 56.6 ms per 15 Da SWATH (total SWATH 58) for a total cycle time of 3.334 s were used to conduct MS/MS experiments. Collision energy for each SWATH (DIA experiment) was set to optimum energy for a +2 ion centered upon the window with a spread of 15 eV. For example, a set of 58 overlapping windows was constructed, covering the precursor mass range of 400−1250 Da.  Spectral library was generated by filtering the DDA mass spectrometry data against the UniProt Swiss-Prot Arabidopsis thaliana protein database (28, 797 proteins, July 2015 release) using ProteinPilot 4.5 (Sciex). Ttrypsin digestion, iodoacetamide cysteine alkylation, biological modification, and thorough ID search were the parameters used in the database search. Mass tolerances for the precursor and product ion were preset as 0.05 and 0.1 Da, respectively. A global false discovery rate of <1% was the criteria for selection of peptide assignments and protein identifications. The library contains information used for spectral alignment and targeted data extraction of DIA samples performed by PeakView v.1.2 (Sciex). Spectral library and all DIA data were loaded in PeakView software with the following settings: extraction window (10 min); ion library mass tolerance (50 ppm); eight peptides; six transitions; 99% peptide confidence; and exclusion of shared peptides. Based on high abundance peptides distributed along the gradient run, realignment of retention time was performed. Later, the quantified proteins and associated peptides were displayed and exported to MarkerView (Sciex) format, resulting in the generation of peak areas for each protein. Following global normalization of the total peak area of five biological replicates, relative quantitation for proteins (fold change) between the wild type and R. solani-infected conditions was obtained and analysed by t test (MarkerView).

### Publication Abstract
Plants are continuously infected by various pathogens throughout their lifecycle. Previous studies have reported that the expression of Class III acyl-CoA-binding proteins (ACBPs) such as the Arabidopsis ACBP3 and rice ACBP5 were induced by pathogen infection. Transgenic Arabidopsis AtACBP3-overexpressors (AtACBP3-OEs) displayed enhanced protection against the bacterial biotroph, Pseudomonas syringae, although they became susceptible to the fungal necrotroph Botrytis cinerea. A Class III ACBP from a monocot, rice (Oryza sativa) OsACBP5 was overexpressed in the dicot Arabidopsis. The resultant transgenic Arabidopsis lines conferred resistance not only to the bacterial biotroph P. syringae but to fungal necrotrophs (Rhizoctonia solani, B. cinerea, Alternaria brassicicola) and a hemibiotroph (Colletotrichum siamense). Changes in protein expression in R. solani-infected Arabidopsis OsACBP5-overexpressors (OsACBP5-OEs) were demonstrated using proteomic analysis. Biotic stress-related proteins including cell wall-related proteins such as FASCILIN-LIKE ARABINOGALACTAN-PROTEIN10, LEUCINE-RICH REPEAT EXTENSIN-LIKE PROTEINS, XYLOGLUCAN ENDOTRANSGLUCOSYLASE/HYDROLASE PROTEIN4, and PECTINESTERASE INHIBITOR18; proteins associated with glucosinolate degradation including GDSL-LIKE LIPASE23, EPITHIOSPECIFIER MODIFIER1, MYROSINASE1, MYROSINASE2, and NITRILASE1; as well as a protein involved in jasmonate biosynthesis, ALLENE OXIDE CYCLASE2, were induced in OsACBP5-OEs upon R. solani infection. These results indicated that upregulation of these proteins in OsACBP5-OEs conferred protection against various plant pathogens.

### Keywords
Arabidopsis thaliana, Biotic stress, Rhizoctonia solani

### Affiliations
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
The  University of Hong Kong

### Submitter
Saritha Panthapulakkal Narayanan

### Lab Head
Dr Saritha Panthapulakkal Narayanan
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong


