### Accession
PXD011811

### Title
The biomolecular characterisation of an Early Neolithic finger ring from Syltholm, Denmark

### Description
We present the analysis of an osseous finger ring from an early Neolithic context in Denmark. To characterise the artefact and identify the raw material used for its manufacture, we performed micro-computed tomography (Micro CT) scanning, zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS) peptide mass fingerprinting, as well as protein sequencing by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We found that the ring was made from long bone or antler due to the presence of osteons (Haversian canals). Subsequent ZooMS analysis of the collagen present indicated that it was made from either elk (Alces alces) or red deer (Cervus elaphus) material. We then used LC-MS/MS analysis to refine our species identification, confirming that the ring was made from red deer, and to examine other proteins present. This study demonstrates the potential of ancient proteomics for species identification of prehistoric artefacts made from osseous material.

### Sample Protocol
The protein extractions were based on a minimally destructive protocol published by van Doorn et al. (2011) with the following modifications: The samples were incubated in 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 (Sigma) for 16 hours at ambient temperature. They were then vortexed for 15 seconds and centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 1 min, the supernatant was discarded. Two different extractions were performed for the ring (Extraction 1 and 2), while the reference samples were extracted according to the Extraction 1 protocol. Extraction 1: 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 was added to the sample before incubation at 65℃ for one hour, the supernatant (Extraction 1) was collected. Extraction 2: the remaining sample was washed three times with 100 μL of 0.1 M NaOH at 4℃ and subsequently incubated in 100 μL of 50 mM NH4HCO3 at 65℃ for one hour, the supernatant (Extraction 2) was collected. 50 μL of each extraction was transferred to a separate 1.5 mL Eppendorf tube, 1 μL of sequence grade Trypsin (0.4 μg/μl) (Promega) was added to each followed by incubation at 37oC for 16 hours. After digestion, the extractions were centrifuged at 13,000 rpm for 1 min before acidification to <pH 2 using 5% (vol/vol) Trifluoroacetic acid (TFA, Sigma Aldrich). Purification was performed using C18 reverse phase resin ZipTips (PierceTM) according to the manufacturer's instruction, and the peptides were eluted with 50 μL of 50% acetonitrile (ACN) (Sigma Aldrich) /0.1% TFA (vol/vol).  ZooMS- Peptide eluates of the ring were co-crystallised with α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid (Sigma Aldrich) matrix solution (50% ACN /0.1% TFA (vol/vol) at a ratio of 1:1 (1 μL : 1 μL). Mass spectrometry was performed using a Bruker Ultraflex III (Bruker Daltonics) MALDI-TOF-MS instrument in reflector mode with laser acquisition set to 1200 and acquired over an m/z range of 800–3200.   LC-MS/MS- The leftover peptide eluates of the ring sample were evaporated to dryness using a vacuum concentrator (Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany), and delivered to the Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research, the University of Copenhagen for LC-MS/MS analysis on a EASY-nLC 1200 (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) coupled to a Q Exactive HF-X (Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany). The dried peptides from the two ring extractions were resuspended in 100 µL 80% ACN and 0.1% formic acid (FA), and 15 µL of each of the two ring sample extractions were combined. The combined sample was vacuum centrifuged at 40ºC until approximately 3 μL was left, and was then rehydrated with 10 μL of 0.1% TFA, 5% ACN. The reference sample elutions were measured by Nanodrop (Thermo, Wilmington, DE, USA) for protein concentration. The volume required for approximately 2 µg of protein per sample was placed in separate wells on a new 96-well plate and topped up to 30 µL using 40% ACN and 0.1% FA. They were then vacuum centrifuged and resuspended as above. The parameters for LC-MS/MS were the same as previously used for palaeoproteomic samples, with only 5 µl of sample being injected (Mackie et al. 2018).

### Data Protocol
ZooMS- The generated spectral output was converted to TXT and was analysed using the open-source software mMass v.5.5.0 (24). The triplicate raw files were merged, and then peak picked with a S/N threshold of 4. MALDI-TOF-MS was performed at Centre for Excellence in Proteomics at the University of York, United Kingdom.   LC-MS/MS- The raw files generated were then searched using the software MaxQuant (v.1.6.2.6a or v.1.6.3.4). The database was prepared using previously published type 1 collagen sequences from red deer and elk (Welker et al 2016). Missing amino acids in the elk and red deer collagen sequences were substituted with ones from the same positions from the Bos taurus sequence (obtained from UniProt, 20-07-18). Furthermore, all proteins available for red deer were downloaded from UniProt (20-07-18) in case the species in question was red deer. At present, no proteins for elk have been uploaded to UniProt. MaxQuant settings were as follows: Digestion mode was set to semispecific for Trypsin, to account for possible additional hydrolytic cleavages occurring during diagenesis. Variable modifications were: oxidation (M), Acetyl (Protein N-term), Deamidation (NQ), Gln ->pyro-Glu, Glu ->pyro-Glu, and Hydroxyproline. Fixed modifications were: Carbamidomethyl (C). The remaining settings were set to the program defaults, apart from Min. score for unmodified and modified peptides searches, which were both set to 60. Proteins were considered confidently identified if at least two razor+unique peptides covering distinct areas of the sequence were recovered. MS/MS spectra were assessed manually for confident identification, and peptides from the red deer Uniprot proteins were searched against the NCBI database using the BLASTp tool (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi, to determine species specificity.

### Publication Abstract
We present the analysis of an osseous finger ring from a predominantly early Neolithic context in Denmark. To characterize the artefact and identify the raw material used for its manufacture, we performed micro-computed tomography scanning, zooarchaeology by mass spectrometry (ZooMS) peptide mass fingerprinting, as well as protein sequencing by liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). We conclude that the ring was made from long bone or antler due to the presence of osteons (Haversian canals). Subsequent ZooMS analysis of collagen I and II indicated that it was made from <i>Alces alces</i> or <i>Cervus elaphus</i> material. We then used LC-MS/MS analysis to refine our species identification, confirming that the ring was made from <i>Cervus elaphus</i>, and to examine the rest of the proteome. This study demonstrates the potential of ancient proteomics for species identification of prehistoric artefacts made from osseous material.

### Keywords
Collagen; lc-ms/ms; mass spectrometry; palaeoproteomics; zooarchaeology; zooms

### Affiliations
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark.
University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Meaghan Mackie

### Lab Head
Dr Hannes Schroeder
Section for Evolutionary Genomics, University of Copenhagen, Øster Voldgade 5-7, 1350 Copenhagen, Denmark.


