### Accession
PXD014457

### Title
The proteome of neutrophils in sickle cell disease

### Description
Polymorphonuclear neutrophils are key actors in the pathophysiology of sickle cell disease, but specific factors underlying their activation and sustained inflammation are not well documented. In the present study, we investigated the proteome of neutrophils by a label-free global comparative approach between 4 non-treated sickle patients (SS genotype) at steady state and 4 healthy donors. We identified 101 proteins differentially expressed in SS and normal neutrophils. We found overexpression of CD64 and under-expression of CD62L suggestive of an activated and aged neutrophil profile in SS patients. Comparison of the two proteomes revealed a strong involvement of the type 1 interferon (IFN) response pathway with a 3- to 84-fold increase of type 1 IFN-induced proteins in SS neutrophils, and overexpression of STAT1 and STAT2. Thus, we next determined the plasmatic concentration of type 1 IFNs (IFNα and IFNβ) using the digital-ELISA technology and found a significant higher concentration of IFNα in the plasma from half of our SS patients compared to controls. Overall, a dramatic high-level expression of IFNα signaling proteins in neutrophils from SS patients suggests auto-inflammatory-like phenotype in sickle cell disease at steady state. This finding could open the way to new anti-inflammatory therapies.

### Sample Protocol
Blood samples were collected on ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) from patients with sickle cell anemia (SS genotype), and from healthy donors (Etablissement Français du Sang). SCD patients were children aged 2 to 18 years old, at steady state (no concomitant infection, no acute event in the past month and no blood transfusion within the last past 3 months). Blood samples used in this study were recovered from blood tubes drawn for medical care, in accordance with French legislation.  Purified PMNs were incubated at 4°C for 5 minutes in 1 mL PBS containing 2mM Diisopropylfluorophosphate (Sigma) to avoid excessive protein degradation during sample preparation. After three washes in cold PBS, 2 million of neutrophils were lysed and sonicated in 100 µl Tris/HCl 100 mM pH8.5, SDS 2%, 1mM PMSF. Then, 50µg of proteins were reduced with 10 mM TCEP, alkylated with 40 mM chloroacetamide and digested with 1 µg trypsin using the FASP protocol. Peptides were separated in 5 fractions by strong cationic exchange (SCX) StageTips and analyzed using an Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermos Scientific). Peptides from each SCX fraction were separated on a C18 reverse phase column (2μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75µm inner diameter, 25cm length) with a 3hr gradient starting from 99% of solvent A containing 0.1% formic acid, ending in 40% of solvent B containing 80% ACN and 0.085% formic acid. The MS1 scans spanned from 350-1500 m/z with 1.106 Automated Gain Control (AGC) target, within 60ms maximum ion injection time (MIIT) and a resolution set to 60,000. In a 3 seconds window, as many Higher energy Collisional Dissociation (HCD) fragmentations as possible were performed on the most abundant ions and subsequently measured in the ion trap (data-dependent acquisition with top speed mode: 3 seconds cycle) with a dynamic exclusion time of 30s. Precursor selection window was set at 1.6 m/z with quadrupole filtering. HCD Normalized Collision Energy was set at 30% and the ion trap scan rate was set to “rapid” mode with AGC target 1.105 and 60ms MIIT.

### Data Protocol
The mass spectrometry data were analyzed using Maxquant (v.1.6.1.0). The database used was a concatenation of human sequences from the Uniprot-Swissprot database (release 2017-05) and the list of contaminant sequences from Maxquant. Cystein carbamidomethylation was set as constant modification and acetylation of protein N-terminus and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Second peptide search and the “match between runs” (MBR) options were allowed. Label-free protein quantification (LFQ) was done using both unique and razor peptides with at least 2 such peptides required for LFQ. Statistical analysis and data comparison were done using the Perseus software version 1.6.2.3

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human neutrophils, Lfq, Homo sapiens, Inflammation, Sickle cell disease, Orbitrap fusion

### Affiliations
1Université de Paris, UMR_S1134, BIGR, Inserm, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, F-75015 Paris, France ;Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex
ICO Angers

### Submitter
François GUILLONNEAU

### Lab Head
Dr Bérengère Koehl
1Université de Paris, UMR_S1134, BIGR, Inserm, Institut National de la Transfusion Sanguine, F-75015 Paris, France ;Laboratoire d’Excellence GR-Ex


