### Accession
PXD042696

### Title
Proteomic profile of BxPC3 cells after RAD51 inhibition by treatment with BRC4

### Description
RAD51 protein is an evolutionarily conserved recombinase that plays a central role in homologous recombination (HR) and DNA double strand break (DSB) repair. RAD51 inactivation by small molecules has been proposed as a strategy to impair the BRCA2/RAD51 binding and, ultimately, the HR pathway, with the aim to make cancer cells more sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPi). This strategy, which mimics a synthetic lethality (SL) approach, has been successfully assayed in vitro by using myr-BRC4, a peptide derived from the fourth BRC repeat of BRCA2, being the strongest reported natural RAD51 binder. The present study applies a method to obtain a proteomic fingerprint for RAD51 inhibition by the myr-BRC4 peptide (designed for a more efficient cell entry) using a mass spectroscopy (MS) proteomic approach. We performed a comparative proteomic profiling of the myr-BRC4 treated vs. untreated BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells and evaluated the differential expression of proteins. Among the identified proteomic hits, we focused our attention on proteins shared by both the RAD51 and the BRCA2 interactomes, and on those whose reduction showed high statistical significance. Three downregulated proteins were identified (FANCI, FANCD2, and RPA3) and protein downregulation was confirmed through immunoblotting analysis, validating the MS approach. Our results suggest that, being a direct consequence of RAD51 inhibition, the detection of FANCD2, FANCI, and RPA3 downregulation could be used as an indicator for monitoring HR impairment.

### Sample Protocol
5 x 106 BxPC-3 cells were seeded in a T75 flask. Two days later, the medium was removed. After a brief wash with PBS, cells were treated with 5 µM of myr-BRC4 peptide for 24h. The treatment was entirely conducted in serum-deprived medium. After the treatment, cells were harvested and the pellet was washed twice with cold PBS. Then PBS was removed, and the pellet was stored at -80°C. MS-based proteomic analysis was performed as described.[30] Briefly, BxPC-3 cells were lysed in whole cell lysis buffer (25 mM Tris·HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP40, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS, 0.5 mM DTT) supplemented with 1 X complete protease inhibitor cocktail tablets (Sigma). The lysates were incubated for 15 min on ice and sonicated at 3 Å approximately for 2 seconds at high power. Lysates were incubated on ice for another 15 min and cleared by centrifugation at max speed for 15 minutes at 4 °C.  Supernatant was recovered and transferred into a new tube. Samples were stored at -80 °C until further use. The protein concentration of cell lysates was determined by using the Pierce 660-nm Protein Assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer instruction/protocol. For each sample, approximately 50 μg of proteins were adjusted in 20 μL of buffer/MS grade water.  Samples were homogenized and denatured in urea (final concentration, 4 M), ammonium bicarbonate (100 mM), and calcium chloride (100 mM), then reduced in DTT (final concentration, 1 mM) for 15 minutes at room temperature and alkalinized in iodoacetamide (IAA) (3 mM) in the dark at room temperature for 15 minutes.  The tryptic digestion protocol was performed using automated KingFisher DuoPrime purification system (ThermoFisher) in a series of steps.[30]  Briefly, a combination of magnetic hydrophobic and hydrophilic beads were washed several times in MS grade water and added to the deep-well plate in the KingFisher along with the samples and the same volume as the sample of 100 % ethanol. Next, the solutions were mixed at low speed for 10 minutes, after which the beads coupled to the proteins were collected with the magnetic arm of the KingFisher and transferred to be washed in 3 different deep-well plates containing each 80% of ethanol.  The washed beads-proteins were then released into the trypsin (Promega, V5111)-containing deepwells at a 50:1 (w/w) protein to protease ratio and mixed at low speed for 4 h of digestions into peptide fragments at 37 °C in the KingFisher.  Peptide samples were transferred into low protein binding tubes, 1% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) was added to acidify the samples ready to be desalted, cleaned, and concentrated on C18Tips (ThermoFisher, 87784).[31] Purified peptides were dried and stored at -80 °C prior to use.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry analysis Samples were run on a Bruker timsTOF Pro mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonics) connected to a Bruker nanoElute nano-LC chromatography system (Bruker Daltonics) as described previously by Catozzi et al. with small modifications.[32]  Tryptic peptides were resuspended in LC-MS water with 0.1% (v/v) trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Each sample was loaded onto an Acclaim PepMap C18 trap cartridge (0.3 mm inside diameter, 5 mm length) or just use part (Part 160434, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at an approximate flow rate of 10 L/min with buffer A (99.9% water, 0.1% formic acid). Peptides were then separated on an Aurora UHPLC column (25 cm x 75 m ID, C18, 1.6 m) (Ionopticks) over 60 minutes. Separation was carried out with a linear gradient: from 0 to 53 min buffer B (99.9% acetonitrile, 0.1% TFA) increases from 2 to 32% at a flow rate of 250 nL/min, from 53 to 55 min buffer B increases from 32 to 95%, from 55 to 60 min the column is washed with 95% buffer B.  The mass spectrometer, Bruker timsTof Pro was operated in positive ion mode with a capillary voltage of 1500 V, dry gas flow of 3 l/min and a dry temperature of 180 °C. All data was acquired with the instrument operating in trapped ion mobility spectrometry (TIMS) mode. Trapped ions were selected for ms/ms using parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF). A scan range of (100–1700 m/z) was performed at a rate of 10 PASEF MS/MS frames to 1 MS scan with a cycle time of 1.15 s.[33]

### Publication Abstract
BRCA2 and RAD51 are two proteins that play a central role in homologous recombination (HR) and DNA double strand break (DSB) repair. BRCA2 assists RAD51 fibrillation and defibrillation through binding with its eight BRC repeats, with BRC4 being one of the most efficient and best characterized. RAD51 inactivation by small molecules has been proposed as a strategy to impair BRCA2/RAD51 binding and, ultimately, the HR pathway, with the aim of making cancer cells more sensitive to PARP inhibitors (PARPi). This strategy, which mimics a synthetic lethality (SL) approach, has been successfully performed in vitro by using the myristoylated derivative of BRC4 (myr-BRC4), designed for a more efficient cell entry. The present study applies a method to obtain a proteomic fingerprint after cellular treatment with the myr-BRC4 peptide using a mass spectroscopy (MS) proteomic approach. (Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD042696.) We performed a comparative proteomic profiling of the myr-BRC4 treated vs. untreated BxPC-3 pancreatic cancer cells and evaluated the differential expression of proteins. Among the identified proteins, we focused our attention on proteins shared by both the RAD51 and the BRCA2 interactomes, and on those whose reduction showed high statistical significance. Three downregulated proteins were identified (FANCI, FANCD2, and RPA3), and protein downregulation was confirmed through immunoblotting analysis, validating the MS approach. Our results suggest that, being a direct consequence of myr-BRC4 treatment, the detection of FANCD2, FANCI, and RPA3 downregulation could be used as an indicator for monitoring HR impairment. SIGNIFICANCE: RAD51's inhibition has gained increasing attention because of its possible implications in personalized medicine through the SL approach. Chemical disruption of protein-protein interactions (PPIs) between RAD51 and BRCA2, or some of its partner proteins, could potentiate PARPi DNA damage-induced cell death. This could have application for difficult to treat cancers, such as BRCA-competent and olaparib (PARPi) resistant pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Despite RAD51 being a widely studied target, researchers still lack detailed mechanistic information. This has stifled progress in the field with only a few RAD51 inhibitors having been identified, none of which have gained regulatory approval. Nevertheless, the peptide BRC4 is one of the most specific and best characterized RAD51 binder and inhibitor reported to date. Our study is the first to report the proteomic fingerprint consequent to cellular treatment of myr-BRC4, to offer a reference for the discovery of specific protein/pathway alterations within DNA damage repair. Our results suggest that, being a direct consequence of myr-BRC4 treatment, and ultimately ofBRCA2/RAD51 disruption, the detection of FANCD2, FANCI, and RPA3 downregulation could be used as an indicator for monitoring DNA damage repair impairment and therefore be used to potentiate the development of new effective therapeutic strategies.

### Keywords
Rad51, Bxpc3 cells, Proteomie, Brc4.

### Affiliations
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin.
University College Dublin

### Submitter
Kieran Wynne

### Lab Head
Dr Giorgio Oliviero
Systems Biology Ireland, University College Dublin.


