### Accession
PXD046228

### Title
Mirror-image trypsin digestion and sequencing of D-proteins

### Description
The development of mirror-image biology systems and related applications is hindered by the lack of effective methods to sequence mirror-image (D-) proteins. Although natural-chirality (L-) proteins can be sequenced by bottom–up liquid chromatography–tandem mass spectrometry (LC–MS/MS), the sequencing of long D-peptides and D-proteins with the same strategy requires digestion by a site-specific D-protease before mass analysis. Here we apply solid-phase peptide synthesis and native chemical ligation to chemically synthesize a mirror-image version of trypsin, a widely used protease for site-specific protein digestion. Using mirror-image trypsin digestion and LC–MS/MS, we sequence a mirror-image large subunit ribosomal protein (L25) and a mirror-image Sulfolobus solfataricus P2 DNA polymerase IV (Dpo4), and distinguish between different mutants of D-Dpo4. We also perform writing and reading of digital information in a long D-peptide of 50 amino acids. Thus, mirror-image trypsin digestion in conjunction with LC–MS/MS may facilitate practical applications of D-peptides and D-proteins as potential therapeutic and informational tools.

### Sample Protocol
The trypsin-digested peptides and proteins were desalted by a Sep-Pak tC18 cartridge, dried using a CV200 vacuum centrifugal concentrator (Beijing JM Technology), and dissolved in 20 μl 0.1% TFA in H2O, of which 6 μl was used for LC–MS/MS analysis. The samples were separated using a 100-μm × 150-mm fused silica capillary column, packed in-house with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 1.9-μm resin (Dr Maisch), with a gradient of 5–95% CH3CN (with 0.1% formic acid) in H2O (with 0.1% formic acid) over 60 min at a flow rate of 0.30 µl min−1, directly interfaced with an Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
For sequencing the ribosomal protein L25 and different mutants of Dpo4, the tandem mass spectra were searched by Proteome Discoverer software (version 2.5, Thermo Fisher Scientific) against a protein database containing the proteome of E. coli (UniProt Taxonomy 83333, 4,530 proteins), porcine trypsin (UniProt P00761) and different mutants of Dpo4 (with norleucines in Dpo4-5m-Y12S replaced by leucines of the same mass), with the following settings: full trypsin specificity (for calculating protein sequence coverage) or no enzyme specificity (for calculating the frequency of non-specific cleavage), two missed cleavages allowed, oxidation of methionine (+16.00 Da) and deamination of asparagine and glutamine (+0.98 Da) set to variable modifications, carbamidomethyl of cysteine (+57.02 Da) set to static modification for sequencing the mutants of Dpo4, precursor ion mass tolerance set to 3 ppm with nonlinear mass recalibration applied, and fragment ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da. The false discovery rate was set to 0.01 based on the q-value calculated by Percolator in Proteome Discoverer software. For the analysis of cleavage site specificity, the intensity of the precursor ion of each PSM was used to calculate the amino-acid frequency at the P1 site. For information storage in a long D-peptide, PEAKS Studio software (version 8.5, BioInformatics Solutions) was used for de novo sequencing, with the following settings: no enzyme specificity, oxidation of methionine (+16.00 Da) and deamination of asparagine and glutamine (+0.98 Da) set to variable modifications, precursor ion mass tolerance set to 10 ppm, and fragment ion mass tolerance set to 0.02 Da, with the ALC calculated by PEAKS Studio software.

### Publication Abstract
The development of mirror-image biology systems and related applications is hindered by the lack of effective methods to sequence mirror-image (D-) proteins. Although natural-chirality (L-) proteins can be sequenced by bottom-up liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS), the sequencing of long D-peptides and D-proteins with the same strategy requires digestion by a site-specific D-protease before mass analysis. Here we apply solid-phase peptide synthesis and native chemical ligation to chemically synthesize a mirror-image version of trypsin, a widely used protease for site-specific protein digestion. Using mirror-image trypsin digestion and LC-MS/MS, we sequence a mirror-image large subunit ribosomal protein (L25) and a mirror-image Sulfolobus solfataricus P2 DNA polymerase IV (Dpo4), and distinguish between different mutants of D-Dpo4. We also perform writing and reading of digital information in a long D-peptide of 50 amino acids. Thus, mirror-image trypsin digestion in conjunction with LC-MS/MS may facilitate practical applications of D-peptides and D-proteins as potential therapeutic and informational tools.

### Keywords
D-trypsin, Lc-ms/ms, Total chemical synthesis, D-protein sequencing, Mirror-image biology

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University

### Submitter
Guanwei Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Ting Zhu
School of Life Sciences, Westlake University


