### Accession
PXD009683

### Title
Rab18 is not necessary for lipid droplet biogenesis or turnover in human mammary carcinoma cells

### Description
Rab GTPases recruit peripheral membrane proteins and can define organelle identity. Rab18 localizes to the ER but also to the surfaces of lipid droplets (LDs), where it has been implicated in effector protein recruitment and in defining LD identity. Here, we studied Rab18 localization and function in SUM159 cells. Rab18 localized to the ER and to LD membranes upon LD induction, with the latter depending on the Rab18 activation state. In cells lacking Rab18, LDs were modestly reduced in size and numbers, but we found little evidence for Rab18 function in LD formation, LD turnover upon cell starvation, or the targeting of several proteins to LDs. We conclude that Rab18 is not a general, necessary component of the protein machinery involved in LD biogenesis or turnover, but instead likely plays a specialized role in specific cell types

### Sample Protocol
Precipitated proteins from total cell lysates and purified LD fractions were resolubilized in 100 mM NaOH aided by sonication at 4°C, and the solution was brought to pH 7.5 with 200 mM HEPES (4-(2-hydroxyethyl)-1-piperazineethanesulfonic acid). Proteins were reduced using 5 mM dithiothreitol (Sigma-Aldrich) at 37°C for 1 h, followed by alkylation of cysteine residues using 15 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the dark at RT for 1 h. Excessive iodoacetamide was quenched using 10 mM dithiotheritol. Protein mixtures were diluted in 1:6 ratio (v/v) using ultrapure water prior to digestion using sequencing grade trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 16 h. Digested peptides were subsequently desalted using self-packed C18 STAGE tips (3M EmporeTM) for LC-MS/MS analysis (Rappsilber et al., 2003). Desalted peptides were resuspended in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and loaded onto HPLC-MS/MS system for analysis on an Orbitrap Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy nanoLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The stationary phase buffer was 0.5 % formic acid, and mobile phase buffer was 0.5 % (v/v) formic acid in acetonitrile. Chromatography for peptide separation was performed using increasing organic proportion of acetonitrile (5–40 % (v/v)) over a 265-min gradient) on a self-packed analytical column using PicoTipTM emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA) using Reprosil Gold 120 C-18, 1.9-μm particle size resin (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). The mass spectrometry analyzer operated in data dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 method at a mass range of 300–2000 Da.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data were processed by MaxQuant software version 1.5.2.8 (Cox and Mann, 2008) with the following setting: oxidized methionine residues and protein N-terminal acetylation as variable modification, cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, first search peptide tolerance 20 ppm, main search peptide tolerance 4.5 ppm. Protease specificity was set to trypsin with up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Only peptides longer than five amino acids were analyzed, and the minimal ratio count to quantify a protein is 2 (proteome only). The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for peptide and protein identifications. Database searches were performed using the Andromeda search engine integrated into the MaxQuant environment (Cox et al., 2011) against the UniProt-human database containing 71,579 entries (October 2017). “Matching between runs” algorithm with a time window of 0.7 min was employed to transfer identifications between samples processed using the same nanospray conditions. Protein tables were filtered to eliminate identifications from the reverse database and also common contaminants

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lipid droplet, Neutral lipid storage, Triacylglycerol, Rabgtpase, Rab18, Endoplasmic reticulum

### Affiliations
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health
Harvard University

### Submitter
Zon Weng Lai

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Harvard University


