### Accession
PXD006322

### Title
Bod1 interactome in mitotic HeLa cells

### Description
To discover candidate proteins that can target Bod1 to kinetochores in mitotic HeLa cells, we combined affinity purification of Bod1 with label-free quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Eight 15cm plates of stably Bod1-GFP or GFP transfected cells or two 15cm plates of transiently Bod1-GFP or GFP transfected cells were arrested in mitosis and affinity purification using GFP-Binder (Chromotek) was performed as described in Porter et al., 2013. Proteins were eluted with 2xSDS buffer and the full eluate was run on a 4-12% SDS-PAGE. Bands were visualised using Coomassie Brilliant Blue and lanes were cut into 4 gel pieces.  Gel pieces were subsequently de-stained with ammonium bicarbonate and acetonitrile as an organic solvent and dried completely in a vacuum centrifuge. 10mM DTT was used to reduce cystine disulphide bonds and the resulting thiol groups were irreversibly alkylated to S-carboxyamidomethylcysteine with 55mM iodoacetamide. Excess iodoacetamide was removed and gel pieces were dried in a vacuum centrifuge before enzymatic digest of the proteins. In-gel digest was performed with 20ng/µl trypsin in 50mM ammonium bicarbonate at 37°C o/n. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel by repeated addition of 0.1%TFA/acetonitrile extraction solution and sonication. Peptide samples were cleaned for mass spectrometry using a C18-Ziptip protocol. Mass spectrometry was performed on an LTQ Orbitrap Velos Pro instrument (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed in the MaxQuant software package V1.5.0.35 utilising the Swiss-Prot Human database (03/04/2013). Parameters applied include: minimum peptide length = 7, Protein FDR = 0.01. Peptides with variable modifications (N-terminal acetylation of the protein, oxMet, and pyroGlu) and fixed modifications (S-carboxyamidomethylcysteine) were accounted for in the analysis. Downstream data analysis, including statistical analysis and GO term analysis, was performed using the Perseus software package V1.5.5.3. Statistical test performed was an unpaired Student’s t-test with a threshold p-value of 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
Regulation of protein phosphatase activity by endogenous protein inhibitors is an important mechanism to control protein phosphorylation in cells. We recently identified Biorientation defective 1 (Bod1) as a small protein inhibitor of protein phosphatase 2A containing the B56 regulatory subunit (PP2A-B56). This phosphatase controls the amount of phosphorylation of several kinetochore proteins and thus the establishment of load-bearing chromosome-spindle attachments in time for accurate separation of sister chromatids in mitosis. Like PP2A-B56, Bod1 directly localizes to mitotic kinetochores and is required for correct segregation of mitotic chromosomes. In this report, we have probed the spatio-temporal regulation of Bod1 during mitotic progression. Kinetochore localization of Bod1 increases from nuclear envelope breakdown until metaphase. Phosphorylation of Bod1 at threonine 95 (T95), which increases Bod1's binding to and inhibition of PP2A-B56, peaks in prometaphase when PP2A-B56 localization to kinetochores is highest. We demonstrate here that kinetochore targeting of Bod1 depends on the outer kinetochore protein Ndc80 and not PP2A-B56. Crucially, Bod1 depletion functionally affects Ndc80 phosphorylation at the N-terminal serine 55 (S55), as well as a number of other phosphorylation sites within the outer kinetochore, including Knl1 at serine 24 and 60 (S24, S60), and threonine T943 and T1155 (T943, T1155). Therefore, Ndc80 recruits a phosphatase inhibitor to kinetochores which directly feeds forward to regulate Ndc80, and Knl1 phosphorylation, including sites that mediate the attachment of microtubules to kinetochores.

### Keywords
Human, Mitosis, Interactome

### Affiliations
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Katharina Schleicher

### Lab Head
Dr Jason R Swedlow
School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom


