### Accession
PXD010474

### Title
Proximity-dependent biotinylation to elucidate the interactome of TNK2 non-receptor tyrosine kinase

### Description
Non-receptor tyrosine kinases represent an important class of signaling molecules which are involved in driving diverse cellular pathways. Although the large majority have been well-studied in terms of their protein binding partners, the interactomes of some important non-receptor tyrosine kinases such as TNK2 (also known as activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 or ACK1) have not been systematically investigated. Aberrant expression and hyperphosphorylation of TNK2 have been implicated in a number of cancers, although the exact proteins and cellular events that mediate phenotypic changes downstream of TNK2 are unclear. Biological systems that employ proximity-dependent protein labeling methods, such as biotinylation identification (BioID), are being increasingly used to map protein-protein interactomes as they provide increased sensitivity in finding interaction partners. In the present study, we employ BioID coupled to a Biotinylation Site Identification Technology (BioSITe) method we recently developed to perform molecular mapping of intracellular protein interactors of TNK2. By performing a controlled comparative analysis between full-length TNK2 and its truncated counterpart, we were not only able to confidently identify site-level biotinylation of previously well-established TNK2 binders and substrates, but also several novel binders of TNK2 that may help explain its role in oncogenic signaling.

### Sample Protocol
Quantitative SILAC proteomics for BioSITe: HCC1395 TNBC cells expressing mutant TNK2 ΔC-BirA* were labeled as “light” by culturing in media supplemented with light lysine (K0) and light arginine (R0) while cells expressing TNK2 FL-BirA* were labeled as “heavy” by culturing in media supplemented with 15N2-Lysine (K8) and 13C6, 15N4-Arginine (R10). Cells expressing TNK2 FL-BirA* and TNK2 ΔC-BirA* were cultured overnight with 50 mM biotin. Cells were lysed in 8 M urea buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 8.0, 8 M urea, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 5 mM sodium fluoride), sonicated, and then cleared by centrifugation at 15,000 x g at 4 °C for 20 min. Protein concentration of lysates was determined by BCA Protein Assay. For each biological replicate, equal amounts of protein (10 mg) from each labeling condition was mixed and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion followed by BioSITe analysis. BioSITe: Samples were processed using BioSITe method as previously described in Kim et al. (2017) Journal of Proteome Research, 17, 759-769. Briefly, peptide samples dissolved in BioSITe capture buffer (50 mM Tris, 150 mM NaCl, 0.5% Triton X-100) were incubated with anti-biotin antibody bound to protein-G beads for 2 hours at 4°C. Following incubation, beads were washed multiple times with PBS and then washed two times with BioSITe capture buffer, two times with 50 mM Tris and two times with ultrapure water. Biotinylated peptides were eluted four times using elution buffer (80% acetonitrile and 0.2% trifluoroacetic acid in water). The eluted sample was further cleaned up using C18 reversed-phase column and subject to LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis: Proteome Discoverer software suite (v 2.2; Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for a combined database search of all raw files. Spectrum selector was used to import spectra from raw file. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithm against the Human RefSeq database (v73 containing 73,198 entries) containing protein FASTA sequences of TNK2 FL-BirA* and TNK2 ΔC-BirA*. The search parameters for identification of biotinylated peptides were as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to three missed cleavages); b) minimum peptide length was set to 6 amino acids. c) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; d) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and e) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) as a fixed modification and f) oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da), 13C6, 15N2-lysine (K8),13C6, 15N4-arginine (R10), biotinylation of lysine (+226.077598 Da), biotinylation of heavy lysine (+234.091797) as variable modifications. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the PSM level using percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively. For obtaining the relative quantification of biotinylated peptides modified by SILAC light or heavy amino acids, we used PyQuant to derive the precursor ion abundance values for the isotopic counterparts for each biotinylated precursor identified from database search.

### Publication Abstract
Nonreceptor tyrosine kinases (NRTKs) represent an important class of signaling molecules driving diverse cellular pathways. Aberrant expression and hyperphosphorylation of TNK2, an NRTK, have been implicated in multiple cancers. However, the exact proteins and cellular events that mediate phenotypic changes downstream of TNK2 are unclear. Biological systems that employ proximity-dependent biotinylation methods, such as BioID, are being increasingly used to map protein-protein interactions, as they provide increased sensitivity in discovering interaction partners. In this study, we employed stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture and BioID coupled to the biotinylation site identification technology (BioSITe) method that we recently developed to quantitatively explore the interactome of TNK2. By performing a controlled comparative analysis between full-length TNK2 and its truncated counterpart, we were able to not only identify site-level biotinylation of previously well-established TNK2 binders and substrates including NCK1, NCK2, CTTN, and STAT3, but also discover several novel TNK2 interacting partners. We also performed co-immunoprecipitation and immunofluorescence analysis to validate the interaction between TNK2 and CLINT1, a novel TNK2 interacting protein. Overall, this work reveals the power of the BioSITe method coupled to BioID and highlights several molecules that warrant further exploration to assess their functional significance in TNK2-mediated signaling.

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Biosite, Tnk2

### Affiliations
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205

### Submitter
Akhilesh Pandey

### Lab Head
Dr Akhilesh Pandey
733 N. Broadway Miller Research Building room 527 Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21205


