### Accession
PXD006756

### Title
Fbxl13 regulates centrosome homeostasis and migration through ubiquitin mediated proteolysis

### Description
F-box proteins are the variable substrate adaptor subunits of the SCF (Skp1, Cul1, F-box) ubiquitin ligases. The family comprise about 69 members with important roles in cancer pathogenesis and cell proliferation. Among the F-box proteins, Fbxl13 is frequently amplified in several cancer patient cohorts suggesting an important role in promoting cancer pathogenesis. However, the main function of Fbxl13 is unknown and its biochemical mechanism of action remains uncharacterised. Here, we show that Fbxl13 specifically interacts with the centrosomal proteins Centrin-2, Centrin-3, Cep152, and Cep192. Fbxl13 is enriched at the centrosome, where it targets Cep192 for ubiquitin mediated proteolysis. In line with this, Fbxl13 overexpression downregulated centrosomal γ-tubulin, and disrupted centrosomal microtubule arrays. Furthermore, depletion of Fbxl13 in U2OS cells corresponds to defects in centrosome duplication and cell motility. Thus, we propose that Fbxl13 is a novel regulator of centrosome duplication and microtubule nucleation activity, highlighting a potential tumourigenic role of Fbxl13 in promoting cell motility.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were lysed in lysis buffer (LB) supplemented with protease inhibitors. 3xFlag Fbxl13 and interacting proteins were enriched by Flag-tag immunoprecipitation. The eluate was subjected to two rounds of chloroform-methanol precipitation, then resuspended in 6 M urea, 100 mM ammonium acetate pH ~8, and subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion and analysis by nano-liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using a UHPLC 3000 system (Thermo Fisher) coupled to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
The raw MS data was converted into Mascot generic files using MSconvert. Searches were performed using Matrix Science software using the following parameters: Carbomidomethyl (C) as a fixed modification, Deamidated (N) and Oxidation (M) as variable modifications, precursor error 10 ppm, fragment error 0.5 Da, up to one missed cleavage and up one 13C shift in precursor mass. MS data was searched against the Homo sapiens UniProt SwissProt database (retrieved 20151126, 20,268 sequences), and filtered at 1% FDR.

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant centrosome organisation with ensuing alterations of microtubule nucleation capacity enables tumour cells to proliferate and invade despite increased genomic instability. CEP192 is a key factor in the initiation process of centrosome duplication and in the control of centrosome microtubule nucleation. However, regulatory means of CEP192 have remained unknown. Here, we report that FBXL13, a binding determinant of SCF (SKP1-CUL1-F-box)-family E3 ubiquitin ligases, is enriched at centrosomes and interacts with the centrosomal proteins Centrin-2, Centrin-3, CEP152 and CEP192. Among these, CEP192 is specifically targeted for proteasomal degradation by FBXL13. Accordingly, induced FBXL13 expression downregulates centrosomal &#x3b3;-tubulin and disrupts centrosomal microtubule arrays. In addition, depletion of FBXL13 induces high levels of CEP192 and &#x3b3;-tubulin at the centrosomes with the consequence of defects in cell motility. Together, we characterise FBXL13 as a novel regulator of microtubule nucleation activity and highlight a role in promoting cell motility with potential tumour-promoting implications.

### Keywords
Fbxl13, Hek293t, Ubiquitin ligase, F-box protein, Orbitrap elite

### Affiliations
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford
University of Oxford

### Submitter
Philip Charles

### Lab Head
Dr Benedikt Kessler
Target Discovery Institute, Nuffield Department of Medicine, University of Oxford


