### Accession
PXD010868

### Title
S. cerevisiae natural isolate proteomics

### Description
Natural S. cerevisiae isolates were evaluated for tolerance to a complex mixture of lignocellulosic inhibitors. Two isolates, with intermediate and superior tolerance characteristics, were investigated to determine the proteomic changes required for tolerance to lignocellulosic inhibitors.

### Sample Protocol
Isolates were grown to early exponential phase in the presence of inhibitors or without (50 ml SC-URA) (Biological replicates of four). Cells were harvested, washed with ddH2O and arrested with 10% TCA, followed by washing (x2) extraction buffer (8 M urea, 75 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 100 mM sodium butyrate, 10 mM nicotinamide, 1% PVP40, protease and phosphatase inhibitors). Cell pellets were resuspended in 800 μl extraction buffer and 600 μl glass beads and cells lysed by bead beating. Intracellular proteins extracts were acidified by adding 4 M acetic acid and precipitated with acetone overnight. Protein pellets were solubilised in TEAB of which 20 ug was separated on a 16.5% Criterion Tris-Tricine precast polyacrylamide gel to remove residual lignocellulosic inhibitors. Gel fragments were rehydrated with 2 mM TCEP in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide. Proteins were digested with 0.02 mg/mL trypsin overnight. The peptide containing supernatant was dried and resuspended in 0.1% formic acid, 2% ACN in analytical grade H2O. Resuspended tryptic peptides were separated by a C18 column (75 μm x 25 cm x 2 μm) (equilibrated with 96.5% solvent A (LC water, 0.1% formic acid) and 3.5% solvent B (ACN, 0.1% formic acid) attached to a NanoLC. Peptides were eluted into an Orbitrap Q-Exactive mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were used as input to MaxQuant (v 1.6.0.1) and searched with the Andromeda search algorithm against the SGD protein fasta database of all named ORFs (Release R64-2-1; 2014-11-18). The false discovery rate (FDR) was calculated with a reversed-sequence decoy library. The following settings and thresholds were used during the database search: Oxidation and protein N-terminal acetylation was set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a fixed modification. The FDR thresholds for both peptides and proteins was set at ≤ 0.01 (1%). The maximum number of missed cleavages was set at 2 and match tolerance at 20 ppm. Match between runs was disabled, and quantification was done individually for each sample with the maxLFQ algorithm. The output (LFQ data) from MaxQuant was log transformed and filtered for peptides matching to the included contaminants or the reversed-sequence decoy database with custom R scripts. Protein groups only identified by a site modification were removed. Protein groups identified in less than 3 biological replicates were not considered in downstream analyses. The Normalyzer (v 1.1.1) R package was used to determine the optimum normalisation method and missing values imputed with a downshifted normal distribution with Perseus (v 1.6.0.7). Differentially accumulated proteins were identified by q-value corrected (0.01) two-tailed t-tests implemented with the genefilter (v 1.58.1) and qvalue (v 2.8.0) R packages.

### Publication Abstract
Strains of Saccharomyces cerevisiae with improved tolerance to plant hydrolysates are of utmost importance for the cost-competitive production of value-added chemicals and fuels. However, engineering strategies are constrained by a lack of understanding of the yeast response to complex inhibitor mixtures. Natural S. cerevisiae isolates display niche-specific phenotypic and metabolic diversity, encoded in their DNA, which has evolved to overcome external stresses, utilise available resources and ultimately thrive in their challenging environments. Industrial and laboratory strains, however, lack these adaptations due to domestication. Natural strains can serve as a valuable resource to mitigate engineering constraints by studying the molecular mechanisms involved in phenotypic variance and instruct future industrial strain improvement to lignocellulosic hydrolysates. We, therefore, investigated the proteomic changes between two natural S. cerevisiae isolates when exposed to a lignocellulosic inhibitor mixture. Comparative shotgun proteomics revealed that isolates respond by regulating a similar core set of proteins in response to inhibitor stress. Furthermore, superior tolerance was linked to NAD(P)/H and energy homeostasis, concurrent with inhibitor and reactive oxygen species detoxification processes. We present several candidate proteins within the redox homeostasis and energy management cellular processes as possible targets for future modification and study. Data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD010868.

### Keywords
Natural isolate, Lignocellulosic inhibitors, Saccharomyces

### Affiliations
Dept. Microbiology Stellenbosch University
Stellenbosch University

### Submitter
Riaan Neethling de Witt

### Lab Head
Dr Heinrich Volschenk
Dept. Microbiology Stellenbosch University


