### Accession
PXD008520

### Title
Distinct branches  of the N-end rule pathway modulate the plant immune response

### Description
The N-end rule pathway is a highly conserved constituent of the ubiquitin proteasome system, though little information exists regarding biological roles. Here we show that the cysteine (Cys-) and glutamine (Gln)-specific amino-terminal (Nt)-amidase NTAQ1 branches are both components of the plant immune system, through the E3 ligase PROTEOLYSIS (PRT)6. Both ntaq1 and prt6 mutants of Arabidopsis thaliana showed enhanced basal resistance to the hemibiotroph pathogen Pseudomonas syringae, associated with constitutive expression of defence-response genes and activation of synthesis pathway of the phytoalexin camalexin. We observed a role in stomatal defence for the Nt-Cys substrates ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR VII transcription factors. Transgenic barley lines with reduced HvPRT6 expression showed enhanced resistance against Ps japonica and Blumeria graminis f. sp. Hordei, indicating a conserved role of the pathway in immunity. These data demonstrate that different branches of the N-end rule pathway act at distinct levels of the plant immune response.

### Sample Protocol
Rosettes of 3.5-week-old plants were detached from the rest of the plant and weighed using a precision balance. The assay was performed three times, using 20 plants per line in each replicate. The harvested plant material was frozen in liquid nitrogen and crushed using a pestle and mortar to a very fine powder. The material (four replicates of each treatment) was then suspended in homogenization buffer (30% sucrose, 0.1 M KCl, 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8), 5 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT) and cells were lysed by point sonication (15 W output, 5 bursts of 10 s) while cooling them on ice between bursts. After removing the debris by centrifugation (20,000 x g, 20 min, 15°C) the protein containing supernatant was transferred to a fresh tube and precipitated by using a methanol:chloroform:water mixture (3:1:4 ratio). The aqueous phase was removed without disturbing the protein pellet (located at the interface of the phases) and the pellet was washed with 4 parts methanol and vigorous vortexing. The supernatant was removed, the pellet washed with 80% acetone and centrifuged. After removing the acetone, the pellet was solubilized in a denaturation buffer made from 6 M guanidinium hydrochloride in 50 mM TEAB buffer. Cysteines were reduced and alkylated with DTT (15 mM final concentration (f.c.), 30 min at 55°C) and IAA (30 mM f.c., 15 min at 22°C in the dark), respectively. After diluting the guanidinium hydrochloride to 1 M with 50 mM TEAB, the protein concentration was determined by Bradford and 200 µg from each sample was digested overnight with a trypsin/endoproteinase-LysC mix (Promega) in a 1:50 enzyme:protein ratio. The next day peptide mixtures were acidified with TFA (pH < 3) and cleaned using C18 Macro SpinColumns (Harvard Apparatus, 74-4101). The eluents were completely dried and stored at -20°C. LC-MS/MS analyses The peptide mixtures were analyzed by LC−MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLC nano LC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The peptides were first loaded on a trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.) × 20 mm, 5 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) and after flushing from the trapping column, peptides were loaded on an analytical column (made in-house, 75 μm I.D. × 400 mm, 1.9 μm beads C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch) using a non-linear 150 min gradient of 2-56% solvent B (0.1% formic acid (FA) in water/acetonitrile, 20/80 (v/v)) at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. This was followed by a 10 min wash reaching 99% solvent B and 20 min re-equilibration with solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The column temperature was kept constant at 50°C (CoControl 3.3.05, Sonation). The Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant peaks in a given MS spectrum. The source voltage was set to 3.0 kV and the capillary temperature was 250°C. One MS1 scan (m/z 375-1500, AGC target  3E6 ions, maximum ion injection time of 45 ms) acquired at a resolution of  60,000 (at 200 m/z) was followed by up to 16 tandem MS scans (resolution  15,000 at 200 m/z) of the most intense ions fulfilling predefined selection criteria (AGC target 1E5 ions, maximum ion injection time of 45 ms, isolation window of 1.5 m/z, fixed first mass of 145 m/z, spectrum data type: centroid, under fill ratio 2%, intensity threshold 1.3E4, exclusion of unassigned, singly charged precursors, peptide match preferred, exclude isotopes on, dynamic exclusion time of 12 s). The HCD collision energy was set to 32% Normalized Collision Energy and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane background ion at 445.12002 Da was used for internal calibration (lock mass).

### Data Protocol
Data analysis was performed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.3.8) using the Andromeda search engine with default search settings including a false discovery rate set at 1% on both the peptide and protein level. Spectra were searched against the A. thaliana proteins in the UniProt/Swiss-Prot database (database release version of July 2016 containing 31,423 protein sequences, www.uniprot.org). The mass tolerance for precursor and fragment ions was set to 4.5 and 20 ppm, respectively, during the main search. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to arginine and lysine (trypsin), also allowing cleavage at arginine/lysine-proline bonds with a maximum of two missed cleavages. S-carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification and variable modifications were set to oxidation of methionine (to sulfoxides) and acetylation of protein N-termini.  Proteins were quantified by the MaxLFQ algorithm integrated in the MaxQuant software. A minimum ratio count of two unique or razor peptides was required for quantification. Data analysis was performed with the Perseus software (version 1.5.2.4). After loading the protein groups file from MaxQuant, the proteins only identified by site and reverse database hits were removed, as well as potential contaminants. The replicate samples were grouped (ntaq1-3 and Col-0) and a minimum of three valid values were required in at least one group. Missing values were imputed by replacing them with random numbers from the lower part of the normal distribution, representing the detection limit. A two-sample t-test was performed for the comparison between ntaq1-3 infected plant cells and Col-0 with a permutation-based FDR of 0.05 and S0 of 0.1 for truncation with a total of 1,000 randomizations.

### Publication Abstract
The N-end rule pathway is a highly conserved constituent of the ubiquitin proteasome system, yet little is known about its biological roles. Here we explored the role of the N-end rule pathway in the plant immune response. We investigated the genetic influences of components of the pathway and known protein substrates on physiological, biochemical and metabolic responses to pathogen infection. We show that the glutamine (Gln) deamidation and cysteine (Cys) oxidation branches are both components of the plant immune system, through the E3 ligase PROTEOLYSIS (PRT)6. In Arabidopsis thaliana Gln-specific amino-terminal (Nt)-amidase (NTAQ1) controls the expression of specific defence-response genes, activates the synthesis pathway for the phytoalexin camalexin and influences basal resistance to the hemibiotroph pathogen Pseudomonas syringae pv tomato (Pst). The Nt-Cys ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR VII transcription factor substrates enhance pathogen-induced stomatal closure. Transgenic barley with reduced HvPRT6 expression showed enhanced resistance to Ps. japonica and Blumeria graminis f. sp. hordei, indicating a conserved role of the pathway. We propose that that separate branches of the N-end rule pathway act as distinct components of the plant immune response in flowering plants.

### Keywords
Amino-terminal glutamine amidase, Ntaq, N-end rule pathway, Plant immunity, Erfvii

### Affiliations
School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, LE12 5RD, UK
VIB-Ugent

### Submitter
Jarne Pauwels

### Lab Head
Dr Michael J. Holdsworth
School of Biosciences, University of Nottingham, LE12 5RD, UK


