### Accession
PXD035996

### Title
KCNQOT1 binding peptides

### Description
We examined whether K non-rep and K rep sequences bind to different set of proteins by performing ChOP-mass spectrometry (ChOP-MS) in WT, K non-rep KO and K rep KO HEK293T cells, using lacZ probes as control.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were crosslinked with 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at RT, followed by quenching with 125mM glycine and subsequent washing with ice-cold PBS. For each sample, 5 × 106 nuclei were resuspended in 300 µl lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS), and sonicated using a Qsonica sonicator at 4°C to shear chromatin to 200-500 bp fragments. The samples were centrifuged for 15 min at 15,000 rpm to remove insoluble debris. The supernatants were transferred to new tubes. Afterward, 1% supernatant was saved as input. After incubating protein A/G magnetic beads (Thermo Scientific) with 5 µg of antibodies, anti-H3K9me3 (Abcam, ab8898), or non-specific control IgG (Cell Signaling Technology, 2729), the beads were washed twice with lysis buffer and resuspended with sheared chromatin, incubated on a rotator overnight at 4 °C. The next morning beads were washed three times with ice-cold lysis buffer, three times with ice-cold high salt buffer (50 mM HEPES-KOH, pH 7.5, 350 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, 0.1% SDS), three times with ice-cold LiCl buffer (0.25 M LiCl, 1% NP40, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0), and one time with ice-cold TE buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 1 mM EDTA) at 4°C. Chromatin was eluted from beads with elution buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS) by incubating at 65°C for 1 h, followed by reversing formaldehyde cross-links through overnight incubation at 65°C. DNA was purified using phenol:chloroform:isoamyl alcohol (Sigma-Aldrich).

### Data Protocol
SEQUEST HT engine in Proteome Discoverer 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used to search against the human proteome (Uniprot-reviewed sequences, March 10, 2020). Then peptides of the same protein were merged, controling the protein FDR confidence at 1%, and proteins with <2 unique peptides were removed to obtain the prey protein data for subsequent analysis. The normalized spectral abundance factor (NSAF) was used to calculate the relative abundance of prey proteins in each sample. MiST (https://github.com/kroganlab/mist) and SAINTexpress (v3.6.3) software were then used with default parameters to identify high-confidence protein-lncRNA interactions. For SAINTexpress, annotated protein interactions in the CORUM database (December 24, 2020). Only protein-lncRNA interactions with MiST score ≥ 0.7, SAINTexpress Bayesian false-discovery rate (BFDR) ≤ 0.1, and average spectral count ≥  2 were kept for further analyses. Cytoscape (v3.8.0) was used to visualize high-confidence protein-lncRNA interactions. Besides the high-confidence protein-lncRNA interactions obtained by MS, the physical interactions between prey proteins in the BIOGRID database (Release 4.1.190) were also included in the network. ClusterProfiler package in the R software(v3.6.1) was used to annotate the enriched protein complexes and biological processes on the network and among high-confidence proteins of each sample. For each network module, if there were redundant enriched GO terms, a representative was manually selected as the annotation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Kcnq1ot1, Heterochromatin, Senescence, Transposon, Rna-dsdna triplex

### Affiliations
CAS Key Laboratory of Computational Biology, Shanghai Institute of Nutrition and Health, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences; 320 Yue Yang Road, Shanghai, 200031, China
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Center for Quantitative Biology (CQB), Peking University; Beijing 100871, China

### Submitter
Jiyang LI

### Lab Head
Dr Jing-Dong J. Han
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Center for Quantitative Biology (CQB), Peking University; Beijing 100871, China


