### Accession
PXD031874

### Title
Trafficking and interactions upon loss of  TECPR2

### Description
Hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathy 9 (HSAN9) is a rare neurological disease caused by mutations in the gene encoding for Tectonin β-propeller repeat containing protein 2 (TECPR2) which possibly result in loss of the protein. Beside its potential role in autophagy, TECPR2 may serve as positive modulator of COPII-mediated ER export. However, the molecular consequences of TECPR2 deficiency for the secretory pathway remain unclear, in particular with regard to specific cargo proteins. By employing spatial proteomic approaches, we unveiled pronounced changes in several steps along the secretory pathway with numerous proteins important for neuronal function being affected in their intracellular trafficking or secretion upon loss of TECPR2. Moreover, TECPR2’s associations with endomembranes and components of the secretory pathway were strongly reduced when a HSAN9 mutant TECPR2 variant was expressed. Collectively, this resource provides the first systemic profiling of global secretory pathway defects in a loss of function HSAN9 cell model.

### Sample Protocol
All samples were reconstituted in 0.1% formic acid and separated using an Easy-nLC1200 liquid chromatograph (Thermo Scientific) followed by peptide detection on a Q Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Samples were separated on a 75 µm x 15 cm custom-made fused silica capillary packed with C18AQ resin (Reprosil-PUR 120, 1.9 µm, Dr. Maisch), flow rates and gradients were adjusted according to the experiment. Except for plasma membranome analysis, peptide mixtures were separated on a 35 min acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min (5%–38% ACN gradient for 23 min, 38%–60% ACN gradient for 3 min, 60%–95% ACN gradient for 2 min). For plasma membranome analysis, peptide mixtures were separated on a 75 min acetonitrile gradient in 0.1% formic acid at a flow rate of 400 nl/min (7%–38% ACN gradient for 53 min, 38%–60% ACN gradient for 5 min, 60%–100% ACN gradient for 5 min). Peptides were identified in full MS / dd MS² (Top15) mode, dynamic exclusion was enabled for 20 s and identifications with an unassigned charge or charges of one or >8 were rejected.

### Data Protocol
Raw data were analyzed using MaxQuant (version 1.6.0.1) (Cox and Mann, 2008) in reversed decoy mode based on a human reference proteome (Uniprot-FASTA, UP000005640) with false discovery rates of 0.01. Depending on the experiment, label-free quantification, re-quantification and match-between-runs was selected and at least 4 biological replicates were analyzed. Resulting protein group files were processed using Perseus (version 1.6.5.0) (Tyanova et al., 2016). In general, common contaminants, reverse and site-specific identifications as well as proteins identified with a peptide count <1 or <2 were excluded. Remaining proteins were filtered by statistical testing.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Copii, Rush specs, Proximity biotinylation, Suspecs, Apex2, Spg49, Eres, Tecpr2, Hsan9, Lysoip

### Affiliations
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-University München, Munich, Germany
SyNergy, LMU München

### Submitter
Christian Behrends

### Lab Head
Dr Christian Behrends
Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), Ludwig-Maximilians-University München, Munich, Germany


