### Accession
PXD044239

### Title
Parallel proteomics and phosphoproteomics defines starvation signal specific processes in cell quiescence

### Description
Cells arrest growth and enter a quiescent state upon nutrient deprivation.  However, the molecular processes by which cells respond to different starvation signals to regulate exit from the cell division cycle and initiation of quiescence remains poorly understood. To study the role of protein expression and signaling in quiescence we combined temporal profiling of the proteome and phosphoproteome using stable isotope labeling with amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (budding yeast). We find that carbon and phosphorus starvation signals activate quiescence through largely distinct proteome and phosphoproteome remodeling. However, increased expression of mitochondrial proteins is essential for quiescence establishment in response to both starvation signals.  Whereas the quiescent proteome is established within 6 hours of starvation the quiescent phosphoproteome undergoes continuous changes for at least 30 hours following initial starvation. Deletion of the putative quiescence regulator RIM15, which encodes a serine-threonine kinase, results in reduced survival of cells starved for phosphorus and nitrogen, but not carbon.  However, we identified common protein phosphorylation roles for RIM15 in quiescence that are enriched for RNA metabolism and translation. We also find evidence for RIM15-mediated phosphorylation of some targets, including IGO1, prior to starvation consistent with a functional role for RIM15 beyond quiescence regulation. Finally, we find evidence for widespread catabolism of amino acids in response to nitrogen starvation, indicating widespread amino acid recycling via salvage pathways in conditions lacking environmental nitrogen. Our study defines an expanded quiescent proteome and phosphoproteome in yeast, and highlights the multiple coordinated molecular processes at the level of protein expression that are required for quiescence.

### Sample Protocol
Protein extraction, pooling and digestion At each time point  3 x 108 cells were pelleted and washed twice with ice cold PBS before flash freezing. A technical replica was also collected. Samples were randomized for protein extraction and digestion to minimize technical variation. After thawing on ice, cells were disrupted by glass-bead agitation at 4°C in standard buffer: 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAM), 1x complete protease inhibitor (Roche) and 1x phosphatase inhibitor cocktail (PhosphoSTOP, Roche). The extract was cleared by centrifugation and protein concentration was determined by Bradford assay (BioRad). Cell lysate extracted from different genotypes under the same starvation treatment at the same time point were then mixed at equal amounts with an external control sample (wild type cells in exponential growth phase in rich medium) at a 1:1:1 ratio. Approximately 600μg of the mixed light/medium/heavy/ protein sample was processed for in-solution digestion as described in (Monteoliva et al. 2011). Proteins were reduced with 5mM DL-Dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 minutes at 37°C and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at 30°C. Samples were diluted six times with 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, trypsin/lysC (Promega, Spain) was added to the protein mixture at a 25:1 protein:protease ratio (w/w), and samples were incubated overnight at 37°C. Protein digestion was stopped by addition of formic acid. Phosphopeptide enrichment  Enrichment for phosphopeptide was performed  using Pierce™ TiO2 Phosphopeptide Enrichment and Clean-up Kit. All digested peptides were desalted with C18 according to a previous study (Villén and Gygi 2008). Then, an aliquot of 10 μg peptides was separated to be further processed and analyzed without phosphopeptide enrichment. The remainder of the sample was processed with the TiO2 according to the user manual. Samples representing the whole proteome were solubilized in 15 μl of 2% ACN 0.5% AcOH and 2 μl were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Enriched phosphopeptides were solubilized in 10 μl of 2% acetonitrile 0.5% acetic acid and 5 μl were analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Mass Spectrometry LC separation was performed online on EASY-nLC 1000 (Thermo Scientific) using Acclaim PepMap 100 (75 um x 2 cm) precolumn and PepMap RSLC C18 (2 μm, 100A x 50 cm) analytical column. Peptides were gradient eluted from the column directly to Orbitrap HFX mass spectrometer using 160 min acetonitrile gradient from 5-26% B in 118 minutes followed by ramp to 40% B in 20 min and final equilibration in 100% B for 15 minutes (A=2% acetonitrile 0.5% acetic acid; B=80% acetonitrile 0.5% acetic acid). The flow rate was set at 200 nl/minute. For whole cell digests, high resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6, with a maximum ion injection time of 32 ms, and scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z.  Following each full MS scan 20 data-dependent HCD MS/MS scans were acquired at the resolution of 7,500, AGC target of 2e5, maximum ion time of 32 ms, one microscan, 1.4 m/z isolation window, nce of 27 and dynamic exclusion for 45 seconds. For phosphopeptides analysis, high resolution full MS spectra were acquired with a resolution of 120,000, an AGC target of 3e6, with a maximum ion injection time of 100 ms, and scan range of 400 to 1600 m/z.  Following each full MS scan 20 data-dependent HCD MS/MS scans were acquired at the resolution of 30,000, AGC target of 5e5, maximum ion time of 100 ms, one microscan, 1.4 m/z isolation window, nce of 27 and dynamic exclusion for 45 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification MS data were analyzed using MaxQuant software version 1.6.3.4 and searched against the S. Cerevisiae reference database (http://www.uniprot.org/) containing 6,721 entries. Multiplicity was set to three, matching the number of SILAC labels used (“light,” “medium,” and “heavy”) in each experiment; lys-4/arg-6 and lys-8/arg-10 were specified as medium and heavy labels, respectively. Database search was performed in Andromeda integrated in the MaxQuant environment. A list of 248 common laboratory contaminants included in MaxQuant was also added to the database as well as reversed versions of all sequences. For searching, the enzyme specificity was set to trypsin with the maximum number of missed cleavages set to 2. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search used for non-linear mass re-calibration  and then set to 6 ppm for the main search. Oxidation of methionine was searched as variable modification; carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. For phosphopeptides samples phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine residues was also included as a variable modification. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide, protein, and site identification was set to 1%, the minimum peptide length was set to 6. To transfer identifications across different runs, the ‘match between runs’ option in MaxQuant was enabled with a retention time tolerance of one minute (after data-dependent nonlinear retention time recalibration).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Starvation, Yeast, Quiescence

### Affiliations
New York University
Department of Biology New York University New York NY

### Submitter
David Gresham

### Lab Head
Dr David Gresham
Department of Biology New York University New York NY


