### Accession
PXD022267

### Title
Complex-dependent histone acetyltransferase activity of KAT8 determines its role in transcriptional regulation and cellular homeostasis [AP-MS]

### Description
Histone acetylation is associated with open chromatin and transcriptionally active genes. Specifically, acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) has been shown to prevent the assembly of nucleosomal arrays in vitro. This modification is catalyzed by the MYST-family histone acetyltransferase KAT8 (also known as MOF and MYST1), which is part of two distinct chromatin-associated complexes: NSL and MSL. While extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and the two KAT8-containing complexes in mammalian cells are not well understood. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8. We found that KAT8 catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16 acetylation as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that the core proteins of the MSL complex and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and global chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it is enriched at the promoters of housekeeping genes and is required for their transcription initiation. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins, and that, as part of the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5 and H4K8 acetylation required for the expression of genes essential for cell survival

### Sample Protocol
Interactomics analysis was performed using four cell lines in four replicates (a total of 16 samples): parental THP1 line and three THP1 cell lines with different members of NSL complex FLAG-tagged (KANSL2, KANSL3 and KAT8). For each replicate 10 mln cells were lysed in 50 mM EPPS, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton X-100, complete protease inhibitors and 25U/mL of benzonase. The lysate was kept on ice for 5 minutes to allow DNA digestion and cleared by centrifugation at 20.000 g for 5 minutes and filtering through acropep advance 96 well 2ml, 1 µm glass fiber filter plate. Immupreciptation was performed for 1 hour at 4C with ANTI-FLAG® M2 Affinity Gel (A2220) in Eppendorf™ Deepwell™ Plates 96 with shaking at 1300 rpm. After immunoprecipitation, the beads were washed five times in wash buffer (50 mM EPPS, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) and subjected to trypsin digestion for two hours at 37C with 15 µl of 10 ng/µl LysC and 20 ng/µl Trypsin in  10 mM EPPS pH 8.5 on Orochem OF1100 plates. The digest was labelled with 4 µl 20 g/L TMTPro tags, as recommended by the manufacturer and the material was fractionated by Pierce™ High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit concatenating 2 fractions into a superfraction (e.g. 1 and 5).  After fractionation the samples were evaporated using vacuum centrifuge, resuspended in 20 µl 0.1% TFA and 4.5 µl was analyzed by Waters nanoAcquity M Class UPLC on 2 µm particle size, 75 µm x 500 mm easyspray column in direct injection mode. The samples were separated using the following gradient of buffer A (0.1% formic acid in water) and buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile): 0-7% in 5 min, 7-30% in 90 min, 30-50% in 20 min. Eluting peptides were analysed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos instrument using MS3 SPS method with the settings recommended by the instrument manufacturer with the following modifications: 1. CID NCE for MS2 was set at 32; 2. HCD NCE for MS3 was set at 45; 3. C series exclusion was disabled, since TMTPro reagent was not enabled in C-series exclusion.

### Data Protocol
Data were analyzed in Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software. A database search was performed with Sequest HT search engine using Homo Sapiens UniProt database containing only reviewed entries and canonical isoforms (retrieved on 14/06/2019). Oxidation (M) was set as a variable modification, while TMTPro was set as fixed modificaion. A maximum of two missed cleavages were permitted. The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were 10 ppm and 0.6 Da, respectively. PSMs were validated by percolator with a 0.01 posterior error probability (PEP) threshold. Only PSMs with isolation interference < 25% and at least 5 MS2 fragments selected for MS3 matched to peptide sequence were considered. The quantification results of peptide spectrum matches were combined into protein-level quantitation using MSstatsTMT R package [PMID: 24794931] with at least 2 peptides per protein.

### Publication Abstract
Acetylation of lysine 16 on histone H4 (H4K16ac) is catalyzed by histone acetyltransferase KAT8 and can prevent chromatin compaction in&#xa0;vitro. Although extensively studied in Drosophila, the functions of H4K16ac and two KAT8-containing protein complexes (NSL and MSL) are not well understood in mammals. Here, we demonstrate a surprising complex-dependent activity of KAT8: it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac as part of the NSL complex, whereas it catalyzes the bulk of H4K16ac as part of the MSL complex. Furthermore, we show that MSL complex proteins and H4K16ac are not required for cell proliferation and chromatin accessibility, whereas the NSL complex is essential for cell survival, as it stimulates transcription initiation at the promoters of housekeeping genes. In summary, we show that KAT8 switches catalytic activity and function depending on its associated proteins and that, when in the NSL complex, it catalyzes H4K5ac and H4K8ac required for the expression of essential genes.

### Keywords
Nsl, Msl, Kat8, Histone

### Affiliations
Syddansk University
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)

### Submitter
Pavel Shliaha

### Lab Head
Dr Ole N Jensen
University of Southern Denmark, Department of Biochemistryand Molecular Biology, Protein Research Group (lab head)


