### Accession
PXD038554

### Title
Palmitoylation couples insulin hypersecretion with β-cell failure in diabetes

### Description
Hyperinsulinemia often precedes type 2 diabetes but its role in disease progression is unknown. Palmitoylation, a protein modification implicated in regulated exocytosis, is reversed by acyl-protein thioesterase 1 (APT1). We found altered APT1 biology in pancreatic islets from humans with type 2 diabetes, and APT1 knockdown in nondiabetic human islets caused insulin hypersecretion. Chow fed global and islet specific APT1 knockout mice had enhanced glucose tolerance due to islet autonomous increased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. APT1 deficiency did not affect islet calcium dynamics but prolonged insulin granule fusion. Using palmitoylation proteomics, we identified Scamp1 as an APT1 substrate that localized to insulin secretory granules. Knockdown of Scamp1 caused insulin hypersecretion. APT1 deficient insulinoma cells subjected to nutrient excess had increased apoptosis, and expression of a mutated Scamp1 incapable of being palmitoylated in APT1 deficient cells rescued insulin hypersecretion and nutrient induced apoptosis. Compared to APT1 sufficient controls, high fat fed islet specific APT1 knockout mice and global APT1 deficient db/db mice showed increased -cell failure. These findings suggest that the depalmitoylation enzyme APT1 is regulated in human islets, and that APT1 deficiency causes insulin hypersecretion leading to -cell failure, modeling the evolution of some forms of human type 2 diabetes.

### Sample Protocol
Human pancreatic islets for research from deidentified organ donors were obtained from Prodo Laboratories Inc. following the instructions of the Integrated Islet Distribution Program (IIDP), and studied with the approval of the Washington University Human Research Protection Office (HRPO). Table S1 A-C summarizes donor information.  Mouse models Animal protocols were approved by the Washington University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) and complied with the NIH Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. APT1 global deficient mice (APT1 global KO) in the C57BL/6J background and floxed Lypla1 mice were generated as described.14 Islet-specific APT1 knockout mice (APT1 islet-KO) were produced by crossing floxed animals with tamoxifen-inducible Pdx1PBCreERTM mice.19 Adult mice were administered tamoxifen (75 mg/kg i.p.) for five consecutive days. APT1 global KO mice were crossed with db/+ (BKS.Cg-Dock7m++ Leprdb/J) animals followed by intercrossing the progeny to yield db/db mice with and without APT1 deficiency. APT2 global knockout mice (APT2KO) were generated by the trans-NIH Knock-Out Mouse Project (KOMP) and obtained from the KOMP Repository (Project ID: CSD34805). Mice were housed in a specific pathogen-free facility with a 12 h light-dark cycle and fed with commercial chow or high-fat diet with 42% of calories as fat (Envigo Cat. No. TD 88137). Both sexes were metabolically phenotyped, and detailed studies of islet physiology were further pursued in both genders for global APT1KO mice, or males only for the islet APT1 KO model due to the stronger phenotype in males as compared to females with APT1 deficiency.  Mouse islet isolation  Mouse islet isolations were performed essentially by the procedure described by Carter et al.40 Briefly, in anesthetized mice, the common bile duct was clamped off near the junction with the small intestine and cannulated. The pancreas was perfused with 4.5 mL of 1.4 mg/mL collagenase P (Roche, Cat. No. 11213857001) solution (10 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM glucose in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution without CaCl2, MgCl2, NaHCO3 and phenol) and then removed from the mouse and kept with 1 mL of collagenase P solution on ice. Pancreatic digestion was performed in 10 mL glass tubes at 37°C for 10 min, and facilitated with hand-shaking for approximately 15 s to complete the separation of tissue. The reaction was stopped by dilution with 8 mL wash buffer (1 mM CaCl2.2H2O, 10 mM HEPES, 1 mM MgCl2 and 5 mM glucose in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution without CaCl2, MgCl2, NaHCO3 and phenol) on ice, and the digested pancreas was transferred into a 50 mL Falcon tube for washing three times with wash buffer. After the final wash, the pancreas suspension was filtered through a 70 μm cell strainer, and the filtrate maintained in complete RPMI (Gibco, Cat. No. 11875-085) media (10% FBS, 2% Pen/Strep and 2 mM GlutaMax in RPMI 1640 basal media). Individual islets were then picked up manually under the stereomicroscope, and cultured in RPMI 1640 complete media overnight for further experiments.  Acyl-resin assisted capture (RAC) assay  Palmitoylated proteins were purified by RAC as described 42. Mouse islets or INS-1 cells were homogenized with lysis buffer containing 2% Triton-X-100 and 0.2 mM HDSF (hexadecylsulfonyl fluoride from Santa Cruz, Cat. No. sc-221708). After protein concentrations were determined by BCA protein assay kits (Thermofisher, Cat. No. 23227), the same amounts of protein lysates were incubated in 2.5% SDS with 0.1% MMTS (S-methyl methanethiosulfonate from Sigma, Cat. No. 64306) to block free sulfhydryl groups. Proteins were then precipitated, washed, and resuspended in binding buffer (100 mM HEPES, 1 mM EDTA, 1% SDS with protease Inhibitor) followed by thiopropyl-sepharose bead (GE healthcare, Cat. No.17-0420-01) pull-down. Incubation with neutral hydroxylamine (0.8 M, pH 7.4, Alfa Aesar, Cat. No. B22202) was used to specifically cleave the thioester linkage in palmitoylated proteins, and enriched palmitoylated proteins were eluted with 50 mM DTT (dithiothreitol). Eluted proteins were then denatured and followed by Western blotting with antibodies to proteins of interest including Scamp1 antibody (Thermofisher, Cat. No. PA1-739).   Palmitoylation proteomics Proteomic screening was performed essentially as described.14 Palmitoylation-enriched samples were first obtained by acyl-RAC from APT1 global KO mouse islets. Trypsin-digested peptides were labeled with tandem mass tag reagents (TMT10plex™ Isobaric Label Reagent Set from Thermofisher, Cat. No. 90110), suspended in formic acid, and loaded onto a nano-LC column. Eluted peptides were subjected to MS1 scans and selected ions subjected to MS2 scans.

### Data Protocol
All statistical analyses were performed in Prism 9 software (GraphPad Software, La Jolla, CA) using unpaired t test (with Welch’s correction where appropriate), or two-way ANOVA (matched values over different time points with Bonferroni’s correction for multiple comparisons). Normal distribution was analyzed by Shapiro-Wilk test and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Data are presented as pooled data (n refers to numbers or sample numbers as indicated in figure legends) as mean ± sem, and p<0.05 was considered significant.

### Publication Abstract
Hyperinsulinemia often precedes type 2 diabetes. Palmitoylation, implicated in exocytosis, is reversed by acyl-protein thioesterase 1 (APT1). APT1 biology was altered in pancreatic islets from humans with type 2 diabetes, and APT1 knockdown in nondiabetic islets caused insulin hypersecretion. APT1 knockout mice had islet autonomous increased glucose-stimulated insulin secretion that was associated with prolonged insulin granule fusion. Using palmitoylation proteomics, we identified Scamp1 as an APT1 substrate that localized to insulin secretory granules. Scamp1 knockdown caused insulin hypersecretion. Expression of a mutated Scamp1 incapable of being palmitoylated in APT1-deficient cells rescued insulin hypersecretion and nutrient-induced apoptosis. High-fat-fed islet-specific APT1-knockout mice and global APT1-deficient db/db mice showed increased &#x3b2; cell failure. These findings suggest that APT1 is regulated in human islets and that APT1 deficiency causes insulin hypersecretion leading to &#x3b2; cell failure, modeling the evolution of some forms of human type 2 diabetes.

### Keywords
Palmitoylation, Proteomics, Diabetes, Pancreatic islet, Insulin

### Affiliations
Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism & Lipid Research, Washington University, St. Louis Department of Cell Biology & Physiology, Washington University, St. Louis
Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
Qiang Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Clay Semenkovich
Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism & Lipid Research, Washington University, St. Louis Department of Cell Biology & Physiology, Washington University, St. Louis


