### Accession
PXD005873

### Title
Systemic perturbation of keratinocyte homeostasis

### Description
We performed comprehensive proteome profiling (ECM and cell lysate) of human collagen VII deficient and control epidermal keratinocytes to generate global and detailed images of dysregulated epidermal molecular pathways linked to loss of collagen VII. These revealed downregulation of interaction partners of collagen VII, but also increased abundance of S100 pro-inflammatory proteins and enhanced activity of lysosomal proteases. Thus, loss of a single extracellular structural protein, collagen VII, induced persistent fibrosis enabling inflammatory and tissue destabilizing activities of keratinocytes.

### Sample Protocol
A SILAC approach was used to compare RDEB keratinocytes to normal controls by MS-based proteomics. 5x105 fully SILAC-labeled keratinocytes were seeded on 10 cm2 cell culture dishes. On the following day, the medium was exchanged and 50 µg/mL ascorbate was added to allow proper maturation and secretion of collagens (Myllyharju & Kivirikko, 2004). Keratinocytes were kept in culture for six days and fresh culture medium containing ascorbate was added daily. After six days, keratinocytes were washed 3 times with DPBS. The cells were removed from the underlying ECM through incubation with 0.5% Triton X-100 in DPBS for 10 s, followed by a washing step with DPBS and an incubation for 10 s with 20 mM NH4OH in DPBS (Vlodavsky, 2001). Cell lysates were concentrated by ultrafiltration using vivaspin columns (10 kDa MWCO). The remaining ECM was carefully washed 3 times with DPBS to eliminate intracellular contaminants and then solubilized with 4% SDS in 0.1 M Tris–HCl, pH 7.6 (Wisniewski, Zougman et al., 2009). Aliquots of the different ECM samples or cell lysates were used for WB analysis or mixed 1:1:1 and prepared for MS analysis in order to test accurate mixing ratios. Mixing was adjusted for actual MS analysis afterwards. Samples were heated in SDS‐PAGE loading buffer, reduced with 1 mM DTT for 5 min at 95°C and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature. Protein mixtures were separated on 4-12% gradient gels. The gel lanes were cut into 10 equal slices, the proteins were in‐gel digested with trypsin and the resulting peptide mixtures were processed on STAGE tips and analyzed by LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into the MaxQuant software version 1.4.1.2 for peak detection, generation of peak lists of mass error corrected peptides, and for database searches (Cox & Mann, 2008). A full-length UniProt human database additionally containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in–gel digestion (based on UniProt human FASTA version September 2013) was used as reference. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification and protein amino–terminal acetylation and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Triple SILAC was chosen as quantitation mode. Three missed cleavages were allowed, enzyme specificity was trypsin/P, and the MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. The average mass precision of identified peptides was in general less than 1 ppm after recalibration. Peptide lists were further used by MaxQuant to identify and relatively quantify proteins using the following parameters: peptide and protein false discovery rates, based on a forward-reverse database, were set to 0.01, minimum peptide length was set to 6, minimum number of peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to one which must be unique, minimum ratio count was set to two, and identified proteins were requantified. The ‘match-between-run’ option (2 min) was used.

### Publication Abstract
Chronic skin wounds accompany many prevalent age-related diseases and are a major cause of morbidity and mortality. Both keratinocytes and fibroblasts contribute to the pathomechanisms in chronic skin wounds. Dysregulated pathways in the epidermis have been extensively studied, but little is known of the influence of dermal fibroblasts on chronic wounding. We isolated fibroblasts from chronic wounds, propagated them in&#xa0;vitro, and analyzed them using proteomic profiling in combination with functional characterization of the proteomic changes. Chronic wound-associated fibroblasts exhibit a unique proteome profile characteristic of lysosomal dysfunction and dysregulated TGF&#x3b2; signaling. They display a decreased propensity for cell proliferation and migration, combined with an enhanced ability to contract the extracellular matrix. With these properties, chronic wound-associated fibroblasts actively contribute to pathological inabilities to close wounds and represent potential targets for pharmacological interference for changing cellular phenotypes.

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Human, Matrix, Collagen, Keratinocyte, Silac, Ecm

### Affiliations
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Switzerland
University of Fribourg

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dep. of Biology, University of Fribourg, Switzerland


