### Accession
PXD004134

### Title
Analysis of Gulf Toadfish Intestinal Precipitate Matrix

### Description
Marine teleosts produce CaCO3 in their intestine as part of their osmoregulatory strategy. This study aimed to characterize the proteinaceous matrix associated with these precipitates.

### Sample Protocol
Precipitates were collected directly from the intestine of sacrificed Gulf toadfish (Opsans beta). The precipitates were then purified using a multi-step method, that removes the mucus coating surrounding the precipitates, while leaving the ultrastructure of the precipitates intact. The organic matrix was then isolated by removing the inorganic mineral via incubation in concentrated EDTA. EDTA was removed by dialysis and the samples were acetone precipitated and trypsin digested. Intestinal fluid samples were collected directly from the intestine, and again acetone precipitated and trypsin digested. All analysis was completed on a Thermo Orbitrap Velos Pro.

### Data Protocol
Raw data was searched using Mascot against an Opsanus beta database produced by translating a previously assembled transcriptomic database. Mascot search results were loaded into Scaffold version 4.5 (Proteome Software). Protein and peptide identity threshold were set to 99% and 95%, respectively, using the algorithms included in Scaffold.

### Publication Abstract
Marine teleost fish produce CaCO<sub>3</sub> in their intestine as part of their osmoregulatory strategy. This precipitation is critical for rehydration and survival of the largest vertebrate group on earth, yet the molecular mechanisms that regulate this reaction are unknown. Here, we isolate and characterize an organic matrix associated with the intestinal precipitates produced by Gulf toadfish (Opsanus beta). Toadfish precipitates were purified using two different methods, and the associated organic matrix was extracted. Greater than 150 proteins were identified in the isolated matrix by mass spectrometry and subsequent database searching using an O. beta transcriptomic sequence library produced here. Many of the identified proteins were enriched in the matrix compared to the intestinal fluid, and three showed no substantial homology to any previously characterized protein in the NCBI database. To test the functionality of the isolated matrix, a micro-modified in vitro calcification assay was designed, which revealed that low concentrations of isolated matrix substantially promoted CaCO<sub>3</sub> production, where high concentrations showed an inhibitory effect. High concentrations of matrix also decreased the incorporation of magnesium into the forming mineral, potentially providing an explanation for the variability in magnesium content observed in precipitates produced by different fish species.

### Keywords
Teleost, Organic matrix, Caco3, Biomineral, Opsanus beta

### Affiliations
Marine Biology and Ecology Department, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami
Rosenstiel School of Marine & Atmospheric Science, University of Miami

### Submitter
Kevin Schauer

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Grosell
Marine Biology and Ecology Department, Rosenstiel School of Marine and Atmospheric Science, University of Miami


