### Accession
PXD009736

### Title
The response of the Escherichia coli proteome to deuteration and minimal media

### Description
Substitution of hydrogen for deuterium strongly affects biological systems. While higher eukaryotes, such as plants and mammals, hardly survive >30% deuterium content of water and nutrients, many microorganisms can grow on fully deuterated media albeit at reduced rates. Due to the large relative mass change, H/D replacement leads to pronounced changes in chemical reaction rates and equilibria. Very little is known how these physico-chemical effects influence cellular life at the systems level. Here we have followed the adaptation of a large part of the E. coli proteome from growth on a protonated full medium, over a protonated minimal to a completely deuterated minimal medium. More than 1800 proteins could be quantified under all conditions and several hundreds show strong regulation in both adaptation processes. As expected, the adaption to minimal medium mostly upregulates amino acid synthesis and sugar metabolism. In contrast, deuteration causes a very wide response over many cell function categories. No morphological effects are apparent under light and electron microscopy. Most of the regulated proteins have enzymatic functions involving hydrogen transfer reactions. This indicates that kinetic isotope effects and not changes in biomolecular stability are the dominant mechanisms that affect cellular function under deuteration.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was subjected to LC–MS analysis using a dual pressure LTQ-Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer connected to an electrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described {Glatter:2012ki} with a few modifications. In brief, peptide separation was carried out using an EASY nLC-1000 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a RP-HPLC column (75 μm × 45 cm) packed in-house with C18 resin (ReproSil-Pur C18–AQ, 1.9 μm resin; Dr. Maisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a linear gradient from 95% solvent A (0.15% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and 5% solvent B (98% acetonitrile, 0.15% formic acid) to 28% solvent B over 120 min at a flow rate of 0.2 μl/min. The data acquisition mode was set to obtain one high resolution MS scan in the FT part of the mass spectrometer at a resolution of 240,000 full width at half-maximum (at m/z 400) followed by MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap of the 20 most intense ions. The charged state screening modus was enabled to exclude unassigned and singly charged ions and the dynamic exclusion duration was set to 30 s. The ion accumulation time was set to 300 ms (MS) and 50 ms (MS/MS).

### Data Protocol
MS raw files were imported into the Progenesis QI LC-MS software (Nonlinear Dynamics, Version v.2.0) and analyzed using the default parameter settings. MS/MS data were exported directly from Progenesis in mgf format and searched using Mascot (Matrix Science, Version 2.4.0) against a concatenated target-decoy E. coli protein database including forward and reversed sequences (UniProt, release date 01.01.2015 including 4479 target sequences). The search criteria were set as follows: 10 ppm precursor ion mass tolerance, 0.6 Da fragment ion mass tolerance, and full tryptic specificity required (cleavage after lysine or arginine residues); maximum three missed cleavages; fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (C), variable modification: oxidation (M). The database search results were filtered limiting the peptide and protein level false discovery rate (FDR) to 1%. The Mascot peptide identifications were subsequently imported into Progenesis and mapped to the detected MS1 peaks to ≤90%. The relative quantitative data obtained were normalized and statistically analyzed using our in-house software script SafeQuant {Glatter:2012ki}. This analysis included global data normalization by equalizing the total MS1 peak intensity across all LC-MS runs and channels, summation of MS1 peak intensities per protein and LC-MS/MS run.

### Publication Abstract
Substitution of protium (H) for deuterium (D) strongly affects biological systems. Whereas higher eukaryotes such as plants and mammals hardly survive a deuterium content of &gt;30%, many microorganisms can grow on fully deuterated media, albeit at reduced rates. Very little is known about how the H/D replacement influences life at the systems level. Here, we used MS-based analysis to follow the adaptation of a large part of the <i>Escherichia coli</i> proteome from growth on a protonated full medium, over a protonated minimal medium, to a completely deuterated minimal medium. We could quantify &gt;1800 proteins under all conditions, several 100 of which exhibited strong regulation during both adaptation processes. The adaptation to minimal medium strongly up-regulated amino acid synthesis and sugar metabolism and down-regulated translational proteins on average by 9%, concomitant with a reduction in growth rate from 1.8 to 0.67 h<sup>-1</sup> In contrast, deuteration caused a very wide proteomic response over many cell functional categories, together with an additional down-regulation of the translational proteins by 5%. The latter coincided with a further reduction in growth rate to 0.37 h<sup>-1</sup>, revealing a clear linear correlation between growth rate and abundance of translational proteins. No significant morphological effects are observed under light and electron microscopies. Across all protein categories, about 80% of the proteins up-regulated under deuteration are enzymes with hydrogen transfer functions. Thus, the H/D kinetic isotope effect appears as the major limiting factor of cellular functions under deuteration.

### Keywords
Ecoli, Deuteration, Label-free quantification

### Affiliations
Proteomics Core Facilty, Biozentrum, University of Basel
Proteomics Core Facility

### Submitter
Alexander Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Alexander Schmidt
Proteomics Core Facilty, Biozentrum, University of Basel


