### Accession
PXD006893

### Title
Arabidopsis thaliana seedling lectin enriched LC-MS

### Description
this study discovered unique glycoprotein resources responsible for plant salt stress tolerance and suggested crucial roles of Nthis study discovered unique glycoprotein resources responsible for plant salt stress tolerance and suggested crucial roles of N-glycans in regulating salt responsive protein expression in Arabidopsis.-glycans in regulating salt responsive protein expression in Arabidopsis.

### Sample Protocol
Briefly, two-week-old Arabidopsis thaliana seedlings were cultured in 1/2 MS liquid medium or 1/2 MS medium containing 200 mM NaCl for 6 h, respectively. The NaCl concentration and incubation time of salt treatment was optimized by phenotype observation and relative references (Jiang et al., 2007; Pang et al., 2010). After harvest, the proteins from different samples were extracted, denatured, and digested with trypsin, respectively. Then, the N-glycopeptides were enriched from the trypsin-digested mixtures using a “filter aided sample preparation’’ (FASP)-based multiple lectins approach (Zielinska et al., 2012), and analyzed using high resolution mass spectrometry. In order to enhance the enrichment efficiency of glycopeptides carrying various types of N-glycans including high mannose type, hybrid and complex N-glycan (Supplementary Fig. S1), multiple lectins consist of Concanavalin A (ConA), which binds mannose residues on N-glycan, and wheat germ agglutinin (WGA) that combines with N-acetylglucosamine, and castor lectin RCA120 for galactose binding.

### Data Protocol
All six biological samples were analyzed in triplicates and the raw data files obtained from MS were processed using a MaxQuant analysis (Cox and Mann, 2008). The MaxQuant analysis not only identified the site-specific N-glycosylation events but also quantitated glycoprotein expression levels in multiple samples.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Salt stress, Arabidopsis, Glycoproteins

### Affiliations
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
Nanjing University

### Submitter
Chuanfa Liu

### Lab Head
Dr Zhi Hong
Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China


