### Accession
PXD024544

### Title
Proteogenomic subtyping of chronic lymphocytic leukemia identifies subgroups with contrasting clinical outcome and distinct ex-vivo drug response profile – DIA Validation

### Description
We have performed a comprehensive proteomic analysis of clinical patient samples of chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) alongside genome-, transcriptome- and ex-vivo drug response profiling. Trisomy 12 and IGHV mutation status had the strongest impact on the proteome and transcriptome; and SF3B1 mutations preferentially affected the proteome. Unsupervised clustering of the proteome data partitioned CLL patients into six protein based subgroups (PG) with contrasting clinical behavior. PG1-4 could be explained by the impact of trisomy 12 and IGHV mutation status on protein abundances and another subgroup (PG6), was enriched for TP53 mutations. In addition we uncovered a new subgroup (PG5) only detectable from the proteome, characterized by low expression of central B-cell receptor proteins, altered splicing, metabolic reprogramming and increased sensitivity to proteasomal inhibition.    We further validated the existence of this subgroup by conducting DIA based proteomics of an additional 167 patients. This entry contains the DIA-data for 167 patients used to validate the subgroups identified using HiRIEF-LC-MS/MS (see separate accession: PXD017453) as well as DIA data for 36 of the original discovery cohort. https://www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/projects/PXD028936

### Sample Protocol
Patient Samples Written consent was obtained from patients according to the declaration of Helsinki. Leukemia cells were isolated from blood using Ficoll density gradient centrifugation. Cells were viably frozen and kept on liquid nitrogen until use.  Samples isolation for proteomics Cells were thawed and allowed to recover in medium for 3h. To deplete dead cells, which form clumps during the recovery process, the suspension was filtered through a 40µm cell strainer. Cell viability and counts were analysed using Trypan Blue. Cells were washed twice and tumour cells were collected by Magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) using CD19 beads (Miltenyi Biotec). Cells were filtered through a 40µM strainer. Pellets for proteomics analysis were washed twice with PBS and snap frozen in liquid nitrogen.   Sample preparation for mass spectrometry Each sample was dissolved in 200 µl lysis buffer (25 mM HEPES pH 7.6, 4% SDS, 1 mM DTT), heated at 90 oC for 5 min and sonicated for 1 min. The total protein amount was estimated (Bio-Rad DC). Samples were then prepared for mass spectrometry analysis using  a modified version of the SP3 protein clean-up and a digestion protocol (Moggridge et al., 2018) (Hughes et al., 2014), where proteins were digested by LycC and trypsin (sequencing grade modified, Pierce). In brief, 200µg (or the entire amount if <200 µg protein was available) from each sample was alkylated with 4 mM Chloroacetamide. Sera‐Mag SP3 (GE Healthcare products 45152105050250 and 65152105050250, distributed by Thermo Fisher) bead mix (20 µl) was transferred into the protein sample together with 100% Acetonitrile to a final concentration of 70 %. The mix was incubated under rotation at room temperature for 20 min. The mix was placed on the magnetic rack and the supernatant was discarded, followed by two washes with 70 % ethanol and one with 100 % acetonitrile. The beads-protein mixture was reconstituted in 100 µl LycC buffer (0.5 M Urea, 50 mM HEPES pH: 7.6 and 1:50 enzyme (LycC) to protein ratio) and incubated overnight. Finally, trypsin was added in 1:50 enzyme to protein ratio in 100 µl 50 mM HEPES pH 7.6 and incubated overnight. Peptide concentration was measured using Bio-Rad DCC.  50 μg of peptides from each sample were cleaned by SP3 beads. For that, peptides were dried by SpeedVac, and dissolved in 20 µl water.10 µl beads were added to each tube and mixed by short vortex. 570 µl acetonitrile was added to each sample to reach 95 % ACN. The mixture was incubated for 30 minutes at room temperature. To remove the buffer, the tube was placed on magnetic rack and incubated for 2 minutes at room temperature. Supernatant was discarded. Magnetic beads were washed by addition of 250 μl of acetonitrile and incubate for 30 seconds on the magnetic stand. Supernatant was discarded and the beads air-dried. Tryptic peptides were detached from the beads by addition of 100 μl of 3% ACN, 0.1% FA and transferred to a new tube. MS data acquisition. 5 μg of peptides from each sample were injected and separated using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system coupled to a Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fischer Scientific, San Jose, CA, USA). Samples were trapped on an Acclaim Pep Map nanotrap column (C18, 3 mm, 100Å, 75 µm x 20 mm, Thermo Scientific), and separated on an Acclaim PepMap RSLC column (C18, 2 µm, 100Å, 75 µm x 50 cm, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were separated using a gradient of mobile phase A (5% DMSO, 0.1% FA) and B (90% ACN, 5% DMSO, 0.1% FA), ranging from 6% to 30% B in 180 min with a flow of 0.25 ml/min.  For data independent acquisition (DIA), data was acquired using a variable window strategy. The survey scan was performed at 120,000 resolution from 400-1200 m/z, with a max injection time of 200 ms and target of 1e6 ions. For generation of HCD fragmentation spectra, max ion injection time was set as auto and AGC of 2e5 were used before fragmentation at 28% normalized collision energy, 30,000 resolution. The sizes of the precursor ion selection windows were optimized to have similar density of precursor m/z. The median size of windows was 18.3 m/z with a range of 15-88 m/z covering the scan range of 400-1200 m/z. Neighbor windows had a 2 m/z overlap.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification and quantification, all raw files analyzed by Spectronaut using the Direct-DIA option without the use of a spectral library, files were searched against ENSEMBL protein database (GRCh38). All parameters were kept as default for protein identification. Briefly, runs were recalibrated using iRT standard peptides in a local and non-linear regression. Precursors, peptides and proteins were filtered with FDR 1%. The decoy database was created by mutation method. For quantification, only peptides unique to a protein group were used. Protein groups were defined base on gene symbols to obtain a gene symbol centric quantification. Stripped peptide quantification was defined as the top precursor quantity. Protein group quantification was calculated by the median value of the top 3 most abundant peptides. Quantification was performed at the MS2 level based on the peak area. The quantitative values were filtered using the qvalue for each sample. Imputation was not performed at any stage of the quantification data generation.

### Publication Abstract
Cancer heterogeneity at the proteome level may explain differences in therapy response and prognosis beyond the currently established genomic and transcriptomic-based diagnostics. The relevance of proteomics for disease classifications remains to be established in clinically heterogeneous cancer entities such as chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). Here, we characterize the proteome and transcriptome alongside genetic and ex-vivo drug response profiling in a clinically annotated CLL discovery cohort (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;68). Unsupervised clustering of the proteome data reveals six subgroups. Five of these proteomic groups are associated with genetic features, while one group is only detectable at the proteome level. This new group is characterized by accelerated disease progression, high spliceosomal protein abundances associated with aberrant splicing, and low B cell receptor signaling protein abundances (ASB-CLL). Classifiers developed to identify ASB-CLL based on its characteristic proteome or splicing signature in two independent cohorts (n&#x2009;=&#x2009;165, n&#x2009;=&#x2009;169) confirm that ASB-CLL comprises about 20% of CLL patients. The inferior overall survival in ASB-CLL is also independent of both TP53- and IGHV mutation status. Our multi-omics analysis refines the classification of CLL and highlights the potential of proteomics to improve cancer patient stratification beyond genetic and transcriptomic profiling.

### Keywords
Human, Hirief, Lc-ms, B-cell, Leukemia, Data independent acquisition, Lymphoblast, Clinical samples, Proteogenomics, Proteomics, Dia, Chronic lymphoblastic leukemia, Cancer

### Affiliations
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden
Karolinska Institutet

### Submitter
Georgios Mermelekas

### Lab Head
Dr Janne Lehtiö
Dept. Oncology Pathology, Karolinska Institutet, and Scilifelab, Stockholm, Sweden


