### Accession
PXD004993

### Title
Equine OA model -  An inflammatory equine model demonstrates dynamic changes of immune response and cartilage matrix molecule degradation in vitro

### Description
Articular cartilage explants were incubated with or without interleukin-1β for 25 days. Media samples collected at 3-day intervals were analysed by quantitative proteomics. Semi-tryptic COMP peptides containing novel neo-epitopes were identified and quantified in cell culture media from cartilage explants.

### Sample Protocol
Culture media were concentrated on 3-kDa molecular weight cut-off filters and the retentates were washed with water and 0.5 M triethyl ammonium bicarbonate several times until pH >8 was achieved. Retentates were recovered in microtubes, followed by denaturation with 2% SDS. Proteins were reduced with 50 mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine and alkylated with 200 mM S-methyl methanethiosulphonate prior to digestion with trypsin. Trypsin in water was added to each sample at a 1:10 ratio. Digestion was performed overnight at 37°C. In parallel, the reference pools consisting of an aliquot from each sample were prepared as described above. TMT-6 plex reagents were added to the samples according to the experimental layout and an aliquot from both stimulated and unstimulated samples at each time point was used as a reference pool. Samples labelled with TMTs were combined and concentrated, yielding three sets of samples. TMT-labelled peptides were separated with Strong Cation Exchange Chromatography (SCX) on a ÄKTA purifier system (GE Healthcare; Buckinghamshire, UK). The concentrated peptides were acidified with 10% formic acid to pH 2−3, diluted with SCX solvent A [25 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8, 20% acetonitrile (ACN)] to a final volume of 330 μL, and injected onto a PolySULFOETHYL A™ SCX column (2.1 mm i.d. × 10 cm length, 5 μm particle size, 300 Å pore size). Separation was achieved using the following gradient: 0% B (500 mM ammonium formate, pH 2.8, 20% ACN) for 5 min; 0−40% B for 20 min; 40−100% B for 10 min; and 100% B for 10 min at a flow rate of 0.25 mL/min. Ultraviolet absorbance was monitored at 254 nm and 280 nm and fractions were collected in 0.5-mL aliquots and evaporated in a SpeedVac. The peptide-containing fractions were desalted on PepClean C18 spin columns (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The desalted and dried fractions were reconstituted in 10 µl 0.1% formic acid and analysed on an LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) interfaced with a nano-LC column constructed in-house. Two-microlitre sample injections were performed with an Easy-nLC system (Thermo Fisher Scientific) running at 200 nL/min. The peptides were trapped on a pre-column (45 × 0.075 mm i.d.) and separated on a reversed-phase column (200 × 0.075 mm) packed in-house with 3-μm Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ particles. The gradient was run as follows: 0−60 min 5−25% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, 60−75 min 25−80% ACN with 0.1% formic acid, and 75−90 min at 90% ACN with 0.1% formic acid. LTQ-Orbitrap Velos settings were as follows: spray voltage 1.4 kV, 1 microscan for MS1 scans at 60,000 resolutions (m/z 400), full MS mass range m/z 400−1800. The LTQ-Orbitrap Velos was operated in data-dependent mode with one MS1 FTMS precursor ion scan followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) and high-energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS2 scans of the five most abundant doubly or triply protonated ions in each precursor scan. The settings for MS2 were as follows: one microscan for HCD-MS2 at 7500 resolution (at m/z 400), mass range m/z 100−2000 with collision energy at 50%, one microscan for CID-MS2 with collision energy at 30%. All samples were analysed a second time with the aforementioned MS settings and including an exclusion list of all m/z values corresponding to peptides identified at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) from the first MS-analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS raw data files from all 15−20 peptides containing SCX fractions within a single TMT set were merged for protein identification and relative quantification using Proteome Discoverer version 1.3 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Database searches were performed using the Mascot search engine against the Equine subsection of UniProtKB database. The following parameters were applied: MS peptide tolerance 10 ppm, MS/MS tolerance 0.5 Da, semi-tryptic digestion allowing a single missed cleavage, variable modifications methionine oxidation, cysteine methylthiol, and the fixed modifications N-terminal TMT 6-plexlabel and lysine TMT 6-plexlabel. The detected protein threshold in the software was set to a confidence level corresponding to FDR of 1% at the peptide level. Identified proteins were grouped together when sharing the same sequences to avoid redundancy. For quantification, the TMT reporter ion intensities in MS/MS spectra (m/z 126.12, 127.13, 128.13, 129.14, 130.14, or 131.14) were divided by their reference reporter ion intensities, yielding a ratio for each quantified peptide. A protein ratio was calculated as the median value for all unique peptides for a given protein.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-msms, Il-1, Horse, Tmt, Cartilage explant

### Affiliations
Department of clinical chemistry, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at Gothenburg University
Sahlgrenska University Hospital

### Submitter
Ulla Rüetschi

### Lab Head
Dr Ulla Ruetschi
Department of clinical chemistry, Institute of Biomedicine, The Sahlgrenska Academy at Gothenburg University


