### Accession
PXD000266

### Title
Murine kidney glomeruli phosphorylation

### Description
Isolated murine kidney glomeruli were lysed in buffer containing 8M urea, and proteins were reduced and alkylated. Proteins were digested with trypsin. After reverse-phase chomatrography, peptides were fractionated using strong cation exchange chromatography. Phosphopeptides were enriched using IMAC (FeNTA) columns. Peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS on a Q Exactive mass spectrometer or an LTQ Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer.   Metadata for Orbitrap samples (MaxQuant Output files include „Orbi“) 1. General features – 1.1 Global descriptors a. Responsible person or role:  Markus Rinschen. markus.rinschen@uk-koeln.de; tobias.lamkemeyer@uni-koeln.de b. Instrument manufacturer, model: LTQ-Orbitrap XL, Thermo Scientific c. customization 2. Ion sources –  ESI fed by nLC 2 (Proxeon) 3. Post source component 3.1.  Analyser: MS1 survey scan in an Orbitrap and MS2 analysed in Linear Trap. 3.2. Activation/Dissociation: CID 4. Spectrum and peak list generation and annotation 4.1. Data acquisition: MaxQuant v. 1.3.05 Top one method with a cycle of one full MS1 scan in the Orbitrap, followed by the fragmentation with dynamic exclusion window of 60 seconds and followed by the acquisition of 5 product ion scans generated in the LTQ analyser, and detected in the LTQ. Unselected fragmentation. For further details, see .raw files.  URL of file: Filename 4.2. Data analysis: MaxQuant v 1.3.05 Parameters used in the generation of peak lists or processed spectra: see annotation in “parameters” file.  The mouse uniprot reference database “complete proteome” obtained on January 2nd, 2013 was used.    Metadata for QExactive samples (Max Quant output files include „QE“) 1. General features – 1.1 Global descriptors a. Responsible person or role:  Markus Rinschen. markus.rinschen@uk-koeln.de; Marcus Krüger marcus.krueger@mpi-bn.mpg.de b. Instrument manufacturer, model: Q Exactive Thermo Scientific c. customization 2. Ion sources –  ESI fed by nLC 1000 (Proxeon) 3. Post source component 3.1.  Analyser: MS1 survey scan in an Orbitrap and MS2 analysed in Orbitrap/HCD cell 3.2. Activation/Dissociation: HCD 4. Spectrum and peak list generation and annotation 4.1. Data acquisition: MaxQuant v. 1.3.05 Top one method with a cycle of one full MS1 scan in the Orbitrap, followed by the fragmentation with dynamic exclusion window of 20 seconds in the HCD cell and followed by the acquisition of 10 product ion scans generated in the LTQ analyser, and detected in the LTQ. Unselected fragmentation. For further details, see .raw files.  URL of file: Filename 4.2. Data analysis: MaxQuant v 1.3.05 Parameters used in the generation of peak lists or processed spectra: see annotation in “parameters” file.  The mouse uniprot reference database “complete proteome” obtained on January 2nd, 2013 was used.

### Sample Protocol
Glomeruli were isolated from wildtype mouse kidneys by perfusion with magnetic beads. Glomeruli were lysed and protein lysates were reduced, alkylated and digested with trypsin as indicated in the method section in the respective published manuscript (PMID: 24511133). Peptides were desalted using HLB columns and subjected to strong cation exchange fractionation. Phosphopeptides were isolated using IMAC columns. Phosphopeptides were cleaned up using ZipTip columns. Samples were measured using nLC-MS/MS on a LTQ Orbitrap XL machine.

### Data Protocol
.RAW files were searched using the MaxQuant search algorithm with phosphorylation(S,T,Y) as variable modifications (for details please see PMID: 24511133)

### Publication Abstract
Diseases of the kidney filtration barrier are a leading cause of ESRD. Most disorders affect the podocytes, polarized cells with a limited capacity for self-renewal that require tightly controlled signaling to maintain their integrity, viability, and function. Here, we provide an atlas of in vivo phosphorylated, glomerulus-expressed proteins, including podocyte-specific gene products, identified in an unbiased tandem mass spectrometry-based approach. We discovered 2449 phosphorylated proteins corresponding to 4079 identified high-confidence phosphorylated residues and performed a systematic bioinformatics analysis of this dataset. We discovered 146 phosphorylation sites on proteins abundantly expressed in podocytes. The prohibitin homology domain of the slit diaphragm protein podocin contained one such site, threonine 234 (T234), located within a phosphorylation motif that is mutated in human genetic forms of proteinuria. The T234 site resides at the interface of podocin dimers. Free energy calculation through molecular dynamic simulations revealed a role for T234 in regulating podocin dimerization. We show that phosphorylation critically regulates formation of high molecular weight complexes and that this may represent a general principle for the assembly of proteins containing prohibitin homology domains.

### Keywords
Glomerular epithelial cell, Mouse, Phosphoproteomics, Podocytes, Kidney

### Affiliations
Kidney research center cologne
University Hospital Cologne

### Submitter
Markus Rinschen

### Lab Head
Dr Thomas Benzing
University Hospital Cologne


