### Accession
PXD028072

### Title
Identification and function of components from a divergent mRNA export pathway in trypanosomes

### Description
mRNA export is central to gene regulation and expression. In trypanosomes, transcription is polycistronic, all mRNAs are processed by trans-splicing and export is mediated by non-canonical mechanisms. We have described several conserved mRNA export pathway components in Trypanosoma cruzi, including orthologs of Sub2, a component of the TREX complex, and eIF4AIII, a core component of the exon junction complex (EJC). Few orthologs of proteins involved in mRNA export in higher eukaryotes are detectable in trypanosome genomes and examples of mechanistic divergence well known. To uncover additional components of the trypanosome mRNA maturation and export system we undertook an unbiased search for protein interactors of TcSub2 and TceIF4AIII. Significant overlap between TcSub2 and TceIF4AIII interacting protein cohorts suggests that both proteins associate with similar machinery. We confirmed several interactions with conserved core components of the EJC and multiple additional complexes, together with identification of proteins specific to trypanosomatids. The highly interactive super-interactome uncovered here, capable of supporting RNA processing from splicing through to nuclear export and cytoplasmic events, highlights kinetoplastid-specific and conserved components creating an amalgam to support the unique mRNA maturation mechanisms in trypanosomes.

### Sample Protocol
For TcSub2 and TceIF4AIII samples were purified and desalted by electrophoresis into 4–12% NuPAGE Novex Bis-Tris precast gel (Life technologies), silver-stained, excised and was digested with trypsin for 18 hours at 30°C. Tryptic peptides were extracted from the gel with 95% Acetonitrile/5% Formic acid (v/v) and captured with an Acclaim PepMap 100 system (C18, 100 µm x 2 cm) and fractionated on a C18 Easy-Spray PepMap RSLC (75 µm x 50 cm) (Thermo Scientific) columns with an Ultimate 3000 RS LCnano system (Thermo Scientific) coupled to an LTQ OrbiTrap Velos Pro (Thermo Scientific). For TcMex67, TcAPI5, TcFOP, TcNTF2L and TcHYP The peptides were analyzed by LC-MS/MS in an Easy-nLC 1000 on line with a LTQ Orbitrap XL (Thermo Scientific). The chromatography was performed in a C18 column (30 cm length, 75 um I.D., 2.4 um particle) with a flow of 250 nl/min and a linear gradient of 5 to 40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid and 5% DMSO for 120 min. The MS was acquired in data-dependent mode, to automatically switch between MS and MS/MS (MS2) acquisition. Survey full-scan MS spectra (at 300 – 2,000 m/z range) were acquired in the Orbitrap analyzer with (60,000 resolution). The twelve most intense ions were sequentially isolated and fragmented in the linear ion trap using collision-induced dissociation at a target value of 30,000. The “lock mass” option was enabled in all full scans to improve mass accuracy of precursor ions.

### Data Protocol
Peaklist picking, protein identification, quantification, and validation were done using the MaxQuant platform (version 1.5.5.1) and the Mascot Search Engine (Version 2.3.2). The default parameters were used including: trypsin as protease; carbamidomethylation of cysteine as fixed modification; acetylation of protein N-terminal and oxidation of methionine as variable modification. The T. cruzi CL Brener protein sequence database, containing 19242 protein sequences, downloaded on August 10, 2016 from Uniprot or a custom T. cruzi protein sequence library of 54,500 sequences from five different strains (CL Brener Esmeraldo-like, CL Brener non Esmeraldo-like, Sylvio, Dm28c and Marinkellei).  These databases were complemented with frequently observed contaminants (porcine trypsin, Achromobacter lyticus lysyl endopeptidase, and human keratins).

### Publication Abstract
In trypanosomatids, transcription is polycistronic and all mRNAs are processed by trans-splicing, with export mediated by noncanonical mechanisms. Although mRNA export is central to gene regulation and expression, few orthologs of proteins involved in mRNA export in higher eukaryotes are detectable in trypanosome genomes, necessitating direct identification of protein components. We previously described conserved mRNA export pathway components in Trypanosoma cruzi, including orthologs of Sub2, a component of the TREX complex, and eIF4AIII (previously Hel45), a core component of the exon junction complex (EJC). Here, we searched for protein interactors of both proteins using cryomilling and mass spectrometry. Significant overlap between TcSub2 and TceIF4AIII-interacting protein cohorts suggests that both proteins associate with similar machinery. We identified several interactions with conserved core components of the EJC and multiple additional complexes, together with proteins specific to trypanosomatids. Additional immunoisolations of kinetoplastid-specific proteins both validated and extended the superinteractome, which is capable of supporting RNA processing from splicing through to nuclear export and cytoplasmic events. We also suggest that only proteomics is powerful enough to uncover the high connectivity between multiple aspects of mRNA metabolism and to uncover kinetoplastid-specific components that create a unique amalgam to support trypanosome mRNA maturation.

### Keywords
Mrna export, Mrna processing, Proteomics, Trypanosomes, Lc-ms/ms, Evolution, Gene expression, Trex complex, Ejc

### Affiliations
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Apicomplexa - LAPAPI, Instituto Carlos Chagas - Fiocruz Paraná
Carlos Chagas Institute

### Submitter
Patricia Domingues

### Lab Head
Dr Andréa Rodrigues Ávila
Laboratório de Pesquisa em Apicomplexa - LAPAPI, Instituto Carlos Chagas - Fiocruz Paraná


