### Accession
PXD009018

### Title
ULK1 IFNgamma Proteomics

### Description
For this project, standard GeLC proteomics was performed to identify immunoprecipitated proteins.

### Sample Protocol
IP-eluted proteins were initially separated using SDS-PAGE and cut into ten equivalent height bands prior to standard in-gel digestion .  Resulting peptides were extracted from the gel pieces and desalted using solid phase extraction on a Pierce C18 Spin column, prior to elution.

### Data Protocol
Data were searched using Mascot (Matrix Science) 2.5 against the human SwissProt database and results were reported at 1% FDR in Scaffold 4.5 (Proteome Software).

### Publication Abstract
It is well established that activation of the transcription factor signal transducer and activator of transcription 1 (STAT1) is required for the interferon-&#x3b3; (IFN-&#x3b3;)-mediated antiviral response. Here, we found that IFN-&#x3b3; receptor stimulation also activated Unc-51-like kinase 1 (ULK1), an initiator of Beclin-1-mediated autophagy. Furthermore, the interaction between ULK1 and the mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase kinase MLK3 (mixed lineage kinase 3) was necessary for MLK3 phosphorylation and downstream activation of the kinase ERK5. This autophagy-independent activity of ULK1 promoted the transcription of key antiviral IFN-stimulated genes (ISGs) and was essential for IFN-&#x3b3;-dependent antiviral effects. These findings define a previously unknown IFN-&#x3b3; pathway that appears to be a key element of the antiviral response.

### Keywords
Ulk1 interferon gamma proteomics

### Affiliations
Northwestern University

### Submitter
Paul Thomas

### Lab Head
Dr Neil Kelleher
Northwestern University


