### Accession
PXD040651

### Title
PRAME and CTCFL-reactive TCRs for the treatment of ovarian cancer

### Description
Recurrent disease emerges in the majority of patients with ovarian cancer (OVCA). Adoptive T-cell therapies with T-cell receptors (TCRs) targeting tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) are considered promising solutions for less-immunogenic ‘cold’ ovarian tumors. In order to treat a broader patient population, more TCRs targeting peptides derived from different TAAs binding in various HLA class I molecules are essential. By performing a differential gene expression analysis using mRNA-seq datasets, PRAME, CTCFL and CLDN6 were selected as strictly tumor-specific TAAs, with high expression in ovarian cancer and at least 20-fold lower expression in all healthy tissues of risk. In primary OVCA patient samples and cell lines we confirmed expression and identified naturally expressed TAA-derived peptides in the HLA class I ligandome. Subsequently, high-avidity T-cell clones recognizing these peptides were isolated from the allo-HLA T-cell repertoire of healthy individuals. Three PRAME TCRs and one CTCFL TCR of the most promising T-cell clones were sequenced, and transferred to CD8+ T cells. The PRAME TCR-T cells demonstrated potent and specific antitumor reactivity in vitro and in vivo. The CTCFL TCR-T cells efficiently recognized primary patient-derived OVCA cells, and OVCA cell lines treated with demethylating agent 5-aza-2′-deoxycytidine (DAC). The identified PRAME and CTCFL TCRs are promising candidates for the treatment of patients with ovarian cancer, and are an essential addition to the currently used HLA-A*02:01 restricted PRAME TCRs. Our selection of differentially expressed genes, naturally expressed TAA peptides and potent TCRs can improve and broaden the use of T-cell therapies for patients with ovarian cancer or other PRAME or CTCFL expressing cancers.

### Sample Protocol
Sample collection for peptide elution Seven solid primary OVCA patient samples derived from different patients (2 – 20 gram) were collected and dissociated using the gentleMACS (Miltenyi Biotec) procedure (Supplemental Methods). Also one ascites OVCA patient sample (6*109 cells) and three primary acute myeloid leukemia (AML) samples (65 – 500*109 cells) were collected. Furthermore, various cell lines were expanded up to at least 2*109 cells (Suppl. table 3). Cell lines transduced with HLA alleles, CLDN6 and/or CTCFL were first enriched for marker gene expression via magnetic-activated cell sorting (MACS) or fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS). HLA typing of all samples/cell lines was performed and gene expression was quantified by Quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction (qPCR) (Supplemental Methods).  HLA class I-peptide elution procedure, fractionation and mass spectrometry Cell pellets were lysed and subjected to an immunoaffinity column to collect bound peptide-HLA complexes. Peptides were subsequently separated, fractionated and analyzed by data-dependent MS/MS (Supplemental Methods). Proteome Discoverer V.2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification, using the mascot search node for identification (mascot V.2.2.04) and the UniProt Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640; Jan 2015; 67,911 entries). Peptides were in-house synthesized using standard Fmoc chemistry and PE-conjugated pMHC-multimers were generated with minor modifications (Supplemental Methods).

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer V.2.1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was used for peptide and protein identification, using the mascot search node for identification (mascot V.2.2.04) and the UniProt Homo Sapiens database (UP000005640; Jan 2015; 67,911 entries). Peptides were in-house synthesized using standard Fmoc chemistry and PE-conjugated pMHC-multimers were generated with minor modifications (Supplemental Methods).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovarian cancer; prame; ctcfl; cldn6; tcr gene transfer; t-cell therapy; immunotherapy; peptide; allogeneic hla

### Affiliations
Leiden University Medical Center, Proteomics group
Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands

### Submitter
Rayman Tjokrodirijo

### Lab Head
Dr Peter A. van Veelen
Leiden University Medical Center, Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, PO Box 9600, Postal zone P1-Q, 2300 RC  Leiden, The Netherlands


