### Accession
PXD008959

### Title
SCI1 co-purifies with the STRIPAK protein PRO11

### Description
The STRIPAK complex is a conserved multi-protein complex, which is found in animals and in fungi but not in prokaryotes and plants. It is involved in growth and development, regulating signal transduction in cellular pathways, for example hippo and MAPK, and it has a role in human neuronal diseases, cell fusion, and cancer (1, 2). Small coiled-coil (CC) proteins were described in the STRIPAK complex of humans, in the Far complex of S. cerevisiae, in the SIP complex of S. pombe and in the STRIPAK complex of D. melanogaster (dSTRIPAK) (3-8). However, the function of small CC proteins in the STRIPAK complex is poorly investigated. We identified SCI1, a small CC protein belonging to the STRIPAK complex in the filamentous ascomycete S. macrospora. As all other STRIPAK components, SCI1 is required for development, hyphal fusion and vegetative growth.

### Sample Protocol
For the protein preparation, mycelium of S. macrospora (Δpro11:HApro11 and the control strain wt:HA) was harvested, dried, and ground in liquid nitrogen. One gram of mycelium was combined with 500 µL extraction buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 10% glycerol, 2 mM EDTA) with freshly added 2 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 0.2% NP-40 and protease inhibitor cocktail IV (1:100 Roche, 04693132001, Mannheim, Germany). Protein samples were centrifuged for 20 min at 16.000 g and the supernatant was centrifuged again for 1 h at 16.000 g. The supernatant (1 mL) was incubated on a rotating device for 3 h at 4°C with 20 µL monoclonal anti-HA-agarose beads (Merck, A2095 Darmstadt, Germany). The beads were washed twice with dilution buffer (100 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 2 mM DTT) containing 1 mM PMSF and protease inhibitor cocktail IV (1:100 Roche, 04693132001, Mannheim, Germany) and boiled in Laemmli buffer for 10 min at 98°C. After separation of the proteins samples by SDS-PAGE and Coomassie® Brilliant Blue R250 (Serva, 17525, Heidelberg, Germany) straining and destaining of the SDS-Gel was performed and each lane was cut into 10 pieces. A digest with trypsin NB sequencing grade (Serva, 37283.01, Heidelberg, Germany) was performed with each gel piece over night at 37°C (9). The eluates of the five upper and the five lower gel pieces were combined, C18 stage tipped, resuspended in sample buffer (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid) and analyzed by LC-MS (10, 11). IP-Trap and LC/MS of the resulting pull-down sample and the control was performed in 3 biological replicates. Proteins were identified by LC/MS with an Orbitrap Velos ProTM Hybrid Ion Trap-Orbitrap mass spectrometer. For liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry analysis, peptide solutions (1-5 μl) were loaded and washed on an Acclaim® PepMAP 100 pre-column (100 μm x 2 cm, C18, 3 μm, 100 Å; Thermo Fisher Scientific, 164564, Waltham, USA) with 100% loading solvent A (98% H2O, 2% acetonitrile, 0.07% trifluoracetic acid (TFA) with a flow rate of 25 μl/min for 6 min. Reverse phase chromatography was applied to separate peptides on an Acclaim® PepMAP RSLC column (75 μm x 25 cm (#164536) or 50 cm (#164540), C18, 3 μm, 100 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) using a gradient from 98% solvent A (H2O, 0.1% formic acid) and 2% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 20% H2O, 0.1% formic acid) to 42% solvent B for 95 min and to 65% solvent B for the following 26 min at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. Peptides eluting from the chromatographic column were online ionized by nanoelectrospray at 2.4 kV with the Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA).  Full scans of ionized peptides within a mass range of 300-1850 m/z were recorded with the Orbitrap FT analyzer at a resolution of 30,000. Collision induced dissociation (CID) fragmentation of data-dependent top-ten peptides was performed with the LTQ Velos Pro linear ion trap. For data acquisition and programming, the XCalibur 2.2 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified with the MaxQuant 1.4.1.2. software (12) using the Andromeda algorithm. S. macrospora specific protein database (13) was used for database search. Default parameters were used and the digestion mode was trypsin/P. Maximum missed cleavage sites were 3, carbamidomethylation of cysteins was considered as fixed modification. The mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm for precursor ions and 0.5 Da for fragment ions. The decoy mode was revert with a false discovery rate of 0.01. Subsequent data processing and statistical analysis were performed with the Perseus 1.5.1.0 software (14, 15). For analysis with Perseus, label free quantification (LFQ) based on signal intensities was applied. To identify specifically enriched proteins, criteria were as follows: enriched in at least two LC/MS experiments compared to the control. Proteins significantly enriched in all three pull-downs were considered as candidates. A 2 sample t-test was performed using Perseus and the results were represented by a volcano plot. Criterea for specifically enriched proteins were t-test differences of <-3 and p-values of <0.1. Proteins were also identified with the Proteome DiscovererTM 1.4 software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, USA) and Mascot search algorithms. For the maximum of missed cleavage sites two residues were expected and the digestion mode was trypsin. Fixed modification was carbamidomethylation of cysteins. The mass tolerance was 10 ppm for precursor ions and 0.6 Da for fragment ions. The decoy mode was revert. The settings in the Proteome DiscovererTM were as follows, high peptide confidence and minimum 2 peptides with a false discovery rate less than 0.01. Samples containing HAPRO11 fusion proteins enriched with HA-affinity purification and co-purified proteins were named ER36-37, ER44-45 and ER66-67. HA control samples were named ER34-35, ER46-47 and ER62-63.

### Publication Abstract
The STRIPAK complex is involved in growth, cell fusion, development and signaling pathways, and thus malfunctions in the human STRIPAK complex often result in severe neuronal diseases and cancer. Despite the high degree of general conservation throughout the complex, several STRIPAK complex-associated small coiled-coil proteins of animals and yeasts are not conserved across species. As there are no data for filamentous ascomycetes, we addressed this through affinity purification with HA-tagged striatin ortholog PRO11 in Sordaria&#xa0;macrospora. Combining the method with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, we were able to co-purify STRIPAK complex interactor 1 (SCI1), the first STRIPAK-associated small coiled-coil protein in filamentous ascomycetes. Using yeast two-hybrid experiments, we identified SCI1 protein regions required for SCI1-PRO11 interaction, dimerization of SCI1 and interaction with other STRIPAK components. Further, both proteins PRO11 and SCI1 co-localize with the nuclear basket protein SmPOM152 at the nuclear envelope. Expression of the gene sci1 occurs during early developmental stages of S. macrospora, and the protein SCI1 in combination with PRO11 is required for cell fusion, vegetative growth and sexual development. The results of the present study will help to understand the underlying molecular mechanisms of STRIPAK signaling and function in cellular development and diseases in higher eukaryotes.

### Keywords
Pro11, Fruiting-body development, Sordaria macrospora, Stripak, Hyphal fusion, Sci1

### Affiliations
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen
Georg-August University, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Grisebachstr. 8, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany

### Submitter
Oliver Valerius

### Lab Head
Dr Stefanie Pöggeler
Georg-August University, Institute of Microbiology and Genetics, Grisebachstr. 8, D-37077 Göttingen, Germany


