### Accession
PXD021632

### Title
The schizophrenia-associated variant in SLC39A8 alters N-glycosylation of critical proteins in the mouse brain

### Description
A missense mutation (A391T) in the manganese transporter SLC39A8 is strongly associated with schizophrenia through GWAS, though the molecular connection to the brain remains hypothetical. Human carriers of A391T have reduced serum manganese, altered plasma glycosylation, and brain MRI changes consistent with altered metal transport. Here, using a mouse knock-in model homozygous for A391T, we show that the schizophrenia-associated variant changes protein glycosylation in the brain. N-linked glycosylation was most significantly impaired, with effects differing between regions. RNAseq analysis showed negligible variation, consistent with changes in the activity of glycosylation enzymes rather than gene expression. Finally, one third of all detected glycoproteins were differentially N-glycosylated in the cortex, including members of several pathways previously implicated in schizophrenia such as cell adhesion molecules and neurotransmitter receptors. These findings provide a mechanistic link between a risk allele and biochemical changes in the brain, furthering our molecular understanding of the pathophysiology of schizophrenia.

### Sample Protocol
Brain samples were lysed in 1 mL of lysis buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 1% SDS, 1 × protease inhibitors). Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay. Reduction and alkylation were performed as previously described. S-trap digestion was done according to the manufacturer's instructions resulting in 0.6 mg tryptic peptides. To one half of tryptic peptides, 15 mg of HILIC beads (PolyLC) (pre-activated with 0.1% TFA) were added to make a 1:50 peptide-to-beads mass ratio. The samples were vortexed in binding buffer (0.1% TFA, 19.9% H2O, 80% ACN) for 1 h to allow N-glycopeptides to bind to beads. The unbound peptides were washed with 150 μL binding buffer for 6 times. N-glycopeptides were eluted by washing the beads with 0.1% TFA for 5 times. Finally, 2 μL PNGase F (500U/μL) (NEB) was added to the elution buffer and the samples were incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. The eluted N-glycopeptides were concentrated to dryness. Multi-lectin enrichment was performed based on a previously reported protocol with some modifications. Briefly, tryptic peptides were mixed with lectin mixture (90 μg ConA, 90 μg WGA, and 36 μg RCA120 in 2 × binding buffer) and transferred to the 30 kDa filter. The resultant mixture was incubated at room temperature for 1 h and unbound peptides were eluted by centrifuging at 14 000 × g for 10 min. N-glycopeptides were washed with 200 μL binding solution four times and 50 μL digest buffer (50 mM TEAB) twice. Finally, 2 μL PNGase F (500U/μL) (NEB) was added to the filter and incubated for 3 h at 37 °C. The deglycosylated N-glycopeptides were eluted with 2 × 50 μL digest buffer. N-glycopeptides from two enrichment methods were combined and desalted by C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) following the manufacturer’s instructions and resuspended in 30 µL 100 mM TEAB buffer. For each sample, 5 µL the corresponding amine-based TMT 10-plex reagents (10 µg/µL) was added and reacted for 1 h at room temperature. The reactions were quenched with 2 µL 5% hydroxylamine solution and combined. The combined mixture was concentrated to dryness. High-pH fractionation was done according to the manufacturer's instructions resulting in 15 fractions.

### Data Protocol
The raw data was processed using Proteome Discoverer 2.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Data was searched against the UniProt/SwissProt mouse (Mus musculus) protein database (May. 30, 17,372 total entries) and contaminant proteins using Sequest HT and Byonic algorithms. Searches were performed with the following guidelines: spectra with a signal-to-noise ratio greater than 1.5; trypsin as enzyme, 2 missed cleavages; variable oxidation on methionine residues (15.995 Da) and deamidation on asparagine (0.984 Da); static carboxyamidomethylation of cysteine residues (57.021 Da), static TMT labeling (229.163 Da) at lysine residues and peptide N-termini; 10 ppm mass error tolerance on precursor ions, and 0.02 Da mass error on fragment ions. Data were filtered with a peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) of 1% FDR using Percolator. The TMT reporter ions were quantified using the Reporter Ions Quantifier with total peptide normalization. For the obtained PSMs, the data was further filtered with the following guidelines: confidence is high; PSM ambiguity is unambiguous; modifications contain deamidated; exclude all contaminant proteins.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Schizophrenia; slc39a8; mouse; n-linked glycosylation

### Affiliations
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY  HARVARD UNIVERSITY
Harvard University

### Submitter
Christina Woo

### Lab Head
Dr Christina Woo
DEPARTMENT of CHEMISTRY & CHEMICAL BIOLOGY  HARVARD UNIVERSITY


