### Accession
PXD046097

### Title
Interactome analysis of RESC6 and RESC8 from Trypanosoma brucei

### Description
Trypanosoma brucei requires extensive uridine insertion and deletion RNA editing of most of their mitochondrial transcripts to generate translatable open reading frames. The RNA editing substrate binding complex (RESC) serves as the scaffold that coordinates the protein-protein and protein-RNA interactions during editing. This project is to characterize the interactome of RESC6 and RESC8 protein by TurboID. Three replicates of each condition were performed.

### Sample Protocol
On-beads protein digestion. A surfactant-aided precipitation/on-pellet digestion protocol was adopted using our previously published method with slight modification. 5% SDS was spiked into each sample to a final concentration of 0.5%. Proteins on the beads were sequentially reduced by 10 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) at 56°C for 30 min and alkylated by 25 mM iodoacetamide (IAM) at 37°C in darkness for 30 min. Both steps were performed in a thermomixer (Eppendorf) with rigorous shaking. The beads with proteins were then precipitated by addition of 6 volumes of chilled acetone with vortexing, and the mixture was incubated at -20°C for 3 hr. Samples were then centrifuged at 20,000xg at 4°C for 30 min, and supernatant was removed. The bead pellet was gently rinsed by adding 500 μL methanol, centrifuged again at 20,000xg at 4°C for 30 min, methanol was carefully removed, and air-dried for 1 min. The bead pellet was re-suspended in 46 μL 50 mM pH 8.4 Tris-formic acid (FA). A total volume of 4 μL trypsin (Sigma Aldrich) re-constituted in 50 mM pH 8.4 Tris-FA to a final concentration of 0.25 μg/μL was added for 6-hr tryptic digestion at 37°C with constant shaking in a thermomixer. Digestion was terminated by addition of 0.5 μL FA, and samples were centrifuged at 20,000xg at 4°C for 30 min. Supernatant was carefully transferred to liquid chromatography (LC) vials for analysis.  LC-MS analysis. The LC-MS system consists of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nano LC system, a Dinoex Ultimate 3000 micro LC system with a WPS-3000 autosampler, and an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer. A large-inner diameter (i.d.) trapping column (300-um i.d. x 5 mm) was implemented before the separation column (75-m i.d. x 65 cm, packed with 2.5-um Xselect CSH C18 material) for high-capacity sample loading, cleanup and delivery. For each sample, 10 L derived peptides was injected for LC-MS analysis. Mobile phase A and B were 0.1% FA in 2% ACN and 0.1% FA in 88% ACN. The 90-min LC gradient profile was: 4% B for 3 min, 4–9% B for 2 min, 9–38% B for 70 min, 90% B for 5 min, and then equilibrated to 4% B for 10 min. The mass spectrometer was operated under data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with a maximal duty cycle of 3 s. MS1 spectra was acquired by Orbitrap (OT) under 120k resolution for ions within the m/z range of 400-1,500. Automatic Gain Control (AGC) and maximal injection time was set at 175% and 50 ms, and dynamic exclusion was set at 60 s, ± 10 ppm. Precursor ions were isolated by quadrupole using a m/z window of 1.6 Th and were fragmented by high-energy collision dissociation (HCD). MS2 spectra of a precursor ion fragmented were acquired by Ion Trap (IT), which was operated under Rapid scan rate with a Standard AGC target and a maximal injection time of 150 ms.

### Data Protocol
LC-MS files were searched against Trypanosoma brucei brucei TREU927 TriTryp database containing 10642 gene entries (ver Feb-2021) using Sequest HT embedded in Proteome Discoverer 1.4 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Target-decoy approach using a concatenated forward and reverse protein sequence database was applied for FDR estimation and control. Searching parameters include: 1) Precursor ion mass tolerance: 20 ppm; 2) Product ion mass tolerance: 0.8 Da; 3) Maximal missed cleavages per peptide: 2; 4) Fixed modifications: Cysteine (C) carbamidomethylation; 5) Dynamic modifications: Methionine (M) oxidation, peptide N-terminal acetylation. Search result merging, protein inference/grouping, and FDR control were performed in Scaffold 5 (Proteome Software, Inc.). For identification, global protein/peptide FDR was set to 1.0% and at least 2 unique peptides were required for each protein. For quantification, protein abundance was determined by total spectrum counts and total MS2 ion intensities. Results were exported and manually curated in Microsoft Excel.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Interactome, Trypanosoma brucei, Turboid

### Affiliations
University at Buffalo
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo and NYS Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, University at Buffalo, USA

### Submitter
Xiaoyu Zhu

### Lab Head
Dr Jun Qu
Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University at Buffalo and NYS Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics and Life Sciences, University at Buffalo, USA


