### Accession
PXD036024

### Title
Native holdup (nHU) to measure binding affinities from cell extracts

### Description
Characterizing macromolecular interactions is essential for understanding cellular processes, yet nearly all methods used to detect protein interactions from cells are qualitative. Here, we introduce the native holdup (nHU) approach to quantify equilibrium binding constants and explore binding mechanisms of protein interactions from cell extracts. Compared to other pulldown-based assays, nHU requires less sample preparation and can be coupled to any analytical methods, such as western blotting (nHU-WB) or mass spectrometry (nHU-MS) as readouts. We use nHU to explore interactions of SNX27, a cargo adaptor of the retromer complex and find good agreement between in vitro affinities and those measured directly from cell extracts using nHU. This challenges the unwritten paradigm stating that biophysical parameters like binding constants cannot be accurately determined from cells or cellular extracts. We discuss the strengths and limitations of nHU and provide simple protocols that can be implemented in most laboratories.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS Analysis Samples were analyzed using an Ultimate 3000 nano-RSLC coupled in line, via a nano-electrospray ionization source, with a LTQ-Orbitrap ELITE mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, California) or with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 mass-spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a FAIMS (high Field Asymmetric Ion Mobility Spectrometry) module. Peptide mixtures were injected in 0.1% TFA on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 trap-column (75 µm ID x 2 cm, 3 µm, 100Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) for 3 min at 5 µL/min with 2% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O and then separated on a C18 Acclaim PepMap100 nano-column (75 µm ID x 50 cm, 2.6 µm, 150 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 300 nl/min and 40°C with a 90 min linear gradient from 5% to 30% buffer B (A: 0.1% FA in H2O / B: 80% ACN, 0.1% FA in H2O), regeneration at 5% B. Spray voltage were set to 2.1 kV and heated capillary temperature at 280°C. For the Orbitrap Elite, the mass spectrometer was operated in positive ionization mode, in data-dependent mode with survey scans from m/z 350-1,500 acquired in the Orbitrap at a resolution of 120,000 at m/z 400. The 20 most intense peaks from survey scans were selected for further fragmentation in the Linear Ion Trap with an isolation window of 2.0 Da and were fragmented by CID with normalized collision energy of 35% (TOP20CID method). Unassigned and single charged states were excluded from fragmentation. The Ion Target Value for the survey scans (in the Orbitrap) and the MS2 mode (in the Linear Ion Trap) were set to 1E6 and 5E3 respectively and the maximum injection time was set to 100 ms for both scan modes. Dynamic exclusion was set to 20 s after one repeat count with mass width at ± 10 ppm. For the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS associated with the FAIMS module, a combination of two Compensation Voltage (CV), -40 V and -55 V, was choose with a cycle time of 1 second for each. For the full MS1 in DDA mode, the resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200 and with a mass range set to 300-1400. The full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT set to Auto mode. For the fragment spectra in MS2, AGC target value was 100% (Standard) with a resolution of 30,000 and the maximum Injection Time set to Auto mode. Intensity threshold was set at 1E4. Isolation width was set at 2 m/z and normalized collision energy was set at 30%. All spectra were acquired in centroid mode using positive polarity. Default settings were used for FAIMS with voltages applied as described previously, and with a total carrier gas flow set to 4.2 L/min.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry data analysis Proteins were identified by database searching using SequestHT (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with Proteome Discoverer 2.4 software (PD2.4, Thermo Fisher Scientific) on human FASTA database downloaded from UniProt (reviewed, release 2021_06_03, 20380 entries, https://www.uniprot.org/). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 7 ppm and 0.6 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For the data acquired on the Orbitrap Exploris 480, the software Proteome Discoverer 2.5 version was used with a human fasta database from UniProt (reviewed, release 2022_02_21, 20291 entries). Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set at 10 ppm and 0.02 Da respectively, and up to 2 missed cleavages were allowed. For all the data, Oxidation (M, +15.995 Da) was set as variable modification, and Carbamidomethylation (C, + 57.021 Da) as fixed modification. Peptides and proteins were filtered with a false discovery rate (FDR) at 1%. Label-free quantification was based on the extracted ion chromatography intensity of the peptides. All samples were measured in technical triplicates. The measured extracted ion chromatogram (XIC) intensities were normalized based on median intensities of the entire dataset to correct minor loading differences. For statistical tests and enrichment calculations, not detectable intensity values were treated with an imputation method, where the missing values were replaced by random values similar to the 10% of the lowest intensity values present in the entire dataset. Unpaired two tailed T-test, assuming equal variance, were performed on obtained log2 XIC intensities. All raw LC-MS/MS data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange via the PRIDE database with identifier PXD034790.

### Publication Abstract
Characterizing macromolecular interactions is essential for understanding cellular processes, yet most methods currently used to detect protein interactions from cells are qualitative. Here, we introduce the native holdup (nHU) approach to estimate equilibrium binding constants of protein interactions directly from cell extracts. Compared to other pull-down-based assays, nHU requires less sample preparation and can be coupled to any analytical methods as readouts, such as Western blotting or mass spectrometry. We use nHU to explore interactions of SNX27, a cargo adaptor of the retromer complex and find good agreement between in vitro affinities and those measured directly from cell extracts using nHU. We discuss the strengths and limitations of nHU and provide simple protocols that can be implemented in most laboratories.

### Keywords
Protein-protein interaction, Affinity constant determination, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM U1258/CNRS UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, F-67404 Illkirch, France
CNRS

### Submitter
Luc Negroni

### Lab Head
Dr Gergo Gogl
Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), INSERM U1258/CNRS UMR 7104/Université de Strasbourg, 1 rue Laurent Fries, BP 10142, F-67404 Illkirch, France


