### Accession
PXD017713

### Title
BioID of SUMOylation-deficient glucocorticoid receptor GR3KR

### Description
Purpose of these experiments was to assess the effect of glucocorticoid receptor SUMOylation on its protein-protein interactions using BioID. Experiments were performed with SUMOylation deficient GR3KR (K277,293,703R) fused to the BirA* biotin ligase tag.

### Sample Protocol
Flp-In 293 T-REx™ cells expressing tetracycline-inducibly BirA*-fused GR SUMOylation mutant GR3KR (K277,293,703R) were grown for 72 h, washed with PBS and the medium was replaced with steroid-depleted medium. After growing in serum-depleted medium for 24 h, cells were induced with tetracycline (0.03 µg/ml, Sigma Aldrich) for the next 18 h, after which biotin (50 µM, Sigma Aldrich) with vehicle or dexamethasone (Dex, Sigma-Aldrich) was added for 6 h. The cells were washed with ice-cold PBS supplemented with 0.1 mM MgCl2 and 0.1 mM CaCl2, harvested in PBS supplemented with 1 mM EDTA, snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -70 degree C until purification.   For affinity purification, ~1 x 10^8 cells were lysed in 3 ml of lysis buffer (50 mM Hepes-NaOH [pH 8.0], 5 mM EDTA [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF, 0.5% NP40, 1 mM PMSF, 1.5 mM Na3VO4, 0.1% SDS, 83 U/ml benzonase, and 0.1x protease inhibitor cocktail from Sigma) and sonicated with a probe sonicator (Branson Digital Sonifier) in ice-water bath using eighteen 30 s bursts with 60 s pauses with 30% amplitude. The lysates were then centrifuged at 16 000 x g for 15 min at 4 degree C, transferred to new tubes and centrifuged for an additional 10 min at 16 000 x g at 4 degree C. The cleared lysates were loaded on spin columns (Bio-Rad) containing 400 µl Strep-Tactin beads (IBA, 2-1201-010) prewashed in lysis buffer and the beads were washed three times with 1 ml of wash buffer 1 (lysis buffer without SDS and benzonase) and four times with 1 ml of wash buffer 2 (50 mM Hepes-NaOH [pH 8.0], 5 mM EDTA [pH 8.0], 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM NaF). Proteins were eluted twice with 300 µl of 0.5 mM biotin in wash buffer 2, and frozen at -20 degree C until further processing.  Eluates were neutralized with 100 mM NH4HCO3. Cysteine bonds were reduced with 5 mM Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. The proteins were then trypsinized to peptides by adding 1 μg trypsin (Promega). After overnight incubation at 37 degree C, samples were quenched with 10% trifluoroacetic acid, purified with C18 Micro SpinColumns (The Nest Group) according to the manufacturer’s instructions and re-dissolved in 30 μl buffer A (0.1% trifluoroacetic acid and 1% acetonitrile in LC-MS grade water).  The MS analysis was performed on Orbitrap Elite hybrid mass spectrometer coupled to EASY-nLC II –system using the Xcalibur version 2.7.0 SP1 (Thermo Fisher Scientific). 4 μl of the tryptic peptide mixture was loaded into a C18-packed precolumn (EASY-Column™ 2cm x 100 μm, 5 μm, 120 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific) in 10 μl volume of buffer A and then to C18-packed analytical column (EASY-Column™ 10 cm x 75 μm, 3 μm, 120 Å, Thermo Fisher Scientific). 60 -minute linear gradient at the constant flow rate of 300 nl/minute from 5 to 35% of buffer B (98% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in MS grade water) was used to separate the peptides. Analysis was performed in data-dependent acquisition: one high resolution (60 000) FTMS full scan (m/z 300-1700) was followed by top20 CID- MS2 scans in ion trap (energy 35). Maximum FTMS fill time was 200 ms (Full AGC target 1000000) and the maximum fill time for the ion trap was 200 ms (MSn AGC target of 50000). Precursor ions with more than 500 ion counts were allowed for MSn. To enable the high resolution in FTMS scan preview mode was used.

### Data Protocol
Proteins were identified using Proteome Discoverer™ software with SEQUEST search engine (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific). Thermo .raw files were searched against the human component of the UniProt-database (release 2014_11; 20130 entries) complemented with trypsin, BSA and tag sequences. Carbamidomethylation (+57.021464 Da) of cysteine residues was used as static modification whereas oxidation (+15.994491 Da) of methionine and biotinylation (+226.078 Da) of lysine residues or N-terminus were used as dynamic modification. Maximum two missed cleavages and maximum of 15 ppm monoisotopic mass error were allowed. Peptide false discovery rate (FDR) was set to < 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, Bioid, Hek293, Sumo, Glucocorticoid receptor, Bira, Gr

### Affiliations
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Finland
University of Eastern Finland, Institute of Biomedicine

### Submitter
Joanna Lempiäinen

### Lab Head
Dr Jorma J Palvimo
Institute of Biomedicine, University of Eastern Finland, Finland


