### Accession
PXD037553

### Title
Quantitative proteomics reveals common and unique molecular mechanisms underlying beneficial effects of caffeine and trigonelline on human hepatocytes

### Description
Caffeine and trigonelline are the major bioactive compounds in coffee. Caffeine alone or combined with other coffee compounds shows hepatoprotective effects. However, molecular mechanisms underlying such hepatoprotective effects remain unclear. We therefore addressed molecular effects of caffeine and trigonelline on human hepatocytes using quantitative proteomics followed by bioinformatic analyses to obtain topological and functional significance. HepG2 cells were treated with 100 μM caffeine or trigonelline for 24-h and evaluated by quantitative proteomics using nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS. A total of 27 and 26 significantly altered proteins were identified in caffeine-treated and trigonelline-treated cells, respectively, compared with control cells. Topological analyses revealed that ribosomal and translation regulatory proteins predominantly served as the hub proteins associated with protein clusters. Functional analyses also revealed that these two bioactive compounds shared some molecular mechanisms via induction of translational processes. There were also other unique molecular functions and biological processes triggered or suppressed by either caffeine or trigonelline. These data highlight common and unique molecular mechanisms underlying the hepatoprotective effects of caffeine and trigonelline that may be useful for future clinical applications.

### Sample Protocol
Extraction of cellular proteins for proteomics analysis  HepG2 cells were seeded in 6-well plate (Corning Inc; Corning, NY) at a density of 5×105 cells/well and maintained in the complete medium for 24-h prior to experiment. The cells were then treated with or without 100 μM of caffeine or trigonelline for 24-h (n = 3 independent biological samples per group). The cells were washed with PBS five times, and cellular proteins were extracted using SDT lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100 mM DTT, and 100 mM Tris-HCl; pH7.6). Protein concentrations were quantified by Bradford’s method using Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad; Milano, Italy).  In-solution tryptic digestion by filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) method  Proteins from each sample with an equal amount (30 µg/sample) was subjected to in-solution tryptic digestion by filtered-aided sample preparation (FASP) method. Briefly, protein samples prepared in SDT lysis buffer were reduced by heating at 95°C for 5 min. After cooling down at 25°C, an equal amount of protein (30 µg/sample) was transferred to an Omega Nanosep 10K device (Pall Corporation; Port Washington, NY), added with 200 µl of 8 M urea in 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5), and then centrifuged at 14,000 g and 25°C for 15 min. This buffer exchange step was repeated one more cycle. The recovered proteins were then alkylated with 100 µl of 50 mM iodoacetamide in 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5) at 25°C in the dark using a ThermoMixer® C (Eppendorf; Hauppauge, NY) for 20 min. Thereafter, buffer exchange was performed twice by centrifugation at 14,000 g and 25°C for 15 min each using 200 µl of 8 M urea/100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.5). The proteins were then finally exchanged into 50 mM NH4HCO3 and digested with sequencing grade modified trypsin (Promega; Madison, WI) in 50 mM NH4HCO3 at a ratio of 1:50 (w/w) trypsin/protein at 37°C for 16-18 h in a ThermoMixer® C. The digested peptides were collected by transferring the filter unit to a new collection tube and centrifuged at 14,000 g and 25°C for 10-20 min. Trypsin activity was then stopped by adding 10 µl of 5% formic acid in 80% acetronitrile (ACN), and the digested peptides were dried by a SpeedVac concentrator (Savant; Holbrook, NY). The peptides were finally resuspended in 0.1% formic acid prior to MS/MS analysis.  Analyses of proteins by nanoflow liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry (nanoLC-ESI-Qq-Orbitrap MS/MS) Separation of the digested peptides was performed using EASY-nLC II (Thermo Scientific; Waltham, MA). Briefly, peptides were loaded from a cooled (7°C) autosampler into an in-house, 3-cm-long pre-column containing 5-µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH; Ammerbuch, Germany) (trap column to desalt and concentrate the samples) and then into an in-house, 10-cm-long analytical column packed with 3-µm C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH) using mobile phase A (0.1% formic acid). The peptides were then separated by mobile phase B (ACN/0.1% formic acid) gradient elution with four steps as follows: 2-9% for 15 min, 9-35% for 85 min, 35-95% for 20 min, and then 95% for 10 min at a flow rate of 200 nl/min. Peptide sequences were then analyzed by LTQ-Orbitrap-XL (Thermo Scientific) in positive mode with ESI nanosprayer ion source. Data were acquired in a collision-induced dissociation (CID) top-12 mode under the control of the Xcalibur 2.1.0 and LTQ Tune Plus 2.5.5 software (Thermo Scientific). The cycle of one full scan was performed at a resolution of 30,000 (300-2,000 m/z) in the Orbitrap followed by 12 data-dependent MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap with enabled preview mode for FTMS master scan. The minimum signal threshold at 1x105 was required for a precursor ion to be selected for further fragmentation. Accumulation target values of full MS and MS/MS scan were 5x105 and 3x104 ions, respectively. Singly charged ions and unassigned charge states were excluded for fragmentation. Helium was used as a collision gas and the normalized collision energy was set at 35%. The activation time was 30 ms for acquiring mass spectra. The duration of dynamic exclusion was 180 s.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data processing and protein quantitative analysis  The raw files (.raw) were analyzed by MaxQuant software package (version 2.1.4.0) (https://www.maxquant.org) with built-in Andromeda search engine. Proteins were identified by searching against the UniprotKB/Swiss-Prot human database together with commonly observed contaminants and reversed sequences (decoy database) for all entries. The parameters used for protein identification were set as follows: fixed modification = carbamidomethylation at cysteine (C), variable modification = oxidation at methionine (M), maximal number of missed cleavages = 1, minimum peptide length = 7 amino acids, enzyme = trypsin, first search precursor tolerance = 20 ppm, main search precursor tolerance = 2 ppm, and MS/MS tolerance of ion trap mass spectrometer (ITMS) scans = 0.2 Da. The protein and peptide-to-spectrum match (PSM) false discovery rate (FDR) were set at 0.01 calculated based on the search against reverse sequence decoy database. The match between runs option was enabled with a match time window of 0.7 min and a 20‐min alignment time window (as default setting). This option was applied to reduce the missing value problem, where peptides identified by one run were transferred to another by matching with m/z and retention time windows when applicable. The label‐free quantification (LFQ) was enabled with a minimum ratio count of 2.   The search results file (“proteingroups.txt”) from MaxQuant was imported into Perseus (version 2.0.7.0) for statistic comparative analysis. The proteins marked as potential contaminant proteins, proteins matched to reverse sequence, and proteins identified only by site were removed. The LFQ intensity, generated according to the MaxLFQ algorithm, was used as the quantified value and was log2 transformed. The proteins found consistently in all three biological replicates in at least one condition were included for statistical comparative analysis. The missing values were imputed by replacing the values from normal distribution (with a width of 0.3 and down shift of 1.8). The protein quantification and calculation of statistical significance was carried out using two-way Student’s t-test and error correction using the method of permutation-based FDR.  Statistical analysis  All quantitative data are reported as mean ± SEM obtained from three independent biological replicates. Comparative analyses between groups were performed using unpaired Student’s t-test and error correction using the method of permutation-based FDR. Adjusted p-values <0.05 were considered statistically significant.

### Publication Abstract
Caffeine and trigonelline are the major bioactive compounds in coffee. Caffeine alone or combined with other coffee compounds shows hepatoprotective effects. However, molecular mechanisms underlying such hepatoprotective effects remain unclear. We therefore addressed molecular effects of caffeine and trigonelline on human hepatocytes using quantitative proteomics followed by bioinformatic analyses to obtain topological and functional significance. HepG2 cells were treated with 100&#xa0;&#x3bc;M caffeine or trigonelline for 24-h and evaluated by quantitative proteomics using nanoLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap MS/MS. A total of 26 and 25 significantly altered proteins were identified in caffeine-treated and trigonelline-treated cells, respectively, compared with control cells. Topological analyses revealed that ribosomal and translation regulatory proteins predominantly served as the hub proteins associated with protein clusters. Functional analyses also revealed that these two bioactive compounds shared some molecular mechanisms via induction of translational processes. There were also other unique molecular functions and biological processes triggered or suppressed by either caffeine or trigonelline. These data highlight common and unique molecular mechanisms underlying the hepatoprotective effects of caffeine and trigonelline that may be useful for future clinical applications.

### Keywords
Coffee; hepatoprotection; hepg2; protein synthesis; ribosome; translation

### Affiliations
Mahidol University
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand

### Submitter
Visith Thongboonkerd

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Visith Thongboonkerd
Medical Proteomics Unit, Office for Research and Development, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand


