### Accession
PXD016721

### Title
IGF-1 stimulated C2 skeletal myotube phosphoproteome

### Description
Skeletal muscle is known to adapt dynamically to changes in workload by regulatory processes of the phosphatidylinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt pathway. We performed a global quantitative phosphoproteomics analysis of contracting mouse C2 myotubes treated with insulin growth factor 1 (IGF-1) as control and additionally MK-2206 or LY294002 to inhibit PI3K/Akt signaling, respectively.

### Sample Protocol
For stable isotope labeling by amino acids in cell culture (SILAC) (Ong et al., 2002), C2 myoblasts were cultured in high glucose SILAC DMEM medium (PAA, GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Freiburg, Germany) supplemented with 15% dialyzed FCS (PAA), 1% non-essential amino acids, 1% penicillin/streptomycin, 1% sodium pyruvate, 1% proline (all Life Technologies), 84 mg/l arginine and 146 mg/l lysine (Cambridge Isotope Laboratories Inc., Tewksbury, USA) for at least nine cell doublings. Light, medium and heavy labeling of cells was performed with 13C6 L-arginine/12C6 L-lysine, 12C6 L-arginine/D4 L-lysine and 13C615N4 L-arginine/13C615N2 L-lysine, respectively. Stable isotope-labeled myoblasts were seeded into 6-well plates (Corning Incorporated, New York, USA) and grown to 90% confluency. Differentiation was induced by reduction of the serum content to 2% dialyzed HS (Ong et al., 2002) in the absence of sodium pyruvate. Differentiation medium was changed every 48 h until day 4. Subsequently, cells were serum-starved for 4h while sarcomere formation was improved by electrical pulse stimulation (EPS, 0.05 Hz, 4 ms, 10 V) using a C-Pace EP Culture Pacer (IonOptix, Milton, USA). 30 min prior to cell lysis, cells were either treated with 10 ng/ml IGF-1 (control), 10 ng/ml IGF-1 + 10 uM LY294002 or 10 ng/ml IGF-1 + 10 uM MK-2206. SILAC experiments were generally performed in six independent biological replicates with label switches. Phosphopeptides were enriched using TiO2 spherical beads as described before (Humphrey et al., 2018) in 2 technical replicates. Supernatants were used for sequential enrichment of metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC). In brief, supernatant and first washing step from EasyPhos-based TiO2 enrichment were combined and lyophilized overnight. Died peptides were resolved in 0.1% TFA and desalted using C18 solid phase extraction cartidges (3M Empore) according to manufactures protocol. Eluted peptides in 80% ACN were loaded onto 100ul self-made Fe(III)-IMAC resin. To this end, Ni2+-NTA beads (Quiagen) were washed 3 times with pure water, incubated for 30 min with 100 mM EDTA on a rotation wheel and washed further 3 times. Subsequently, beads were incubated with 10 mM FeCl3 for 30 min on a rotation wheel to obtain Fe(III)-IMAC beads. Washed beads were loaded with desalted samples and rotated for another 30 min. Following 3 washing steps with 80% ACN, 0.1% TFA, samples were eluted form the beads using 2 times elution buffer (50% ACN, 5% ammonia water) and a magnetic rack. Reversed-phase liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry was performed using the UltiMate3000 RSLCnano system (Dionex LC Packings/Thermo Fisher Scientific, Dreieich, Germany) coupled online to a QExactive Orbitrap Plus (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) instrument. The UHPLC system was equipped with two C18 pre-columns (μPAC™ Trapping column, PharmaFluidics) and a C18 endcapped analytical column (50 cm μPAC™ column, PharmaFluidics). The MS instrument was externally calibrated using standard compounds and equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source and a stainless steel emitter (Thermo Fischer Scientific). MS/MS analyses were generally performed on multiply charged peptide ions applying normalized collision energy (NCE) of 35% with an activation q of 0.25 and an activation time of 30 ms unless otherwise stated. For global quantitative phosphoproteomics, peptide mixtures were analyzed by a 4h LC-MS/MS gradient using a flow rate of 300nL/min and fragmentation by higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) with a NCE of 28%.

### Data Protocol
For quantitative phosphoproteomics data, Andromeda integrated in MaxQuant 1.6.10.43 (Cox et al., 2011) was used to search peak lists against the UniProt ProteomeSet mouse database (release 11.2019, 63,405 protein entries) together with raw files from PXD009117. The precursor mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm for the first search and to 4.5 ppm for the main search. Trypsin was set as proteolytic enzyme allowing up to two missed cleavages. Oxidation of methionine and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were set as variable modifications and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. A false discovery rate (FDR) of 1% was applied on both peptide (on modified peptides separately) and protein lists. Numbers of unique phosphopeptides were counted based on the MaxQuant peptide ID in the Phospho(STY) sites table. Phosphosites scored with a MaxQuant localization probability of ≥ 0.75 were deemed “localized”, while sites with a localization probability of < 0.75 were counted as putative sites.

### Publication Abstract
The PI3K/Akt pathway promotes skeletal muscle growth and myogenic differentiation. Although its importance in skeletal muscle biology is well documented, many of its substrates remain to be identified. We here studied PI3K/Akt signaling in contracting skeletal muscle cells by quantitative phosphoproteomics. We identified the extended basophilic phosphosite motif RxRxxp[S/T]xxp[S/T] in various proteins including filamin-C (FLNc). Importantly, this extended motif, located in a unique insert in Ig-like domain 20 of FLNc, is doubly phosphorylated. The protein kinases responsible for this dual-site phosphorylation are Akt and PKC&#x3b1;. Proximity proteomics and interaction analysis identified filamin A-interacting protein 1 (FILIP1) as direct FLNc binding partner. FILIP1 binding induces filamin degradation, thereby negatively regulating its function. Here, dual-site phosphorylation of FLNc not only reduces FILIP1 binding, providing a mechanism to shield FLNc from FILIP1-mediated degradation, but also enables fast dynamics of FLNc necessary for its function as signaling adaptor in cross-striated muscle cells.

### Keywords
Phospho-proteomics, Myotubes, Silac, C2

### Affiliations
AG Warscheid
Biologie II
Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg
Schänzlestr. 1
79104 Freiburg
Germany

Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany

### Submitter
Friedel Drepper

### Lab Head
Dr Bettina Warscheid
Department of Biochemistry and Functional Proteomics, Institute of Biology II, Faculty of Biology and BIOSS Centre for Biological Signalling Studies, University of Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg im Breisgau, Germany


