### Accession
PXD005104

### Title
The CVSC mechanically reinforces HSV-1

### Description
Using atomic force microscopy imaging and nanoindentation measurements, the effect of the minor capsid proteins pUL17 and pUL25 on the structural stability of the icosahedral Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 capsids was investigated. pUL17 and pUL25 that form the capsid vertex-specific component particularly contributed to the capsid resilience along the 5-fold and 2-fold, but not the 3-fold icosahedral axes. We tested whether deletion of UL17 and UL25 changed the levels of the proteins that assemble in the nucleocapsid by quantitative mass spectrometry.

### Sample Protocol
Purified HSV-1 particles were resuspended in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, 5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate and heated at 90 °C for 5 min to disrupt the virus particles. 100 μg of proteins for each enzymatic digestion were first reduced using dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 °C and then alkylated by iodoacetamide for 30 min in the dark. Samples were diluted such that the final concentration of sodium deoxycholate was 0.5%, followed by enzymatic digestion overnight at 37 °C with Trypsin (1:50 enzyme protein ratio). The sodium deoxycholate was precipitated and the enzymatic digestion was quenched by adding formic acid to a concentration of 2% (v/v). The samples were centrifuged for 20 minutes at 20,000 x g and the supernatant was subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.The samples were analyzed on a Q-Exactive Plus coupled to an Agilent 1290 Infinity UHPLC system. Briefly, the peptides were loaded onto the trapping column (Dr Maisch Reprosil C18, 3 μm, 2 cm × 100 μm) with a flow rate of 5 μl/min for 10 min with RP solvent A, whereas peptide separation was performed at a column flow rate of ~300 nl/min (Agilent Poroshell 120 EC-C18, 2.7 μm, 50 cm × 75 μm). Nanospray was achieved with an in-house pulled and gold-coated fused silica capillary (360 µm outer diameter, 20 µm inner diameter, 10 µm tip inner diameter) and an applied voltage of 1.7 kV. Full-scan MS spectra (from m/z 350 to 1500) were acquired in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 35,000.

### Data Protocol
Peak lists were generated using Proteome Discoverer (version 1.4, Thermo Scientific, Bremen, Germany) and were searched against a database containing the Human Herpes Virus strain 17 sequences (77 protein entries) using Mascot (version 2.4 Matrix Science, London, UK). The database search was performed using the following parameters: a mass tolerance of 50 ppm for the precursor masses and ±0.05 Da for fragment ions. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin with 2 missed cleavages allowed. Carbarmidomethylation of cysteines was set as fixed modification while oxidation of methionine, was used as variable modification. False discovery rate was set to <1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hsv-1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands
Biomolecular and mass spectrometry group

### Submitter
Eleonora Corradini

### Lab Head
Dr Albert J.R. Heck
Biomolecular mass spectrometry and proteomics, Utrecht University, Utrecht, The Netherlands


