### Accession
PXD014610

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of Affinity-Purified Proteasomes Identifies a Suite of Assembly Chaperones in Arabidopsis

### Description
The 26S proteasome is an essential protease for the selective elimination of dysfunctional and short-lived regulatory proteins in eukaryotes.  To define the composition of this multi-catalytic, ATP-dependent proteolytic machine in plants, we exploited Arabidopsis particles tagged at either the core protease (CP) or regulatory particle (RP) sub-complexes for rapid affinity purification followed by deep sequence analysis via mass spectrometry.  Studies on proteasomes purified from whole seedlings via either a CP or RP subunit with or without ATP, which is needed to maintain the holo-proteasome complex, identified all known core subunits but failed to detect subunit isoform preferences, suggesting that Arabidopsis does not construct unique proteasomes sub-types.  We also identified a suite of proteasome-interacting proteins, including likely orthologs of the yeast and mammalian chaperones Pba1, Pba2, Pba3, and Pba4 that assist in CP assembly; Ump1 that helps connect CP half-barrels; Nas2, Nas6, and Hsm3 that assist in RP assembly; and Ecm29 that promotes CP-RP association.  Analysis of proteasomes enriched from seedlings exposed to the proteasome inhibitor MG132 revealed the accumulation of novel assembly intermediates, which reflect partially built proteasome sub-complexes associated with assembly chaperones, and the CP capped with the PA200/Blm10 regulator.  Unlike in yeast, genetic analyses of Arabidopsis UMP1 showed that this chaperone is essential, with mutants missing the major UMP1a and UMP1b isoforms displaying a strong gametophytic defect.  Single mutants impacting ump1a also accumulate a collection of proteasome assembly intermediates, consistent with its importance for CP construction.  With this list of chaperones, it should now be possible to study the assembly events that generate the 26S holo-proteasome in Arabidopsis from the collection of 64 or more core subunits.

### Sample Protocol
For in-solution trypsin digestion, 200 μl of each proteasome affinity purification was vacuum dried to a final volume of ~25 μl, and denatured in 8 M urea, 25 mM (NH4)HCO3 in a total volume of 300 μl. Proteins were reduced with 10 mM DTT at room temperature for 1 hr, and alkylated in the dark in the presence of 50 mM 2-chloroacetamide at room temperature for 1 hr. Excess alkylating agent was quenched with 50 mM DTT for 5 min at room temperature, and the samples were diluted with 1.2 ml of 25 mM (NH4)HCO3 to reduce the urea concentration to below 1.5 M. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 ug of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega). Peptides were vacuum dried as above to a final volume of ~300 μl, acidified with 10% TFA and desalted and concentrated on a 100 μl Bond Elut OMIX C18 pipette tip. Peptides were eluted in 50 μl of 75% acetonitrile, 0.1% acetic acid, then lyophilized and re-suspended in 30 μl of 5% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. For in-gel trypsin digestion of samples after native PAGE, silver-stained protein bands were cut into 1 mm3 pieces, washed once with H2O, and destained with a freshly prepared 1:1 mixture of 100 mM sodium thiosulfate and 30 mM potassium ferricyanide until colorless, followed by two washes with sterile distilled H2O to remove excess silver. Gel pieces were then dehydrated with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3, vacuum dried as above, and then rehydrated with reducing solution (50 mM NH4HCO3, 25 mM DTT) for 20 min at 55°C. Gel pieces were next treated with alkylating solution (50 mM NH4HCO3, 55 mM iodoacetamide) in the dark for 20 min at room temperature, washed once with sterile distilled H2O, and then dehydrated and vacuum dried as above. Proteins were digested overnight at 37°C with 1 μg of sequencing grade modified porcine trypsin (Promega) together with ProteaseMAX surfactant. Peptides were vacuum dried and acidified as above, desalted with self-packed C18 stage-tips using a spin protocol, then lyophilized and re-suspended in 30 μl of 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. UHPLC separation of tryptic peptides digested in solution was performed on a Dionex Ultimate 3000 Rapid Separation LC system. The protein digests were loaded onto a 1 μl nano-Viper sample loop, and separated on an analytical C18 column (Acclaim PepMap RSLC C18 column with a 2 μm particle size, 100 Å pore size, 75 μm x 15 cm) by a 90 min linear gradient from 2% to 32% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, with the column flow rate set to 300 nl/min. MS/MS analysis of the eluted tryptic peptides was performed online using a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer possessing a Nanospray Flex ion source fitted with a stainless steel nano-bore emitter operated in positive electrospray ionization. Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 380-1500 m/z at a resolution of 70,000 was performed, with the automatic gain control (AGC) target set to 1 x 10^6 ion intensity and the maximum fill time set to 100 msec.  High energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation of the top 15 most intense peaks was performed with a normalized collision energy of 28, an intensity threshold of 1 x 10^5 counts and an isolation window of 1.2 m/z, excluding precursors that had unassigned, +1, +7 or +8 charge states.  MS/MS scans were acquired with a mass range of 200-2000 m/z at a resolution of 17,500, with an AGC target of 8 x 10^3 and a maximum fill time of 80 msec.  All peaks were recorded in profile mode.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2 and an exclusion duration of 10 sec, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 8 x 10^3 counts. Peptide samples obtained from in-gel digestion were instead analyzed using a nanoAcquity UHPLC system connected online to an LTQ Velos Orbitrap mass spectrometer operated in positive ESI mode.  The protein digests were separated on a fused silica capillary C18 micro-column (Waters Corporation; 1.7 μm particle size, 130 Å pore size, 100 μm x 20 cm, with an emitter tip pulled to ~1 μm) by a linear gradient from 2% to 30% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid, with the column flow rate set to 300 nl/min.  Data-dependent acquisition of full MS scans within a mass range of 300-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000 was performed, followed by HCD fragmentation of the top 10 most intense peaks, performed with a normalized collision energy of 42, an intensity threshold of 3 x 103 counts and an isolation window of 3 m/z, excluding precursors that had unassigned or +1 charge states.  MS/MS scans were acquired with a mass starting at 100 m/z at a resolution of 7,500, with an AGC target of 1 x 105 and a maximum fill time of 500 msec.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of 2, an exclusion duration of 30 sec and an exclusion window of 2 min, while the minimum MS ion count for triggering MS/MS was set to 3 x 103 counts.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS/MS spectral files were processed with MaxQuant version 1.5.3.30 (Cox and Mann, 2008), set up to use the Andromeda search engine to interrogate the Arabidopsis proteome file TAIR10_pep_20101214_updated.fasta, obtained from the Arabidopsis Information Resource (TAIR) database version 10.1 (www.arabidopsis.org).  Search parameters were set to assume trypsin digestion with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, precursor mass tolerances of 20 ppm, and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm.  Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a static modification, while oxidation of methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and Gly-Gly footprints (i.e., the ubiquitylation remnant on a lysine residue after cleavage with trypsin) were specified as dynamic modifications.  The target FDR of 0.01 was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides.   Ten proteins were marked as likely contaminants, including nitrilases, cruciferins, and seed storage albumins (Table S4). Label-free-quantitative analyses were performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm in MaxQuant (36) with default settings, except that only unique peptides were used for quantification so that protein isoforms could be discriminated.  Matching was set to “match from and to samples” to increase the number of quantifiable proteins per run, using the “match between runs” feature in MaxQuant.  The resulting proteingroups.txt files were processed using Perseus (www.perseus-framework.org (64)).  MaxLFQ values were averaged for both technical replicates, and missing MaxLFQ quantification values were imputed with values representing a normal distribution around the detection limit of the mass spectrometer, i.e., the mean and standard deviation for the distribution of the real intensities were determined, then a new distribution with a downshift of 1.8 standard deviations and a width of 0.3 standard deviations was created.  The total matrix was then imputed using these values, enabling statistical analysis.  Volcano plots comparing samples were generated in Perseus, with parameters set to use a two-sided t-test, an FDR of 0.01, an S0 value of 2, and 250 permutations, and then plotted using the Seaborn Python graphing library (http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.824567).  Kernel density estimations (KDE) were also calculated in Seaborn, while the median and Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) tests for enrichment were performed using SciPy Statistical Functions version 1.0 (www.docs.scipy.org/scipy/references/stats).  For the bar graphs in Fig. 3, missing values were imputed with a log2(MaxLFQ value) of 15 so that a “zero value” could be more easily viewed along the Y-axis. For analysis of native PAGE gel slices, MS/MS spectra were analysed using the Morpheus search engine (65), set up to search the same proteome database as above.  Search parameters assumed digestion with trypsin, a maximum of 2 missed cleavages, a minimum peptide length of 6, precursor mass tolerances of 2.10 Da, and fragment mass tolerances of 0.01 Da.  Static and dynamic modifications were specified as above, and the FDR of 0.01 was used as validation for peptide-spectral matches (PSMs) and peptides.  Label-free quantification was performed with Morpheus Spectral Counter (48) based on dNSAF values (47).  The data were plotted in R (www.cran.r-project.org) using the heatmap.2 function, with centroided hierarchical clustering based on Pearson’s correlation used as the distance function.

### Publication Abstract
The 26S proteasome is an essential protease that selectively eliminates dysfunctional and short-lived regulatory proteins in eukaryotes. To define the composition of this proteolytic machine in plants, we tagged either the core protease (CP) or the regulatory particle (RP) sub-complexes in <i>Arabidopsis</i> to enable rapid affinity purification followed by mass spectrometric analysis. Studies on proteasomes enriched from whole seedlings, with or without ATP needed to maintain the holo-proteasome complex, identified all known proteasome subunits but failed to detect isoform preferences, suggesting that <i>Arabidopsis</i> does not construct distinct proteasome sub-types. We also detected a suite of proteasome-interacting proteins, including likely orthologs of the yeast and mammalian chaperones Pba1, Pba2, Pba3, and Pba4 that assist in CP assembly; Ump1 that helps connect CP half-barrels; Nas2, Nas6, and Hsm3 that assist in RP assembly; and Ecm29 that promotes CP-RP association. Proteasomes from seedlings exposed to the proteasome inhibitor MG132 accumulated assembly intermediates, reflecting partially built proteasome sub-complexes associated with assembly chaperones, and the CP capped with the PA200/Blm10 regulator. Genetic analyses of <i>Arabidopsis</i> UMP1 revealed that, unlike in yeast, this chaperone is essential, with mutants lacking the major UMP1a and UMP1b isoforms displaying a strong gametophytic defect. Single <i>ump1</i> mutants were hypersensitive to conditions that induce proteotoxic, salt and osmotic stress, and also accumulated several proteasome assembly intermediates, consistent with its importance for CP construction. Insights into the chaperones reported here should enable study of the assembly events that generate the 26S holo-proteasome in <i>Arabidopsis</i> from the collection of 64 or more subunits.

### Keywords
Chaperone; core protease; degradation; proteasome; proteolysis; regulatory particle; ubiquitin

### Affiliations
UW Madison
George & Charmaine Mallinckrodt Professor Department of Biology Washington University in St. Louis

### Submitter
David C Gemperline

### Lab Head
Dr Richard D Vierstra
George & Charmaine Mallinckrodt Professor Department of Biology Washington University in St. Louis


