### Accession
PXD038373

### Title
Glaucoma-Associated CDR1 Peptide Promotes RGC Survival in Retinal Explants through Molecular Interaction with Acidic Leucine Rich Nuclear Phosphoprotein 32A (ANP32A)

### Description
Glaucoma is a complex, multifactorial optic neuropathy mainly characterized by the progressive loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their axons, resulting in a decline of visual function. The pathogenic molecular mechanism of glaucoma is still not well understood, and therapeutic strategies specifically addressing the neurodegenerative component of this ocular disease are urgently needed. Novel immunotherapeutics might overcome this problem by targeting specific molecular structures in the retina and providing direct neuroprotection via different modes of action. Within the scope of this research, the present study showed for the first time beneficial effects of the synthetic CDR1 peptide SCTGTSSDVGGYNYVSWYQ on the viability of RGCs ex vivo in a concentration-dependent manner compared to untreated control explants (CTRL, 50 µg/mL: p < 0.05 and 100 µg/mL: p < 0.001). Thereby, this specific peptide was identified first as a potential biomarker candidate in the serum of glaucoma patients and was significantly lower expressed in systemic IgG molecules compared to healthy control subjects. Furthermore, MS-based co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the specific interaction of synthetic CDR1 with retinal acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32A (ANP32A; p < 0.001 and log2 fold change > 3), which is a highly expressed protein in neurological tissues with multifactorial biological functions. In silico binding prediction analysis revealed the N-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain of ANP32A as a significant binding site for synthetic CDR1, which was previously reported as an important docking site for protein-protein interactions (PPI). In accordance with these findings, quantitative proteomic analysis of the retinae ± CDR1 treatment resulted in the identification of 25 protein markers, which were significantly differentially distributed between both experimental groups (CTRL and CDR1, p < 0.05). Particularly, acetyl-CoA biosynthesis I-related enzymes (e.g., DLAT and PDHA1), as well as cytoskeleton-regulating proteins (e.g., MSN), were highly expressed by synthetic CDR1 treatment in the retina; on the contrary, direct ANP32A-interacting proteins (e.g., NME1 and PPP2R4), as well as neurodegenerative-related markers (e.g., CEND1), were identified with significant lower abundancy in the CDR1-treated retinae compared to CTRL. Furthermore, retinal protein phosphorylation and histone acetylation were also affected by synthetic CDR1, which are both partially controlled by ANP32A. In conclusion, the synthetic CDR1 peptide provides a great translational potential for the treatment of glaucoma in the future by eliciting its neuroprotective mechanism via specific interaction with ANP32A’s N terminal LRR domain.

### Sample Protocol
1.1 In-solution trypsin digestion The SOP for the mass spectrometric (MS) analysis of peptide-based immunoprecipitation experiments (see method section 2.3, manuscript) is described elswhere in detail. The sample preparation protocol for the MS analysis of the retina organ culture ± CDR1 treatment was slightly modified. At first, the retina organ culture model was performed as described in method section 2.2 (manuscript)and the retinal tissues subsequently snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen (n=3 for each group; CTRL and CDR1 100 µg/mL). Afterwards, the frozen retinae ± CDR1 treatment were subjected to further homogenization and tryptic digestion as described in previous publication. Therefore, the retinal proteins were extracted in T-PER™ buffer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) using the Precellys® 24 homogenizer (VWR, International GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) and subsequently rebuffered in 200 µL of PBS using an Amicon 3 kDa centrifugal filter device (Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA). After determination of the protein concentration of each sample, 10 µg of protein was evaporated in the SpeedVac until dryness at 30° C. Each protein sample was resolved in 30 µL of 10 mM ammonium bicarbonate (ABC) with 3 µL of 20 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) in 10 mM ABC. All samples were incubated at 56 °C for 30 min to reduce the disulfide bonds of the proteins. As next step, 3 µL of 40 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) in 10 mM ABC were added for the alkylation of the released cystein residues. Hence, all samples were incubated for 30 min at RT in the dark followed by enzymatic digestion with 10 µl of trypsin solution (1 mg/mL in 10 mM ABC 10% acetonitrile (ACN); Promega; Madison, WI, USA) at 37° C overnight. Next day, the digestion was quenched with 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid (FA) and all samples evaporated in the SpeedVac until dryness at 30° C. Prior to MS analysis, peptide purification was carried out with SOLAµTM HRP SPE spin plates (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) [8,35] and stored as dried as well as concentrated samples at  20 °C before further experimental procedure. 1.2 Mass spectrometric (MS) analysis The MS measurements were performed with Hybrid Linear Ion Trap-Orbitrap MS system (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), which is a well established technology for quantitative proteomics in our laboratory [8,29,35–37]. In case of the peptide-based immunoprecipitation experiments (see method section 2.3), the MS system was online coupled to an capillary HPLC system as described elsewhere [29,36,37]. Respectively, experimental settings for this HPLC-MS analysis are listed in previous study [8]. For the other quantitative proteomic analysis (see method section 2.2 and 2.5), the LTQ Orbitrap XL MS operated with the EASY-nLC 1200 system (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA), which was combined with the PepMap C18 column system (75 mm x 500 mm; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA). The solvent A for the nanoLC instrument comprised of 0.1% FA in water and solvent B consisted of 0.1% FA in 80% ACN. In total 2 µl of each sample (peptide concentration: 0.125 µg/µL) were injected into nanoLC system and were measured twice to receive technical replicates. The chromatographic separation of the peptides was performed within 200 min using a flow rate of 0.3 µL/min with the following solvent gradient: 5–30% B (0–160 min), 30–100% B (160–180 min) and 100% B (180–200 min). The MS data acquisation was performed with a resolution of 30,000 in the positive ion mode and the target automatic gain control (AGC) was set to 1 x 106 ions. The internal lock mass calibration was set to 445,120,025 m/z (polydimethylcyclosiloxane). Dynamic exclusion (DE) of the MS system was enabled during data acquisation with the following settings: Repeat count = 1, repeat duration = 30 s, exclusion list size = 100, exclusion duration = 300 s and exclusion mass width of ± 20 ppm.  1.3 Quantitative analysis of the proteomic MS data The acquired tandem MS data were analyzed with bioinformatics software MaxQuant v. 1.6.17.0 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). The reviewed SwissProt databases with the taxonomies Homo sapiens (date: 13/04/2021, number of sequences: 20,408) and Sus scrofa (date: 13/04/2021, number of sequences: 1,439) were used for protein identifications and quantification. Due to the low public availability of proteomic data for the house swine (Sus scrofa) [39], we included the species-related human proteomic database (Homo sapiens) for this quantitative analysis. The following software settings were used for the database search: peptide ion mass tolerance of ± 30 ppm, ion fragment mass tolerance of 0.5 Da, tryptic cleavage, maximum of 2 missed cleavage sites, carbamidomethylation as fixed modification, acetylation (N-terminal protein) and oxidation as variable modifications.

### Data Protocol
2.1 Statistics and bioinformatics The output data of the MaxQuant analysis were statistically analyzed with software program Perseus v. 1.6.15 (Max Planck Institute for Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany). As first step, proteins identified as contaminants, reversed hits or “only identified by site” were removed from the data table. Afterwards, the intensity values of the filtered proteins were log2 tranformed. Reliable protein identifications had to present in at least 3 biological replicates of one study group (CTRL or CDR1-treated group) and were employed for data imputation and further statistical analysis. Imputation of missing protein abundances was based on the normal distribution of the data for each replicate (width: 0.3, down shift: 1.8). For the statistical analysis of the peptide-based immunoprecipitation experiment (see method section 2.3), only missing values of the control bead group (CTRL) were imputed in accordance with previous publications. After data imputation, two-sided t-test statistics for pairwise comparison was used to identify significant changed proteins between the experimental groups (p < 0.05). For data visualisation, the protein intensities were standardized by Z-score followed by illustration in the Heatmap using Euclidean for hierarchical clustering. Further statistical analyses (t-test statistics or ANOVA for multiple group comparison) as well as graphical presentation of the data were performed with Statistica version 13 (Statsoft; Tulsa, OK, USA). Furthermore, significant changed protein markers were screened for molecular-biological annotations as well as signaling functions unsing biological database STRING version 11.5 (Search Tool for the Retrieval of Interacting Genes/Proteins) and Ingenuity Pathway Analysis software v. 1-04 (IPA, Ingenuity QIAGEN; Redwood City, CA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Glaucoma is a complex, multifactorial optic neuropathy mainly characterized by the progressive loss of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) and their axons, resulting in a decline of visual function. The pathogenic molecular mechanism of glaucoma is still not well understood, and therapeutic strategies specifically addressing the neurodegenerative component of this ocular disease are urgently needed. Novel immunotherapeutics might overcome this problem by targeting specific molecular structures in the retina and providing direct neuroprotection via different modes of action. Within the scope of this research, the present study showed for the first time beneficial effects of the synthetic CDR1 peptide SCTGTSSDVGGYNYVSWYQ on the viability of RGCs ex vivo in a concentration-dependent manner compared to untreated control explants (CTRL, 50 &#xb5;g/mL: <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05 and 100 &#xb5;g/mL: <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001). Thereby, this specific peptide was identified first as a potential biomarker candidate in the serum of glaucoma patients and was significantly lower expressed in systemic IgG molecules compared to healthy control subjects. Furthermore, MS-based co-immunoprecipitation experiments confirmed the specific interaction of synthetic CDR1 with retinal acidic leucine-rich nuclear phosphoprotein 32A (ANP32A; <i>p</i> &lt; 0.001 and log2 fold change &gt; 3), which is a highly expressed protein in neurological tissues with multifactorial biological functions. In silico binding prediction analysis revealed the N-terminal leucine-rich repeat (LRR) domain of ANP32A as a significant binding site for synthetic CDR1, which was previously reported as an important docking site for protein-protein interactions (PPI). In accordance with these findings, quantitative proteomic analysis of the retinae &#xb1; CDR1 treatment resulted in the identification of 25 protein markers, which were significantly differentially distributed between both experimental groups (CTRL and CDR1, <i>p</i> &lt; 0.05). Particularly, acetyl-CoA biosynthesis I-related enzymes (e.g., DLAT and PDHA1), as well as cytoskeleton-regulating proteins (e.g., MSN), were highly expressed by synthetic CDR1 treatment in the retina; on the contrary, direct ANP32A-interacting proteins (e.g., NME1 and PPP2R4), as well as neurodegenerative-related markers (e.g., CEND1), were identified with significant lower abundancy in the CDR1-treated retinae compared to CTRL. Furthermore, retinal protein phosphorylation and histone acetylation were also affected by synthetic CDR1, which are both partially controlled by ANP32A. In conclusion, the synthetic CDR1 peptide provides a great translational potential for the treatment of glaucoma in the future by eliciting its neuroprotective mechanism via specific interaction with ANP32A's N terminal LRR domain.

### Keywords
Glaucoma, Neuroprotection, Anp32a, Proteomics, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany
Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Care Centre Mainz

### Submitter
Carsten Schmelter

### Lab Head
Dr Franz H.
Department of Experimental and Translational Ophthalmology, University Medical Center, Johannes Gutenberg University, Mainz, Germany


