### Accession
PXD001062

### Title
Substrate Trapping Proteomics Reveals Targets of the βTrCP2/FBXW11 Ubiquitin Ligase

### Description
We inhibited the proteosome to ‘trap’ ubiquitylated substrates on the SCFFBXW11 E3 complex. Comparative mass spectrometry analysis of immunopurified FBXW11 protein complexes before and after proteosome inhibition revealed known and putatively novel substrates.

### Sample Protocol
For streptavidin and FLAG affinity purification, cells were lysed in 0.1% Triton lysis. Cell lysates were incubated with streptavidin or FLAG resin for overnight affinity purification. The beads were washed 4 times with ice cold lysis buffer. Proteins bound on beads were reduced with dithiothreitol (DTT), alkylated with chloroacetamide, and digested with trypsin. This on-beads digestion was adapted from FASP protocol using spin filter column (VIVACON 500 30,000 MWCO cutoff). After overnight digestion at 37 °C, tryptic peptides were collected by centrifugation and acidified with 0.5% TFA. After SpeedVac concentration, tryptic peptides were saved at -20 °C before mass spectrometric analysis.   The peptide mixture was analyzed in positive mode using a nanoAquity UPLC coupled LTQ Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Chromatographic separation used a 2-cm trapping column and a self-packed 25-cm analytical column (75-μm ID, Michrom Magic C18 beads of 5.0-μm particle size, 100-Å pore size). The HPLC flow rate was set to 350 nl/min over a gradient of 1% buffer B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) to 35% buffer B in 200 min. The full mass scan (300 to 2000 m/z) was acquired at a resolution of 60,000 with a maximum injection time of 500 ms, and MS/MS was performed in a data-dependent manner for the top 15 intense ions in the linear ion trap by collision-induced dissociation.

### Data Protocol
All raw data were converted to mzXML format before a search of the resultant spectra with Sorcerer-SEQUEST (build 4.3.0, Sage-N Research) and the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.6.2). Data were searched against the human UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot sequence database (Release 2013_07) supplemented with common contaminants, such as porcine (Swiss-Prot P00761) and bovine (P00760) trypsin, and further concatenated with its reversed copy as a decoy (40,526 total sequences). Search parameters used were a precursor mass between 400 and 4500 atomic mass units (amu), up to 2 missed cleavages, a precursor-ion tolerance of 3 amu, accurate mass binning within PeptideProphet, semi-tryptic digestion, a static carbamidomethyl cysteine modification, and variable methionine oxidation. False discovery rates (FDRs) were determined by ProteinProphet, and minimum protein probability cutoffs resulting in a 1% FDR were selected individually for each experiment.

### Publication Abstract
Defining the full complement of substrates for each ubiquitin ligase remains an important challenge. Improvements in mass spectrometry instrumentation and computation and in protein biochemistry methods have resulted in several new methods for ubiquitin ligase substrate identification. Here we used the parallel adapter capture (PAC) proteomics approach to study &#x3b2;TrCP2/FBXW11, a substrate adaptor for the SKP1-CUL1-F-box (SCF) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex. The processivity of the ubiquitylation reaction necessitates transient physical interactions between FBXW11 and its substrates, thus making biochemical purification of FBXW11-bound substrates difficult. Using the PAC-based approach, we inhibited the proteasome to "trap" ubiquitylated substrates on the SCF(FBXW11) E3 complex. Comparative mass spectrometry analysis of immunopurified FBXW11 protein complexes before and after proteasome inhibition revealed 21 known and 23 putatively novel substrates. In focused studies, we found that SCF(FBXW11) bound, polyubiquitylated, and destabilized RAPGEF2, a guanine nucleotide exchange factor that activates the small GTPase RAP1. High RAPGEF2 protein levels promoted cell-cell fusion and, consequently, multinucleation. Surprisingly, this occurred independently of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) catalytic activity and of the presence of RAP1. Our data establish new functions for RAPGEF2 that may contribute to aneuploidy in cancer. More broadly, this report supports the continued use of substrate trapping proteomics to comprehensively define targets for E3 ubiquitin ligases. All proteomic data are available via ProteomeXchange with identifier PXD001062.

### Keywords
E3 ubiquitin ligase, Fbxw11, Btrc

### Affiliations
Cell Biology and Physiology
Institute for Informatics
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

### Submitter
Dennis Goldfarb

### Lab Head
Dr Michael Ben Major
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.


