### Accession
PXD010421

### Title
The beta-catenin interactome in a vascular smooth muscle cell model

### Description
Canonical Wnt/β-catenin signalling is an essential regulator of various cellular functions throughout development and adulthood. Aberrant Wnt/β-catenin signalling also contributes to various pathologies including cancer, necessitating an understanding of cell context dependent mechanisms regulating this pathway. Since protein-protein interactions underpin β-catenin function and localization, we sought to identify novel β-catenin interacting partners by affinity purification coupled with tandem mass spectrometry in vascular smooth muscle cells (VSMCs), where β-catenin is involved in both physiological and pathological control of cell proliferation. Here, we report novel components of the VSMC β-catenin interactome.

### Sample Protocol
A10 rat aorta vascular smooth muscle cells (ATCC CRL-1476) were grown at 37 degrees Celsius in 5% CO2 in high glucose DMEM with 100 U/mL penicillin, 100 µg/mL streptomycin, 1.5 g/L sodium bicarbonate and 10% (v/v) fetal bovine serum. Cells were harvested after two washes in PBS and immediately lysed in NP-40 lysis buffer (0.5% NP-40 v/v, 50 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.6, 150 mM NaCl, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 2 mM EDTA, 1 mM of Na3VO4, 1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, 1 µg/ml aprotinin, 1 µg/ml pepstatin A).  Lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 21,000 g at 4 degrees Celsius to remove insoluble pellets and the supernatants collected. Cell culture, collection and lysis were performed in quintuplicate. For each immunoprecipitation, 5 µg anti-beta-catenin antibody (Cell Signaling Technology #9562) was immobilized to 50 µL of ImmunoCruz IP/WB Optima F agarose bead substrate (Santa Cruz Biotechnology sc-45043) overnight at 4 degrees Celsius in 500 µL PBS with 0.1% Tween 20 (v/v). For negative controls, beads were incubated with rabbit serum (Sigma Aldrich R9133).  Unbound antibody was washed away with two 500 µL volumes of PBS. Antibody-conjugated beads were incubated with A10 cell lysates on a nutator overnight at 4 degrees Celsius. The beads were washed twice with 500 µL NP-40 lysis buffer and then twice with 500 µL of NP-40 lysis buffer without NP-40. Bound proteins were eluted for LC-MS analysis in 500 µl of 0.5 M ammonium hydroxide on a nutator for 20 minutes at room temperature.  Separate immunoprecipitation columns were used for each sample and parallel pre-immune rabbit serum controls were generated from separate biological replicates of A10 cells. Eluates were dried in a centrifugal concentrator then dissolved in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate and treated with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60 degrees Celsius then 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature in the dark. The alkylated immunoprecipitates were incubated at 37 degrees Celsius overnight with 0.75 µg of trypsin each. Trypsin digests were dried in a centrifugal concentrator, dissolved in aqueous 0.1% (v/v) formic acid and separated on a C18 column (15 cm long, 75 μm internal diameter, 3 μm diameter stationary phase, 120Å pore size) by HPLC over a 60 min 300 nL/min acetonitrile gradient.  The HPLC system consisted of a NanoLC-Ultra 2D pump with a Nanoflex cHiPLC (AB Sciex, Concord ON, Canada).   Mobile phases A and B were 0.1% formic acid (v/v) in water and acetonitrile respectively (Honeywell, Morristown, NJ, USA).  The following mobile phase B concentrations were used: 2% (v/v) at 0 min to 35% at 35 min to 80% from 35.5 to 38.5 min to 2% from 39 to 60 min.  Mass spectra of the HPLC eluate were collected on an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA).  Precursor ion scans were collected on the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000 and the linear ion trap was used for MS/MS.  Tandem mass spectrometry was performed using collision induced dissociation with a normalized collision energy setting of 35, activation Q of 0.250, 2 Da isolation width and a 10 millisecond activation time.  Dynamic precursor ion exclusion with a repeat count of 1 and an exclusion mass width of 10 ppm was applied. A 10 second dynamic exclusion duration and 20 second repeat duration were used.  Between sample runs, three blank runs were acquired using the same method to control analyte carryover.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS data were searched against the UniProt Rattus norvegicus sequence library (September 18, 2013 edition downloaded from the UniProt Knowledge Base on September 26, 2013) with the Sequest algorithm navigated through Proteome Discoverer (Thermo) software version 1.3.  Search settings were as follows: precursor mass range: 350-5000 Da; minimum peak count: 1; enzyme: trypsin; maximum missed cleavages: 1; precursor ion tolerance: 10 ppm, product ion tolerance: 0.4 Da, product ion series considered: b and y; dynamic modifications: methionine oxidation (+15.995 Da), phosphorylation (S, T and Y at +79.966 Da), glutamine deamidation (+0.984 Da) and tryptophan dioxidation (+31.990); static modification:  cysteine carbamidomethylation (+57.021 Da). Cut-off scores at the peptide level were determined by automated false discovery rate estimation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Rat, Interactome, Beta-catenin, Lc-ms/ms, Vascular smooth muscle cell, Aorta

### Affiliations
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
University of Toronto

### Submitter
Declan Williams

### Lab Head
Dr John C. McDermott
Department of Biology, York University, Toronto, Ontario, Canada


