### Accession
PXD014277

### Title
Proteomics of blood sera from Macaca fascicularis in the framework of the development of a vaccine against Lassa virus.

### Description
Next-generation proteomics of blood sera from Macaca fascicularis monkeys immunized with measles-based and Mopeia-based vaccine platforms.

### Sample Protocol
Protein samples were immunodepleted for albumin and immunoglobulins using High Select HAS/Immunoglobulin depletion columns (Thermofisher Scientific), and then loaded on a SDS-PAGE for a short migration, excised from a single polyacrylamide band, digested by trypsin, and the resulting peptides were analyzed by Q-Exactive HF tandem mass spectrometry in data dependent mode.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were assigned to peptide sequences with the MASCOT Daemon 2.3.2 search engine (Matrix Science). Peptide mass tolerance was set at 5 ppm; fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.02 Da, and missed cleavages were allowed until a maximum of 2. Carbamidomethylation of cysteines was searched as a fixed modification. Deamination of Asparagine or Glutamine and oxidation of methionine were set as variable modifications. Peptide-to-spectrum matches were parsed with IRMA and spectral counts were compared with PatternLab.

### Publication Abstract
Lassa fever is a major threat in Western Africa. The large number of people living at risk for this disease calls for the development of a vaccine against Lassa virus (LASV). We generated live-attenuated LASV vaccines based on measles virus and Mopeia virus platforms and expressing different LASV antigens, with the aim to develop a vaccine able to protect after a single shot. We compared the efficacy of these vaccines against LASV in cynomolgus monkeys. The vaccines were well tolerated and protected the animals from LASV infection and disease after a single immunization but with varying efficacy. Analysis of the immune responses showed that complete protection was associated with robust secondary T cell and antibody responses against LASV. Transcriptomic and proteomic analyses showed an early activation of innate immunity and T cell priming after immunization with the most effective vaccines, with changes detectable as early as 2 days after immunization. The most efficacious vaccine candidate, a measles vector simultaneously expressing LASV glycoprotein and nucleoprotein, has been selected for further clinical evaluation.

### Keywords
Virus, Immunization, Serum, Primate, Vaccine, Shotgun proteomics, Blood serum

### Affiliations
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France
Li2D

### Submitter
Jean ARMENGAUD

### Lab Head
Dr Jean Armengaud
CEA-Marcoule, ProGénoMIX platform, DRF-Li2D, 30207 Bagnols-sur-Cèze, France


