### Accession
PXD014373

### Title
Proteomic response of yeast cells to 2-deoxyglucose exposure (0.2%, 2.5h)

### Description
Cancer cells display an altered metabolism with increased glycolysis and glucose uptake. Anti-cancer strategies targeting glycolysis through metabolic inhibitors have been considered. The glucose analog 2-deoxyglucose (2DG) is imported into cells and after phosphorylation becomes 2DG-6-phosphate, a toxic by-product that inhibits glycolysis. 2DG has other cellular effects and can induce resistance. Using yeast as a model, we performed an unbiased, mass-spectrometry-based approach to probe the cellular effects of 2DG on the proteome and study resistance mechanisms. We found that two 2DG-6-phosphate phosphatases, Dog1 and Dog2, were induced upon exposure to 2DG and participated in 2DG detoxication. 2DG induced Dog2 by activating several signaling pathways, such as the MAPK (the p38 ortholog Hog1)-based stress-responsive pathway, the unfolded protein response (UPR) triggered by 2DG-induced ER stress, and the MAPK (Slt2)-based cell wall integrity (CWI) pathway. Thus, 2DG-induced interference with cellular signaling rewired the expression of these endogenous phosphatases to promote 2DG resistance. Consequently, loss of the UPR or CWI pathways led to 2DG hypersensitivity. In contrast, DOG2 was transcriptionally repressed by glucose availability through the inhibition of the Snf1/AMPK pathway, and glucose-repression mutants were 2DG-resistant. The characterization and genome resequencing of spontaneous 2DG-resistant mutants revealed that DOG2 overexpression was a common strategy to achieve 2DG resistance. A human Dog2 homolog, HDHD1, also displays 2DG-6-phosphate phosphatase activity in vitro, and its overexpression conferred 2DG resistance in HeLa cells, suggesting potential interference with chemotherapies involving 2DG.

### Sample Protocol
Samples used for the proteome-wide analysis of 2-deoxyglucose treatments were prepared from six liquid cultures (WT strain, BY4741) growing overnight at 30°C in 100mL of rich medium with 2% glucose to mid-log phase. On the next morning, 2-deoxyglucose was added to three of the cultures to a final concentration of 0.2% in order to obtain triplicates treated with 2-DG and triplicates without drug treatment (negative control). After 2.5 hours of incubation at 30°C, the six cultures were centrifuged at 4000g for 5 minutes at 4°C, resuspended in 500µL of 10% trichloroacetic acid (TCA, Sigma-Aldrich) and lysed by shaking after addition of glass beads (0.4-0.6mm, Sartorius) for 10 minutes at 4°C. Cell lysates were retrieved by piercing under the 1.5mL tubes and brief centrifugation. Precipitated proteins were centrifuged at 16000g for 10 minutes at 4°C, supernatants were discarded and pellets were rinsed 4 times in 1mL of 100% cold acetone. Proteins were then digested overnight at 37°C in 20 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 containing sequencing-grade trypsin (12.5 μg/mL; Promega). The resulting peptides were sequentially extracted with 70% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid. Digested samples were acidified with 0.1% formic acid. All digests were analyzed by an Orbitrap Fusion equipped with an EASY-Spray nanoelectrospray ion source and coupled to an Easy nano-LC Proxeon 1000 system (all from Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA). Chromatographic separation of peptides was performed with the following parameters: Acclaim PepMap100 C18 pre-column (2 cm, 75 μm i.d., 3 μm, 100 Å), Pepmap-RSLC Proxeon C18 column (50 cm, 75 μm i.d., 2 μm, 100 Å), 300 nl/min flow, using a gradient rising from 95 % solvent A (water, 0.1 % formic acid) to 40 % B (80 % acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid) in 120 minutes, followed by a column regeneration of 20 min, for a total run of 140 min. Peptides were analyzed in the orbitrap in full-ion scan mode at a resolution of 120,000 (at m/z 200) and with a mass range of m/z 350-1550, and an AGC target of 2x105. Fragments were obtained by higher-energy C-trap dissociation (HCD) activation with a collisional energy of 30 %, and a quadrupole isolation window of 1.6 Da. MS/MS data were acquired in the linear ion trap in a data-dependent mode, in top-speed mode with a total cycle of 3 seconds, with a dynamic exclusion of 50 seconds and an exclusion duration of 60 seconds. The maximum ion accumulation times were set to 250 ms for MS acquisition and 30 ms for MS/MS acquisition in parallelization mode.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry data from the Thermo Fisher Orbitrap Fusion were analyzed using the MaxQuant software (109) version 1.5.0.7, which includes the Andromeda peptide search engine (110). Theoretical peptides were created using the Saccharomyces cerevisiae S288C proteome database obtained from Uniprot. Identified spectra were matched to peptides with a main search peptide tolerance of 6ppm. After filtering of contaminants and reverse identifications, the total amount of yeast proteins identified among the six samples was equal to 3425. Protein quantifications were performed using MaxLFQ (111) on proteins identified with a minimum amount of two peptides with a False Discovery Rate threshold of 0.05. LFQ values were then analyzed using Perseus (version 1.5.0.15). For the statistical analysis of yeast proteomes treated with 2-dexogylucose compared to negative control samples, each group of triplicates was gathered into a statistical group in order to perform a Student's t-test. Results are presented in the form of Volcano-plots (112) and significant up-regulated and down-regulated candidates were determined by setting an FDR of 0.01 and an S0 of 2.

### Publication Abstract
Anti-cancer strategies that target the glycolytic metabolism of tumors have been proposed. The glucose analog 2-deoxyglucose (2DG) is imported into cells and, after phosphorylation, becomes 2DG-6-phosphate, a toxic by-product that inhibits glycolysis. Using yeast as a model, we performed an unbiased mass spectrometry-based approach to probe the cellular effects of 2DG on the proteome and study resistance mechanisms to 2DG. We found that two phosphatases that target 2DG-6-phosphate were induced upon exposure to 2DG and participated in 2DG detoxification. Dog1 and Dog2 are HAD (haloacid dehalogenase)-like phosphatases, which are evolutionarily conserved. 2DG induced Dog2 by activating several signaling pathways, such as the stress response pathway mediated by the p38 MAPK ortholog Hog1, the unfolded protein response (UPR) triggered by 2DG-induced ER stress, and the cell wall integrity (CWI) pathway mediated by the MAPK Slt2. Loss of the UPR or CWI pathways led to 2DG hypersensitivity. In contrast, mutants impaired in the glucose-mediated repression of genes were 2DG resistant because glucose availability transcriptionally repressed <i>DOG2</i> by inhibiting signaling mediated by the AMPK ortholog Snf1. The characterization and genome resequencing of spontaneous 2DG-resistant mutants revealed that <i>DOG2</i> overexpression was a common strategy underlying 2DG resistance. The human Dog2 homolog HDHD1 displayed phosphatase activity toward 2DG-6-phosphate in vitro and its overexpression conferred 2DG resistance in HeLa cells, suggesting that this 2DG phosphatase could interfere with 2DG-based chemotherapies. These results show that HAD-like phosphatases are evolutionarily conserved regulators of 2DG resistance.

### Keywords
2-deoxyglucose, Saccharomyces cerevisiae

### Affiliations
Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS/Université de Paris, Paris-France
Institut Jacques Monod

### Submitter
Sebastien LEON

### Lab Head
Dr Sebastien LEON
Institut Jacques Monod, CNRS/Université de Paris, Paris-France


