### Accession
PXD031009

### Title
RNA-protein interactome reveals essential roles of RPL5 and RNA helicase A in mediating translation from the Hepatitis E virus internal ribosome entry site-like element

### Description
Multiple processes exist in a cell to ensure continuousproduction of essential proteins either through cap-dependent or cap-independent translation processes. Viruses depend on the host translation machinery for viral protein synthesis. Therefore, viruses have evolved clever strategies to utilize the host translation machinery. Earlier studies have shown that genotype1 hepatitis E virus (g1-HEV) utilizes both cap-dependent and cap-independent translation machineries for its replication and proliferation. Cap-independent translation in g1-HEV is driven by an eighty seven nucleotide-long RNA element which acts as a noncanonical, internal ribosome entry site like (IRESl) element. Here, we have identified the RNA-protein interactome of the HEV IRESl element and characterized the functional significance of some of its components. Our study reveals indispensable roles of host ribosomal proteinRPL5 and DHX9 (RNA helicase A) in mediating efficient translation from the IRESlelement and establish the function of HEV IRESl as a bonafide internal ribosome entry site.

### Sample Protocol
10mg protein for each sample was treated with 10mM DTT (Dithiothreitol), for 30 min at 560C and alkylated with 20mM iodoacetamide (IAA) at room temperature for 1 hour in dark. Trypsin was added to the samples at a 1: 20 (wt/wt) ratio and incubated at 370C for 24 hours. Next, 1% formic acid was added to the samples and desalting of the peptides was done using a Sep-Pak C18 cartridge followed by lyophilization in a SpeedVac. Lyophilized peptides were solubilized in 1ml PBS and incubated with 150μl pre-washed streptavidin agarose beads for 2 hours at ambient temperature. The beads were washed in PBS, followed by washing in wash buffer (5% acetonitrile in PBS) and finally with ultrapure water. Excess liquid was completely removed from beads, and biotinylated peptides were eluted by adding 0.3 ml of a solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 80% acetonitrile in water by boiling at 95ÅãC for 5 min. A total of 10 elutions were collected and dried together in a SpeedVac. Enriched peptides were desalted with C18 tips and reconstituted with solvent A (2%, v/v, acetonitrile, 0.1% v/v, formic 1148 acid in water) for LC1149 MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
A Sciex 5600+ triple time of flight (TOF) mass spectrometer was used for LC-MS/MS analysis. It was coupled with a chromXP reversed-phase 3-µm C18-CL trap column (350 μm  by  0.5  mm, 120 Å; Eksigent; AB Sciex, MA, USA) and a nanoViper C18 separation column (75 μm  by  250 mm, 3 μm, 100 Å; Acclaim PepMap; Thermo Fisher Scientific, MA, USA) in an Eksigent nanoLC (ultra 2D plus) system. A binary mobile solvent system was applied, with the following composition: solvent C, 2% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid in water; solvent B, 98% (v/v) acetonitrile, 0.1% (v/v) formic acid. To separate the peptides, a 60 minutes gradient was run with a total run time of 90 minutes at a flow rate of 200 nl/minute and MS data was acquired in information dependent-acquisition (IDA) with high sensitivity mode. Each cycle was run for 2.3 seconds with 250- and 100-ms acquisition times for MS1 (m/z 350 to 1,250 Da) and MS/MS (100 to 1,800 m/z) scans, respectively. Every experimental condition was run in quadruplets.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Hepatitis e virus;cap-independent translation; rna-protein interaction; virus-host interaction;internal ribosome entry site, Hev orf4.

### Affiliations
Translational of health science and technology institute, India.
Molecular virology, THSTI, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India

### Submitter
MIlan  Surjit

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Milan Surjit
Molecular virology, THSTI, NCR Biotech Science Cluster, Faridabad, India


