### Accession
PXD001343

### Title
Characterization of the gila monster (Heloderma suspectum suspectum) venom proteome

### Description
The archetypical venomous lizard species are the helodermatids, the Gila Monster (Heloderma suspectum) and the Beaded Lizards (Heloderma horridum). In the present study, the gila monster venom proteome was characterized using 2D-gel electrophoresis and tandem mass spectrometry-based de novo peptide sequencing followed by protein identification based on sequence homology. A total of 39 different proteins were identified out of the 58 selected spots that represent the major constituents of venom. Of these proteins, 19 have not previously been identified in helodermatid venom. The data showed that helodermatid venom is complex and that this complexity is caused by genetic isoforms and post-translational modifications including proteolytic processing. In addition, the venom proteome analysis revealed that the major constituents of the gila monster venom are kallikrein-like serine proteinases (EC 3.4.21) and phospholipase A2 (type III) enzymes (EC 3.1.1.4). A neuroendocrine convertase 1 homolog that most likely converts the proforms of the previously identified bioactive exendins into the mature and active forms was identified suggesting that these peptide toxins are secreted as proforms that are activated by proteolytic cleavage following secretion as opposed to being activated intracellularly. The presented global protein identification-analysis provides the first overview of the helodermatid venom composition.

### Sample Protocol
Captive reticulated gila monsters (Heloderma suspectum suspectum), banded gila monster (Heloderma suspectum cinctum), Rio Fuerte beaded lizard (Heloderma exasperatum), and Mexican beaded lizard (Heloderma horridum) were housed in vivariums by a Danish breeder and used for venom milking. The animals were fed rodents or chickens once every 7-14 day and fresh water was always available. The lizards, all males, were enticed to bite repeatedly on soft rubber tubing; the venom glands were then gently massaged to facilitate the release of venom that subsequently was pipetted directly from the mouth. Venom samples contaminated with blood were discarded. After collection, a freshly prepared protease inhibitor cocktail was added to a final concentration of 5 mM ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 0.1 mM 1,10-Phenanthroline, 1 mM phenylmethanesulfonylfluoride (PMSF), and 0.02 mM trans-epoxysuccinyl-L-leucylamido-(4-guanidino)butane (E-64). The samples were placed on dry ice after addition of protease inhibitors and later moved to a -80 °C freezer for storage.   Aliquots of 30 μl venom from each of the four lizard species were clarified by centrifugation before the proteins in the supernatant were recovered by ethanol precipitation. The pellet was dissolved in 60 μl Tris-buffered saline. Then 1 μl from each sample was mixed with sample-buffer containing dithiothreitol (DTT), boiled, and analysed by sodium dodecyl sulphate-polyacrylamide gel-electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) using 5-15% gradient gels. Subsequently, the resolved proteins were stained using Coomassie Brilliant Blue [32]. For the 2D-gel analyses approximately 100 μL of reticulate gila monster (Heloderma suspectum suspectum) venom from one individual was centrifuged and subsequently the proteins in the supernatant was precipitated using a 2-D Clean up kit (GE Healthcare). The resulting pellets were redissolved in a 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.5 buffer containing 7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 10 mM dithiothreitol, 4% CHAPS, and 0.5% IPG buffer. The protein concentration was determined (2-D Quant kit) and the samples were loaded on Immobiline DryStrip Gels pH 3-10 or 4-7 and allowed to rehydrate before isoelectric focusing was performed using an Ettan IPGphor II (GE Healthcare) at 25°C using the following program: 5 min at 200 V followed by a 90 min linear gradient from 200 V to 3500 V and finally 90 min at 3500 V. After the isoelectric focusing the proteins in the strip were reduced by DTT (10 mg/ml) in 6 M Urea, 30% glycerol, 2% SDS in 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.8 (equilibration buffer). The Immobiline DryStrip gel was incubated in the reducing buffer for 15 min at 25°C, followed by 15 min in the same buffer, but with iodoacetamide (18.5 mg/ml), instead of DTT, to alkylate the proteins. Subsequently, the Immobiline DryStrip was positioned on top of a 12.5% SDS polyacrylamide gel and the second dimension of the electrophoresis was conducted. Following SDS-PAGE, the gel-spots were revealed by the Coomassie Brilliant Blue-staining and excised from the 2D-gels. Different amounts of venom proteins were loaded on the 2D-gels to secure proper separation of the high-abundant proteins in certain gels, and to assure that gels, where the 2D-gel spots of the less abundant venom proteins contain enough material to facilitate protein identification in the subsequent analyses, were also available. All gel-spots were subjected to in-gel trypsin treatment, essential as described [33]. Afterwards, the resulting tryptic peptides were micropurified using C18-StageTips, and stored at -20°C.   Nano liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)-analyses were performed using a nano flow HPLC system (Thermo Scientific, EASY-nLC II) connected directly to the mass spectrometer (AB Sciex TripleTOF 5600+) equipped with a NanoSpray III source (AB Sciex) and operated under Analyst TF 1.6.0 control. The samples were injected, trapped and desalted isocratically on a precolumn (Biosphere C18, ID 100 µm x 2 cm, 5 µm, 120 Å, NanoSeparation, Nieuwkoop, Netherlands) whereupon the peptides were eluted and separated on a 15 cm analytical column (75 μm i.d.), pulled in-house (P2000 laser puller, Sutter Instrument Co.) and packed with ReproSil-Pur C18-AQ 3 μm resin (Dr. Marisch GmbH, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany). Peptides were eluted from the analytical column at a flow rate of 250 nl/min using a 50 min gradient from 5% to 35% B (0.1% formic acid, 90% acetonitrile). The samples were run multiple times at different concentrations to assure that the optimal amount of the samples were loaded.  The LC-MS/MS runs that did not initially result in protein identification (see next paragraph), were re-analysed, the data merged, and the merged file used for the PEAKS-depended protein identification, as described below. The mass spectrometry data have been deposited to the ProteomeXchange Consortium[34] via the PRIDE partner repository with the dataset identifier PXD001343.

### Data Protocol
Protein Identification Sauropsida (birds, crocodiles, lizards, snakes, and turtles) protein sequences were extracted from the Swiss-Prot database version 2014_06 (5.913 sequences) and 890.360 Sauropsida protein sequences were extracted from NCBI on June 11, 2014. The two sets of sequences were merged into a single Sauropsida protein database containing a total of 896.273 sequences. The collected MS files were converted to Mascot generic format (MGF) using the AB SCIEX MS Data Converter beta 1.3 (AB SCIEX) and the "ProteinPilot MGF" parameters. Finally, the peak lists were used to interrogate the in-house constructed Sauropsida protein database. For these analyses PEAKS Studio 7.0 was employed using trypsin as the enzyme with one missed cleavage allowed. Carbamidomethyl was entered as a fixed modification and PEAKS’ PTM algorithm was applied to identify variable modifications [29]. The mass accuracy of the precursor and product ions was set to 10 ppm and 0.2 Da, respectively, the instrument was specified as an AB Sciex TripleTOF and fragmentation method as collision-induced dissociation. PEAKS was used to perform de novo sequencing[31], database searches [31], PTM analyses [29], and the finally homology searches were performed using the SPIDER algorithm [35]. The SPIDER algorithm allows the matching of de novo-obtained amino acid sequences with homologous protein sequences in the database [30]. After the PEAKS analyses the resulting list of proteins were filtered using a peptide false discovery rate 0.1% and only proteins identified with a minimum of 3 peptides are reported. All protein identifications, inclusive PTMs, supporting peptides, and spectral counts, are available online in the PRIDE archive (PXD001343).   De novo-sequencing-based reconstruction of three gila monster venom protein sequences The procedure described above failed to identify the proteins in samples 19, 21, and 54. By changing the parameters in PEAKS to allow de novo amino acid sequence tags, spot 54 was identified as phospholipase A2 (type III), but with a low score, inconsistent with the staining intensity of the 2D-gel spot. For spot 19 and 21 the de novo amino acid sequences with average local confidence scores above 90% were extracted from PEAKS, and searched against the sequence database nrdb95 using MS-BLAST and standard settings. This software is similar to the SPIDER function in PEAKS and was developed to identify homologous proteins using sequences obtained by mass spectrometry-based de novo amino acid sequencing [36]. The MS-BLAST analyses of the two sets of amino acid sequences identified kallikrein-like toxin sequences originating from other lizard species. A total of 33 sequences were extracted from the NCBInr database using the combined search criteria “toxin and lizard and kallikrein”. The PEAKS’ SPIDER function was then subsequently able to use the LC-MS/MS data from the two samples to interrogate these 33 extracted protein sequences. The highest scoring kallikrein-like toxin homologues from each of the SPIDER searches were finally used to reconstruct and approximate the protein sequences of the corresponding gila monster homologous. The same procedure was used on the identified phospholipase A2 (type III) protein from spot 54 (see also the accompanying Data in Brief article [37]). In order to approximate the sequences of the gila monster proteins present in the these three spots, the PEAKS-generated de novo amino acid sequences with average local confidence scores above 90% were initially extracted and only individual amino acid residues with a total local confidence score of minimum 90% was accepted. The extracted de novo amino acid sequences were subsequently manually filtered: Peptides, which were not identified with a minimum of 4 spectral counts, and peptides, which did not include a sequence of minimum of 5 consecutive residues, were removed. Afterwards, the remaining amino acid sequences were merged if they had an overlapping stretch of at least 4 identical amino acid residues. If disagreements existed in the sequences to be combined, the consensus sequence was derived from the sequence with the highest number of spectral counts. The lists of peptides were then aligned with the template sequences (the two kallikrein-like proteases and the type III phospholipase A2, respectively), and if the peptides aligned (defined by minimum 4 identical residues) with the homologous protein, the sequence of the homologous protein was changed according to the peptides’ amino acid sequences. Subsequently, PEAKS’ SPIDER function was applied to search the LC-MS/MS data against the new optimized sequences with the same search and filtering criteria as described above. Confident mutations, suggested by SPIDER, were subsequently included in the modified sequences. Finally, the resulting three protein sequences were included in the sauropsida sequence database, and the three samples were reanalysed using PEAKS.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Reptiles, Protein identification, Venomics, 2d-gel electrophoresis, Lc-ms/ms; de novo sequencing

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics
iNANO and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark

### Submitter
Thomas F. Dyrlund

### Lab Head
Dr Jan Johannes Enghild
iNANO and Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Aarhus University, Denmark


