### Accession
PXD020585

### Title
human breast cancer cell line LC-MS/MS

### Description
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive type with poor prognosis among the breast cancers and has a high population of cancer stem cells (CSCs) which are main target to cure and inhibit TNBC. In this study, we analyzed the CSC-related proteome alteration by NEDD4 knockdown in CSC-abundant MDA-MB-231 cells by LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Sample Protocol
To prepare tryptic peptides for LC-MS/MS analysis, FASP was performed according to the previously report in siCONT and siNEDD4-treated MDA-MB-231, respectively. Briefly, cells were lysed by SDT-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl (pH7.6), 0.1M DTT). And then, total 250 μg of proteins extracted by urea buffer (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) were alkylated and digested by trypsin in FASP filters on the shaking incubator at 250rpm overnight at 37 °C. Digests were dried by centrifugation under vacuum. For quantitative comparison, TMT 6-plex labeling were performed with 80 μg of tryptic peptides according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Data Protocol
To prepare tryptic peptides for LC-MS/MS analysis, FASP was performed according to the previously report in siCONT and siNEDD4-treated MDA-MB-231, respectively. Briefly, cells were lysed by SDT-lysis buffer (4% SDS, 100mM Tris-HCl (pH7.6), 0.1M DTT). And then, total 250 μg of proteins extracted by urea buffer (8M urea in 0.1M Tris-HCl (pH 8.5)) were alkylated and digested by trypsin in FASP filters on the shaking incubator at 250rpm overnight at 37 °C. Digests were dried by centrifugation under vacuum. For quantitative comparison, TMT 6-plex labeling were performed with 80 μg of tryptic peptides according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Thermofisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA).

### Publication Abstract
Triple-negative breast cancer (TNBC) is the most aggressive type with poor prognosis among the breast cancers and has a high population of cancer stem cells (CSCs), which are the main target to cure and inhibit TNBC. In this study, we examined the role of neural precursor cell expressed developmentally downregulated protein 4 (NEDD4) in the proliferation, migration, and CSC characteristics of MDA-MB-231, a TNBC cell line. Interestingly, the Kaplan-Meier plotter showed that the survival rate of patients with a higher expression level of NEDD4 was significantly shorter than those of patients with a lower expression only in relatively aggressive and higher stage (grade 3) breast cancer patients. The knockdown of NEDD4 drastically decreased the proliferation, migration, and mammosphere formation in MDA-MB-231 cells. A proteomic analysis revealed the alteration of CSC-related proteins; notably, Myc targets stem cell-like signatures in siNEDD4-treated MDA-MB-231. An immunoassay also showed that the expression and the activity of breast CSC markers are decreased in NEDD4-deleted MDA-MB-231. Taken together, these results indicate that NEDD4 is involved in the maintenance of populations and characteristics of breast CSCs.

### Keywords
Nedd4, Hhuman, Breast cancer, Mda-mb-231

### Affiliations
Seoul national university
Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University  Seoul, South Korea.

### Submitter
Seon-Ae Jeon

### Lab Head
Dr Je-Yoel Cho
Department of Veterinary Biochemistry, College of Veterinary Medicine, Seoul National University  Seoul, South Korea.


