### Accession
PXD031318

### Title
Changes in saliva associated to COVID-19: a proteomic study

### Description
The objective of this report was to perform a proteomic study of the saliva of SARS-CoV-2 patients.

### Sample Protocol
This case-control study consisted of two different groups: (1) COVID group, composed of ten confirmed positive COVID-19 cases, including five men (aged between 35 and 64 years old) with mild infection (no need for oxygen supplementation or conventional oxygen therapy) and five men (aged between 21 and 67 years old) with severe infection (requiring nasal flow oxygen or assisted respiration); and (2) control group, based on ten healthy men (aged between 28 and 55 years old) who did not show any sign of disease for at least four weeks, and tested negative for COVID-19 in RT-PCR.  Saliva samples were taken under supervision using the drainage technique in 5 mL polystyrene tubes with a collection time of 5 min. The samples were collected at about the same time in all subjects (8:00–11:00 a.m.). Immediately after collection, samples were placed in coolers and transported to the laboratory, where saliva was vortexed and centrifuged (3000× g for 10 min at 4 ◦C), and the supernatant was transferred into polypropylene tubes and refrigerated until the inactivation procedure.  From each sample, 35 µg of acetone-precipitated proteins were subjected to reduction, alkylation, and digestion and were labeled using 10-plex TMT reagents (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) according to manufacturer instructions (Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Total protein concentration of salivary samples was determined using BCA assay (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA). A pooled sample, generated by mixing equal protein amounts of all 20 samples, was used as an internal standard in all TMT 10-plex experiments. In short, 35 µg of the samples and internal standards were reduced with 200 mM DTT (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), alkylated with 375 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA), and precipitated with ice-cold acetone (VWR, Radnor, PA, USA) overnight. The samples were then centrifuged, and acetone was decanted. The pellets were resuspended with 50 µL of 100 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, USA) and digested with trypsin (Promega) overnight at 37 ◦C (2.5 µg of trypsin per 100 µg of protein). TMT 10-plex reagents were equilibrated at room temperature, resuspended in anhydrous acetonitrile (LC-MS grade, Thermo Scientific, USA), and added to each sample. The labeling reaction was incubated for one hour at room temperature and then quenched by adding 5% hydroxylamine (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA ) for 15 min. The samples were then combined at equal amounts, and 5 µg of each mixed sample set was stored at −80 ◦C before further LC-MS/MS analysis.  The LC-MS/MS analysis was performed by using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano flow system (Dionex, Germering, Germany)) coupled to a Q Exactive Plus mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). peptides were dissolved in loading solvent (1% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) and loaded onto the trap column (C18 PepMap100, 5 μm, 100A, 300 μm×5 mm), desalted for 12 min at the flow rate of 15 μL/min and separated on the analytical column (PepMap™ RSLC C18, 50 cm×75 μm) using a linear gradient of 5–45% mobile phase B (0.1% formic acid in 80% ACN) over 120 min, 45% to 90% for 2 min, held at 80% for 2 min and re-equilibrated at 5% B for 20 min at the flow rate of 300 nL/min. Mobile phase A consisted of 0.1% formic acid in water. Ionisation was achieved using nanospray Flex ion source (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) containing a 10 μm-inner diameter SilicaTip emitter (New Objective, Woburn, MA, USA). The MS operated in positive ion mode using DDA Top8 method. Full scan MS spectra were acquired in range from m/z 350.0 to m/z 1800.0 with a resolution of 70,000, 110 ms injection time, AGC target 1×10E6, a ± 2.0 Da isolation window and the dynamic exclusion 30 s. HCD fragmentation was performed at step collision energy (29% and 35% NCE) with a resolution of 17,500 and AGC target of 2×10E5. Precursor ions with unassigned charge state, as well as charge states of +1 and more than +7 were excluded from fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
For protein identification, a database search against Homo sapiens FASTA files (downloaded from Uniprot database on April 30th, 2019, 262540 sequences)was performed in Proteome Discoverer (version 2.3., ThermoFisher Scientific). Following parameters were applied: two trypsin missed cleavage sites, precursor and fragment mass tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively; carbamidomethyl (C) fixed peptide modification, oxidation (M), and TMT 10-plex (K, peptide N-terminus) dynamic modifications. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide identification was calculated using the Percolator algorithm in the Proteome Discoverer workflow according to the search results against a decoy database and was set at 1% FDR. For reporting confidently identified proteins, at least two unique peptides and 5% FDR were required. On the other hand, protein quantification was analyzed by correlating the relative intensities of reporter ions extracted from the tandem mass spectrum to that of the peptides selected for MS/MS fragmentation. For comparison relative quantification results between the experiments, the internal standard was used.

### Publication Abstract
The coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19), caused by the severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV 2), is usually associated with a wide variety of clinical presentations from asymptomatic to severe cases. The use of saliva as a diagnostic and monitoring fluid has gained importance since it can be used to investigate the immune response and to direct quantification of antibodies against COVID-19. Additionally, the use of proteomics in saliva has allowed&#xa0;to increase&#xa0; our understanding of the underlying pathophysiology of diseases, bringing new&#xa0;perspectives on diagnostics, monitoring, and treatment. In this work, we compared the salivary proteome of 10 patients with COVID-19, (five patients with mild and five patients with severe COVID-19) and ten control healthy patients. Through the application of proteomics, we have identified 30 proteins whose abundance levels differed between the COVID-19 groups and the control group. Two of these proteins (TGM3 and carbonic anhydrase-CA6) were validated by the measurement of gGT and TEA respectively, in 98 additional saliva samples separated into two groups: (1) COVID-19 group, integrated by 66 patients who tested positive for COVID-19 (2) control group, composed of 32 healthy individuals who did not show any sign of disease for at least four weeks and were negative for COVID-19 in RT-PCR. In the proteomic study there were observed upregulations in CAZA1, ACTN4, and ANXA4, which are proteins related to the protective response against the virus disturbance, and the upregulation of TGM3, that is correlated to the oxidative damage in pulmonary tissue. We also showed the downregulation in cystatins and CA6 that can be involved in the sensory response to stimulus and possibly related to the presence of anosmia and dysgeusia during the COVID-19. Additionally, the presence of FGB in patients with severe COVID-19 but not in mild COVID-19 patients could indicate a higher viral aggregation and activation in these cases. In conclusion, the salivary proteome in patients with COVID-19 showed changes in proteins related to the protective response to viral infection, and the altered sensory taste perception that occur during the disease. Moreover, gGT and TEA could be potential biomarkers of respiratory complications that can occurs during COVID 19 although further larger studies should be made to corroborate this.

### Keywords
Human; saliva; tandem mass tag; covid

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Proteomics, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb

### Submitter
Josipa Kuleš

### Lab Head
Dr Vladimir Mrljak
Laboratory of Proteomics, Internal Diseases Clinic, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Zagreb, Zagreb, Croatia


