### Accession
PXD004003

### Title
Determination of the interactome of Non-Structural Protein12 from Highly Pathogenic Porcine Reproductive and Respiratory Syndrome Virus with Host Cellular Proteins UsingHigh Throughput Proteomics and Identification of Hsp70 as a Critical Cellular Factor for Virus Biology

### Description
Porcine reproductive and respiratory syndrome virus (PRRSV) has caused tremendous economic losses and continues to be a serious problem to the swine industry worldwide. Although extensive research has been focused on PRRSV, the structure and function of some viral proteins like nonstructural protein12 (NSP12), which may play important roles in viral replication and production, still remain unknown. In order to better understand the function of NSP12, we investigated the interaction of NSP12 with cellular proteins using quantitative proteomics coupled with an immune-precipitation strategy based on the over expression of an NSP12-EGFP fusion protein in 293T cells. Data analysis identified 112 cellular proteins interacted with NSP12-EGFP with high probability. The majority of those proteinsare nucleic acid binding proteins or chaperones, which are involved in RNA post-transcriptional modification, protein synthesis and cellular assembly and organization.Among them, cellular chaperon Hsp70 was verified to interact with PRRSV NSP12 protein, and inhibition of HSP70 significantly reduced the viral mRNA synthesis and virus replication. Our data suggested that NSP12 could recruit cellular proteins such as HSP70 to maintain its own stability and benefit for the virus replication.

### Sample Protocol
IP sample preparation for proteomics Sample volume was normalised to 160 μl with 25mM ammonium bicarbonate. Rapigest (Waters) was then added to the samples (final concentration 0.05 % w/v) prior to heating at 80⁰C for 10 minutes. Samples were then reduced with 3 mM (final) dithiothreitol (Sigma) at 60⁰C for 10 minutes then alkylated with 9 mM (final) iodoacetimde (Sigma) at room temperature for 30 minutes in the dark. Proteomic grade trypsin (Sigma) was added at a protein: trypsin ratio of 50:1 and samples were incubated at 37⁰C overnight. Rapigest (Waters) was then removed by adding trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) to a final concentration of 1% (v/v) and incubating at 37⁰C for 2 hours. Peptide samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 60 min (4⁰C) to remove precipitated Rapigest. Each sample was concentrated and desalted using C18 Stage tips (Thermo scientific), then dried down using a centrifugal vacuum concentrator (Jouan) and resuspended in a 0.1% (v/v) TFA, 3% (v/v) acetonitrile solution. Nano-C MS ESI MS/MS analysis Peptide mixtures (2µl) were analysed by on-line nanoflow liquid chromatography using the nanoACQUITY-nLC system (Waters MS technologies, Manchester, UK) coupled to an LTQ-OrbitrapVelos (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) mass spectrometer equipped with the manufacturer’s nanospray ion source. The analytical column (nanoACQUITY UPLCTM BEH130 C18 15cm x 75µm, 1.7µm capillary column) was maintained at 35⁰C and a flow-rate of 300nl/min. The gradient consisted of 3-40% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 30min then a ramp of 40-85% acetonitrile in 0.1% formic acid for 3 min. Full scan MS spectra (m/z range 300-2000) were acquired by the Orbitrap at a resolution of 30,000. Analysis was performed in data dependant mode. The top 20 most intense ions from MS1 scan (full MS) were selected for tandem MS by collision induced dissociation (CID) and all product spectra were acquired in the LTQ ion trap.

### Data Protocol
Thermo RAW files were imported into Progenesis LC–MS (version 4.1, Nonlinear Dynamics). Runs were time aligned using default settings and using an auto selected run as reference. Peaks were picked by the software and filtered to include only peaks with a charge state between +2 and +6. Peptide intensities were normalised against the reference run by progenesis LC-MS and these intensities were used to highlight differences in the protein expression between control and treated samples with supporting statistical analysis (ANOVA p-values) calculated by the Progenesis LC-MS software. Spectral data were transformed to .mgf files with Progenesis LC–MS and exported for peptide identification using the Mascot (version 2.3.02, Matrix Science) search engine. Tandem MS data were searched against the Human predicted proteomes (Uniprot release 2014_02) and PRRSV Strain TA-12 (Genbank accession HQ416720). Mascot search parameters were as follows; precursor mass tolerance set to 10ppm and fragment mass tolerance set to 0.5 Da. One missed tryptic cleavage was permitted. Carbamidomethylation (cysteine) was set as a fixed modification and oxidation (methionine) set as a variable modification. Mascot search results were further processed using the machine learning algorithm Percolator. The false discovery rate was < 1%. Individual ion scores > 13 indicated identity or extensive homology (p < 0.05). Mascot results were imported into Progenesis LC–MS as .xml files[18, 19].

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Inhibitor study, Hsp70, Interactome, Hp-prrsv, Label free proteomics, Nsp12

### Affiliations
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,
Infection Biology

### Submitter
Stuart Armstrong

### Lab Head
Dr Julian Hiscox
Department of Infection Biology, Institute of Infection and Global Health, University of Liverpool,


