### Accession
PXD006817

### Title
Compartmentalization of HP1 proteins in pluripotency acquisition and maintenance

### Description
Embryonic stem cells (ESCs) have a hyperdynamic chromatin structure characterized by fewer discrete foci of heterochromatin protein 1 family of proteins (HP1) compared to somatic cells. During reprogramming of somatic cells, depletion of HP1γ early, reduced, while depletion later, enhanced the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs); concomitant with a change from a centromeric to nucleoplasmic localization. To identify the interactome of HP1γ in different biochemical environment in ESCs, we compared protein complexes of HP1γ at 0.42M salt (Dignam et al, 1983), with micrococcal nuclease (MCN) digestion with 0.3M NaCl, and MCN with 0.5M NaCl. To understand the effectors of the change in localization, we isolated protein complexes containing HP1γ in ESCs and compared the profile to that in partially reprogrammed intermediates called pre-iPSCs. Given the differential distribution of the HP1 family in ESCs, we also compared the protein interactome of HP1γ in ESCs with that of HP1α and HP1β. In addition, we probed histone associations of HP1γ in ESCs further by querying the histone post-translational modifications that were detectable. The HP1 proteins themselves are decorated with multiple PTMs, several of which we have found to be novel. Taken together our results reveal the complex contribution of the HP1 proteins to pluripotency.

### Sample Protocol
MEF-depleted ESCs or pre-iPSC were MEF-depleted, harvested by trypsin, and washed twice with PBS. Cell pellets were dounce homogenized in Buffer A; (10mM HEPES pH7.9, 1.5mM MgCl2, 10mM KCl, 1mM DTT, phosphatase inhibitor and protease inhibitor cocktail, EDTA-free (Roche)) and nuclear pellet obtained by centrifuging at 2800g for 10 min. For salt extraction, nuclear pellet was dounce homogenized in Buffer C (0.42M KCl, 20mM HEPES pH7.9, 0.2mM EDTA pH 8.0, 5% glycerol, 1mM DTT, phosphatase and protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche)) and extracted for 1hour followed by centrifuging at 13000g for 30 mins. For MCN+salt extraction, nuclear pellet was resuspended in Micrococcal Nuclease digestion buffer (MCN; 50mM Tris pH 7.6, 1mM CaCl2, 0.2% Triton-X-100, phosphatase inhibitor and protease inhibitor cocktail, EDTA-free (Roche)) and treated with 20 units S7 Micrococcal Nuclease (Roche) for each 1x105 cells for 10 min at 37°C, shaking and stopped with 50mM EDTA. NaCl to appropriate levels were added and incubated at 4°C for 1hr before centrifuging at 13000g for 30 mins to isolate soluble nuclear extracts. 20mg of nuclear extract was incubated with 150μl of FLAG-M2 agarose beads (Sigma, 50% slurry) that had been equilibrated in nuclear extract buffer for 2 hours at 4°C, the beads were washed three times with MCN buffer with 0.3M NaCl, followed by washing twice with the same buffer but without Triton-X-100. Bead-bound complexes were eluted by two 30 min incubations with 150 ng/μl 3X FlAG peptide (Sigma) in MCN buffer without Triton-X-100. Eluted protein complexes were TCA-precipitated, in-solution digested with Trypsin(Wisniewski et al., 2009) and injected on an Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos, ThermoFisher Scientific). Flag IP-MS were done in three biological replicates for pre-iPSC Flag-HP1γ, and two biological replicates for ESC Flag-HP1γ, Flag-HP1α and Flag-HP1β.  Samples were analyzed in duplicate (two technical replicates for each biological replicate) by HPLC-ESI-MS/MS using a system consisting of a high performance liquid chromatograph (nanoAcquity, Waters) connected to an electrospray ionization (ESI) Orbitrap mass spectrometer (LTQ Velos, ThermoFisher Scientific).  HPLC separation employed a 100 x 365 m fused silica capillary micro-column packed with 20 cm of 1.7m-diameter, 130 Angstrom pore size, C18 beads (Waters BEH), with an emitter tip pulled to approximately 1 m using a laser puller (Sutter instruments).  Peptides were loaded on-column at a flow-rate of 400nL/minute for 30 minutes and then eluted over 120 min at a flow-rate of 300 nl/minute with a gradient of 2% to 30% acetonitrile, in 0.1% formic acid.  Full-mass profile scans were performed in the FT orbitrap between 300-1500 m/z at a resolution of 60,000, followed by ten MS/MS HCD scans of the ten highest intensity parent ions at 42% relative collision energy and 7,500 resolution, with a mass range starting at 100 m/z.  Dynamic exclusion was enabled with a repeat count of two over the duration of 30 seconds and an exclusion window of 120 seconds.

### Data Protocol
(Cox et al., 2014; Cox and Mann, 2008) version 1.5.6.5 and searched against the reviewed Mus musculus Swiss-Prot proteome database. The following parameters were used: Trypsin/P digest enzyme with strict Trypsin specificity; Fixed Mod: carbamidomethylation; Variable Mod: Oxidation of Methionine; Fragment ion mass tolerances 20 ppm; Precursor mass tolerances 4.5 ppm; Peptide FDR 1%; Protein FDR 1%. To calculate protein intensities across samples, the options ‘Match between runs’, and label-free quantification (LFQ) were selected to obtain MaxLFQ.  For the G-PTM-D strategy, an initial search was performed on Morpheus version 255 with precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerance of 0.01 Da. The results were run through software to perform mass calibration (currently integrated into the software MetaMorpheus https://github.com/smith-chem-wisc/MetaMorpheus). An open-mass-search was utliziated with precursor mass tolerance of 100 Da, and a Perl script was utilized to add mass differences corresponding to post-translational modifications to the database (also currently integrated into MetaMorpheus software). A final search was performed using a precursor mass tolerance of 10 ppm and product mass tolerance of 0.01 Da.

### Publication Abstract
The heterochromatin protein 1 (HP1) family is involved in various functions with maintenance of chromatin structure. During murine somatic cell reprogramming, we find that early depletion of HP1&#x3b3; reduces the generation of induced pluripotent stem cells, while late depletion enhances the process, with a concomitant change from a centromeric to nucleoplasmic localization and elongation-associated histone H3.3 enrichment. Depletion of heterochromatin anchoring protein SENP7 increased reprogramming efficiency to a similar extent as HP1&#x3b3;, indicating the importance of HP1&#x3b3; release from chromatin for pluripotency acquisition. HP1&#x3b3; interacted with OCT4 and DPPA4 in HP1&#x3b1; and HP1&#x3b2; knockouts and in H3K9 methylation depleted H3K9M embryonic stem cell (ESC) lines. HP1&#x3b1; and HP1&#x3b3; complexes in ESCs differed in association with histones, the histone chaperone CAF1 complex, and specific components of chromatin-modifying complexes such as DPY30, implying distinct functional contributions. Taken together, our results reveal the complex contribution of the HP1 proteins to pluripotency.

### Keywords
Esc, Ipsc, Hp1, Pluripotency

### Affiliations
Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison
UW-Madison

### Submitter
Leah Schaffer

### Lab Head
Dr Rupa Sridharan
Cell and Regenerative Biology, University of Wisconsin-Madison


