### Accession
PXD014284

### Title
QUANTITATIVE SUBCELLULAR PROTEOMICS OF THE ORBITOFRONTAL CORTEX OF SCHIZOPHRENIA PATIENTS

### Description
We analyzed orbitofrontal cortex post-mortem brain tissue from patients. We generated an organellar proteome map from different subcellular fractions such as mitochondria (MIT), crude nuclear fraction (NUC) and cytoplasm (CYT) with the aim to monitor the subproteome changes using iTRAQ labelling for relative quantification and Selected Reaction Monitoring (SRM) for targeted quantification.

### Sample Protocol
Enzymatic digestion for iTRAQ labeling experiment used 10 µg of protein from MIT (n=6), 25 µg of NUC (n=12), 50 µg of CYT (n=11) and control pool (20 µg MIT, 100 µg NUC, and 200 µg CYT, all with n=8). The samples were reduced with 5 mM TCEP for 1 hour at 30 oC, alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide for 30 minutes at room temperature followed by dilution (1:10) with 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) pH 8 and digestion with trypsin (1:50) for 18 hours at 35 o C. The samples were cleaning in C18 MacroSpin Columns (Harvard Apparatus) The peptides were dried in Speed Vac and resuspended in 30 µl of TEAB 20 mM for Qubit® assay quantification. For SRM experiments were digested 8 µg of proteins from all subcellular fractions (MIT n=12, NUC n=8, and CYT n=12) and 8 µg of control pool (n=8 for MIT, NUC, and CYT) following the procedure above. Labeled peptides were fractionated by SCX chromatography (MacroSpin Columns - Harvard Apparatus) the samples were completed to a final volume of 100 µl with a solution of KH2PO4 5 mM / ACN 25% pH 3.  Peptides were eluted by one step with 500 mM KCl for MIT and NUC fractions and 75, 150, 250 and 500 mM KCl for CYT fraction. Samples were desalted in C18 MacroSpin columns (Harvard apparatus).

### Data Protocol
Raw data was analyzed using Proteome Discoverer 2.1 software against the human database from UniProt using a target-decoy strategy (maximum delta CN of 0.05 and 0.01 target false discovery rate (FDR)). The search space was full-tryptic considering two missed cleavages for trypsin. The precursor mass tolerance and fragment mass tolerance were 10 ppm and 0.1 Da respectively. As fixed modification was included the carbamidomethylation of cysteine. Methionine oxidation, protein N-terminal acetylation and iTRAQ modifications (K, Y, and N-terminal) were considered as dynamic modifications. The peptide filter was set up for high confidence counting only peptides rank 1 with a minimum length of 6 amino acids. The confidence threshold in FDR protein validator was 0.01, grouping the proteins by maximum parsimony.   iTRAQ quantification was made with unique peptide using patients’ value as nominator and pool of controls as the denominator for fold-change calculation. Additional filters as a correction for the impurity reporter and a filter to do not report quantitative values for a single-peak in the precursor isotope pattern were applied.

### Publication Abstract
Schizophrenia is a chronic disease characterized by the impairment of mental functions with a marked social dysfunction. A quantitative proteomic approach using iTRAQ labeling and SRM, applied to the characterization of mitochondria (MIT), crude nuclear fraction (NUC), and cytoplasm (CYT), can allow the observation of dynamic changes in cell compartments providing valuable insights concerning schizophrenia physiopathology. Mass spectrometry analyses of the orbitofrontal cortex from 12 schizophrenia patients and 8 healthy controls identified 655 protein groups in the MIT fraction, 1500 in NUC, and 1591 in CYT. We found 166 groups of proteins dysregulated among all enriched cellular fractions. Through the quantitative proteomic analysis, we detect as the main biological pathways those related to calcium and glutamate imbalance, cell signaling disruption of CREB activation, axon guidance, and proteins involved in the activation of NF-kB signaling along with the increase of complement protein C3. Based on our data analysis, we suggest the activation of NF-kB as a possible pathway that links the deregulation of glutamate, calcium, apoptosis, and the activation of the immune system in schizophrenia patients. All MS data are available in the ProteomeXchange Repository under the identifier PXD015356 and PXD014350.

### Keywords
Quantification, Proteomics, Schizophrenia, Cellular fractions

### Affiliations
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Institute of Chemistry, Proteomics unit
UFRJ

### Submitter
Proteomics Unit

### Lab Head
Dr Fabio Nogueira
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Institute of Chemistry, Proteomics unit


