### Accession
PXD040870

### Title
Translational and post-translational dynamics in a model peptidergic system

### Description
The cell bodies of hypothalamic magnocellular neurones are densely packed in the hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus whereas their axons project to the anatomically discrete posterior pituitary gland. We have taken advantage of this unique anatomical structure to establish proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics in neuronal cell bodies and axonal terminals in response to physiological stimulation. We have found that proteome and phosphoproteome responses to neuronal stimulation are very different between somatic and axonal neuronal compartments, indicating the need of each cell domain to differentially adapt. In particular, changes in the phosphoproteome in the cell body are involved in the reorganisation of the cytoskeleton and in axonal terminals the regulation of synaptic and secretory processes. We have identified that prohormone precursors including vasopressin and oxytocin are phosphorylated in axonal terminals and are hyperphosphorylated following stimulation. By multi-omic integration of transcriptome and proteomic data we identify changes to proteins present in afferent inputs to this nucleus.

### Sample Protocol
Twelve male Sprague-Dawley rats weighing 250–300g were acclimatised for 10 days. Rats were maintained under a 12:12 light dark cycle (lights on 8.00 am) at a constant temperature of 21-22°C and a relative humidity of 40%-50% with ad libitum access to food and water. Rats were housed in groups of 3 with environmental enrichment consisting of nesting material, cardboard tube, and a chew block. Animal cages were randomly assigned to control or WD groups. For the WD group, water was removed for 48 hours with ad libitum access remaining for controls. All sample collections were performed between 9.00 am and 12.00 pm.  Rats were killed by striking the cranium then forebrain and posterior pituitary were dissected. SON samples were collected bilaterally from 100um brain coronal cryostat sections using a 1mm micropunch. Proteins from SON and NIL samples were extracted in lysis buffer containing 50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.6; 150 mM NaCl; 0.1% (w/v) sodium dodecyl sulfate; 0.5% (w/v) sodium deoxycholate; 1% (v/v) Nonidet P-40; 1 mM EDTA) containing the protease inhibitors 1mM Phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride (Merck, P7626), Pierce Protease Inhibitor Tablets(Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32963) and Pierce Phosphatase Inhibitor Mini Tablets (Thermo Fisher Scientific, A32957) in three sonication cycles of 12 seconds. Samples were then incubated in ice for 30 minutes, vortexing every 5 minutes, and then centrifuged at 10000 g for 20 minutes at 4°C.   Aliquots of 100 µg of each sample were reduced (10mM TCEP, 55°C for 1h), alkylated (18.75mM iodoacetamide, room temperature for 30min.), digested with trypsin (2.5µg trypsin per 100µg protein; 37°C, overnight), labelled with Tandem Mass Tag (TMTpro) sixteen plex reagents according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Loughborough, LE11 5RG, UK) and the labelled samples pooled.  For the total proteome analysis, an aliquot of 50 µg of the pooled sample was desalted using a SepPak cartridge according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Waters, Milford, Massachusetts, USA). Eluate from the SepPak cartridge was evaporated to dryness and resuspended in buffer A (20 mM ammonium hydroxide, pH 10) prior to fractionation by high pH reversed-phase chromatography using an Ultimate 3000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo Fisher Scientific). The resulting fractions (20 in total) were evaporated to dryness and resuspended in 1% (v/v) formic acid prior to analysis by nano-LC MSMS using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific).  All spectra were acquired using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer controlled by Xcalibur 3.0 software (Thermo Scientific) and operated in data-dependent acquisition mode using an SPS-MS3 workflow. FTMS1 spectra were collected at a resolution of 120 000, with an automatic gain control (AGC) target of 200 000 and a max injection time of 50ms. Precursors were filtered with an intensity threshold of 5000, according to charge state (to include charge states 2-7) and with monoisotopic peak determination set to Peptide. Previously interrogated precursors were excluded using a dynamic window (60s +/-10ppm). The MS2 precursors were isolated with a quadrupole isolation window of 0.7m/z. ITMS2 spectra were collected with an AGC target of 10 000, max injection time of 70ms and CID collision energy of 35%. For FTMS3 analysis, the Orbitrap was operated at 50 000 resolution with an AGC target of 50 000 and a max injection time of 105ms. Precursors were fragmented by high energy collision dissociation (HCD) at a normalised collision energy of 60% to ensure maximal TMT reporter ion yield. Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS) was enabled to include up to 10 MS2 fragment ions in the FTMS3 scan.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files were processed and quantified using Proteome Discoverer software v2.1 (Thermo Scientific) and searched against the UniProt Rat database (downloaded July 2021: 35859 entries) using the SEQUEST HT algorithm. Peptide precursor mass tolerance was set at 10ppm, and MS/MS tolerance was set at 0.6Da. Search criteria included oxidation of methionine (+15.995Da), acetylation of the protein N-terminus (+42.011Da) and Methionine loss plus acetylation of the protein N-terminus (-89.03Da) as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.0214) and the addition of the TMTpro mass tag (+304.207) to peptide N-termini and lysine as fixed modifications. For the Phospho-proteome analysis, phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine (+79.966) was also included as a variable Proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics in the HNS9 modification. Searches were performed with full tryptic digestion and a maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed. Protein groupings were determined by PD2.4. The master protein selection was improved with an in-house script Which selects all of the candidate master proteins, retrieves from Uniprot the up-to-date annotation information, and selects the master protein for the group based upon which accession has the highest annotation. This enables us to infer biological trends more effectively in the dataset without any loss in the quality of identification or quantification. The MS data were searched against the human Uniprot database retrieved on 2022-01-05 and updated with additional annotation information on 2022-01-20. The protein abundances were normalised within each sample to total peptide amount, and then scaled to the abundance of the common pool sample (a single representative sample run in each separate TMT experiment) to allow comparisons between experiments. The scaled abundances were then Log2 transformed to bring them closer to a normal distribution.   The experiment was performed by combining an equal amount of each sample, following TMT labelling. 5% of this combined sample was used for the total proteome analysis, and 95% was taken for phosphopeptide enrichment and subsequent analysis of the phosphoproteome. After phosphor enrichment we would not necessarily expect the samples to contain the same amount of phosphopeptides, due to biological differences in the levels of phosphorylation between the conditions. As such, normalisation of phosphopeptide abundance was performed using the normalisation factor generated from analysis of the corresponding samples in the total protein dataset. The samples were then scaled to the corresponding pool in the same manner as occurred with the total proteome. When total protein data is available for the phosphopeptide, the Log2 Scaled Protein abundance was subtracted from the Log2 Scaled Phosphopeptide abundance to adjust the phosphopeptide abundance for any changes in the total protein. As such, if a constitutively phosphorylated protein doubles in its protein abundance as a result of a condition of interest, the Log2 Scaled Phosphopeptide Abundance will show a doubling in the abundance of the phosphopeptide, however the Adjusted Log2 Phosphopeptide Abundance will not show any significant change, as the same proportion of the protein is phosphorylated. Statistical significance was then determined using Welch’s T-Tests between the conditions of interest. Since it has been discussed that the use of multiple testing corrected FDR may be too blunt and restrictive or proteomic analysis (26), especially when analysing such a heterogeneous and complex tissue as the brain (27-32), we considered uncorrected p < 0.05 as differentially produced proteins and phosphosites in all our SON and NIL analysis

### Publication Abstract
The cell bodies of hypothalamic magnocellular neurones are densely packed in the hypothalamic supraoptic nucleus, whereas their axons project to the anatomically discrete posterior pituitary gland. We have taken advantage of this unique anatomical structure to establish proteome and phosphoproteome dynamics in neuronal cell bodies and axonal terminals in response to physiological stimulation. We have found that proteome and phosphoproteome responses to neuronal stimulation are very different between somatic and axonal neuronal compartments, indicating the need of each cell domain to differentially adapt. In particular, changes in the phosphoproteome in the cell body are involved in the reorganization of the cytoskeleton and in axonal terminals the regulation of synaptic and secretory processes. We have identified that prohormone precursors including vasopressin and oxytocin are phosphorylated in axonal terminals and are hyperphosphorylated following stimulation. By multiomic integration of transcriptome and proteomic data, we identify changes to proteins present in afferent inputs to this nucleus.

### Keywords
Cytoskeleton, Proteome, Phosphoproteome, Posterior pituitary, Supraoptic nucleus

### Affiliations
University of Bristol
Translational Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Bristol

### Submitter
Benjamin Gillard

### Lab Head
Dr David Murphy
Translational Health Sciences, Bristol Medical School, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Bristol


