### Accession
PXD018006

### Title
Illuminating the key biological processes during the blooming period of a marine dinoflagellate by metaproteomics

### Description
Dinoflagellate blooms are natural phenomena that have drawn global attention due to their huge negative impacts on marine ecosystems, mariculture and human health. Although the understanding of dinoflagellate blooms has been significantly improved over the past half century, little is known about the underlying mechanisms sustaining the high biomass growth rate during the bloom period which is paradoxically characterized by low dissolved CO2 and inorganic nutrients. Here, we compared the metaproteomes of non-bloom, mid-bloom and late-bloom cells of a marine dinoflagellate Prorocentrum donghaiense in the coastal East China Sea, to understand the underlying mechanisms sustaining high biomass growth rate under the typically low CO2 and inorganic nutrient conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Each sample was digested using Trypsin Gold (Promega, Madison, WI, USA) with a protein/trypsin ratio of 30:1 at 37 °C for 6 h. Then, Trypsin Gold was added once again with a protein/trypsin ratio of 30:1 and digested for 10 h at 37 °C. After desalting on the Strata-X C18 solid phase extraction column (Phenomenex), the trypsin-digested samples were evaporated and reconstituted in 0.5 M TEAB. Peptide fractionation was performed by high-pH reversed-phase chromatography through a LC-20AB high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) pump system (Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan). Re-dissolved peptides were loaded onto an analytical C18 column (5 μm, 110 Å, 250 × 4.6 mm, Phenomenex, Torrance, CA) with 5 min 5% buffer B at 1 mL min-1, followed by a 40 min linear gradient from 5 to 35% buffer B, 1 min from 35 to 95% buffer B, maintained at 95% buffer B for 3 min, and dropped to 5% within 1 min before equilibrating with 5% buffer B (Buffer A: 5% acetonitrile (ACN) and adjust pH to 9.8 with ammonia; Buffer B: 95% ACN in ammonia, pH 9.8) for 10 min. Peptide fractions were collected at every minute and pooled into 10 fractions , desalted via a Strata-X C18 column (Phenomenex), vacuum-dried and re-dissolved in 0.1% (v/v) formic acid/water. Each fraction of the peptide mixtures was analyzed twice with a Q-Exactive HF mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). For each fraction, 2 μg of peptide mixture was loaded onto a 300 μm × 5 mm C18 TRAP column (μ-Precolumn, Thermo Scientific, Waltham, MA) and a 75 μm × 25 cm in-house packed analytical column containing 3 μm Ultimate LP-C18 particles (120 Å) from Welch (Shanghai, China). Separation of peptides was performed over a 60 min elution and the eluates were directly entered into the nano-ESI source of the Q-Exactive HF. The mass spectrometer was set in a data-dependent MS2 mode. Full-scan MS ranged from m/z 350 to 1 500 with a resolution of 60,000. The 30 most abundant ions from the full scan were selected for MS/MS scans.

### Data Protocol
Peptide spectral matching was performed using the MaxQuant software (Version 1.5.2.8) against the protein sequence database constructed from metatranscriptome sequences of the same samples. The following parameters were selected: trypsin specificity with up to two missed cleavages; fixed modifications of carbamidomethylation of cysteine; variable modifications consisting of oxidation of methionine, acetylation of protein N-terminal, deamidation of asparagine or glutamine; peptide charge: up to 7+; peptide length: from 7 to 43; and the fragment ion tolerance was set to 20 ppm for first search and 4.5 ppm for main search. The time window of match and alignment for match between runs were set as default, 0.7 min and 20 min, respectively. To reduce the probability of false identification, the false discovery rate (FDR) estimating by a target-decoy approach was set to less than 1% at both peptide and protein levels. Unique proteins matching at least two unique peptides and one unique peptide but at least two spectra were considered as high-confidence identifications. Both unique and razor peptides were used to obtain intensity-based absolute quantification (iBAQ) values calculated by MaxQuant software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Marine dinoflagellates, Metaproteomics, Harmful algal bloom

### Affiliations
BGI
BGI-Research

### Submitter
Hongkai Xu

### Lab Head
Dr Siqi Liu
BGI-Research


