### Accession
PXD042676

### Title
Spring phytoplankton bloom in the North Sea during the 2018 spring bloom – free-living Spring phytoplankton bloom in the North Sea during the 2018 spring bloom – free-living bacteriabacteria

### Description
The dataset represents the proteome analysis of 7 sampling dates during the phytoplankton bloom in the Helgoland Roads in the North Sea at the long-term research station ‘Kabeltonne’ (54°11'N 7°54'E, DEIMS.ID https://deims.org/1e96ef9b-0915-4661-849f-b3a72f5aa9b1) in 2018.

### Sample Protocol
Environmental sampling:  Samples were taken from March to May 2018 at research station ‘Kabeltonne’ off the coast of Helgoland Roads (North Sea) during a diatom-dominated spring phytoplankton bloom. Seawater was sampled at 1 m depth as described previously (Teeling et al., 2016). Ten liters of seawater were filtered sequentially through 10, 3, and 0.2 µm pore-size polycarbonate filters (142 mm diameter) for bacterial biomass. The 0.2 µm filters collected the bulk of the free-living bacteria. All filtrations were performed in duplicates, and filters were immediately flash-frozen in liquid nitrogen and kept at −80 °C until further use.  Metaproteome analyses – sample preparation Filters for metaproteome analysis were prepared as previously described (Deusch & Seifert, 2015). One-eighth of a filter (Millipore Express PLUS Membrane, polyethersulfone, 0.2 µm pore size, diameter 142 mm) was cut into 10 x 10 mm fragments and transferred to 15 mL tubes containing 1 mL resuspension buffer 1 (50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 0.1 mg mL1 chloramphenicol, 1 mM PMSF). After mixing with 1,5 mL resuspension buffer 2 (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 2% SDS (w/v)) for 10 min at 60 °C at 1,000 rpm in a thermo-mixer, 5 mL DNAse buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.5, 0.1 mg mL-1 MgCl2, 1 mM PMSF, 1 μg mL-1 DNAse I) was added, and cells were lysed by ultra-sonication (amplitude 51-60%; cycle 0.5; 4-times 2 min) on ice. The lysate was incubated in the thermo-mixer for 10 min at 37 °C at 1,000 rpm. After centrifugation for 10 min at 4 °C at 10,000 × g, the supernatant was collected and the pelleted filter pieces were stirred and centrifuged again for 1 min at 4 °C at 5,000 × g. The supernatant was added to the previously collected supernatant. Proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by adding pre-cooled trichloroacetic acid (20% TCA (v/v)) and after inverting the tube approximately 10-times, the precipitate was pelleted by centrifugation (30 min, 4 °C, 12,000 × g). The protein pellet was washed 3-times in pre-cooled ( 20 °C) acetone (10 min, 4 °C, 12,000 × g) and dried at room temperature. The protein pellet was resuspended in 2× SDS sample loading buffer (4% SDS (w/v), 20% glycerine (w/v), 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 6.8, bromphenol blue (tip of a spatula), 3.6% 2 mercaptoethanol (v/v) (freshly added before use)) by incubation 5 min at 95 °C, 5 min sonication bath before vortexing, and separated by 1D SDS-PAGE. After separation, fixation, and staining with Coomassie, each gel lane was cut into 20 pieces as described previously with some modifications (Bonn et al., 2014). The gel pieces were destained 3-times for 10 min with 1 mL of gel washing buffer (200 mM ammonium bicarbonate in 30% acetonitrile (v/v)) at 37 °C, dehydrated in 1 mL 100% acetonitrile (v/v) for 20 min before drying in a vacuum centrifuge at 30 °C. For reduction and alkylation, the gel pieces were treated with 100 µL 10 mM Dithiothreitol in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer, incubated for 1 h at 56 °C, mixed with 100 µL 55 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer and further incubated in the dark for 45 min at room temperature before the supernatant was removed. The gel pieces were washed with 1 mL 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (10 min, 1,000 rpm) before the supernatant was removed. Next, the gel pieces were dehydrated with 500 µL 100% acetonitrile for 10 min and the supernatant was removed before the gel pieces were completely dried in a vacuum centrifuge (20 min) and finally covered with 120 µL trypsin solution (2 µg/mL Trypsin (Promega™). After rehydration for 20 min at room temperature, excess trypsin solution was removed with gel loader tips and incubated in a thermo-mixer 15 h at 37 °C without shaking. Peptides were eluted with 120 µL solvent A (water MS grade in 0,1% acetic acid (v/v)) by sonication for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred into a new tube. Peptides were eluted again with 120 µL 30% acetonitrile (v/v) by sonication for 15 min. The supernatant was transferred into the same new tube as used before. The sample volume was reduced in a vacuum centrifuge to a maximum of 15 to 20 µL. The peptides were desalted via ZipTips µC18 (Merck Millipore, P10 tip size) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The eluted samples were dried in a vacuum centrifuge and resuspended in 10 µL 0.5x Biognosys™ iRT standard kit in solvent A.

### Data Protocol
Metaproteome analyses - LC-MS/MS measurement and data analysis For measurement, an Easy-nLC1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA) was coupled to an Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were loaded onto in-house packed capillary columns of 20 cm length and 75 µm inner diameter. Columns were filled with Dr. Maisch ReproSil Pur 120 C18-AQ 1.9 µm (Dr. Maisch GmbH). Peptides were separated using a 131 min nonlinear binary gradient from 2% to 99% solvent B (99.9% acetonitrile(v/v), 0.1% acetic acid (v/v)) in solvent A at a constant flow rate of 300 nL min-1. The MS1 scan were recorded in the orbitrap with a mass window of 300–1,650 m/z and a resolution of 140,000 at 200 m/z. The 15 most intense precursor ions (ions with an unassigned charge or a charge of 1,7,8, >8 are excluded) were selected for HCD fragmentation with a normalized collision energy of NCE 27. The resulting MS/MS spectra were acquired were recorded with a resolution of 17.500 at 200 m/z. Dynamic exclusion and lock mass correction were enabled.   All MS/MS spectra were analysed using Mascot (version 2.7.0.1; Matrix Science, London, UK). Mascot was set up to search the database containing all protein sequences from the 18 metagenomes obtained during the spring bloom 2018 assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin. For database construction, redundant proteins from the 18 metagenomic samples were removed using cd-hit (Li & Godzik, 2006) with a clustering threshold of 97% identity. The created database was added by a set of common laboratory contaminants and reverse entries, amounting to 81,874,922 sequences in the final database. The database search with Mascot (Perkins, Pappin, Creasy, & Cottrell, 1999) was performed with the following parameters: fragment ion mass tolerance and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, none missed cleavages, methionine oxidation as a variable modification, and cysteine carbamidomethylation as fixed modification. Scaffold (version 4.11.1; Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to merge the search results and to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. During creation of the Scaffold file, an additional X! Tandem search was performed for validation (version 2017.2.1.4; The GPM, thegpm.org; version X!Tandem Alanine) with default settings (fragment ion mass tolerance and parent ion tolerance of 10 ppm, carbamidomethyl of cysteine as fixed modification, Glu->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, ammonia-loss of the n-terminus, Gln->pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, oxidation of methionine and carbamidomethyl of cysteine as variable modifications). Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95% probability by the Peptide Prophet algorithm (Keller, Nesvizhskii, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2002) with Scaffold delta-mass correction. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 99% probability and contained at least 2 identified peptides. Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (Nesvizhskii, Keller, Kolker, & Aebersold, 2003). Proteins that contained similar peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS analysis alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Metaproteomics, Spring phytoplankton bloom, Free-living bacteria

### Affiliations
Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald

### Submitter
Anke Trautwein-Schult

### Lab Head
Professor Doerte Becher
Institute for Microbiology, University of Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 8, 17489 Greifswald, Germany


