### Accession
PXD031460

### Title
Small Proteome of Haloferax volcanii - Spectral-library Based Validation of novel sORFs

### Description
The small proteome has already been well explored in eukaryal and bacterial species, but so far, archaeal genomes have not yet been analysed broadly with a dedicated focus on small proteins. Here, we present a combinatorial approach, integrating experimental information from small protein-optimized mass spectrometry (MS) and ribosome profiling (Ribo-seq) to generate a high confidence inventory of small proteins in the model archaeon Haloferax volcanii. Translation was demonstrated for 67% of the annotated small coding sequences by both methods. Annotation-independent data analysis allowed for the prediction of 47 sites of ribosomal engagement outside known coding regions by Ribo-seq, seven of whom correspond to the eight un-annotated small proteins identified by a similar independent analysis of proteomic data. We also present independent evidence in vivo for the translation of a subset of small proteins (comprising both previously annotated and newly identified), underlining the validity of our identification scheme. Moreover, several of these translated sORFs are conserved in Haloferax and might have important functions. Based on our findings, we conclude that the small proteome of H. volcanii is larger than previously expected and that the combined use of mass spectrometry to detect protein presence with Ribo-seq to inform on translation is a powerful tool for the discovery of new small protein-coding genes in diverse organisms. This data-set contains the validation of novel sORFs by synthetic reference peptides and spectral-library searches.

### Sample Protocol
Enrichment of small proteins for MS analysis All experiments were carried out using the H. volcanii wildtype strain H119. H119 was cultivated aerobically at 45 °C in complex medium (Dyall-Smith, 2015) to exponential (OD650nm=0.5) or stationary phase (OD650nm =1.2-1.3) and harvested in triplicate by centrifugation. Flash-frozen pellets were thawed and suspended in Tris HCl buffer (50 mM, pH 7.4) before disruption by ultrasonication with an MS 72 sonotrode (Bandelin) operated at 40 W output (4 x 60 sec). A mild centrifugation step at 8,000 x g for 5 min ensured minimal loss of membrane-related small proteins, while undisrupted cells and cell debris were sufficiently removed. Small proteins were enriched by solid-phase enrichment (SPE) as previously described. Briefly, disposable SPE columns (Phenomenex, 8B-S100-AAK) packed with an 8.5 nm pore-size, modified styrene-divinylbenzene resin were equilibrated; 500 µg proteins were loaded; and unbound, potentially larger proteins were removed by washing. Finally, the enriched small protein fraction was eluted and evaporated to dryness in a vacuum centrifuge.  Proteolytic digest for MS analysis One small-protein enriched aliquot of each sample (~20 µg) was digested with Lys C. In brief, the samples were diluted with triethylammonium bicarbonate buffer (TEAB), containing the acid-labile detergent RapiGest (Waters). All samples were subsequently reduced with Tris(2 carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP). The reaction was quenched by adding iodoacetamide and the mixture was allowed to alkylate before Lys C was added in a 1: 100 enzyme to protein ratio. The samples were digested for 12 h and the digestion was interrupted by acidifying the mixture with hydrochloric acid. Prior to analysis with MS, peptides were purified by Pierce C18 Tips (Thermo Fisher Scientific) according to the manufacturer's protocol and retention time calibration peptides (iRT, Biognosys) were spiked to each sample in order to monitor reproducibility of subsequent LC-MS runs. In a complementary Top-down approach, an additional aliquot from each sample was prepared without digestion before MS analysis.  Liquid chromatography and electrospray MS All samples were analysed with a Q-Exactive coupled to an EASY nLC 1000 (both Thermo-Fisher Scientific) which was equipped with an in house build 20 cm reversed-phase column packed with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch) with integrated emitter tip. About 1 µg peptides were loaded onto the column with solvent A (0.1% acetic acid in water), eluted by a non-linear gradient of solvent B (0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile) and on line infused in the MS. For analysis of the Lys C digested samples the Q-Exactive was operated with the following parameters: Survey scan: 300 – 1650 Th mass range; 70,000 resolution at m/z 200; 3 x 1e6 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 120 ms injection time; activated lock mass correction. Fragment scans: data-dependent higher-energy collisional dissociation at normalized energy of 27.5 for the top 10 ions with an assigned charge state between +2 and +6; fixed first mass: 100 Th; mass range dependent on precursor m/z; 17,500 resolution at m/z 200; 1 x 1e5 predictive automatic gain control target; max. 60 ms injection time. For undigested samples, the resolution of the survey and fragment scans was increased to 140,000 and 35,000, respectively, and only the top 8 ions with any assigned charge state above +1 were fragmented with a stepped normalized collision energy of 27.5 / 32.5 omitting a fixed first mass.

### Data Protocol
To validate the identification of peptides assigned to proteins not annotated in the reference database, 26 peptides for 12 proteins were synthesized by JPT Peptide Technologies (Berlin) and analyzed by MS.  Obtained raw files were converted to mzXML using the msconvert script of ProteoWizard (v3.0.9974) and its vendor-supplied algorithms for centroiding mass peaks. Afterwards, synthesised peptides were identified by an MSFragger search against a .fasta database containing the full length sequences of the 12 proteins to validate, 44 sequences of commonly observed laboratory contaminants and the retention time calibration peptides as well as a reversed version of each protein. This database finally contained 112 entries. Spectra identified with a PeptideProphet assigned probability of at least 0.99 that identified one of the synthesized peptides or a truncated version of these, were included into a spectral library build with SpectraST (version 5.0), which we called synthetic peptide library. Truncated versions of synthetic peptides could appear due to the process of peptide synthesis at JPT. The synthetic peptide library was supplemented with spectra obtained at a 0.1% peptide FDR from an MSFragger database search of 48 H. volcanii samples, which were analysed as user service samples on the same instrument, against the reference database. Decoy spectra were created within SpectraST on the level of the merged consensus spectra. The resulting combined spectral library is called “Hfvol_ReferenceGenome_and_ReferencePeptides_HCD_consLib_inclDecoys.splib”. The SEP-enriched samples were finally searched against the combined spectral library and not yet annotated proteins, which obtained at least 2 spectral counts at 1% FDR on spectral, peptide and protein level, were considered validated if the identifying spectra passed a subsequent manual inspection.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Small protein, Proteogenomics, Top-down, Haloferax volcanii, Archaea, Sprotein, Proteolytic digest, Sorf, Database search, Small protein enrichment, Ribosome profiling, Sep

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Institute for Microbiology, Department for Microbial Proteomics
University of Greifswald, Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Juergen Bartel

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Institute for Microbiology, Department for Microbial Proteomics


