### Accession
PXD038575

### Title
Mammalian oocytes store proteins in cytoplasmic lattices

### Description
Oocytes must accumulate and store maternal factors such as proteins during growth to sustain the first stages of embryonic development. How mammalian oocytes store maternal proteins is not understood. Here, we show that mouse and human oocytes store proteins on cytoplasmic lattices. With super-resolution light microscopy and electron tomography, we demonstrate that cytoplasmic lattices are twisted filament bundles formed by proteins of the subcortical maternal complex, filling the entire ooplasm. The lattices were associated with many proteins that have crucial functions during early embryo development, including proteins controlling genome methylation. Loss of cytoplasmic lattices prevented the accumulation of these proteins and resulted in early embryonic arrest. Thus, cytoplasmic lattices are important for storage of essential maternal proteins and the developmental success of early mammalian embryos.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation For proteomic analyses, mouse oocytes were collected in M2 media without BSA. For data-independent acquisition (DIA) analysis, 120 mouse GV oocytes were collected per replicate for a total of three replicates per sample. Collected oocytes were snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at -80°C awaiting further processing.  Cell lysis was performed using SDS lysis buffer (4% [w/v] SDS, 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Hepes-NaOH pH 7.5, 2 mM DTT, 0.5% [v/v] NP40, 1X Roche complete protease inhibitors-EDTA), which was added to frozen cells, followed by incubation at 99 °C for 10 min and sonication for 10 min with 30 sec on/off cycles at 20°C using a Bioruptor (Diagenode) at the highest output level. Samples were diluted to a final concentration of 0.1% SDS and 1 mM MgCl2 was added. DNA was digested using 500U of Pierce™ Universal Nuclease (ThermoFisher Scientific; 88700) for 30 min at 37°C, 300 rpm. Proteins were reduced by incubation with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 37°C, 300 rpm, and alkylated by incubation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min at 25°C, 300 rpm, in the dark. The reaction was quenched by addition of another 5 mM of DTT and subsequent incubation for 5 min at 25°C, 300 rpm. Sample cleanup was performed by applying the single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation protocol by Hughes et al. 2019 1. Briefly, carboxylate modified magnetic beads (Cytiva; 65152105050350, 45152105050250, mixed 1:1) were added at a 1:10 protein-to-bead mass ratio and an equal volume of 100% acetonitrile (ACN) was added to induce protein binding to the magnetic beads. Washing was performed twice with 80% EtOH and once with 100% ACN. Proteins were digested on beads in 100 mM NH4HCO3 containing trypsin (Promega, V5111) at a 1:20 enzyme-to-protein ratio (assuming 25 ng total protein amount per cell) ON at 37 °C, 1000 rpm. Peptides were removed from the magnetic beads and dried in a vacuum concentrator before DIA LC-MS/MS analysis.  DIA LC-MS/MS analysis of Padi6 and Tle6 KO/WT GV oocytes Peptides from Padi6 or Tle6 KO/WT GV oocytes were dissolved in 2% ACN, 0.05% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and subjected to DIA LC-MS/MS analysis using an Orbitrap Exploris 480 Mass Spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) coupled to a Dionex Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system. Peptides were loaded on a Pepmap 300 C18  trap column (Thermo Fisher Scientific) (flow rate, 10 µl/min) in buffer A (0.1% [v/v] FA) and the column was washed subsequently for 3 min with buffer A. Peptide separation was performed on an in-house packed C18 column (30 cm; ReproSil-Pur 120Å, 1.9 µm, C18-AQ; inner diameter, 75 µm; flow rate: 300 nl/min) by applying a two-step linear gradient of buffer B (80% [v/v] ACN, 0.08% [v/v] FA). The main column was equilibrated with 5% buffer B for 3 min, before samples were applied.  Two subsequent linear gradients from 5-14% buffer B over 27 min and from 14-48% over 77 min were applied to elute peptides, followed by 4.8 min washing at 90% buffer B and 6 min at 5% buffer B. Eluting peptides were analysed in positive mode for 118 min using a data-independent acquisition (DIA) method. Resolution was set to 120,000 (MS1) and 30,000 (MS2) FWHM, AGC targets to 3x106 (MS1) and 106 (MS2), maximum injection time to 20 ms (MS1) and 55 ms (MS2) and MS1 scan range to m/z 350-1650. MS2 scans were acquired after every MS1 scan, using tMS2 option in Thermo Xcalibur Instrument Setup software, in 70 m/z windows (Suppl. Table X). Precursors were fragmented using 30% normalized, higher-energy collision-induced dissociation (HCD) fragmentation.  For all measurements, the lock mass option (m/z 445.120025) was used for internal calibration. 1 Hughes, C. S. et al. Single-pot, solid-phase-enhanced sample preparation for proteomics experiments. Nat Protoc 14, 68-85, doi:10.1038/s41596-018-0082-x (2019).

### Data Protocol
DIA MS database search DIA data was processed using Spectronaut (v. 16.2.220903.53000) 2. For library generation, DDA LC-MS/MS data from fractionated mouse oocyte samples 3 were searched using the Pulsar search engine platform and a protein sequence database including canonical and isoform sequences downloaded from UniProt Knowledgebase (date of download: 10.09.2021; 17077 proteins). The database search was performed using the default BGS Factory settings including: enzyme, trypsin/P; fixed modification, carbamidomethyl (C); variable modifications oxidation (M), acetylation (protein N-term). The resulting spectral library was used for library-based DIA data analysis in addition to a library-free, directDIA™ analysis. For both, default BGS Factory settings were applied. Global imputation and local normalization were enabled for all analyses. Differential abundance testing was performed using Spectronaut post analysis option. An unpaired t test was performed based on the log2 ratios of protein intensities and p values were corrected for multiple testing4. 2 Bruderer, R. et al. Extending the limits of quantitative proteome profiling with data-independent acquisition and application to acetaminophen-treated three-dimensional liver microtissues. Mol Cell Proteomics 14, 1400-1410, doi:10.1074/mcp.M114.044305 (2015). 3 Cheng, S. et al. Mammalian oocytes store mRNAs in a mitochondria-associated membraneless compartment. Science 378, eabq4835, doi:10.1126/science.abq4835 (2022). 4 Storey, J. D. A direct approach to false discovery rates. J Roy Stat Soc B 64, 479-498, doi:Unsp 1369-7412/02/64479

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cytoplasmic lattices, Lc-ms/ms, Dia, Oocytes

### Affiliations
Department of Meiosis, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany.
Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical Chemistry

### Submitter
Luisa Welp

### Lab Head
Dr Melina Schuh
Department of Meiosis, Max Planck Institute for Multidisciplinary Sciences, Göttingen, Germany.


