### Accession
PXD018610

### Title
Data-dependent and independent acquisition of Salmonella in epithelial cells throughout the infection process

### Description
Viewing the scarce amount of protein material coming from the bacterial pathogen in infection models and despite the availability of contemporary, highly sensitive and fast scanning mass spectrometers, the power requirement still not suffices to study the host and pathogen proteomes simultaneously. In the present work we aimed to establish a DIA mass spectrometry workflow for improving the protein identification and quantification of LC-MS/MS, in Salmonella infected epithelial cells, therefore enabling simultaneous host and pathogen protein expression profiling at different time post infection.

### Sample Protocol
Human epithelial cervix (HeLa ATCC® CCL2™) cells, were cultured in a 5% CO2 gas-equilibrated humidified incubator at 37°C in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) media (Gibco, cat no 31966-047) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS, Gibco, cat no 10270-106) and 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin (Gibco; cat no 5070-063). Cells were sub-cultivated at 1:8 ratio every 4 days. For infection experiments, the day before the infection, 10,000,000 cells were seeded in T-175 cell culture flasks (Greiner Bio One, cat no 660160) to reach a final ~85% confluency in DMEM media supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS and without antibiotics supplementation (infection media). Serum heat-inactivation was done incubating the serum at 56°C for 30 min. To prepare the bacteria for infection, growing conditions to induce Salmonella Pathogenicity Island (SPI)-1 genes expression were implemented: a single colony of Salmonella enterica serovar Typhimurium strain SL1344 (Salmonella Genetic Stock Center, Calgary, Canada; cat n° 438, (Hoiseth and Stocker 1981)) was used to inoculate 3 mL of Luria Beltrami (LB) Miller broth (10 g/L Bacto tryptone, 5 g/L Bacto yeast extract, 10 g/L NaCl) in round-bottom falcon tubes (Corning, cat no 352059). Saturated cultures, grown for 18h at 37°C and 180 rpm in a shaking incubator (INFORS HT Ecotron), reached a final optical density measured at 600 nm (OD600) ~2, were diluted 1:50 in the same media in T-25 flasks with ventilation to late exponential phase (OD600 ~4) at 37°C and 180 rpm. Then, cells were washed with pre-warmed Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (DPBS, Gibco; cat no 14190-144) and resuspended in HeLa cells infection media (DMEM, 10% heat-inactivated FBS).  In the invasion assays, bacteria were added to HeLa cells at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 100 and bacteria internalization was allowed to happen for 30 min in a 5% CO2 gas-equilibrated humidified incubator at 37°C. After this time, HeLa cells were DPBS washed and extracellular bacteria were killed by addition of culture media (DMEM 10% FBS 50 units/ml penicillin and 50 µg/ml streptomycin) supplemented with gentamycin 100 µg/mL. Infected cells were incubated at 5% CO2 37°C until corresponding acquisition time point. For time points after 2 hpi gentamycin concentration was decreased to 10 µg/mL, since longer exposure to higher concentrations of gentamycin produces bacterial stress (Menashe, Kaganskaya et al. 2008). At the indicated time points (2, 4, 8, 16 and 24 hpi), cells were PBS-washed and collected by addition of Trypsin-EDTA (0.05%), Phenol red (Gibco, cat no 25300054) during 5 min at 5% CO2 37°C in Eppendorf tubes. Next, cells were PBS-washed (150 g, 5 min) 2 times and pellet was frozen in liquid nitrogen.  For proteome extraction and mass spectrometry analysis, 4 biological replicates of each infection time point were performed. The frozen pellets were stored at -80°C, until complete collection of samples, and then, processed all together. Cell pellets (HeLa/Salmonella) were lysed in Gu.HCl by freeze-thaw and sonication and protein concentration determined by Bradford. For all sample mixes, 2x water diluted aliquots (400 µg) were acetone precipitated. Pellets were resuspended in 10% TFE, and digested overnight using mass-spec grade trypsin/Lys-C Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) (1:100 w/w) at 37°C, 550 rpm. Methionine oxidation was performed in hydroxen peroxide and peptides were extracted using C18 reversed phase sorbent 100 µL pipette tips (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA, USA, cat no A57003100K). Then, peptides were vacuum-dried in a SpeedVac concentrator and re-dissolved in 50 µL (artificial mixtures) of 2 mM tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) in 2% acetonitrile spiked with an iRT peptide mix (Biognosys) for retention time (RT) prediction.     Bradford, M. M. (1976). "A rapid and sensitive method for the quantitation of microgram quantities of protein utilizing the principle of protein-dye binding." Anal Biochem 72: 248-254. Hoiseth, S. K. and B. A. Stocker (1981). "Aromatic-dependent Salmonella typhimurium are non-virulent and effective as live vaccines." Nature 291(5812): 238-239. Menashe, O., E. Kaganskaya, T. Baasov and S. Yaron (2008). "Aminoglycosides affect intracellular Salmonella enterica serovars typhimurium and virchow." Antimicrobial agents and chemotherapy 52(3): 920-926.

### Data Protocol
From each sample 10 µL was injected for LC-MS/MS analysis on an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano system in-line connected to a Q Exactive HF BioPharma mass spectrometer (Thermo). Trapping was performed at 10 μL/min for 4 min in loading solvent A (0.1% TFA in water/ACN (98:2, v/v) on a 20 mm trapping column (made in-house, 100 μm internal diameter (I.D.), 5 μm beads, C18 Reprosil-HD, Dr. Maisch, Germany). After flushing from the trapping column, the peptides were loaded and separated on an analytical column, a 200 cm µPAC™ column with C18-endcapped functionality (Pharmafluidics, Belgium) kept at a constant temperature of 50°C. Peptides were eluted by a non-linear gradient reaching 99% MS solvent B (0.1% FA in water/acetonitrile (2:8, v/v)) in 135 min at a constant flow rate of 300 nL/min , followed by a 5-minute wash at 99% MS solvent B and re-equilibration with MS solvent A (0.1% FA in water). The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent mode, positive ionization mode, automatically switching between MS and MS/MS acquisition for the 16 most abundant ion peaks per MS spectrum. Full-scan MS spectra (375-1500 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 60,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer after accumulation to a target value of 3,000,000. The 16 most intense ions above a threshold value of 13,000 were isolated for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation at a normalized collision energy of 28% after filling the trap at a target value of 100,000 for maximum 80 ms injection time).   MS/MS spectra (200-2000 m/z) were acquired at a resolution of 15,000 at 200 m/z in the Orbitrap analyzer.   Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) A total of 24 raw data files corresponding to quadruplicates of 6 conditions: 2, 4, 8, 16, 24 hpi of Salmonella infecting HeLa samples next to non-infected control, were searched in parallel by MaxQuant (version 1.6.9.0). Methionine oxidation was set as fixed modification, and N-terminal acetylation was set as variable modification. To augment peptide quantification, we performed matching-between-runs with a match time window of 1.2 min and an alignment time window of 20 min and performed label-free quantitation with the LFQ algorithm using default settings in MaxQuant. We used the enzymatic rule of trypsin/P with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages. The main search peptide tolerance was set to 4.5 ppm and the ion trap MS/MS match tolerance was set to 0.5 Da. Peptide-to-spectrum match level was set at 1% FDR with an additional minimal Andromeda score of 40 for modified peptides. Protein FDR was set at 1% and estimated by using the reversed search sequences. The maximal number of modifications per peptide was set to 5. For protein quantification in the proteinGroups.txt file, we used only unique peptides and allowed all modifications.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Data-dependent acquisition (dda), Salmonella, Hela cells, Proteomics, Lc-ms/ms, Data-independent acquisition (dia)

### Affiliations
1Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium
UGent

### Submitter
Ursula Fels

### Lab Head
Dr Petra Van Damme
1Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium


