### Accession
PXD023690

### Title
Spatial-proteomics reveals phospho-signaling dynamics at subcellular resolution

### Description
Dynamic change in subcellular localization of signaling proteins is a general concept that eukaryotic cells evolved for responding and elicit a coordinated response to stimuli. Mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics in combination with subcellular fractionation can provide comprehensive maps of spatio-temporal regulation of cells but this is highly challenging involving laborious workflows that do not cover the phosphoproteome level. Here we present a high-throughput workflow based on sequential cell fractionation to profile the global (phospho)proteome dynamics across six distinct subcellular fractions. We benchmarked the workflow by studying spatio-temporal EGFR phospho-signaling dynamics in-vitro in HeLa cells and in-vivo in mouse tissues. Finally, we investigated the spatio-temporal stress signaling, revealing cellular relocation of ribosomal proteins in response to hypertonicity and muscle contraction.

### Sample Protocol
Subcellular fractions were denatured, reduced and alkylated with 0.3% SDS, 5 mM TCEP and 10 mM CAA during 10 minutes at 95°C. Afterwards, samples were digested overnight using the PAC protocol implemented for the KingFisher robot. Samples were acidified after digestion to final concentration of 1% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). 20 µl of each sample were loaded directly into Evotips for full proteome analysis. Remaining sample was loaded onto Sep-Pak cartridges for phospho-enrichment of subcellular fractions. Sep-Pak cartridges were eluted into the KingFisher plate using 75 µl of 80% ACN. 150 µl of loading buffer (80% ACN, 8% TFA and 1.6 M glycolic acid) was added to each sample. Phosphoenrichment was performed in the KingFisher robot using 10 µl of TiIMAC-HP beads per sample. Eluted phosphopeptides were acidified with 10% TFA to pH <3 and loaded into Evotips for further MS analysis. LC-MSMS analysis: samples were analyzed on the Evosep One system using an in-house packed 15 cm, 150 μm i.d. capillary column with 1.9 μm Reprosil-Pur C18 beads (Dr. Maisch, Ammerbuch, Germany) using the pre-programmed gradients for 60 samples per day. The column temperature was maintained at 60°C using an integrated column oven (PRSO-V1, Sonation, Biberach, Germany) and interfaced online with the Orbitrap Exploris 480 MS. When using FAIMS, Spray voltage was set to 2.3 kV, otherwise it was set to 2kV, funnel RF level at 40, and heated capillary temperature at 275°C. For full-proteome analysis using DIA and FAIMS full MS resolutions were set to 120,000 at m/z 200 and full MS AGC target was 300% with an IT of 45 ms. Mass range was set to 350−1400. AGC target value for fragment spectra was set at 100%. 49 windows of 13.7 Da scanning from 361 to 1033 Da were used with an overlap of 1 Da. Resolution was set to 15,000 and IT to 22 ms and normalized collision energy was 27. For phospho-proteome analysis using DIA we employed 17 windows of 39.5 Da scanning from 472 to 1143 Da with 1 Da overlap. Resolution was set to 45,000 and IT to 86 ms. Normalized collision energy was set at 27%. All data were acquired in profile mode using positive polarity and peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on.

### Data Protocol
Full proteome and phospho-proteome subcellular fraction raw files were searched using Spectronaut (v14 or v15) with a library-free approach (directDIA) using either human database (UniprotKB/Swissprot, 21074 entries) or mouse database (UniprotKB/Swissprot 22286 entries), supplemented with a database of common contaminants. Carbamylation of cysteines was set as a fixed modification, whereas oxidation of methionines and acetylation of protein N-termini were set as possible variable modifications. Additionally, for phospho-proteome analysis, and phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine were included as well. The maximum number of variable modifications per peptide was limited to 3. Only for phospho-proteome files, PTM localization cutoff was set as 0.75. Cross-run normalization was turned off. For protein quantification, major protein group aggregation method was changed to sum. Phospho-peptide quantification data was exported and collapsed to site information using the Perseus plugin described in Bekker-Jensen et al (PMID: 32034161). Data at protein and phospho-site level were processed using R (v3.6.2). For normalization to remove experimental bias, as well as, for imputation of missing values, each fraction was treated separately. Data was log2 transformed and three valid values in at least one experimental group were required to preserve the protein/site. Most of the data analysis was performed using functions implemented in the Dapar package (v 1.18.3) and following the data analysis pipeline of Prostar (v 1.18.4). Normalization was performed using loess function from limma package. Imputation of missing values was performed in two steps: first partially observed values (i.e: values missing within a condition in which there are valid quantitative values) were imputed using the KNN function (at protein level) and slsa function (at phospho-site level); secondly, values missing in an entire condition were imputed using the detQuant function from imp4p package. Finally, differential expressed protein and sites were calculated using limma (BH FDR<5%), requiring at least three valid values in one of the two experimental conditions compared.

### Publication Abstract
Dynamic change in subcellular localization of signaling proteins is a general concept that eukaryotic cells evolved for eliciting a coordinated response to stimuli. Mass spectrometry-based proteomics in combination with subcellular fractionation can provide comprehensive maps of spatio-temporal regulation of protein networks in cells, but involves laborious workflows that does not cover the phospho-proteome level. Here we present a high-throughput workflow based on sequential cell fractionation to profile the global proteome and phospho-proteome dynamics across six distinct subcellular fractions. We benchmark the workflow by studying spatio-temporal EGFR phospho-signaling dynamics in vitro in HeLa cells and in vivo in mouse tissues. Finally, we investigate the spatio-temporal stress signaling, revealing cellular relocation of ribosomal proteins in response to hypertonicity and muscle contraction. Proteomics data generated in this study can be explored through https://SpatialProteoDynamics.github.io .

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Proteomics, Spatio-temporal dynamics, Dia

### Affiliations
Group leader, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper V. Olsen
Group leader, Professor Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences


