### Accession
PXD002967

### Title
Improving Human Genome Annotation Using a High-Stringency Proteogenomics Workflow

### Description
Reanalysis of three large human tissue proteomics datasets using a bespoke GENCODE database and multiOTHER algorithm high confidence pipeline.

### Sample Protocol
Three large, publicly available human tissue proteomics datasets were downloaded. The first, was downloaded from PRIDE PXD000561. These were HCD RAW files, from Thermo Scientific Orbitrap instruments, comprising 85 fractionated experimental samples covering 30 different human adult and fetal tissues. The second dataset was downloaded from ProteomicsDB PRDB000042. This dataset consists of 1087 HCD and CID Thermo Scientific RAW files from 48 experiments covering 36 different tissues. The final dataset was also downloaded from ProteomicsDB PRDB000012 and contains 1618 CID Thermo Scientific RAW files covering 10 different human tissues.

### Data Protocol
Each RAW file was converted to the standard mzML format using the ProteoWizard (v3.0.6485) msconvert tool. Following conversion, the data was processed with TOPP tools from OpenMS. All spectra were centroided using the PeakPickerHiRes tool, and files from fractionated experiments were merged using the FileMerger tool (up to a maximum file size of 2 GB). A small number of the RAW files appeared to contain no spectra and were not included in the conversion. A human sequence database in FASTA format was created by combining GENCODE v20 UniProt human reference proteome from May 2014; common contaminant protein sequences; a selection of non-coding gene sequences also from GENCODE v20 novel sequences generated using the AUGUSTUS gene predictor pseudogene predictions from Pseudogene.org (December 2013); and three-frame translated RNAseq transcript sequences. Finally, a set of randomised decoy sequences of equal size to the target database was generated using the Mimic tool and appended to the database. To account for isobaric peptides all isoleucine (I) residues within the database were replaced with leucine (L); after OTHERing leucine residues were always converted to the ambiguous code J. All protein accessions were formatted to include the source database, a unique identifier, and if available a genomic locus. The TOPP tool MascotAdapterOnline was used to submit mzML files to a Mascot Server v2.4; the in-house developed TOPP tool MSGFPlusAdapter was used to run MS-GF+ v10089 on the same files. Two wrappers were implemented to run MascotPercolator v2.08 and the msgf2pin/Percolator tool combination. Additionally SEQUEST combined with Percolator was used to OTHER the data in a Proteome Discoverer. All database OTHERes were performed with a precursor tolerance of 10 ppm and a fragment tolerance of 0.02 Da for HCD spectra and 0.5 Da for CID spectra. Up to three missed cleavages were allowed. The fixed modification carbamidomethyl (+57.0214) was specified for all cysteine residues. In addition, the following variable modifications were used in the OTHERes: N-terminal acetylation (+42.01056), N-terminal carbamidomethyl (+57.0214), deamidation of asparagine and glutamine residues (+0.984), oxidation of methionine (+15.9949), and N-terminal conversion of glutamine and glutamic acid to pyro-glutamine (-17.0265, -18.0106).

### Publication Abstract
Complete annotation of the human genome is indispensable for medical research. The GENCODE consortium strives to provide this, augmenting computational and experimental evidence with manual annotation. The rapidly developing field of proteogenomics provides evidence for the translation of genes into proteins and can be used to discover and refine gene models. However, for both the proteomics and annotation groups, there is a lack of guidelines for integrating this data. Here we report a stringent workflow for the interpretation of proteogenomic data that could be used by the annotation community to interpret novel proteogenomic evidence. Based on reprocessing of three large-scale publicly available human data sets, we show that a conservative approach, using stringent filtering is required to generate valid identifications. Evidence has been found supporting 16 novel protein-coding genes being added to GENCODE. Despite this many peptide identifications in pseudogenes cannot be annotated due to the absence of orthogonal supporting evidence.

### Keywords
Human, Tissue, Proteogenomics, Proteome, Gencode

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


