### Accession
PXD024684

### Title
Characterization of peptide-protein relationships in protein ambiguity groups via bipartite graphs (data set D1)

### Description
Motivation: In bottom-up mass spectrometry proteins are enzymatically digested before measurement. The relationship between proteins and peptides can be represented by bipartite graphs that can be split into connected components. This representation is useful to aid protein inference and quantification, which is complex due to the occurrence of shared peptides. We conducted a comprehensive analysis of these bipartite graphs using peptides from an in silico digestion of protein databases as well as quantified peptides. Results: The graphs based on quantified peptides are smaller and have less complex structures compared to the database level. However, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides and the proportion of graphs that contain these proteins increase. Large differences between the two underlying organisms (mouse and yeast) on database as well as quantitative level could be observed. Insights of this analysis may be useful for the development of protein inference and  quantification algorithms. Link to preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2021.07.28.454128v1?ct=

### Sample Protocol
See the original data set PXD012986 for sample processing.

### Data Protocol
The raw data files as well as the protein database were taken from the ProteomXchange repository, identifier PXD012986. Data were re-analyzed using a KNIME Workflow using the search engines Mascot 2.5 [PMID: 10612281], MS-GF+ [PMID: 20829449] and X!Tandem [PMID: 14976030]. The peptide identifications were combined using PIA [PMID: 30474983 and 25938255]. The workflows were similar to the workflows of the original publication [PMID: 31699904], except for an applied peptide identification filter directly after the spectrum identification leaving only peptides which are strictly tryptic (i.e. strictly cutting after the amino acids R and K, if not followed by a P). The resulting quantified peptides (quantified_peptides-featureFinderCentroided.csv) were used for the further analysis. The corresponding protein database consists of in total 52,824 entries, 52,548 mouse proteins (UniProt reference mouse proteome from Dec 2017), the 13 spike-in proteins, 147 spike-in contaminants and 115 potential contaminants from the cRAP database.

### Publication Abstract
In bottom-up proteomics, proteins are enzymatically digested into peptides before measurement with mass spectrometry. The relationship between proteins and their corresponding peptides can be represented by bipartite graphs. We conduct a comprehensive analysis of bipartite graphs using quantified peptides from measured data sets as well as theoretical peptides from an in silico digestion of the corresponding complete taxonomic protein sequence databases. The aim of this study is to characterize and structure the different types of graphs that occur and to compare them between data sets. We observed a large influence of the accepted minimum peptide length during in silico digestion. When changing from theoretical peptides to measured ones, the graph structures are subject to two opposite effects. On the one hand, the graphs based on measured peptides are on average smaller and less complex compared to graphs using theoretical peptides. On the other hand, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides, which are a complicated case for protein inference and quantification, is considerably larger for measured data. Additionally, the proportion of graphs containing at least one protein node without unique peptides rises when going from database to quantitative level. The fraction of shared peptides and proteins without unique peptides as well as the complexity and size of the graphs highly depends on the data set and organism. Large differences between the structures of bipartite peptide-protein graphs have been observed between database and quantitative level as well as between analyzed species. In the analyzed measured data sets, the proportion of protein nodes without unique peptides ranged from 6.4% to 55.0%. This highlights the need for novel methods that can quantify proteins without unique peptides. The knowledge about the structure of the bipartite peptide-protein graphs gained in this study will be useful for the development of such algorithms.

### Keywords
Mus musculus, Spike-in, Label-free

### Affiliations
Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Ruhr-University Bochum
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics  Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI)

### Submitter
Karin Schork

### Lab Head
Dr Martin Eisenacher
Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Faculty, Medizinisches Proteom-Center, Medical Bioinformatics  Ruhr-University Bochum, Medical Proteome Analysis, Center for Proteindiagnostics (PRODI)


