### Accession
PXD037421

### Title
Protein SUMOylation in the Drosophila ovary

### Description
Genome regulation involves complex and highly regulated protein interactions that are often mediated through post-translational modifications (PTMs). SUMOylation – the covalent attachment of the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO) – is a conserved PTM in eukaryotes that has been implicated in a number of essential processes such as nuclear import, DNA damage repair, transcriptional control, and chromatin organization. In Drosophila, SUMO is essential for viability and its depletion from the female germline causes infertility associated with global loss of heterochromatin, and illicit upregulation of transposons and lineage-inappropriate genes. However, the specific targets of SUMO and its mechanistic role in different cellular pathways are still poorly understood. Here, we developed a proteomics-based strategy to characterize the SUMOylated proteome in Drosophila that allowed us to identify ~1500 SUMO sites in 843 proteins in the fly ovary. A high confidence set of SUMOylated proteins is highly enriched in factors involved in heterochromatin regulation and the piRNA pathway that represses transposons. Furthermore, SUMOylation of several piRNA pathway proteins occurs in a Piwi-dependent manner, indicating a functional implication of this modification in the cellular response to transposon activity. Together, these data highlight the impact of SUMOylation on epigenetic regulation and reveal an unexpectedly broad role of the SUMO pathway in the cellular defense against genomic parasites. Finally, this work provides a valuable resource and a system that can be adapted to the study of SUMOylation in other Drosophila tissues.

### Sample Protocol
For each replicate, 600 hand-dissected ovaries from flies encoding 6xHIS-SUMO-TR or wild type controls (iso1) strain were lysed in 6M Guanidine HCl denaturing lysis buffer and subjected to Ni affinity purification. Purified proteins were digested with trypsin, and resulting peptides were processed according to the PTMScan® Ubiquitin Remnant Motif (K-ε-GG) Kit #5562 manual. Label-free peptide samples were subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis on an EASY-nLC 1200 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) coupled to a Q Exactive HF Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) equipped with a Nanospray Flex ion source. Samples were directly loaded onto an Aurora 25cm x 75µm ID, 1.6µm C18 column (Ion Opticks) heated to 50°C. The peptides were separated with a 60 min gradient at a flow rate of 220 nL/min for the in-house packed column or 350 nL/min for the Aurora column. The gradient was as follows: 2–6% Solvent B (3.5 min), 6-25% B (42 min), 25-40% B (14.5 min), 40-98% B (1 min), and held at 100% B (12 min). Solvent A consisted of 97.8 % H2O, 2% ACN, and 0.2% formic acid and solvent B consisted of 19.8% H2O, 80 % ACN, and 0.2% formic acid. The Q Exactive HF Orbitrap was operated in data dependent mode with the Tune (version 2.7 SP1build 2659) instrument control software. Spray voltage was set to 1.5 kV, S-lens RF level at 50, and heated capillary at 275°C. Full scan resolution was set to 60,000 at m/z 200. Full scan target was 3 × 106 with a maximum injection time of 15 ms. Mass range was set to 400−1650 m/z. For data dependent MS2 scans the loop count was 12, AGC target was set at 1 × 105, and intensity threshold was kept at 1 × 105. Isolation width was set at 1.2 m/z and a fixed first mass of 100 was used. Normalized collision energy was set at 28. Peptide match was set to off, and isotope exclusion was on. Data acquisition was controlled by Xcalibur (4.0.27.13), with ms1 data acquisition in profile mode and ms2 data acquisition in centroid mode.

### Data Protocol
Thermo raw files were processed and searched using MaxQuant (v. 1.6.10.43)45,46. Spectra were searched against D. melanogaster UniProt entries plus the His-SUMO-TR sequence and a common contaminant database. Trypsin was specified as the digestion enzyme and up to two missed cleavages were allowed. False discovery rates were estimated using a target-decoy approach, where the decoy database was generated by reversing the target database sequences. Protein, peptide, and PSM scores were set to achieve a 1% FDR at each level. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified as a fixed modification. Protein N-terminal acetylation, methionine oxidation, and diGly remnant on lysine were specified as variable modifications with a maximum of 5 mods per peptide. Precursor mass tolerance was 4.5 ppm after mass recalibration and fragment ion tolerance was 20 ppm. Search type was specified as Standard with multiplicity of 1. Fast LFQ and normalization were used, and both re-quantify and match-between-runs were enabled.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Ovary, Sumo, Drosophila

### Affiliations
UC Riverside
Department of Biochemistry, UC Riverside

### Submitter
Maria Ninova

### Lab Head
Dr Maria Antoninova Ninova
Department of Biochemistry, UC Riverside


