### Accession
PXD020036

### Title
Cigarette smoke induces changes in the basement membrane proteins of the corneal endothelium

### Description
Proteome profiling was performed to investigate changes at a molecular level in the mouse corneal endothelium (CE) along with the basement membrane exposed to cigarette smoke (CS). Pregnant mice (gestation days 18-20) were placed in a whole-body exposure smoking chamber and a few days later pups were born. After 3½ months of CS exposure, the Confoscan4 scanning microscope was used to examine the CE of CS-exposed and control (Ct) mice. The CE was peeled under a microscope and maintained as four biological replicates (two male and two female) for CS-exposed and Ct mice; each replicate consisted of 16 CE. The proteome of the CE was investigated through mass-spectrometry using 8-plex isobaric tandem mass tags (TMT). The CE images of CS-exposed and Ct mice revealed a difference in the shape of corneal endothelial cells (CECs) accompanied by a nearly 10% decrease in CEC density (p = 3.0e-0.5) resulting from exposure to CS. The proteome profiling identified a total of 524 proteins exhibiting statistically significant changes in CE from CS-exposed and Ct mice. Importantly, proteins known to be an integral part of the basement membrane including COL4α1, COL4α2, COL4α3, COL4α4, COL4α5, and COL4α6, Col8α1, Col8α2, FN1, etc. exhibited diminished protein levels in the CE of CS-exposed mice. Here, we report the effects of CS on the CE, and our data strongly suggest that CS exposure results in reduced CEC density and diminished concentration of proteins known to be an integral part of the basement membrane.

### Sample Protocol
The C57BL/6J (Stock # 000664; Jackson laboratory) mice strain was used for all experiments. The mice were exposed to CS by placing pregnant mice (gestation days 18-20) in a whole-body exposure smoking chamber and a few days later pups were born. The smoke chamber contained a smoking machine (TE-10, Teague Enterprises, Davis, CA) that burnt five cigarettes (2R4F reference cigarettes (2.45 mg nicotine/cigarette; Tobacco Research Institute, University of Kentucky) at a time, taking two-second duration puffs at a flow rate of 1.05 l/minute, to provide a standard puff of 35 cm3, providing a total of eight puffs per minute. The machine was adjusted to produce sidestream (89%) and mainstream smoke (11%). The chamber atmosphere was monitored to maintain total suspended particulate at 90 mg/m3 and carbon monoxide at 350 ppm. Of these, four adult females along with 32 pups (16 males and 16 females) were exposed to CS for five hours/day, five days/week, and remained in the chamber for a total of 105 days (3½ months). In parallel, four adult females and thirty-two (16 males and 16 females) pups were housed at the Johns Hopkins animal facility for 3½ months that served as a control (Ct).

### Data Protocol
Protein extraction and digestion: The extracted CE from CS-exposed and Ct mice was maintained at −80°C in distinct biological replicates. We used four biological replicates (two male and two female) of the CS-exposed and Ct mice, each of the four biological replicates consisting of 16 CE (right and left eyes) from eight male or eight female mice were used for an 8-plex TMT experiment. Briefly, the frozen samples were homogenized using a sonicator in the lysis buffer (4% sodium dodecyl sulfate in 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate). The homogenized samples were centrifuged at 17,000 x g at 4 °C for 5 minutes to collect pellets. The pellets were subjected to 60 pressure cycles, consisting of 40,000 psi for 50 seconds followed by ambient pressure for 10 seconds at 90 °C using Barocycler 2320 EXT. A total of 100 μg proteins for each sample were reduced and alkylated with 10 mM of tris (2-Carboxyethyl) phosphine hydrochloride and 40 mM of chloroacetamide at room temperature for 1 hour. The protein samples were digested with LysC in the ratio of 1:100 at 37 °C for 3 hours. The samples were further digested with sequencing-grade trypsin in the ratio of 1:50 at 37 °C overnight. The digested peptide samples were labeled with 10-plex TMT reagents. The eight channels (126, 127N, 127C, 128N, 128C, 129N, 129C, and 130N) were used for the labeling. The labeling reaction was performed for 1 hour at room temperature, followed by quenching with 1 volume of 100 mM Tris-HCl (pH 8.0). The digested and labeled peptides were pooled and fractionated by basic pH reversed-phase liquid chromatography into 96 fractions, followed by concatenation into 24 fractions by combining every 24th fraction. Mass spectrometry analysis: The fractionated peptides were analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid Mass Spectrometer coupled with an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano nano-flow liquid chromatography system. The peptides from each fraction were loaded on an Acclaim PepMap100 Nano-Trap Column (100 μm × 2 cm) packed with 5-μm C18 particles at a flow rate of 8 μl/minute. Peptides were resolved at 300 nl/minute flow rate using a linear gradient of 8% to 35% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in 95% acetonitrile) over 95 minutes on an EASY-Spray column (75 μm × 50 cm) packed with 2-μm C18 particles, which was fitted with an EASY-Spray ion source that was operated at a voltage of 2.0 kV. Mass spectrometry analysis was completed in a data-dependent manner with a full scan in the mass-to-charge ratio (m/z) range of 300 to 1800 in the “top speed” setting, 3 seconds per cycle. MS1 was acquired for the precursor ions measured at a resolution of 120,000 at an m/z of 200. An MS2 scan was acquired by fragmenting precursor ions using a higher-energy collisional dissociation method and detected at a mass resolution of 50,000 at an m/z of 200. Automatic gain control for MS1 was set to one million ions, and MS2 was set to 0.05 million ions. A maximum ion injection time was set to 50 milliseconds for MS1, and 100 milliseconds for MS2 (HCD was set to 35%). The precursor isolation window was set to 1.6 m/z with a 0.4 m/z offset. Dynamic exclusion was set to 30 seconds, and singly charged ions were rejected. Internal calibration was carried out using the lock mass option (m/z 445.1200025) from ambient air.  Data analysis: Proteome Discoverer (Ver. 2.2) suite was used for quantitation and identification. During MS/MS preprocessing, the top 10 peaks in each window of 100 m/z were selected for database search. The tandem mass spectrometry data were then searched using SEQUEST algorithms against a mouse UniProt database (May 2018) with common contaminant proteins. The search parameters were used as follows: a) trypsin as a proteolytic enzyme (with up to two missed cleavages); b) peptide mass error tolerance of 10 ppm; c) fragment mass error tolerance of 0.02 Da; and d) carbamidomethylation of cysteine (+57.02146 Da) and TMT tags (+229.162932 Da) on lysine residues and peptide N-termini as a fixed modification and oxidation of methionine (+15.99492 Da) as a variable modification. The minimum peptide length was set to 7 amino acids, and proteins identified by two peptides were filtered out. Peptides and proteins were filtered at a 1% false-discovery rate (FDR) at the peptide spectrum matches level using a percolator node and at the protein level using protein FDR validator node, respectively. MS order was set to MS2. Both unique and razor peptides were used for peptide quantification. Reporter ion abundance was computed based on the signal-to-noise ratio. The average reporter signal-to-noise threshold was set to 50. The Proteome Discoverer summed all the reporter ion intensities of PSMs for the corresponding proteins in TMT run. The reporter ion intensities of four CS-exposed replicates were divided by the reporter ion intensity value of four control replicates, separately. To remove systemic deviation, each column was divided by the median value of the corresponding column.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Proteome, Mass-spectrometry, Corneal endothelium, Cigarette smoke, Basement membrane

### Affiliations
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA
Johns Hopkins Wilmer Eye Institute

### Submitter
OM Genetics

### Lab Head
Dr S. Amer Riazuddin
The Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21287 USA


