### Accession
PXD045588

### Title
Antimycin A-treated vs ETFDH-ko myoblasts TMT

### Description
The electron transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase (ETFDH) is the bottleneck enzyme of fatty acid oxidation (FAO). We performed a TMT 6plex analysis on Antimycin A treated and ETFDH-ko myoblasts (compared to CRL).

### Sample Protocol
Sample proteins were extracted in lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, 1% NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM DTT, 0.1% SDS, and 0.4 mM EDTA, pH 8.0) supplemented with protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktails. Lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 13000 g for 15 min at 4 °C. In-Gel Digestion. Protein extracts were fractionated in a SDS-PAGE gel (0.75 mm-thick, 4% stacking, and 10% resolving). Protein bands were visualized by Coomassie staining, cut into cubes (2 x 2 mm), destained in acetonitrile:water (ACN:H2O, 1:1), reduced and alkylated (disulfide bonds from cysteinyl residues were reduced with 10 mM DTT for 1 h at 56 ºC, and then thiol groups were alkylated with 10 mM ACN for 30 min at RT) and  digested in situ with sequencing grade trypsin. Gel pieces were dried in a speedvac and re-swollen in 100 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 10mM CaCl2 with 60 ng/µL trypsin at 5:1 protein:enzyme (w/w) ratio. Digestion was stopped by the addition of 1% TFA. Whole supernatants were dried down and desalted onto OMIX Pipette tips C18 until the mass spectrometric analysis. TMT labelling. The resultant peptide mixture from desalted proteins tryptic digest (60 µg) was labelled using chemicals from the TMT sixplex Isobaric Mass Tagging Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific) as described by manufacturer.  Fractionation. The sample was then fractionated using the Pierce High pH Reversed-Phase Peptide Fractionation Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific)  Quantitative analysis by reverse phase-liquid chromatography RP-LC-MS/MS. The fractions were resuspended in 10 µL of 0.1% formic acid and analysed in an Easy-nLC II system coupled to an ion trap LTQ-Orbitrap-Velos-Pro hybrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). The peptides were concentrated (on-line) by reverse phase chromatography using a 0.1mm × 20 mm C18 RP precolumn (Thermo Scientific), and then separated using a 0.075mm x 250 mm C18 RP column (Thermo Scientific) operating at 0.3 μl/min. Peptides were eluted using a 90-min dual gradient. The gradient profile was set as follows: 5−25% solvent B for 68 min, 25−40% solvent B for 22 min, 40−100% solvent B for 2 min and 100% solvent B for 18 min (Solvent A: 0,1% formic acid in water, solvent B: 0,1% formic acid, 80% ACN in water). ESI ionization was done using a Nano-bore emitters Stainless Steel ID 30 μm (Proxeon) interface at 2.1 kV spray voltage with S-Lens of 60%. The instrument method consisted of a data-dependent top-20 experiment with an Orbitrap MS1 scan at a resolution (m/Δm) of 30,000 followed by twenty high energy collision dissociation (HCD) MS/MS mass-analyzed in the Orbitrap at 7,500 (Δm/m) resolution. The minimum MS signal for triggering MS/MS was set to 500. The lock mass option was enabled for both MS and MS/MS mode and the polydimethylcyclosiloxane ions (protonated (Si(CH3)2O))6; m/z 445.120025) were used for internal recalibration of the mass spectra. Peptides were detected in survey scans from 400 to 1600 amu (1 μscan) using an isolation width of 1.3 u (in mass-to-charge ratio units), normalized collision energy of 40% for HCD fragmentation, and dynamic exclusion applied for 60 seconds periods. Charge-state screening was enabled to reject unassigned and singly charged protonated ions.

### Data Protocol
Peptide identification from raw data was carried out using PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc.). Database search was performed against uniprot-mus-musculus.fasta. Search engine was configured to match potential peptide candidates with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.025 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, considering fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation at Protein N-term. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 1% and only proteins identified with at least a unique peptide were allowed. Peptide signal abundances were extracted and normalized to obtain the signal abundances at the protein level. Quantitation of TMT labelled peptides was performed with PEAKS Studio Xpro search engine, selected “Reporter Ion Quantification iTRAQ/TMT” under the “Quantifications” options. We use Auto normalization mode that calculate a global ratio from the total intensity of all labels in all quantifiable peptides. The -10LgP, Quality and Reporter Ion Intensity (1e4) were used for Spectrum filter and Significance (PEAKSQ method) was used for peptide and protein abundance calculation.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Myoblast, Antimycin a, Etfdh, Tmt

### Affiliations
Universidad Autónoma de Madrid
Principal Investigator at Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO, UAM-CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, Spain. University professor at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, Spain.

### Submitter
Beñat Salegi

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formentini
Principal Investigator at Departamento de Biología Molecular, Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa (CBMSO, UAM-CSIC), Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, Spain. University professor at Universidad Autónoma de Madrid (UAM), Madrid, Spain.


