### Accession
PXD005853

### Title
SHOTGUN PROTEOMIC ANALYSIS TO STUDY THE DECREASE OF XENOGRAFT TUMOR GROWTH AFTER ROSEMARY EXTRACT TREATMENT

### Description
In the present work, the effects of rosemary extract on xenograft tumor growth has been studied and, for the first time, a shotgun proteomic analysis based on nanoliquid chromatography−tandem mass spectrometry (nano-LC−MS/MS) together with stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) has been applied to investigate the global protein changes in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
10 mg of xenograft tumor were disrupted under liquid N2 and dissolved in 300 µL of lysis buffer (20% ACN, 6 M urea, 1% BOG, 0.15 M NaCl, 1.3 mM EDTA, 1 mM NaVO4, 5 mM NaF, 2.5 mM sodium-pyrophospate and 5 mM β-Glycerophosphate in PBS) supplemented with 10 µL of protease inhibitor cocktail to prevent protein degradation. The samples were incubated for 60 min at 4 ºC during mild agitation, sonicated for 30 min at 0 ºC in water bath and then centrifuged at 10000×g at 4 ºC for 15 min. 20 µg of proteins were reduced with 10 µL of 45 mM DTT at 56 ºC for 15 min, alkylated with 10 µL of 100 mM IAA for 15 min in the dark, and digested with 1 µg of LysC/trypsin solution at 37 ºC overnight. The digests were dried in a SpeedVac system to remove ACN, and water saturated ethyl-acetate was used to extract BOG. Afterwards, the samples were dried, reconstituted in 100 µL of 1% FA and desalted on Isolute C18 solid phase extraction columns. After desalting, peptides from vehicle-control, pre-treated or a pool of samples were labeled as medium, heavy and light, respectively. These labeled samples were mixed, cleaned up using C18 SPE columns, dried in a SpeedVac, and redissolved in 0.1% FA to a final concentration of 1 μg/μL prior to nano-LC−MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
All MS raw files were collectively processed with MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) (http://www.coxdocs.org/doku.php?id=maxquant:start) [25], analyzing the four technical replicates as the same experiment (to increase the number of identified proteins) and applying the Andromeda search engine [26] with the following adaptions. The false discovery rate (FDR) was set to 1% for both proteins and peptides, and a minimum length of seven amino acids was specified. MaxQuant scored peptides for identification based on a search with a maximal mass deviation of precursor and fragment masses of up to 20 ppm and 0.5 Da. The Andromeda search engine was used for the MS/MS spectra search against a concatenated forward and reversed version of the Uniprot human database (downloaded on February 11, 2015, containing 89,909 entries and 245 frequently detected contaminants) for quantitative study. Enzyme specificity was set as C-terminal to Arg and Lys, also allowing cleavage at proline bonds and a maximum of two missed cleavages. Carbamidomethylation of Cys residues was set as fixed modification while oxidation of Met and protein N-acetylation were allowed as variable modifications. For dimethyl labeling, DimethylLys0 and DimethylNter0 were set as light labels, DimethylLys4 and DimethylNter4 were set as medium labels, and DimethylLys8 and DimethylNter8 were set as heavy labels. A minimum peptide ratio count of two and at least one “razor peptide” was required for quantification. After protein quantification, all the quantified ratios (M/L, H/L and H/M) obtained from MaxQuant, were normalized by dividing the ratios with the median of the ratios.

### Publication Abstract
The antiproliferative activity of Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) has been widely studied in different in vitro and in vivo models, which demonstrate that rosemary extracts inhibit the cellular proliferation due to its ability to interact with a wide spectrum of molecular targets. However, a comprehensive proteomics study in vivo has not been carried out yet. In the present work, the effects of rosemary extract on xenograft tumor growth has been studied and, for the first time, a shotgun proteomic analysis based on nano-LC-MS/MS together with stable isotope dimethyl labeling (DML) has been applied to investigate the global protein changes in vivo. Our results show that the daily administration of a polyphenol-enriched rosemary extract reduces the progression of colorectal cancer in vivo with the subsequent deregulation of 74 proteins. The bioinformatic analysis of these proteins indicates that the rosemary extract mainly alters the RNA Post-Transcriptional Modification, the Protein Synthesis and the Amino Acid Metabolism functions and suggests the inactivation of the oncogene MYC. These results demonstrate the high utility of the proposed analytical methodology to determine, simultaneously, the expression levels of a large number of protein biomarkers and to generate new hypothesis about the molecular mechanisms of this extract in vivo.

### Keywords
Xenograft mice, Colon cancer, Quantitative proteomics, Rosemary extract, Mass spectrometry, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049 Madrid, Spain
Department of Chemistry-BMC, Analytical Chemistry, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden

### Submitter
Alberto Valdés

### Lab Head
Dr Alejandro Cifuentes
Laboratory of Foodomics, Institute of Food Science Research (CIAL, CSIC), Calle Nicolás Cabrera 9, 28049 Madrid, Spain


