### Accession
PXD005158

### Title
Maintenance of Neural Activities in Torpid Rhinolophus ferrumequinum Bats Revealed by 2D Gel-based Proteome Analysis

### Description
Bats are the only mammals capable of self-powered flying. Many bat species hibernate in winter. A reversible control of cerebral activities is critical for bats to accommodate a repeated torpor-arousal cycle during hibernation. Little is known about the molecular mechanism that regulates neuronal activities in torpid bats. In this study, brain proteins were fractionated and compared between torpid and active Rhinolophus ferrumequinum bats.

### Sample Protocol
50 mg mashed whole brain was homogenized in 1 mL lysis buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 1.5% NonidetTM P-40, 1X protease inhibitor, and 1X nuclease mix) at 4oC. The homogenate was centrifuged at 14,000 xg, 4oC for 30 min. The clarified supernatant was concentrated with a Centricon Plus-20 Ultracel-10 filter (Millipore, Billerica, MA), and the resulting solution was designated fraction S. The precipitate was dissolved in 700 μL rehydration buffer (7 M urea, 2 M thiourea, 2% CHAPS); sonicated at 100 w, 40 kHz for 20 min at 4oC; and then centrifuged at 14,000 xg, 4oC for 30 min. The resulting supernatant was designated fraction P. The sample from each bat was divided into small aliquots and stored at -80oC until used. One aliquot was used to measure protein concentration by the Quick StartTM Bradford protein assay kit (Bio-Rad, USA) according to manufacturer's instructions.

### Data Protocol
The dried peptides were resuspended in 10 μL of 0.1% formic acid and subjected to LTQ-Orbitrap Discovery hybrid mass spectrometer with a nano-eletrospray ion source (Thermoelectron, San Jose, CA) connected to a nano-flow HPLC (Agilent Technologies 1200 series). The acquired data were processed by Xcalibur 2.0 SR1 software, and the MS/MS data were converted to DTA files using our in-house program. TurboSEQUEST (version 27, revision 11, Waltham, MA) was used to analyze DTA files against the R. ferrumequinum protein database containing 22,338 peptide entities (our unpublished results). The sequences identified were blasted against 41,840 non-redundant entities in the UniprotKB database (Swiss-Prot, 2015/11/07) to obtain UniProt accession numbers (UIDs) of the identified proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Bats are the only mammals capable of self-powered flying. Many bat species hibernate in winter. A reversible control of cerebral activities is critical for bats to accommodate a repeated torpor-arousal cycle during hibernation. Little is known about the molecular mechanisms that regulate neuronal activities in torpid bats. In this study, Rhinolophus ferrumequinum bat brain proteins were fractionated, and their abundance in active and torpid states was compared. Results of 2D gel-based proteomics showed that 38% of identified proteins with a significant change in abundance are involved in synaptic vesicle recycling and cytoskeletal integrity. Changes in the abundance of proteins related to RNA splicing, proteostasis, redox homeostasis, mitochondrial function, and energy metabolism were also detected. In addition, the levels of GNAO1 (guanine nucleotide-binding protein G<sub>&#x3b1;o</sub> subunit), an important modulator of neuronal transmembrane signaling, were significantly increased in the insoluble protein fraction of torpid bats; this may be due to GNAO1 palmitoylation making it insoluble. Our data provide molecular evidence for the maintenance of neuronal activities in torpid bats and suggest that a reversible palmitoylation of the G protein plays a role in the regulation of neuronal activities during bat hibernation.

### Keywords
Bats, Palmitoylation, Hibernation, Gnao1, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
Proteomics Research Center,National Yang-Ming University
National Yang-Ming University  Proteomics Research Center (R648), Taipei, 112 Taiwan (ROC)

### Submitter
Chen-Chung Liao

### Lab Head
Dr Chen-Chung Liao
National Yang-Ming University  Proteomics Research Center (R648), Taipei, 112 Taiwan (ROC)


