### Accession
PXD011344

### Title
The role of early chromatin changes in X chromosome inactivation

### Description
During development, transcriptional and chromatin modification changes co-occur but the order and causality of events often remain unclear. We explore the interrelationship of these processes using the paradigm of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI). We initiate XCI in female, mouse embryonic stem cells by inducing Xist expression and monitor changes in transcription and chromatin by allele-specific TT-seq and ChIP-seq respectively. An unprecedented temporal resolution enabled identification of the earliest chromatin alterations during XCI. We demonstrate that HDAC3 interacts with both NCOR1 and NCOR2 and is pre-bound on the X chromosome where it deacetylates histones to promote efficient gene silencing. We also reveal the choreography of polycomb accumulation following Xist RNA coating, with PRC1-associated H2AK119Ub preceding PRC2-associated H3K27me3. Furthermore, polycomb-associated marks accumulate initially at large, intergenic domains and then spreads into genes but only in the context of gene silencing. Our results provide the hierarchy of chromatin events during XCI and demonstrate that some chromatin changes play key roles in mediating transcriptional silencing.

### Sample Protocol
50mln (per IP) ESCs (TX1072 –DOX; Hdac3Flag/Flag +DOX 24h) were trypsinised and washed in PBS. Pellets were snap frozen and stored at -80°C. Defrosted pellets were resuspended in 10mL of buffer A (10mM HEPES pH 7.9; 5mM MgCl2; 10mM KCl; 1mM DTT; 0.1% NP-40, protease inhibitors) and incubated for 10min at 4°C. Nuclei were pelleted at 2000rpm at 4°C for 10 minutes. Nuclei were resuspended in 500ul of buffer C (20mM HEPES pH 7.9; 20% (v/v) glycerol; 150mM KCl; 5mM MgCl2; 2mM EDTA; 2mM EDTA; 1mM DTT; protease inhibitors) and sonicated 3 times for 10 sec (Bioruptor, medium setting). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation 12000rpm at 4°C for 20 minutes. Lysate concentrations were equalised based on protein concentration. Anti-FLAG M2 Magnetic Beads (Sigma-Aldrich) were washed twice in buffer C and then added to each lysate (50ul per IP). Lysates were left rotating over-night at 4 °C. Next day beads were washed 5 times in wash buffer (20mM HEPES pH 7.9; 0.1% NP-40; 150mM KCl; 5mM MgCl2; 2mM EDTA; 2mM EDTA; 1mM DTT). Proteins on magnetic beads were washed twice with 100 μL of 25 mM NH4HCO3 and on-beads digestion was performed with 0.2 μg of trypsin/LysC (Promega) for 1 hour in 100 µL of 25 mM NH4HCO3. Samples were then loaded onto a custom-made C18 StageTips for desalting. Peptides were eluted using 40/60 MeCN/H2O + 0.1% formic acid and vacuum concentrated to dryness. Online chromatography was performed with an RSLCnano system (Ultimate 3000, Thermo Scientific) coupled online to an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). Peptides were trapped on a C18 column (75 μm inner diameter × 2 cm; nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM 100, Thermo Scientific) with buffer A (2/98 MeCN/H2O in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 4.0 µL/min over 4 min. Separation was performed on a 50 cm x 75 μm C18 column (nanoViper Acclaim PepMapTM RSLC, 2 μm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) regulated to a temperature of 55°C with a linear gradient of 5% to 25% buffer B (100% MeCN in 0.1% formic acid) at a flow rate of 300 nL/min over 100 min. Full-scan MS was acquired in the Orbitrap analyser with a resolution set to 120,000 and ions from each full scan were HCD fragmented and analysed in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
For identification, the data were searched against the Mus musculus (UP000000589) UniProt database using Sequest HF through proteome discoverer (version 2.2). Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and a maximum of two-missed cleavage sites were allowed. Oxidized methionine, N-terminal acetylation, and carbamidomethyl cysteine were set as variable modifications. Maximum allowed mass deviation was set to 10 ppm for monoisotopic precursor ions and 0.6 Da for MS/MS peaks.  The resulting files were further processed using myProMS v3.6 (Poullet et al., 2007). FDR calculation used Percolator and was set to 1% at the peptide level for the whole study. The label free quantification was performed by peptide Extracted Ion Chromatograms (XICs) computed with MassChroQ version 2.2.2 (Valot et al., 2011). For protein quantification, XICs from proteotypic peptides shared between compared conditions (TopN matching) with no missed cleavages were used. Median and scale normalization was applied on the total signal to correct the XICs for each biological replicate. To estimate the significance of the change in protein abundance, a linear model (adjusted on peptides and biological replicates) was performed and p-values were adjusted with a Benjamini–Hochberg FDR procedure with a control threshold set to 0.05.

### Publication Abstract
During development, the precise relationships between transcription and chromatin modifications often remain unclear. We use the X chromosome inactivation (XCI) paradigm to explore the implication of chromatin changes in gene silencing. Using female mouse embryonic stem cells, we initiate XCI by inducing Xist and then monitor the temporal changes in transcription and chromatin by allele-specific profiling. This reveals histone deacetylation and H2AK119 ubiquitination as the earliest chromatin alterations during XCI. We show that HDAC3 is pre-bound on the X chromosome and that, upon Xist coating, its activity is required for efficient gene silencing. We also reveal that first PRC1-associated H2AK119Ub and then PRC2-associated H3K27me3 accumulate initially at large intergenic domains that can then spread into genes only in the context of histone deacetylation and gene silencing. Our results reveal the hierarchy of chromatin events during the initiation of XCI and identify key roles for chromatin in the early steps of transcriptional silencing.

### Keywords
X chromosome inactivation; mouse embryonic stem cells; epigenomics; transcriptomics; histone deacetylation; polycomb; histone acetylation

### Affiliations
Institut Curie
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University

### Submitter
Guillaume Arras

### Lab Head
Dr Damarys Loew
Laboratoire de Spectrometrie de Masse Proteomique Institut Curie PSL Research University


