### Accession
PXD005321

### Title
Alzheimer Disease (AD) and AD model detergent insoluble proteomes

### Description
Characterizing the detergent insoluble brain proteome of sporadic late-onset Alzheimer’s disease (LOAD) has identified proteins and pathways associated with disease pathogenesis. Similar studies in early onset Alzheimer’s disease cases due to presenilin-1 mutations (PS1-EOAD), along with more detailed correlations with insoluble proteomes from LOAD and AD transgenic rodents, are limited. We therefore utilized quantitative proteomics to identify proteins that were significantly changing in the PS1-EOAD insoluble proteome versus controls. Comparison with the LOAD insoluble proteome identified common pathologic AD markers in addition to unique PS1-EOAD insoluble proteins. Similarly, weighted correlation network analysis (WGCNA) identified PS1-EOAD and LOAD co-expression modules with both like and disparate expression levels. Finally, we compared the human PS1-EOAD insoluble proteome to transgenic AD mouse and rat insoluble proteomes to understand how well these models mimic the human disease. Although many common AD pathologic findings were found in the rodents, there were multiple PS1-EOAD proteome changes not well recapitulated in the animal models. These proteomic studies highlight unique PS1-EOAD proteome changes as compared to LOAD and identify limitations to using AD transgenic rodents to study some aspects of AD.

### Sample Protocol
Fresh frozen postmortem human brain was obtained from the Emory Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center Neuropathology Core (Emory University, Atlanta, GA, Marla Gearing Ph.D.), the University of Washington Alzheimer’s Disease Research Center Neuropathology Core (Seattle, WA, Tom Montine MD), and the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (Baltimore, MD, Juan Troncoso). Amyloid precursor protein/PS1 (APP/PS1; APPswe/PS1𝛥E9 mutations) and wild type (WT) mice (12 months old) were obtained from Dr. Jeremy Herskowitz (Emory University, Atlanta, GA) and APP/PS1 (APPswe/PS1𝛥E9 mutations) and WT rats (10 months old) were obtained from Robert Cohen (Emory University, Atlanta, GA) [8, 9]. Animal samples were collected under Emory IACUC approved protocols. Samples were prepared as previous described [4, 7]. Demographics of human cases are present in Table S1. Control and LOAD cases were matched for age, gender, PMI and ApoE [10]. PS1-EOAD cases were significantly younger than control and LOAD cases, however, this was unavoidable so as to allow for data normalization across gels with the same 5 controls (see section 2.3 below). Briefly, ~150 mg of fresh frozen tissue was homogenized on ice using a 2 ml dounce homogenizer in low salt buffer (50 mM HEPES, 25 mM NaCl, 250 mM sucrose, 1 mM EDTA, Sigma protease inhibitor cocktail). 10% N-lauryl sarcosine and 5 M NaCl was then used to bring samples to a final concentration of 1% N-lauryl sarcosine and 0.5 M NaCl. Samples were sonicated (Sonic Dismembrator System, Fisher Scienific) with a microtip probe using 3 x 5 second pulses (30% amplitude) with 15 seconds off time in between. Samples were transferred to an ultracentrifuge tube and centrifuged at 180,000xg for 30 minutes at 4°C. The supernatant was carefully removed and saved. The remaining detergent insoluble pellet was dissolved in 8 M urea and 2% sodium dodecyl sulfate. LC-MS/MS analysis and label free quantification were performed as previously described [11]. 50 µg of the detergent insoluble fraction from individual cases was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 15 minutes at room temperature followed by alkylation with 20 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 minutes at room temperature in the dark and run on a 10% SDS gel and stained with Coomassie blue.  Each gel lane was split into 5 molecular weight regions and subjected to subsequent in-gel trypsin digestion (12.5 µg/ml trypsin at 37°C overnight). Peptides were extracted with formic acid and acetonitrile followed by liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
The SageN Sorcerer SEQUEST 3.5 algorithm matched MS/MS spectra to a semi-tryptic human proteome database (NCBI reference sequence revision 50, 66,652 proteins), mouse proteome database (NCBI reference sequence revision 54, 57,732 proteins), or rat proteome database (NCBI reference sequence 62, 59,378 proteins). For rat database, human APP sequence was added. SEQUEST parameters were 20.0 ppm peptide mass tolerance, oxidation on Met residues as a differential modification, up to 3 instances per peptide, and an isotope check using a mass shift of 1.003355 Da. Extracted ion current (XIC) measurements of peptides were used to quantify protein levels using previously published in-house DQuan software with standard parameters

### Publication Abstract
Despite a key role of amyloid-beta (A&#x3b2;) in Alzheimer's disease (AD), mechanisms that link A&#x3b2; plaques to tau neurofibrillary tangles and cognitive decline still remain poorly understood. The purpose of this study was to quantify proteins in the sarkosyl-insoluble brain proteome correlated with A&#x3b2; and tau insolubility in the asymptomatic phase of AD (AsymAD) and through mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and symptomatic AD. Employing label-free mass spectrometry-based proteomics, we quantified 2711 sarkosyl-insoluble proteins across the prefrontal cortex from 35 individual cases representing control, AsymAD, MCI and AD. Significant enrichment of A&#x3b2; and tau in AD was observed, which correlated with neuropathological measurements of plaque and tau tangle density, respectively. Pairwise correlation coefficients were also determined for all quantified proteins to A&#x3b2; and tau, across the 35 cases. Notably, six of the ten most correlated proteins to A&#x3b2; were U1 small nuclear ribonucleoproteins (U1 snRNPs). Three of these U1 snRNPs (U1A, SmD and U1-70K) also correlated with tau consistent with their association with tangle pathology in AD. Thus, proteins that cross-correlate with both A&#x3b2; and tau, including specific U1 snRNPs, may have potential mechanistic roles in linking A&#x3b2; plaques to tau tangle pathology during AD progression.

### Keywords
Neurodegeneration, Dquan, In-gel digestion, In house xic quantitation

### Affiliations
Emory University
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology Emory University School of Medicine

### Submitter
Eric Dammer

### Lab Head
Dr Nicholas T. Seyfried
Departments of Biochemistry and Neurology Emory University School of Medicine


