### Accession
PXD019800

### Title
Quantitative proteomic analysis of polarized macrophages

### Description
In this study, by using two classical macrophage cell models, RAW264.7 cell line from mouse and THP-1 cell line from human, combined with the applications of two classical stimulation methods for inducing classical activated (M1) and alternatively activated macrophages (M2) from the monocytes of both cell lines, we comprehensively identified and quantified proteins in different types of macrophages from both cell lines through high-throughput proteomics.

### Sample Protocol
For human macrophages, the THP-1 monocytes were treated by 10 ng/ml PMA for 24 h to M0 macrophages. The M0 cells were subsequently stimulated with human IFN-γ (50 ng/mL) and LPS (15 ng/mL) for 48 h to M1 phenotype, or stimulated with human IL-4 (25 ng/mL) and IL-13 (25 ng/mL) for 72 h to M2 phenotype. As for mouse macrophages, RAW 264.7 cells were stimulated by mouse IFN-γ (2.5 ng/mL) and LPS (200 ng/mL) for 24 h to M1 phenotype, or by mouse IL-4 (10 ng/mL) for 48 h to M2 phenotype. Proteins were extracted and digested by sequencing grade trypsin. Each peptide sample underwent triplicate LC−MS/MS runs using an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Mass Spectrometer coupled with an online EASY-nanoLC™ 1200 instrument.

### Data Protocol
All generated raw ﬁles were submitted to Thermo Proteome Discover with label-free quantitation (LFQ) analysis. The human and mouse protein sequence database were downloaded from UniProt database. Gene Ontology (GO) enrichment and Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathway analyses of the significantly different proteins between M1/M2 and M0 (control) macrophages was performed using DAVID software. Protein interactions were analyzed using STRING database.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Polarization, Lc-ms/ms, Macrophage

### Affiliations
College of Life Science, Northwest University

### Submitter
Zhifang Hao

### Lab Head
Dr Zhifang Hao
College of Life Science, Northwest University


