### Accession
PXD042539

### Title
Transcriptomic and proteomic profiling of non-classical monocytes unravels distinct pathogenic features in SLE

### Description
Current non-specific immunosuppressive treatments for Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) show modest efficacy. In SLE the monocytic/macrophage (Mo/Mφ) system plays a key role in the initiation and perpetuation of the systemic autoimmune response. However, the distinct functions of the Mo/Mφ cellular subsets remain elusive. Herein, we demonstrate a distinct proteomic and transcriptomic profile of non-classical monocytes (NCM) of active patients with SLE with enhanced inflammatory features such as deregulated DNA repair, cell cycle and enhanced IFN signaling in parallel with cell differentiation and developmental cues. Ex-vivo assays revealed an upregulation of p53 due to enhanced DNA damage along with G0 cell cycle arrest of SLE NCM indicative of an inflammatory phenotype. This aberrant profile of NCM of active patients with SLE is linked with an activated macrophage-like and enriched M1 pro-inflammatory response. We envisage that enhanced autophagy in SLE NCM may drive their differentiation towards an M1-like macrophage profile contributing to disease severity. Together, these findings provide evidence of skewed differentiation of NCM towards an M1-like macrophage phenotype as a pathogenic feature of NCM in SLE.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation  The three different FACS sorted cell populations were lysed in a buffer consisting of 4% SDS and 0.1M DTT in 0.1M TEAB and incubated for 5 min in a 99o C. Subsequently, the samples were subjected to sonication in a water bath for 15 minutes. The protein extracts were processed by tryptic digestion using the Sp3 protocol, including an alkylation step in 100 mM iodoacetamide (Acros Organics). 20 ug of beads (1:1 mixture of hydrophilic and hydrophobic SeraMag carboxylate-modified beads, GE Life Sciences) were added to each sample in 50% ethanol. Protein clean-up was performed on a magnetic rack. The beads were washed two times with 80% ethanol and once with 100% acetonitrile (Fisher Chemical). The captured-on beads proteins were digested overnight at 37o C under vigorous shaking (1200 rpm, Eppendorf Thermomixer) with 0.5 ug Trypsin/LysC (MS grade, Promega) prepared in 25 mM Ammonium bicarbonate. Next day, the peptides were purified using a modified Sp3 clean up protocol and finally solubilized in the mobile phase A (0.1% Formic acid in water), sonicated and the peptide concentration was determined through absorbance at 280nm measurement using a nanodrop instrument.  LC-MS/MS Samples were analyzed on a liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) setup consisting of a Dionex Ultimate 3000 nanoRSLC coupled in line with a Thermo Q Exactive HF-X Orbitrap mass spectrometer. Peptidic samples were directly injected and separated on an 25 cm-long analytical C18 column (PepSep, 1.9μm3 beads, 75  µm ID) using an one-hour long run, starting with a gradient  of 7% Buffer B (0.1% Formic acid in 80% Acetonitrile) to 35% for 40 min and followed by an increase to 45% in 5 min and a second increase to 99% in 0.5min and then kept constant for equilibration for 14.5min. A full MS was acquired in profile mode using a Q Exactive HF-X Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap mass spectrometer, operating in the scan range of 375-1400 m/z using 120K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 106 and maximum IT of 60ms followed by data independent acquisition method using 8 Th windows (a total of 39 loop counts) each with 15K resolving power with an AGC of 3x 105 and max IT of 22ms and normalized collision energy (NCE) of 26. Each sample was analyzed in three technical replicas.

### Data Protocol
Data analysis Orbitrap raw data were analyzed in DIA-NN 1.8.1 (Data-Independent Acquisition by Neural Networks) through searching against the Human_Reference Proteome (downloaded from Uniprot, 20583 proteins entries, downloaded 8/11/2022) using the library free mode of the software, allowing up to two tryptic missed cleavages and a maximum of three variable modifications/peptide. A spectral library was created from the DIA runs and used to reanalyse them (double search mode). DIA-NN search was used with oxidation of methionine residues, N-terminal methionine excision and acetylation of the protein N-termini set as variable modifications and carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification. The match between runs feature was used for all analyses and the output (precursor) was filtered at 0.01 FDR and finally the protein inference was performed on the level of genes using only proteotypic peptides.

### Publication Abstract
Peripheral blood monocytes propagate inflammation in systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE). Three major populations of monocytes have been recognized namely classical (CM), intermediate (IM) and non-classical monocytes (NCM). Herein, we performed a comprehensive transcriptomic, proteomic and functional characterization of the three peripheral monocytic subsets from active SLE patients and healthy individuals. Our data demonstrate extensive molecular disruptions in circulating SLE NCM, characterized by enhanced inflammatory features such as deregulated DNA repair, cell cycle and heightened IFN signaling combined with differentiation and developmental cues. Enhanced DNA damage, elevated expression of p53, G<sub>0</sub> arrest of cell cycle and increased autophagy stress the differentiation potential of NCM in SLE. This immunogenic profile is associated with an activated macrophage phenotype of NCM exhibiting M1 characteristics in the circulation, fueling the inflammatory response. Together, these findings identify circulating SLE NCM as a pathogenic cell type in the disease that could represent an additional therapeutic target.

### Keywords
Autoimmunity, Systemic lupus erythematosus, Cytokines, M1 macrophages, Transcriptomics, Proteomics, Cell cycle, Non-classical monocytes, Differentiation

### Affiliations
Laboratory of Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Center of Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, 115 27 Athens, Greece.
Protein Analysis Laboratory
B.S.R.C. "Alexander Fleming",
Alexander Fleming Street 34
16672, Vari,
Greece

### Submitter
Martina Samiotaki

### Lab Head
Dr Aggelos Banos
Laboratory of Autoimmunity and Inflammation, Center of Clinical, Experimental Surgery and Translational Research, Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, 115 27 Athens, Greece.


