### Accession
PXD014924

### Title
Chinese giant salamander liver LC-MS/MS

### Description
Chinese giant salamander Andrias davidianus has strong tolerance to starvation. Here, a high-throughput proteomic analysis was carried out on liver samples obtained from the A. davidianus after 3, 7 and 11 months of fasting.s a result, the expression levels of 364 proteins were significantly changed in the fasted liver. This study provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the metabolic response of A. davidianus liver to fasting.

### Sample Protocol
A total of 20 salamanders were randomly divided into 4 groups with 5 salamanders per group: three fasting groups and one normal control group. The salamanders in the fasting groups were subjected to fasting for 3, 7 and 11 months. Animals were heavily anesthetized by MS-222 and sacrificed by dissection before sample collection. Liver tissues were collected from control group and fasting groups. Then, protein extraction was performed according to the methods peviously reported. Protein digestion and iTRAQ labeling were conducted according to the iTRAQ protocol (Applied Biosystems). The peptides from control, 3, 7 and 11 months of fasting samples were labeled with 117, 118, 119 and 121 iTRAQ tags, respectively, and then the labelled samples were pooled and vacuum-dried. The dried sample was separated on the Agilent 1200 HPLC System (Agilent). The parameters of RPLC were set as follows: analytical guard column (4.6*12.5 mm, 5 μm); narrow-bore (2.1*150 mm, 5 μm) with 215 nm and 280 nm UV detection; flow rate of 0.3 ml/min using a nonlinear binary gradient starting with buffer A and transitioning to buffer B (10 mM KH2PO4 pH 3.0, 500 mM KCl, 25% acetonitrile). Each segment was collected at 4.5 min interval between 8-52 min. A total of 10 segments were collected and dried by a vacuum freeze dryer. Finally, the online Nano-RPLC was employed on the Eksigent nanoLC-Ultra™ 2D System (AB SCIEX). Data acquisition was performed with a Triple TOF 5600 System (AB SCIEX, USA) fitted with a Nanospray III source (AB SCIEX, USA) and a pulled quartz tip as the emitter (New Objectives, USA). Data were acquired at an ion spray voltage of 2.5 kV, curtain gas of 30 PSI, nebulizer gas of 5 PSI, and an interface heater temperature of 150°C.

### Data Protocol
Data was processed with Protein Pilot Software v. 5.0 (AB SCIEX, USA) against the protein database obtained from transcriptome data of A. davidianus using the Paragon algorithm. The following search parameters were utilized to analyze MS/MS data: trypsin as the digestion enzyme with a maximum of two missed cleavage allowed, fixed modifications of Carbamidomethyl (C) and iTRAQplex modification (K and N-terminus), variable modifications of Oxidation (M), peptide mass tolerance of ±20 ppm, fragment mass tolerance of ± 0.1 Da, and peptide false discovery rate (FDR) ≤ 0.01.The quantification of iTRAQ labeled peptides was carried out based on reporter ion intensity using Proteome Discoverer 1.4 software. Only unused score >1.3 and unique peptide ≥1 were utilized to determine protein quantification. The frequency distribution histogram was developed to analyze iTRAQ quantitative data.

### Publication Abstract
Chinese giant salamander <i>Andrias davidianus</i> has strong tolerance to starvation. Fasting triggers a complex array of adaptive metabolic responses, a process in which the liver plays a central role. Here, a high-throughput proteomic analysis was carried out on liver samples obtained from adult <i>A. davidianus</i> after 3, 7, and 11 months of fasting. As a result, the expression levels of 364 proteins were significantly changed in the fasted liver. Functional analysis demonstrated that the expression levels of key proteins involved in fatty acid oxidation, tricarboxylic acid cycle, gluconeogenesis, ketogenesis, amino acid oxidation, urea cycle, and antioxidant systems were increased in the fasted liver, especially at 7 and 11 months after fasting. In contrast, the expression levels of vital proteins involved in pentose phosphate pathway and protein synthesis were decreased after fasting. We also found that fasting not only activated fatty acid oxidation and ketogenesis-related transcription factors PPARA and PPARGC1A, but also activated gluconeogenesis-related transcription factors FOXO1, HNF4A, and KLF15. This study confirms the central role of lipid and acetyl-CoA metabolism in <i>A. davidianus</i> liver in response to fasting at the protein level and provides insights into the molecular mechanisms underlying the metabolic response of <i>A. davidianus</i> liver to fasting.

### Keywords
Chinese giant salamander, Fasting, Liver, Lc-ms/ms

### Affiliations
School of Laboratory Medicine, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, China
Xinxiang Medical University

### Submitter
Xiaofang Geng

### Lab Head
Dr Xiaofang Geng
School of Laboratory Medicine, Xinxiang Medical University, Xinxiang, China


