### Accession
PXD021280

### Title
Network analysis combining proteomics and metabolomics reveals new insights into early responses of Eucalyptus grandis during rust infection.

### Description
Eucalyptus rust is caused by the biotrophic fungus, Austropuccinia psidii, which affects commercial plantations of Eucalyptus, a major raw material for the pulp and paper industry in Brazil. Aiming to uncover the molecular mechanisms involved in rust resistance and susceptibility in Eucalyptus grandis, we used epifluorescence microscopy to follow the fungus development inside the leaves of two contrasting half-sibling genotypes (rust-resistance and rust-susceptible), to determine the time-course for comparative metabolomic and proteomic analyses in plantlets artificially inoculated with rust. Within 24 hours of complete fungal invasion, a total of 709 plant metabolites showed that the rust-resistant genotype suppressed many metabolites 6 hours after inoculation (hai), with responses being progressively induced after 12 hai. In contrast, the rust-susceptible genotype displayed an alternated metabolite response to infection, which culminated in a strong suppression at 24 hai. Multivariate analyses of genotypes and time points were used to select 16 differential metabolites chemically classified as flavonoids, benzenoids and other compounds. Applying the Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), rust-resistant and rust-susceptible genotypes had, respectively, 871 and 852 proteins grouped into 14 and 13 modules, of which 10 and 7 protein modules were significantly correlated to the selected metabolites. Functional analyses revealed roles for oxidative-dependent responses leading to temporal activity of metabolites and proteins after 12 hai in rust-resistance, while the initial over-accumulation of metabolites and correlated proteins caused a lack of progressive response after 12 hai in rust-susceptible genotype. This study provides a brief understand on the temporal divergences of resistant and susceptible molecular responses of E. grandis plants to rust.

### Sample Protocol
Leaf samples (100mg) were ground using a vibration mill (Retch MM400) with tungsten carbide beads for 1 min at 20 Hz, and were homogenized in 0.8 mL of protein extraction buffer [0.5M Tris-HCl pH 7.5; 0.7M Sucrose; 0.1M Potassium Chloride; 50mM EDTA; 1mM PMSF; 2% (v/v) β-mercaptoethanol e 1% (m/v) PVPP]. After, 0.8 mL of saturated phenolic solution in Tris-HCl pH 7.5 was added, samples were centrifuged at 10,000 g and 4°C for 30 min. The supernatants were collected and used to repeat this procedure three more times. Proteins were precipitated in 1.2 mL of 0.1 M ammonium acetate in methanol and the pellet was washed with the same solution (two times) and acetone (one time). After the last centrifugation step at 10,000 g and 4°C for 30 min, pellets were dried and proteins were resuspended in 0.4 mL solubilization buffer (7M Urea, 2M Thiourea, 10mM DTT and 0.4% v/v Triton X-100). Proteins in the supernatant were desalted in 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate buffer (pH 8.5) using an Amicon 3 kDa filter (Milipore), and were quantified using the Bradford method (Bradford, 1976). The quality of protein samples was evaluated using a 12% polyacrilamide gel stained with Comassie Blue G250, and bovine serum albumin was used as an internal standard. For each sample, 50 µg of proteins were added to 25 µL 2% (v/v) RapiGest SF (Waters) and incubated at 80°C for 15 min. Then, samples were reduced in 2.5 µL 100 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 60°C and alkylated in 2.5 µL 100 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 30 min in the dark. Proteins were digested in 10 µL 50 ng/µL trypsin at 37°C for 16 h, and the reaction was stopped using 10µL 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g at 6°C for 30 min, and the peptide-containing supernatant was transferred to another tube to be concentrated using a SpeedVac (Concentrador 5301, Eppendorf). Dried peptides were resuspended in 50 µL 0.1% TFA, purified using reverse-phase micro columns (Reverse phase Zip-Tip C18, Millipore) and dried.  Samples were then resuspended in 32 µL 20 mM pH10 ammonium formate with 8 µL of the 100 fmol µL-1 internal standard (P00489. rabbit glycogen-phosphorylase). Peptides were sequenced in a Synapt G2 HDMS mass spectrometer (Waters, Manchester, UK), connected to UPLC NanoAcquity (2D technology, Waters). In the first dimension, peptides were separated using an XBridge BEH 130 C18 column that was 5 µm (300 µm x 50 mm) (Waters, Manchester, UK), using a 3–45% gradient of solvent B [0,1% (v/v) ACN],  and captured using a C18 symmetry column (5 μm, 180 μm x 20 mm) (Waters, Manchester, UK). Separation in the second dimension was carried out using an HSS T3 column (1.8 μm, 75 μm x 100 mm) (Waters, Manchester, UK), and a 7–40% binary gradient of acetonitrile in 0.1% (v/v) and formic acid. Data acquisition was performed with a Q-TOF Synapt MS, with a nanolockspray font in a positive mode (Waters, Manchester, UK). The MS run was calibrated with 200 fmol μL-1 of Glu1 ([M+2H]2+ = 785,84206 Daltons), which was also used for lock mass.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra were processed with the ProteinLynx GlobalServer (PLGS) Program, version 3.0.3, using the protein database with 46,280 proteins of Eucalyptus grandis available on Phytozome v13 2.0 (https://phytozome.jgi.doe.gov accessed on 03/10/2020). Processing parameters included automatic tolerance of precursors and ion-products and required a minimum of three corresponding ion-fragments per peptide, minimum of seven corresponding ion-fragments per protein, minimum of two corresponding peptides per protein, possible cleavage error of trypsin, carbamidometilation of cysteine with fixed modification and methionine oxidation as variable modifying factors (FDR < = 1%).   For protein identification and quantification, spectral intensities were calculated using the stoichiometric method, with an internal standard analyzed with MSE and normalized with the PLGA auto-normalization function. The sequence and abundance of peptides were determined based on the mean values of the three most abundant peptides identified from data obtained from the three biological replicates assessed. FDR values were determined using a reverse database search, which was automatically created by the PLGS 3.0.3 program. Only proteins with confidence levels higher than 95% that were identified and quantified at least in two replicates were considered for subsequent analytical steps.

### Publication Abstract
Eucalyptus rust is caused by the biotrophic fungus, <i>Austropuccinia psidii</i>, which affects commercial plantations of Eucalyptus, a major raw material for the pulp and paper industry in Brazil. In this manuscript we aimed to uncover the molecular mechanisms involved in rust resistance and susceptibility in <i>Eucalyptus grandis</i>. Epifluorescence microscopy was used to follow the fungus development inside the leaves of two contrasting half-sibling genotypes (rust-resistance and rust-susceptible), and also determine the comparative time-course of changes in metabolites and proteins in plants inoculated with rust. Within 24 h of complete fungal invasion, the analysis of 709 metabolomic features showed the suppression of many metabolites 6 h after inoculation (hai) in the rust-resistant genotype, with responses being induced after 12 hai. In contrast, the rust-susceptible genotype displayed more induced metabolites from 0 to 18 hai time-points, but a strong suppression occurred at 24 hai. Multivariate analyses of genotypes and time points were used to select 16 differential metabolites mostly classified as phenylpropanoid-related compounds. Applying the Weighted Gene Co-Expression Network Analysis (WGCNA), rust-resistant and rust-susceptible genotypes had, respectively, 871 and 852 proteins grouped into 5 and 6 modules, of which 5 and 4 of them were significantly correlated to the selected metabolites. Functional analyses revealed roles for photosynthesis and oxidative-dependent responses leading to temporal activity of metabolites and related enzymes after 12 hai in rust-resistance; while the initial over-accumulation of those molecules and suppression of supporting mechanisms at 12 hai caused a lack of progressive metabolite-enzyme responses after 12 hai in rust-susceptible genotype. This study provides some insights on how <i>E. grandis</i> plants are functionally modulated to integrate secondary metabolites and related enzymes from phenylpropanoid pathway and lead to temporal divergences of resistance and susceptibility responses to rust.

### Keywords
Plant-pathogen interaction, Austropuccinia psidii, Lc-ms metabolomics, Fungus development, Microscopy, Time-course, Proteomics, Wgcna.

### Affiliations
ESALQ USP
ESALQ-USP

### Submitter
Thais Cataldi

### Lab Head
Dr Carlos Alberto Labate
ESALQ-USP


