### Accession
PXD036788

### Title
The small, high-light-induced protein SliP4 is involved in the proper organization of photosynthetic complexes in thylakoid membranes of Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803

### Description
An increasing number of small proteins has been identified in the genomes of well-annotated model organisms including photosynthetic cyanobacteria such as Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. A newly assigned protein comprising 37 amino acids was analyzed that is encoded upstream of the super-oxide dismutase SodB encoding gene. The initial hypothesis that this small protein might be functionally related to SodB could not be supported, instead we provide evidence that it fulfills important functions related to the organization of photosynthetic complexes. Therefore, we named it small light-induced protein of 4 kDa, SliP4.  SliP4 is strongly induced under high-light-conditions and it is co-localized to photosystem I and II as well as NDH1 complexes on thylakoid membranes. Tagged SliP4 was used to purify NDH1 complexes, where it is especially associated with the subunits NdhF1 and NdhD1. Mutation of the protein-coding part in the sliP4 gene resulted in a high-light-sensitive phenotype, because the mutant was not further able to induce cyclic electron flow and state transitions under high-light conditions.  Collectively our data indicate that SliP4 contributes to the association of NDH1 with the photosystem I and/or photosystem II complexes to facilitate different electron transfer modes under high light conditions.

### Sample Protocol
Blue native gels for complex separation WT and cells expressing SliP4:3xFlagTag (SliP4.f) were cultivated for 48 h at 250 µmol photons m−2 s−1 and bubbling with 5 % (v/v) CO2-supplemented air in 50 mL BG-11 until reaching OD750 1. The cells were harvested by centrifugation resuspended in 5 mL Buffer buffer (25 mM MES/NaOH pH 6.5; 10 mM MgCl2; 10 mM CaCl2, 25% glycerol) and lysed with French-Press using three cycles of 1000 PSI. Lysate was centrifuged for 30 min, 4° C, 20.000g. Pelleted membranes (10 µg chlorophyll) were resuspended in ACA Buffer (750 mM ACA; 50 mM Bis-TRIS/HCL pH 7.0; 0.5 mM Na-EDTA) and solubilized for 1 h in the dark with 1% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltosite. After solubilization, membranes were separated with the SERVAGel™ N Native Starter Kit for 5 h in cold room.  Purification of flag-tag-associated proteins WT and cells expressing SliP4:3xFlagTag (SliP4.f) cells were cultivated photoautotrophically in cuvette bioreactors until reaching OD750 1 in 2.4 L of BG11 medium at 28 °C under irradiance of 350 µmol photons m-2 s-1. WT and ΔPSI or ΔPSII strains expressing SliP4:3xFlagTag were cultivated mixotrophically in 4 L of BG11 medium in 10 L flasks at 28 °C under irradiance of 5 µmol photons m−2 s−1. To induce expression of SliP4f in mixotrophic cultures, the irradiance was increased to 150 µmol photons m−2 s−1 for the last hour of cultivation. Cells were harvested by 8000 x g for 10 min (Sorvall Lynx 6000), washed with, and resuspended in a thylakoid buffer containing 25 mM MES/NaOH, pH 6.5, 10 mM MgCl2, and 25% glycerol. Cell membranes isolation and the following steps were done as described by Koskela et al. (2020). 7 mg of Chl was loaded directly onto the column with 150 µL of the Anti-FLAG-M2 agarose resin (Sigma-Aldrich). The resin was intensively washed with 20 mL of the buffer. FLAG-tagged SliP4 and associated proteins were finally eluted with 300 µg/ml of 3xFLAG peptide (Sigma-Aldrich) in the 300 µL of the buffer. The elution was repeated once, and the eluted proteins were concentrated using Amicon Ultra 50K. The protein composition of membrane samples was analyzed by two-dimensional clear native (CN)/SDS-PAGE. To carry out CN-PAGE, membrane protein complexes were solubilized with 1% n-dodecyl-β-D-maltoside and separated in 4-14% gradient gel (Komenda et al., 2012). For the second dimension, the cut CN gel strip was first incubated in 2% SDS and 1% dithiothreitol for 20 minutes at room temperature, and the denatured proteins were separated in a 16-20% polyacrylamide gel containing 7 M urea (Dobáková et al., 2009). The protein gel was stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue (G-250). For Mass spectrometry identification of Coomassie-stained protein bands/spots from the SDS-PAGE gels by mass spectrometry was accomplished asexcised gel pieces where treated as described by xxxpreviously. Briefly, gel pieces were destained and dried in a vacuum centrifuge before proteins were in-gel digested with trypsin. Resulting peptides were eluted and subjected to mass spectrometry.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry for protein identification LC-MS/MS analyses were performed with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system coupled to a LTQ Orbitrap Velos (ThermoFisher Scientific, USA). Tryptic peptides were loaded on a self-packed analytical column (OD 360 µm, length 20 cm) filled with 3 µm diameter C18 particles (Dr. Maisch HPLC GmbH). Peptides were then eluted using a binary non-linear gradient of 5-99% acetonitrile in 0.1% acetic acid over 157 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min, and subjected to electrospray ionization-based MS. A full scan in the Orbitrap with a resolution of 30,000 was followed by collision-induced dissociation (CID) of the twenty most abundant precursor ions. MS/MS experiments were acquired in the linear ion trap. Resulting raw-files were searched with MaxQuant (version 2.0.3.0) against a database of Synechocystis 6803 downloaded from Uniprot on 18/12/2019 and supplemented with sequences of flag-tagged non-annotated small proteins (3,510 entries). Common laboratory contaminants and reversed sequences were included by MaxQuant. Search parameters were set as follows: Trypsin/P specific digestion with up to two missed cleavages, methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation as variable modification. The FDRs (false discovery rates) of protein and PSM (peptide spectrum match) levels were set to 0.01.

### Publication Abstract
An increasing number of small proteins has been identified in the genomes of well-annotated organisms, including the model cyanobacterium Synechocystis sp. PCC 6803. We describe a newly assigned protein comprising 37 amino acids that is encoded upstream of the superoxide dismutase SodB encoding gene. To clarify the role of SliP4, we analyzed a Synechocystis sliP4 mutant and a strain containing a fully active, Flag-tagged variant of SliP4 (SliP4.f). The initial hypothesis that this small protein might be functionally related to SodB could not be supported. Instead, we provide evidence that it fulfills important functions related to the organization of photosynthetic complexes. Therefore, we named it a small light-induced protein of 4&#x2009;kDa, SliP4. This protein is strongly induced under high-light conditions. The lack of SliP4 causes a light-sensitive phenotype due to impaired cyclic electron flow and state transitions. Interestingly, SliP4.f was co-isolated with NDH1 complex and both photosystems. The interaction between SliP4.f and all three types of complexes was further confirmed by additional pulldowns and 2D-electrophoreses. We propose that the dimeric SliP4 serves as a molecular glue promoting the aggregation of thylakoid complexes, which contributes to different electron transfer modes and energy dissipation under stress conditions.

### Keywords
High light, Fluorescence, Superoxide dismutase, Ndh1, Photosynthesis, Thylakoid, Acclimation

### Affiliations
University of Greifswald, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany
University of Greifswald,
Department for Microbial Proteomics

### Submitter
Sandra Maass

### Lab Head
Dr Dörte Becher
University of Greifswald, Department of Microbial Proteomics, Institute of Microbiology, D-17489 Greifswald, Germany


