### Accession
PXD034055

### Title
Discovery of XL01126: A Potent, Fast, Cooperative, Selective, Oral bioavailable and Blood Brain Barrier Penetrant PROTAC Degrader of Leucine Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2)

### Description
Leucine Rich Repeat Kinase 2 (LRRK2) is one of the most promising targets for Parkinson’s Disease. LRRK2 targeting strategies have primarily focused on Type 1 kinase inhibitors, which however have limitations as the inhibited protein can interfere with natural mechanisms and lead to undesirable side effects. Herein, we report the development of LRRK2 Proteolysis Targeting Chimeras (PROTACs), culminating in the discovery of degrader XL01126, as an alternative LRRK2 targeting strategy XL01126 induces degradation of LRRK2 by 80-90% in wildtype (WT) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs), G2019S LRRK2 MEFs, R1441C LRRK2 MEFs, bone barrow-derived macrophages, and human peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) with DC50s consistently within 15-72 nM, and degradation half-lives of 0.6-2.4 h. XL01126 forms a positively cooperative ternary complex with VHL and LRRK2 (α=5.7), which compensates for a substantial loss of binary binding affinities to VHL and LRRK2, underscoring its strong degradation performance in cells. Remarkably, XL01126 is orally bioavailable (F=15%) and can penetrate the blood brain barrier after either oral or parenteral dosing in mice. Taken together, these experiments qualify XL01126 as a suitable degrader probe to study non-catalytic and scaffolding functions of LRRK2 in vitro and in vivo and offer an attractive starting point for future drug development.

### Sample Protocol
Wildtype MEFs were seeded in 10 cm tissue culture dishes, at a density of two million cells per dish. Cells were treated with 0.1% DMSO, 300 nM XL01126, or 300 nM Cis-XL01126 for 4 hours prior to harvest in 400 µl complete lysis buffer, supplemented with 1 μg/ml microcystin-LR, 1 mM sodium orthovanadate, complete EDTA-free protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) and 1% (v/v) Triton X-100. Cell lysates were incubated on ice for 10 minutes, then underwent three rounds of high energy sonication for 15 cycles (30 seconds on, 30 seconds off) using the Diagenode Bioruptor. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 15,000 g at 4°C for 15 minutes. Cell pellet was discarded, and supernatant was collected for protein quantification using a BCA protein assay kit (Pierce #23225). 100 µg cell lysate was employed for total proteomic analysis. Proteins in cell lysate were reduced with 0.1 M Tris(2-carboxyethyl)phosphine (TCEP) diluted in 300 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEABC) to a final concentration of 10 mM. Samples were incubated on a Thermomixer for 30 minutes at 60°C at 800 rpm. Samples were incubated to room temperature and underwent alkylation with 0.04 M iodoacetamide (IAA) freshly dissolved in water. Samples were then incubated in the dark on a Thermomixer at room temperature for 30 minutes at 800 rpm. Alkylation was quenched with the addition of 0.1 M TCEP dissolved in 300 mM TEABC at a final concentration of 5 mM. Samples were incubated on a Thermomixer at room temperature for 20 minutes at 800 rpm. Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) was added at a final concentration of 5% (w/v) from a 20% (w/v) stock. 12% (v/v) phosphoric acid was then added to a final concentration of 1.2% (v/v). Samples were diluted in 6 times the sample volume of S-trap wash buffer containing 90% (v/v) methanol diluted in 100 mM (v/v) TEAB pH 7.1. TMT labelling was performed using 10-plex TMT kit by following manufacturer instructions. . LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a Thermo Lumos ETD Tribrid mass spectrometer in line with 3000 ultimate RSLC nano-liquid chromatography system. Sample was injected into pre-column (C18, 5µm, 100Ao, 100µ, 2cm Nano-viper column # 164564, Thermo Scientific) at 5 µl/min flow rate and subsequently loaded onto the analytical column (C18, 5µm, 50cm, 100Ao Easy nano spray column # ES903, Thermo Scientific) for the separation of peptides using nano-pump operated at 300 nl/min flow rate. 85 min non-linear gradient was applied (5% Solvent B (80 %ACN v/v in 0.1% Formic acid v/v) to 22% B for 70 min and increased to 35% B for another 10 min for a total of 100 min run time. The eluted peptides were electrosprayed into the mass spectrometer using easy nano source. The data was acquired in a data dependent acquisition (DDA) mode in SPS MS3 (FT-IT-HCD-FT-HCD) method and was acquired using top speed for 2 sec for each duty cycle. The Full MS1 scan was acquired at 120,000 resolution at m/z 200 and analyzed using Ultra high filed Orbitrap mass analyzer in the scan range of 375-1500 m/z. The precursor ions for MS2 were isolated using Quadrupole mass filter at 0.7 Da isolation width and fragmented using normalized 35% Higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) of in Ion routing multipole analyzed using Ion trap. Top 10 MS2 fragment ions in a subsequent scan were isolated and fragmented using HCD at 65% normalized collision energy and analyzed using Orbitrap mass analyzer at 50,000 resolution in the scan range of 100-500 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data of 48 High-pH fractions were searched using MaxQuant search algorithm (Vesion 2.0.3.0) against Uniprot Mouse database (Release version May 20021 containing 25,375 sequences). 10 plex TMT reporter ion MS3 workflow was loaded and used the following search parameters. Trypsin as a protease was selected by allowing two missed cleavages, deamidation of Asn and Gln; Oxidation of Met were used as variable modifications and Carbamidomethylation of Cys as a fixed modification. The default mass error tolerance for MS1 and MS2 (4 ppm and 20 ppm) were used. Min of 2 unique+razor peptides were selected for the quantification. The data was filtered for 1% PSM, peptide and protein level FDR. The output protein group .txt files were further processed using the companion Perseus software suite (version 1.6.15.0). Decoy hits, contaminants, proteins identified by sites and single peptide hits were filtered out. Further the data was log2 transformed and T-test was performed between the sample groups and the p-values were corrected using 5% permutation-based FDR to identify the differentially regulated protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) is one of the most promising targets for Parkinson's disease. LRRK2-targeting strategies have primarily focused on type 1 kinase inhibitors, which, however, have limitations as the inhibited protein can interfere with natural mechanisms, which could lead to undesirable side effects. Herein, we report the development of LRRK2 proteolysis targeting chimeras (PROTACs), culminating in the discovery of degrader XL01126, as an alternative LRRK2-targeting strategy. Initial designs and screens of PROTACs based on ligands for E3 ligases von Hippel-Lindau (VHL), Cereblon (CRBN), and cellular inhibitor of apoptosis (cIAP) identified the best degraders containing thioether-conjugated VHL ligand VH101. A second round of medicinal chemistry exploration led to qualifying XL01126 as a fast and potent degrader of LRRK2 in multiple cell lines, with DC<sub>50</sub> values within 15-72 nM, <i>D</i><sub>max</sub> values ranging from 82 to 90%, and degradation half-lives spanning from 0.6 to 2.4 h. XL01126 exhibits high cell permeability and forms a positively cooperative ternary complex with VHL and LRRK2 (&#x3b1; = 5.7), which compensates for a substantial loss of binary binding affinities to VHL and LRRK2, underscoring its strong degradation performance in cells. Remarkably, XL01126 is orally bioavailable (<i>F</i> = 15%) and can penetrate the blood-brain barrier after either oral or parenteral dosing in mice. Taken together, these experiments qualify XL01126 as a suitable degrader probe to study the noncatalytic and scaffolding functions of LRRK2 <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> and offer an attractive starting point for future drug development.

### Keywords
Parkinsosn's disease, Lrrk2, Protac, Tmt, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom
MRC Protein Phosphorylation Unit, university of Dundee

### Submitter
Raja Sekhar Nirujogi

### Lab Head
Dr Dario R. Alessi
Medical Research Council (MRC) Protein Phosphorylation and Ubiquitylation Unit, School of Life Sciences, University of Dundee, Dow Street, Dundee DD1 5EH, United Kingdom


