### Accession
PXD028037

### Title
A lysosome-targeted DNA nanodevice selectively targets macrophages to attenuate tumors

### Description
Activating CD8+ T cells by antigen cross-presentation is remarkably effective at eliminating tumors. Although this function is traditionally attributed to dendritic cells, tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) can also cross-present antigens. TAMs are the most abundant tumor-infiltrating leukocyte. Yet, TAMs have not been leveraged to activate CD8+ T cells because mechanisms that modulate their ability to cross-present antigens are incompletely understood. Here we show that TAMs harbor hyperactive cysteine protease activity in their lysosomes which impedes antigen cross-presentation, thereby preventing CD8+ T cell activation. We developed a DNA nanodevice (E64-DNA) targeted to lysosomes of TAMs in mice. E64-DNA inhibits the population of cysteine proteases present specifically inside lysosomes of TAMs, improves their ability to cross-present antigens, and attenuates tumor growth via CD8+ T cells. When combined with cyclophosphamide, E64-DNA showed sustained tumor regression in a triple-negative-breast-cancer model. Our studies demonstrate that DNA nanodevices can be targeted with organelle-level precision to reprogram macrophages and achieve immunomodulation in vivo.

### Sample Protocol
Whole cell lysates from M1 and M2 BMDMs and from flow sorted M1-like and M2-like TAMs (all above 100,000 cells) were collected in 4% sodium deoxycholate (SDC) in 10mM Tris, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7.4 for trypsin digestion. Samples were denatured by heating at 56ºC and reduced with 5mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 1h, alkylated with 15mM iodoacetamide for 30 min at room temperature in the dark, and excess iodoacetamide was quenched with an additional 5mM DTT. Samples were digested with trypsin (Promega, Madison, WI) at 1:20 w/w ratio overnight at 37°C with mixing. After digestion, SDC was precipitated by addition of 1% trifluoroacetic acid and insoluble material was removed by centrifugation at 14,000xg for 10min. Samples were then desalted by solid phase extraction using Oasis HLB 96-well µElution Plate, dried down, stored at -80°C, and reconstituted with 0.1% formic acid in 5% acetonitrile to a peptide concentration of 0.1ug/uL for LC-MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified using the Comet search engine with PeptideProphet and ProteinProphet validation against Mouse Uniprot Reference database (v. Aug 2019). Search criteria included a 20ppm tolerance window for precursors and products, fixed Cys alkylation, and variable Met oxidation. Significance was assessed by a combination of the t-test and G-test with correction for false-discovery rate (<5%) using PepC software.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cysteine proteases, Antigen cross-presentation, Lc-msms, Lysosomes, Macrophages, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Washington
Ben May Department of Cancer Research, University of Chicago

### Submitter
Tomas Vaisar

### Lab Head
Dr Lev Becker
Ben May Department of Cancer Research, University of Chicago


