### Accession
PXD030600

### Title
Secretome Analysis of Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra DSM 14401

### Description
Crystalline chitin is a kind of high molecular-weight polymers which is difficult to degrade. N-acetylglucosamine and chitooligosaccharides (COSs) are important agriculture, medicine, cosmetics and food resources. Conversion of crystalline chitin to GlcNAc and COSs using recombinant chitinases is an environmentally compatible, reproducible and products controllable method. Here, we report the ability of Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra DSM 14401 to degrade crystalline.

### Sample Protocol
Strain DSM 14401 was cultured at 25°C and 180 rpm in the minimal medium supplemented with 3% flake chitin. When the chitin was about half degraded, the culture was centrifuged (8,000 rpm for 6 min at 4°C). The precipitates were resuspended using 20 mM Tris-HCl with 1M NaCl, and followed by centrifugation (3000 rpm for 3 min at 4°C). Repeat three times. The precipitates were resuspended using 50 mM Tris-HCl congtaining 6 M Guanadine-HCl, and then centrifuged (11,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C) to get the supernatant which was subsequently moved into 3K ultrafiltration tube. The Guanadine-HCl in the supernatant was removed by adding 50 mM Tris-HCl to the ultrafiltration tube (15 mL, 3KD, 6,000 rpm for 10 min at 4°C) repeatly. Then the proteins in the supernatant were precipitated by 50 mL acetone with 10% trichloroacetic acid and 0.1% dithiothreitol overnight at -20°C. The precipitates were harvested and washed by 80% acetone and 100% acetone, and followed by lyophilization. Then, the lyophilization sample were successively denatured, reduced and alkylated by denaturation buffer (0.5 M Tris-HCl, 2.75 mM EDTA, 6 M Guanadine-HCl), dithiothreitol (1M) and iodoacetamide (1M). The sample was further replaced with 25mM NH4HCO3 solution by ultrafiltration (1 mL, 3KD, 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4°C) and digested using trypsin (Promega) at 37°C for 12 h to collect the peptides that were further desalted on the C18 column (Millipore). The desalted protein was injected and analyzed using the mass spectrometer Orbitrap Elite (ThermoFisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany) coupled with Easy-nLC 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Finally, the raw data was analyzed using Thermo Scientific Proteome DiscovererTM 1.4.

### Data Protocol
Thermo Scientific proteome discoverer software version 1.4

### Publication Abstract
Chitooligosaccharides (COSs) have been widely used in agriculture, medicine, cosmetics, and foods, which are commonly prepared from chitin with chitinases. So far, while most COSs are prepared from colloidal chitin, chitinases used in preparing COSs directly from natural crystalline chitin are less reported. Here, we characterize three chitinases, which were identified from the marine bacterium <i>Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra</i> DSM 14401<sup>T</sup>, with an ability to degrade crystalline chitin into (GlcNAc)<sub>2</sub> (<i>N,N</i>'-diacetylchitobiose). Strain DSM 14401 can degrade the crystalline &#x3b1;-chitin in the medium to provide nutrients for growth. Genome and secretome analyses indicate that this strain secretes six chitinolytic enzymes, among which chitinases Chia4287, Chib0431, and Chib0434 have higher abundance than the others, suggesting their importance in crystalline &#x3b1;-chitin degradation. These three chitinases were heterologously expressed, purified, and characterized. They are all active on crystalline &#x3b1;-chitin, with temperature optima of 45-50 &#xb0;C and pH optima of 7.0-7.5. They are all stable at 40 &#xb0;C and in the pH range of 5.0-11.0. Moreover, they all have excellent salt tolerance, retaining more than 92% activity after incubation in 5 M NaCl for 10 h at 4 &#xb0;C. When acting on crystalline &#x3b1;-chitin, the main products of the three chitinases are all (GlcNAc)<sub>2</sub>, which suggests that chitinases Chia4287, Chib0431, and Chib0434 likely have potential in direct conversion of crystalline chitin into (GlcNAc)<sub>2</sub>.

### Keywords
Pseudoalteromonas flavipulchra, Secretome, Chitin degradation

### Affiliations
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong University, China
Shandong University

### Submitter
Junhui Cheng

### Lab Head
Dr Yuzhong Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Microbial Technology, Marine Biotechnology Research Center, Shandong University, China


