### Accession
PXD011617

### Title
PRMT1-mediated methylation of the Large Drosha Complex regulates microRNA biogenesis

### Description
MicroRNA (miRNA) biogenesis is a tightly controlled multi-step process operated in the nucleus by the activity of the Large Drosha Complex (LDC). Through high resolution mass spectrometry (MS) analysis we discovered that the LDC is extensively methylated, with 82 distinct methylated sites associated to 16 out of 23 subunits of the LDC. The majority of these modifications occurs on arginine (R)- residues (61), leading to 86 methylation events, while 29 lysine (K)-methylation events occurs on 21 sites of the complex. Interestingly, the depletion and pharmacological inhibition of PRMT1 lead to a widespread alteration of the methylation state of the complex and induce global decrease of miRNA expression, as a consequence of the specific impairment of the pri-to-pre-miRNA processing step. In particular, we show that the reduced methylation of the ILF3 subunit of the complex is linked to its diminished binding to the target pri-miRNAs. Overall, our study uncovers a previously uncharacterized role of R-methylation in the regulation of the LDC activity in mammalian cells, thus effecting global miRNA levels.

### Sample Protocol
Experiments of protein co-IP were performed starting from 1-2 mg of whole cell extract in Ripa Buffer supplemented with fresh PMSF and 1x Roche protease inhibitors. When using nuclear extracts as input, 1-2 mg nuclear extracts were diluted with Ripa Buffer lacking NaCl, in order to decrease NaCl concentration to 150mM. The extracts were pre-cleared 3 times with 50 μL of Dynabeads protein G (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and then the specific antibody was added and incubated overnight on a rotating wheel at 4°C. The following day, 50 μL of Dynabeads protein G pre-equilibrated in PBS supplemented with 0.5% BSA, were added to the extract and incubated for 2 h on a rotating wheel at 4°C. Beads were then washed 3 times with Ripa Buffer and then bound material was eluted by incubation with LSD Sample Buffer (NuPAGE) supplemented with 100 mM DTT, at 95°C for 5 minutes. Samples were then loaded on SDS-PAGE for subsequent WB analysis.  In gel digestion of gel-separated proteins with Trypsin, prior to MS analysis, was carried out as previously described in Schevchenko et al, Nat Prot, 2006. After digestion and extraction from the gel pieces, the digested peptides were desalted and concentrated by reversed-phase chromatography onto micro-column C18 Stage Tips. Peptides were then eluted from the tips with high organic solvent (80% ACN, 0.5% acetic acid), lyophilized, re-suspended in 1% TFA and subjected to LC-MS/MS analysis.  Peptide mixtures were analyzed by online nano-flow liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry using an EASY-nLC™ 1000 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) connected to a quadrupole/Orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q Exactive, Thermo Fisher Scientific) through a nanoelectrospray ion source. The nano-LC system was operated in one column set up with a 25-cm analytical column (75 μm inner diameter, 350 μm outer diameter), packed with C18 reversed-phase resin (ReproSil, Pur C18AQ 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch, Germany) configuration. Solvent A was 0.1% formic acid (FA) and 5% ACN in ddH2O and solvent B was 80% ACN with 0.1% FA. Peptides were injected at a flow rate of 500 nL/min and separated with a gradient of 5–40% solvent B over 90 min, followed by a gradient of 40–60% for 10 min and 60–80% over 5 min at a flow rate of 250 nL/min. The Q-Exactive was operated in the data-dependent mode (DDA). HCD-fragmentation method when acquiring MS/MS spectra consisted of an Orbitrap full MS scan followed by up to 10 MS/MS experiments (Top10) on the most abundant ions detected in the full MS scan. Mass spectrometer conditions for all experiments were as follows: full MS (AGC 3e6; resolution 70,000; m/z range 300-1650; maximum ion time 20 ms); MS/MS (AGC 17,500; maximum ion time 50 ms; isolation width 1.8 Da with a dynamic exclusion time of 20 sec). Singly charged ions and ions for which no charge state could be determined were excluded from the selection. Normalized collision energy was set to 28%; spray voltage was 2.2 kV; no sheath and auxiliary gas flow; heated capillary temperature was 275 °C; S-lens RF level of 60%.

### Data Protocol
Acquired Raw data were analyzed with the integrated MaxQuant software v.1.5.5.1 and v.1.6.0.16, using the Andromeda search engine. The January 2016 version (UniProt Release 2016_01) of the Uniprot sequence was used for peptide identification. Enzyme specificity was set to Trypsin/P, meaning that trypsin cleavage occurs also in the presence of proline, after lysine or arginine residues. In MaxQuant, the estimated false discovery rate (FDR) of all peptide identifications was set to a maximum of 1%. The main search was performed with a mass tolerance of 6 ppm. A maximum of 3 missed cleavages were permitted, and the minimum peptide length was fixed at 7 amino acids. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification.  To assign hmSILAC peptide sequences, we defined new modifications in MaxQuant (v1.5.5.1 and v.1.6.0.16) with the mass increment and residue specificities corresponding to the heavy versions of mono-methylated K/R, di-methylated K/R, and tri-methylated K. Additionally, we defined new variable modifications for heavy methionine (Met4) and oxidized heavy methionine (Met4ox). To reduce the complexity of the search, and given the computational resources available, each experimental set of raw data was analysed three times using three distinct sets of variable modifications, namely: (1) Met4, Met4ox, oxidation, mono-methyl-K/R, mono-methyl4-K/R; (2) Met4, Met4ox, oxidation, di-methyl-K/R, di-methyl4-K/R; (3) Met4, Met4ox, oxidation, tri-methyl-K, tri-methyl4-K.  SILAC peptide and protein quantification was performed automatically with MaxQuant (v.1.5.5.1 and v.1.6.0.16) using default settings parameters. N-terminal acetylation of protein, methionine oxidation, mono-methyl-K/R, di-methyl-K/R and tri-methyl-K were set as variable modifications in MaxQuant. Outputs from MaxQuant were manually filtered as follow: proteins were accepted if identified with at least two peptides of which at least one unique; protein quantified were considered for further analysis only if they have ratio count (RC) equal or greater than 1.

### Publication Abstract
MicroRNA (miRNA) biogenesis is a tightly controlled multi-step process operated in the nucleus by the activity of the Microprocessor and its associated proteins. Through high resolution mass spectrometry (MS)- proteomics we discovered that this complex is extensively methylated, with 84 methylated sites associated to 19 out of its 24 subunits. The majority of the modifications occurs on arginine (R) residues (61), leading to 81 methylation events, while 30 lysine (K)-methylation events occurs on 23 sites of the complex. Interestingly, both depletion and pharmacological inhibition of the Type-I Protein Arginine Methyltransferases (PRMTs) lead to a widespread change in the methylation state of the complex and induce global decrease of miRNA expression, as a consequence of the impairment of the pri-to-pre-miRNA processing step. In particular, we show that the reduced methylation of the Microprocessor subunit ILF3 is linked to its diminished binding to the pri-miRNAs miR-15a/16, miR-17-92, miR-301a and miR-331. Our study uncovers a previously uncharacterized role of R-methylation in the regulation of miRNA biogenesis in mammalian cells.

### Keywords
Microrna, Large drosha complex, Prmt1, Protein methylation, Mass spectrometry

### Affiliations
IEO - European Institute of Oncology
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy

### Submitter
Roberto Giambruno

### Lab Head
Dr Tiziana Bonaldi
Department of Experimental Oncology, IEO, European Institute of Oncology IRCCS, Milan, Italy


