### Accession
PXD009902

### Title
Proteomic Analysis of an Arsenic Response Locus

### Description
Arsenic exposure is a global health problem. Millions of people encounter arsenic through contaminated drinking water, consumption, and inhalation. The arsenic response locus in budding yeast is responsible for the detoxification of arsenic and its removal from the cell. This locus constitutes a conserved pathway ranging from prokaryotes to higher eukaryotes. The goal of this study was to identify how the arsenic response locus is regulated in an arsenic dependent manner. An affinity enrichment strategy called CRISPR-Chromatin Affinity Purification with Mass Spectrometry (CRISPR-ChAP-MS) was used that provides for the proteomic characterization of a given locus. CRISPR-ChAP-MS was applied to the arsenic response locus and uncovered 40 nuclear-annotated proteins showing enrichment. Functional assays, identified the histone acetyltransferase activity of SAGA and the ATPase chromatin remodeling activity of SWI/SNF to be required for activation of the locus.  Furthermore, SAGA and SWI/SNF were both found to specifically organize the chromatin structure at the arsenic response locus for activation of gene transcription. This study provides the first proteomic characterization of an arsenic response locus and key insight into the mechanism of transcriptional activation that is necessary for detoxification of arsenic from the cell.

### Sample Protocol
CRISPR-ChAP-MS was modified from its original protocol (33) and performed in biological triplicate. 3 x 109 cells (0.5 g dry weight) was suspended in purification buffer (25 mM HEPES-KOH, 0.5 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 0.02% NP-40, 250 mM LiCl, 150 mM KCl, 1X Sigma fungal protease inhibitor cocktail, 2 mM PMSF) at 5 mL/gram and sonicated for 10 minutes at 130 watts in a Biorupter (Diagenode). Sonicated yeast lysate was then incubated with 2.5 mg of rabbit IgG-coated Dynabeads (Invitrogen) for 4 hours at 4 ºC. Beads were collected with a magnet and washed for 5 minutes at 4 ºC with rotation as follows: once with purification buffer, once with purification buffer supplemented with 1 M NaCl and 1 M urea, once with purification buffer, once with purification buffer with 4 M urea and 250 mM LiCl, then once more with purification buffer, and finally with TE (10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 8.0). All wash buffers lacked glycerol. Protein-DNA complexes were eluted from the washed beads by re-suspension in 120 µL TE/SDS (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% SDS). Re-suspended beads were incubated for 20 minutes at 95 ºC and shaken every 2 minutes to prevent settling of the beads. Enrichment of the target locus was measured by qPCR and eluted proteins were trypsinized by filter aided sample preparation (FASP) (36). Peptides were then fractionated by off-line basic reverse phase ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography (bRP-UHPLC). An Acquity BEH C18 1.7 µm 1.0 x 100 mm column (Waters) in an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC system (Thermo) with a HPG-3400 pump was used to fractionate tryptic peptide samples into 36 fractions. Dried samples were resuspended in 75 µL of Buffer A (10 mM ammonium hydroxide, 0.5% acetonitrile) of which 50 µL was loaded onto the column. Fractionation was carried out at 30 ºC, with a flow rate of 90 µL/min, and both 214 nm and 280 nm wavelengths were recorded by the detector. A 40 minute gradient from 99:1 Buffer A:Buffer B (10 mM ammonium hydroxide, 99.9% acetonitrile) to 55:45 Buffer A:Buffer B ratio was used. A 3 minute wash of 5:95 Buffer A:Buffer B ratio followed by 10 minutes of 99:1 Buffer A:Buffer B was used to re-equilibrate the column between each sample. After sample collection, three fractions were combined for a total of 12 super-fractions. Samples were then dried by SpeedVac and re-suspended in acidic Buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 0.5% acetronitrile). Mass Spectrometric analysis was carried out on an Orbitrap Fusion Tribrid Mass spectrometer (Thermo). Super-fractions from off-line bRP-UPLC fractionation were separated using an in-line reverse-phase Jupiter Proteo resin (Phenomenex) 0.075 x 200 mm column using a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). A 90 minute gradient from 97:3 to 67:33 acidic Buffer A:acidic Buffer B (0.1% formic acid, 99.9% acetonitrile) was used. Mass spectrometric analysis was performed on eluted peptides following electrospray ionization at 2.15 kV. MS/MS analysis was performed following higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) in top-speed data-dependent mode. The FTMS analyzer was used to record MS1 data in profile mode at a resolution of 240,000 over a range of 375 to 1,500 m/z. After HCD fragmentation centroid MS2 data was acquired in the ion trap analyzer with a normal mass range and precursor mass-dependent normalized collision energy between 28.0 and 31.0.

### Data Protocol
All MS/MS samples were analyzed using Mascot (Matrix Science; version 2.5.1). Mascot was set up to search the UniProtKB_2017_02 database (selected for Saccharomyces Cerevisiae, 7904 entries) assuming the digestion enzyme trypsin, with 3 maximum missed cleavages. Mascot was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.50 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 3.0 PPM. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was specified in Mascot as a fixed modification. Oxidation of methionine and acetyl of lysine and the n-terminus were specified in Mascot as variable modifications. Mascot data was uploaded into Scaffold (version Scaffold_4.8.4, Proteome Software Inc.), which was used to validate MS/MS based peptide and protein identifications. Peptide identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 50.0% probability by the Scaffold Local FDR algorithm. Protein identifications were accepted if they could be established at greater than 95.0% probability and contained at least 1 identified peptide.  Protein probabilities were assigned by the Protein Prophet algorithm (37). Spectral counts were normalized using the normalized spectral abundance factor algorithm (NSAF) (38).  NSAF values were the exported to Excel (Microsoft) and three biological replicates were averaged. These averages were used to determined fold-change (Target/Control). A ≥2-fold enrichment was considered significant based on previous ChAP-MS data sets (31–33). A nuclear annotation filter was then applied to the list of enriched proteins.

### Publication Abstract
Arsenic exposure is a global health problem. Millions of people encounter arsenic through contaminated drinking water, consumption, and inhalation. The arsenic response locus in budding yeast is responsible for the detoxification of arsenic and its removal from the cell. This locus constitutes a conserved pathway ranging from prokaryotes to higher eukaryotes. The goal of this study was to identify how transcription from the arsenic response locus is regulated in an arsenic dependent manner. An affinity enrichment strategy called CRISPR-Chromatin Affinity Purification with Mass Spectrometry (CRISPR-ChAP-MS) was used, which provides for the proteomic characterization of a targeted locus. CRISPR-ChAP-MS was applied to the promoter regions of the activated arsenic response locus and uncovered 40 nuclear-annotated proteins showing enrichment. Functional assays identified the histone acetyltransferase SAGA and the chromatin remodelling complex SWI/SNF to be required for activation of the locus. Furthermore, SAGA and SWI/SNF were both found to specifically organize the chromatin structure at the arsenic response locus for activation of gene transcription. This study provides the first proteomic characterization of an arsenic response locus and key insight into the mechanisms of transcriptional activation that are necessary for detoxification of arsenic from the cell.

### Keywords
Yeast, Arsenic, Crispr, Chap-ms

### Affiliations
UAMS
Professor of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Pediatrics and Pathology Full Member Arkansas Children’s Research Institute  Scharlau Family Endowed Chair in Cancer Research Director COBRE Center for Translational Pediatric Research (www.archildrens.org/archildrens-COBRE) Director IDeA National Resource for Proteomics (http://idearesourceproteomics.org/) University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences

### Submitter
Stephanie Byrum

### Lab Head
Dr Alan J. Tackett
Professor of Biochemistry & Molecular Biology, Pediatrics and Pathology Full Member Arkansas Children’s Research Institute  Scharlau Family Endowed Chair in Cancer Research Director COBRE Center for Translational Pediatric Research (www.archildrens.org/archildrens-COBRE) Director IDeA National Resource for Proteomics (http://idearesourceproteomics.org/) University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences


