### Accession
PXD007942

### Title
Identification of H3 Lysine 4 Monomethylation Associated Proteins at Mammalian Enhancers

### Description
Enhancers act to regulate cell type specific gene expression by facilitating the transcription of target genes. In mammalian cells active or primed enhancers are commonly marked by monomethylation of Histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me1) in a cell-type specific manner. Whether and how this histone modification regulates enhancer-dependent transcription programs in mammals has been unclear. In the present study, we conducted SILAC Mass-spec experiments with mono-nucleosomes and identified multiple H3K4me1 associated proteins, including proteins involved in chromatin remodeling. We demonstrate that H3K4me1 augments the association of the chromatin remodeling complex BAF to enhancers in vivo.  Furthermore we show that in vitro, H3K4me1 nucleosomes are more efficiently remodeled by the BAF complex. Crystal structures of a BAF component BAF45c further reveal that monomethylation, but not trimethylation, is accommodated in this protein’s H3K4 binding site. Our results suggest that H3K4me1 plays an active role at enhancers by facilitating the binding of the BAF complex and possibly other chromatin regulators.

### Sample Protocol
HeLa cells (ATCC CCL-2) were grown in normal DMEM culture media, with 10% FBS and 1% Pen/Strep (termed light from here on) or in culture media containing N15 and C13 labeled Arginine and Lysine (termed heavy NE). NE was prepared using a small scale Digman and Roeder protocol 45,47. Concentration of NE batches was determined by BCA assay as per manufacturer’s instructions (Pierce cat# 23228). For the forward reaction 25 µg of immobilized H3K4me1 mononucleosomes was incubated with 1mg of “light” NE and in a separate tube 25 µg of H3K4me3 nucleosomes were incubated with an equal amount of “heavy” NE at 40C for 4 hours. Beads were washed 3 times in 250mM NaCl, 25mM Tris pH 8.0, 1mM EDTA, 1mM DTT, and 0.2% NP40. Bound factors were eluted in 400 µl of 4M Urea, 500mM NaCl, 20mM HEPES pH 8.0, and 0.2% NP40.  Eluates were combined, alkylated, and digested by trypsin. Digested peptides were desalted by C18, fractionated by HILIC column (Tosoh Bioscience Cat # 21486), and analyzed by LC-MS/MS using an Orbitrap-LTQ mass spectrometer (MS)

### Data Protocol
. MS data was then searched on Sorcerer-SEQUEST using a non-redundant human database downloaded from Uniport with 50ppm parental mass tolerance and a 0.8 cutoff for the peptide prophet probability used to filter the dataset similar to that previously described49. The identified peptides were quantified using XPRESS with a 50ppm mass tolerance and 30 fixed scans from the apex.  The median of the peptide ratio was then calculated. The reverse reaction was set up with the same concentrations but with H3K4me1 with heavy extract and H3K4me3 with light extract. Replicate reactions were performed with different batches of HeLa NE and chemically modified histones. For the forward reaction we calculated the ratio of light to heavy peptides and for the reverse reaction the ratio of heavy to light peptides and logarithm-transformed ratios were plotted. The top right quadrant includes any proteins enriched for H3K4me1 and the bottom left quadrant includes those enriched for H3K4me3 binding.  Replicate pulldowns performed with NE and modified nucleosomes prepared as independent biological replicates. As expected, common processing contaminants (such as actin, ribosomal protein and keratin), along with histones that were part of the nucleosomes used in the purification were removed from the final data sets listed. Proteins in the final dataset were required to be found in both the forward and reverse reactions and their enrichment for both mono- and tri-methylation was required to be consistently positive or negative. Proteins that did not meet this criteria were removed from the dataset.

### Publication Abstract
Enhancers act to regulate cell-type-specific gene expression by facilitating the transcription of target genes. In mammalian cells, active or primed enhancers are commonly marked by monomethylation of histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4me1) in a cell-type-specific manner. Whether and how this histone modification regulates enhancer-dependent transcription programs in mammals is unclear. In this study, we conducted SILAC mass spectrometry experiments with mononucleosomes and identified multiple H3K4me1-associated proteins, including many involved in chromatin remodeling. We demonstrate that H3K4me1 augments association of the chromatin-remodeling complex BAF to enhancers in vivo and that, in vitro, H3K4me1-marked nucleosomes are more efficiently remodeled by the BAF complex. Crystal structures of the BAF component BAF45C indicate that monomethylation, but not trimethylation, is accommodated by BAF45C's H3K4-binding site. Our results suggest that H3K4me1 has an active role at enhancers by facilitating binding of the BAF complex and possibly other chromatin regulators.

### Keywords
Baf, Monomethylation of histone h3 at lysine 4 (h3k4me1), And enhancers

### Affiliations
UCSD
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research

### Submitter
Claudio Ponte de Albuquerque

### Lab Head
Dr Bing Ren
Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research


