### Accession
PXD023733

### Title
Protein citrullination and homocitrullination profiling in mice using LC-MS/MS

### Description
Citrullination and homocitrullination are two post-translational modifications (PTMs) that may cause protein structural and functional changes. Although they have been linked to various biological processes and disease development, the understanding is still poor because of limitations to enrich, detect and localize them. Herein, we report a biotin thiol tag that enables derivatization, enrichment and confident identification of these two PTMs coupled with mass spectrometry. We apply this method to profile these modifications in different tissues of mice. In total, we identify 1,198 citrullination sites and 108 homocitrullination sites from 619 and 79 proteins, respectively, which is the largest dataset to date. We reveal previously unknown distribution and functions of these two PTMs. We also achieve multiplexing quantitative analysis by combing this method with isotopic labeling strategies. This study contributes to an improved understanding of protein citrullination and homocitrullination, and processes the potential to further decipher their physiological and pathological roles.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from mouse tissues were extracted and digested into peptides. Samples were derivatized using our biotin thiol tag. Derivatized citrullinated and homocitrullinated peptides were enriched using streptavidin agarose and released before analyzed on an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex UltiMate 3000 UPLC system.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were searched against the UniProt Mus musculus reviewed database (December 2018) using MaxQuant (version 1.5.2.8) with trypsin/P selected as the enzyme and three missed cleavages allowed. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues (+57.02146 Da) were chosen as fixed modifications and variable modifications include oxidation of methionine residues (+15.99492 Da), biotin tag-labeled citrullination of arginine (+354.10718 Da) and biotin tag-labeled homocitrullination of lysine (+396.12898 Da). A neutral loss of biotin tag (303.10752 Da) and two diagnostic ions of 227.08487 Da and 304.11479 Da were included in the search. Search results were filtered to 1% false discovery rate (FDR) at both peptide and protein levels. Peptides that were found as reverse or potential contaminant hits were filtered out and citrullination or homocitrullination site localization probability threshold was set to 0.75. All other parameters were set as default.

### Publication Abstract
Citrullination is a key post-translational modification (PTM) that affects protein structures and functions. Although it has been linked to various biological processes and disease pathogenesis, the underlying mechanism remains poorly understood due to a lack of effective tools to enrich, detect, and localize this PTM. Herein, we report the design and development of a biotin thiol tag that enables derivatization, enrichment, and confident identification of citrullination via mass spectrometry. We perform global mapping of the citrullination proteome of mouse tissues. In total, we identify 691 citrullination sites from 432 proteins which represents the largest data set to date. We discover novel distribution and functions of this PTM. This study depicts a landscape of protein citrullination and lays the foundation for further deciphering their physiological and pathological roles.

### Keywords
Citrullination, Mouse, Biotin thiol tag, Lc-ms/ms, Homocitrullination

### Affiliations
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA
University of Wisconsin Madison

### Submitter
Zihui Li

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Department of Chemistry and School of Pharmacy, University of Wisconsin-Madison, WI, USA


