### Accession
PXD032956

### Title
SUMOylation controls the rapid transcriptional reprogramming induced by chemotherapies in Acute Myeloid Leukemias

### Description
Genotoxicants have been used for decades as front-line therapies against cancer on the basis of their DNA-damaging actions. However, some of their non-DNA-damaging effects are also instrumental for killing dividing cells. We report here that the anthracycline Daunorubicin (DNR), one of the main drugs used to treat Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), induces broad transcriptional changes in AML cells before cell death induction. The regulated genes are particularly enriched in genes controlling cell proliferation and death, as well as inflammation and immunity. These transcriptional changes are preceded by DNR-dependent deSUMOylation of chromatin proteins, which limits both the positive and negative effects of DNR on transcription. Quantitative proteomics shows that proteins that are deSUMOylated in response to DNR are mostly transcription factors, transcriptional co-regulators and chromatin organizers. Among them, the CCCTC-binding factor CTCF is highly enriched at SUMO-binding sites found in cis-regulatory regions. This is notably the case at the promoter of the DNR-induced NFKB2 gene. Its induction is preceded by a SUMO-dependent reconfiguration of chromatin loops engaging its CTCF- and SUMO-bound promoter with distal cis-regulatory regions. Altogether, our work suggests that one of the earliest effects of DNR in AML cells is a SUMO-dependent transcriptional reprogramming.

### Sample Protocol
For SILAC experiments, SILAC-labeled HL-60 cells were grown in spinner flasks (Nunc). 5 x 108 cells were used for each condition. The immunoprecipitation of endogenously SUMOylated proteins was based on the protocol described in reference Baryschet al (Nat Protoc, 2014). Cells were lysed in PBS containing SDS 2%. The final concentration of SDS after lysis was then adjusted to 1% and lysates were sonicated. Dithiotreitol (DTT) was then added at a final concentration of 50 mM. Lysates were then boiled for 10 min and diluted 10-fold in Na phosphate 20 mM pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, Triton X100 1%, Na deoxycholate 0.5%, EGTA 5 mM, EDTA 5 mM, NEM, 10 mM, aprotinin + pepstatin + leupeptin 1 µg/mL each, filtered through 0.45 µm filter and incubated with Protein G-coupled anti-SUMO-1, -SUMO-2 and -BrdU (control) antibodies at 4°C overnight. Beads were then washed 3 times with RIPA (Na phosphate 20 mM pH 7.4, NaCl 150 mM Triton X100 1%, SDS 0.1%, Na deoxycholate 0.5%, EGTA 5 mM, EDTA 5 mM, NEM 10 mM, aprotinin1µg/mL and pepstatin 1 µg/mL) and twice with RIPA containing NaCl 350 mM in LowBind tubes (Eppendorf). Elution of SUMOylated proteins was performed twice with peptides bearing either the 21C7 SUMO-1- (VPMNSLRFLFE) or the 8A2 SUMO-2/3- (IRFRFDGQPI) epitope diluted in RIPA containing NaCl 350 mM. Eluted proteins were precipitated with 10% TCA for 1 h on ice. Pellets were then washed twice with acetone at -20°C, dried and resuspended in the Laemli electrophoresis sample buffer. For the identification of SUMOylated targets (SILAC1), samples were immunoprecipited with control-, anti-SUMO-1 or anti-SUMO-2/3 antibodies and mixed only after elution with the SUMO epitope-bearing peptides. For the identification of proteins showing DNR-modulated SUMOylation, mock- and DNR-treated samples were mixed right after the initial lysis step and used for immunoprecipitation with SUMO-1 (SILAC2) or SUMO-2/3 (SILAC3) antibodies.

### Data Protocol
Enriched SUMOylated proteins from SILAC lysates were size-separated by SDS-PAGE and in-gel digested with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixtures were extracted, desalted and concentrated on STAGE-tips with two C18 filters and eluted two times with 10 μl of acetonitrile 40% in formic acid 0.5% prior to online nanoflow liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (nano LC-MS/MS) using an EASY-nLC system (Proxeon, Odense, Denmark) connected to the Q Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Germany) through a nano-electrospray ion source. Peptides were separated in a 15 cm analytical column in-house packed with 1.9 μm C18 beads (Reprosil-AQ, Pur, Dr. Manish, Ammerbuch-Entringen, Germany) using a 80 minutes gradient from 8% to 75% acetonitrile in acetic acid 0.5% at a flow rate of 250 nl/minute. The mass spectrometers were operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with a top 10 method. For Q-Exactive measurements, full scan MS spectra were acquired at a target value of 3 x 10 6 and a resolution of 60,000 and the Higher-Collisional Dissociation (HCD) tandem mass spectra (MS/MS) were recorded at a target value of 1 x 10 5 and with a resolution of 60,000 with a normalized collision energy of 30%. Raw mass spectrometry (MS) files were processed with the MaxQuant software suite (version 1.4.0.3). All resulting MS/MS spectra were searched against the human Uniprot database by the Andromeda search engine using the reversed database strategy applying a false discovery rate of 0.01 at both peptide and protein levels.  Overrepresentation of Gene Ontologies of the identified proteins were analyzed using Fisher’s exact test from InnateDB.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sumo, Acute myeloid leukemias

### Affiliations
Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research
Group leader, Professor  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Denmark

### Submitter
Ana Martinez-Val

### Lab Head
Dr Jesper Velgaard Olsen
Group leader, Professor  University of Copenhagen Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Protein Research Denmark


