### Accession
PXD042172

### Title
Cell surface-specific N-glycoproteomics

### Description
To understand the cellular functions of glycans and to exploit them as clinical targets it is essential to acquire information on their cell surface exposure. Here, we developed a sensitive and specific mass spectrometry method to globally study the N-glycoforms displayed at individual protein sites on the cell surface. This offers a valuable tool to discriminate between functionally relevant glycans and biosynthetic intermediates for future cellular glycoproteomic analyses.

### Sample Protocol
C18-LC-MS/MS for released glycans, glycoproteomics and proteomics

### Data Protocol
Skyline for released glycans, PD/Byonic for glycoproteomics, DIA-NN for proteomics

### Publication Abstract
Cell surface glycans are essential for establishing cell communication, adhesion, and migration. However, it remains challenging to obtain cell surface-specific information about glycoconjugate structures. Acquiring this information is essential for unraveling the functional role of glycans and for exploiting them as clinical targets. To specifically analyze the <i>N</i>-glycoprotein forms expressed at the cell surface, we developed a C18 liquid chromatography (LC)-mass spectrometry (MS)-based glycoproteomics method in combination with highly specific cell surface protein labeling and enrichment using a biotin label. The surface-specificity of the method was validated by MS-based proteomics of subcellular component marker proteins. Using the human keratinocytes N/TERT-1 as a model system, we identified and quantified the glycosylation of hundreds of cell surface <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites. This approach allowed us to study the glycoforms present at the functional relevant cell surface, omitting immaturely glycosylated proteins present in the secretory pathway. Interestingly, the different stages of <i>N</i>-glycan processing at individual sites displayed at the cell surface were found to correlate with their accessibility for ER-residing processing enzymes, as investigated through molecular dynamics simulations. Using the new approach, we compared <i>N</i>-glycosylation sites of proteins expressed on the cell surface to their counterparts in a total cell lysate, showing profound differences in glycosylation between the subcellular components and indicating the relevance of the method for future studies in understanding contextual glycan functions.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Keratinocytes, Lc-ms/ms, N-glycan, Cell surface

### Affiliations
Copenhagen center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen

### Submitter
Noortje de Haan

### Lab Head
Dr Hans Wandall
Copenhagen Center for Glycomics, University of Copenhagen


