### Accession
PXD002498

### Title
Quantitative proteomics in osteoblasts-released matrix vesicles

### Description
The use of glycosaminoglycan-coated implants are a promising therapeutic approach in bone research since they mimic the native bone environment and facilitate the skeletonegenesis. Previous studies showed that sulfated glycosaminoglycans induce the osteoblastic phenotype, but the overall effect on the cellular proteome were only minor. Therefore we focussed on the osteoblast-released matric vesicles (MV) that are known to hold a keyrole in the initiation of the mineralization of the extracellular matrix. Indeed, we found a strong impact of sulfated glycosaminoglycans on the activity and composition of MV. In addition, to find out  if the altered MV composition is a reflection of an altered cellular proteome we compared the GAG-induced changes in both proteome.

### Sample Protocol
Cells were cultured in SILAC media to obtain metabolically labeled proteins. Reference samples and test samples were mixed.The gained lysates from MVs and cells were seperated by a 1D-SDS-PAGE. The corresponding gele lanes were cut into slices of equal protein amount after which in-gel tryptic digestion was conducted. Tryptic peptides were seperated in a nano-LC using a non-linear gradient up to 150 min. Seperated peptides were electrosprayed to a LTQ Orbitrap XL ETD mass spectrometer at. 1.7 kV. Full MS scans were conducted using the orbitrap mass analyzer (resolution 60,000). The Top 6 most abundant proteins were were selected for MS/MS scans in the linear ion trap.

### Data Protocol
All generated raw files were analyzed using MaxQuant software (version 1.4.1.2) with the integrated search engine Andromeda. A concatenated Uniprot database, which contains all reviewed human proteins (version 2nd December 2013; 39,665 sequences) as well as reverse entries and contaminants was used. The following MaxQuant search parameters were used: precursor’s mass tolerance 30 ppm for first search, 5 ppm for main search, fragment’s ion mass tolerance 0.5 Da, 2 allowed missed cleavages by setting trypsin in ‘specific’ mode as endoproteases, minimum of 1 peptide per protein including at least 1 unique peptide. The false discovery rate (FDR) for peptide and protein identification was set to 0.01 based on a target-decoy database search. There was no threshold score set for unmodified peptides whereas for modified peptides the threshold score was 40. Oxidation of methionine and acetylation of protein N-terminus was set as variable modifications whereas carbamidomethylation of cysteine was set as a fixed modification. Lysine-6 (13C-labeled lysine) and arginine-10 (13C-15N-labeled arginine) were set as heavy SILAC labels. If not stated otherwise,  MaxQuant default parameters were used.

### Publication Abstract
Our aging population has to deal with the increasing threat of age-related diseases that impair bone healing. One promising therapeutic approach involves the coating of implants with modified glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) that mimic the native bone environment and actively facilitate skeletogenesis. In previous studies, we reported that coatings containing GAGs, such as hyaluronic acid (HA) and its synthetically sulfated derivative (sHA1) as well as the naturally low-sulfated GAG chondroitin sulfate (CS1), reduce the activity of bone-resorbing osteoclasts, but they also induce functions of the bone-forming cells, the osteoblasts. However, it remained open whether GAGs influence the osteoblasts alone or whether they also directly affect the formation, composition, activity, and distribution of osteoblast-released matrix vesicles (MV), which are supposed to be the active machinery for bone formation. Here, we studied the molecular effects of sHA1, HA, and CS1 on MV activity and on the distribution of marker proteins. Furthermore, we used comparative proteomic methods to study the relative protein compositions of isolated MVs and MV-releasing osteoblasts. The MV proteome is much more strongly regulated by GAGs than the cellular proteome. GAGs, especially sHA1, were found to severely impact vesicle-extracellular matrix interaction and matrix vesicle activity, leading to stronger extracellular matrix formation and mineralization. This study shows that the regulation of MV activity is one important mode of action of GAGs and provides information on underlying molecular mechanisms.

### Keywords
Human, Glycosaminoglycans, Lc-msms, Exosome, Matrix vesicles, Silac, Osteoblasts

### Affiliations
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany

### Submitter
Johannes R. Schmidt

### Lab Head
Dr Martin von Bergen
Helmholtz Centre for Environmental Research - UFZ, Leipzig, Germany


