### Accession
PXD005506

### Title
HipSci project proteomics batch 1, comprising 6 IPS cell lines from 3 donors

### Description
The Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Initiative (HipSci) is generating a large, high-quality reference panel of human IPSC lines.  This is a submission of mass-spectrometry analyses from 6 induced pluripotent stem cell lines generated by the HipSci project.

### Sample Protocol
The frozen iPS cell pellets were solubilized using lysis buffer (8M urea, 100 mM TEAB). The cell lysates were digested using a two-step digestion protocol (overnight Lys-C digestion followed by 4 hour-tryptic digestion).  Peptides were labelled using TMT six plex.  Basic Reverse phase LC  (RP-LC)  chromotography was used to fractionate the peptides for subsequent LC-MS/MS analyses.

### Data Protocol
Three seperate proteomics analyses were performed: 1) with Q-exactive mass spectrometer, 2) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (SPS-MS3 method), 3) data-dependent acquisition (DDA) with Oribtrap Fusion mass spectrometer with inclusion list (SPS-MS3).  Data processing was carried out using Maxquant version 1.5.3.30. Data were processed with the following settings: 2 missed cleavages allowed, enzyme used was LysC + trypsin/P, 20 ppm tolerance was used for fragment ions, FDR cut off of 0.05 was used. One fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys) and TMT six plex, and few variable modifications were selected: Oxidation (M); Acetylation (N-term), deamidation (NQ), pyroglutamate conversion of glutamine, phospho(STY).

### Publication Abstract
Technology utilizing human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPS cells) has enormous potential to provide improved cellular models of human disease. However, variable genetic and phenotypic characterization of many existing iPS cell lines limits their potential use for research and therapy. Here we describe the systematic generation, genotyping and phenotyping of 711 iPS cell lines derived from 301 healthy individuals by the Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Initiative. Our study outlines the major sources of genetic and phenotypic variation in iPS cells and establishes their suitability as models of complex human traits and cancer. Through genome-wide profiling we find that 5-46% of the variation in different iPS cell phenotypes, including differentiation capacity and cellular morphology, arises from differences between individuals. Additionally, we assess the phenotypic consequences of genomic copy-number alterations that are repeatedly observed in iPS cells. In addition, we present a comprehensive map of common regulatory variants affecting the transcriptome of human pluripotent cells.

### Keywords
Human, Tandem mass tag, Pluripotent, Tmt, Ips cells

### Affiliations
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Initiative

Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Initiative
Human Induced Pluripotent Stem Cells Initiative
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee

### Submitter
HipSci Project

### Lab Head
Dr Angus Lamond
College of Life Sciences, University of Dundee


