### Accession
PXD035809

### Title
Bifidobacterium infantis utilizes N-acetylglucosamine nitrogen

### Description
15N-labeled N-acetylglucosamine (NAG) fed to B. infantis cells are incorporated into its proteome. This indicates that NAG, an amino sugar residue of human milk oligosaccharides (HMO) and other biopolymers, is used as a nitrogen source. Transcriptomics while subsisting on NAG nitrogen are consistent with the proteomics results. This further indicates that B. infantis utilizes NAG nitrogen in and shunts it towards a fundamental cellular processes.

### Sample Protocol
Bacterial cultures of B. infantis UMA 272 were grown overnight in mMRS supplemented with 2% w/v of NAG, or N15 labelled NAG (C8H15*NO6, Cambridge isotope laboratories, Inc. USA) with 0.15% w/v L-cysteine or 0.15% w/v N15 labelled L-cysteine (HSCH2CH(*NH2)COOH Cambridge isotope laboratories, Inc. USA) or complex nitrogen source. A total of three biological replicates were included for proteomics analysis from each N14 and N15 labeled nitrogen samples. Cultures were harvested at mid-exponential phase and cell pellets were collected by centrifugation at 12,000 x g for 3 min. Cell pellet was washed 2 X with PBS buffer and stored at -80°C until further analysis. Sample preparation for mass spectrometer analysis was done using S-Trap micro universal MS sample prep kit (Protifi LLC, USA). Samples were reduced, alkylated, and trypsin digestion and clean-up was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions (Protifi LLC, USA). Tryptic peptides were reconstituted and purified with ZIPTIP® C18 pipette tips (Merck Millipore, USA) as per manufacturer instructions before MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Tryptic digests were analyzed using a Thermo Easy-nLC 1000 nanoLC system coupled to a Thermo Orbitrap Fusion mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA). Peptides were separated using a 90-minute gradient of increasing concentration of acetonitrile and infused into the mass spectrometer at 300 nl/min. MS1 data was acquired at 60,000 resolution in the Orbitrap and MS/MS data were acquired in a data dependent manner selecting the top 5 most intense ions for fragmentation, using a nominal CID collision energy of 35%. Mass spectrometry data were obtained at the University of Massachusetts Amherst Mass Spectrometry Center.  Mass spectrometric data was analyzed using Peaks studio software (V.10.5, Bioinformatics solutions Inc., Waterloo, ON, Canada).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nitrogen metabolism, N-acetyl glucosamine, 2-oxoglutarate, Human milk oligosaccharides, Bifidobacterium longum subsp. infantis

### Affiliations
University of Massachusetts Amherst
David A. Sela Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010

### Submitter
Asha Rani

### Lab Head
Dr David A. Sela
David A. Sela Associate Professor, Dept. of Food Science Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology University of Massachusetts Amherst Adjunct Associate Professor, Dept. of Microbiology & Physiological Systems University of Massachusetts Medical School selalab.org  413.545.1010


