### Accession
PXD029046

### Title
Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveals diverse stimuli activate distinct signaling pathways during neutrophil activation

### Description
Neutrophils play an active role in acute and chronic inflammation by exhibiting functional heterogeneity. Besides beneficial role in acute infections to eliminate pathogens, neutrophils also contribute to pathogenesis of diseases associated with sterile inflammation including vascular disorders, autoimmune diseases, Type 2 diabetes (T2D) and cancers. During T2D, hyperglycemia constitutively activate neutrophils. In the context of T2D associated complications, we examined influence of high glucose, homocysteine and LPS representing effector molecules of hyperglycemia, thrombosis, and infection respectively on human neutrophil activation to identify distinct signaling pathways by quantitative phosphoproteomics approach.

### Sample Protocol
Neutrophils were isolated from 7 healthy subjects by ficol-dextran method and cells were treated with different activators such as high glucose (25mM), homocysteine(250µM) and LPS(2µg). After 30 minutes of incubation cells were lysed using lysis buffer (1 mM sodium orthovanadate, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β glycerol phosphate in 50 mM TEABC, and 2% SDS) and protein concentrations were estimated by BCA method (Pierce, Waltham, MA) and was also confirmed visually resolving on a 10% SDS- polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) gel.  Lysates were pooled and equal amounts of protein (450 µg) from each condition were used for digestion. Protein was subjected reduction and to alkylation by using 5 mM dithiothourseitol (DTT) and 20 mM iodoacetamide. Prior to trypsin digestion, the samples were buffer exchanged with 50 mM TEABCC to remove urea. Then samples were then incubated with trypsin (1:20) (Worthington Biochemical Corp.).

### Data Protocol
The raw data obtained after acquisition were processed using Proteome Discoverer software suite version 2.2 (Thermo Fisher Scientific) the data was searched against RefSeq 94 database. Protein sequences were downloaded from NCBI, and MS/MS data were searched against the protein database along with known mass spectrometer contaminates using SEQUEST algorithm. Search parameters were fixed as carbamidomethylation of cysteine as a static modification, oxidation of methionine, deamination, N-terminal acetylation at protein N- terminus; minimum peptide length of seven amino acids with 1 missed cleavage. Mass tolerance was set to 10 ppm at MS level and 0.05 Da for MS/MS.

### Publication Abstract
Neutrophils display functional heterogeneity upon responding diversely to physiological and pathological stimulations. During type 2 diabetes (T2D), hyperglycemia constitutively activates neutrophils, leading to reduced response to infections and on the other hand, elevated metabolic intermediates such as homocysteine induce bidirectional activation of platelets and neutrophils leading to thrombosis. Hence, in the context of T2D-associated complications, we examined the influence of high glucose, homocysteine, and LPS representing effector molecules of hyperglycemia, thrombosis, and infection, respectively, on human neutrophil activation to identify distinct signaling pathways by quantitative phosphoproteomics approach. High glucose activated C-Jun-N-Terminal Kinase, NTRK1, SYK, and PRKACA kinases associated with Rho GTPase signaling and phagocytosis, whereas LPS induced AKT1, SRPK2, CSNK2A1, and TTN kinases involved in cytokine signaling and inflammatory response. Homocysteine&#xa0;treatment led to activatation of&#xa0; LRRK2, FGR, MAPK3, and PRKCD kinases which are&#xa0;associated with neutrophil degranulation and cytoskeletal remodeling. Diverse inducers differentially modulated phosphorylation of proteins associated with neutrophil functions such as oxidative burst, degranulation, extracellular traps, and phagocytosis. Further validation of phosphoproteomics data on selected kinases revealed neutrophils pre-cultured under high glucose showed impeded response to LPS to phosphorylate p-ERK1/2<sup>Thr202/Tyr204</sup>, p-AKT<sup>Ser473</sup>, and C-Jun-N-Terminal Kinase<sup>Ser63</sup> kinases. Our study provides novel phosphoproteome signatures that may be explored to understand neutrophil biology in T2D-associated complications.

### Keywords
Type 2 diabetes, Hyperglycemia, Neutrophils, Infections, Homocysteine

### Affiliations
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India Phone: 0824-2204668 (Ext:2057) Email:csbmm@yenepoya.edu.in
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Professor and Deputy Director, Center for Systems Biology and Molecular Medicine Yenepoya Research Centre Yenepoya (Deemed to be University) University Road, Deralakatte Mangalore 575018, India Phone: 0824-2204668 (Ext:2057) Email:csbmm@yenepoya.edu.in


