### Accession
PXD014287

### Title
The role of Xist-mediated Polycomb recruitment in the initiation of X-chromosome inactivation

### Description
The role of Xist-mediated Polycomb recruitment in the initiation of X-chromosome inactivation

### Sample Protocol
Xist FL (both in DOX and noDOX conditions) and Xist ΔB+C (DOX) cells were differentiated for 3 days. A fraction of these cells were used to quantify levels of Xist induction by RNA FISH. Xist ChIRP-MS were conducted using a previously published protocol (Chu et al., 2015) with the following modifications: (1) around 500 million cells per ChIRP-MS experiment were collected (roughly 10-15 15cm2 dishes) cross-linked in 3% formaldehyde for 30min, followed by 0.125M glycine quenching for 5min; (2) All 100mg of cell pellets were then dissolved in 1ml of nuclear lysis buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl pH 7.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1 % SDS) and 880µl were sonicated in a Covaris ultrasonicator for 1hr (20min, three times). Clarified lysates were pooled for each sample; (3) instead of RNase treatment, noDOX condition was used as control. 6µl of Riboblock RNase inhibitor was added per ml of clear lysate into the experiment and control tubes were incubated at 37ºC for 30min prior to hybridization step. Final protein samples were size-separated in bis-tris SDS-PAGE gel for LC/MS-MS. Correct retrieval of Xist RNA after ChIRP from Xist FL and Xist ΔB+C was analyzed by RT-qPCR using three pairs of primers along Xist RNA [Pair 1 - Forward 1 (Fw1): GCCT CTGA TTTA GCCA GCAC, Reverse 1 (Rv1): GCAA CCCA GCAA TAGT CAT; Pair2 - Fw2: GACA ACAA TGGG AGCT GGTT, Rv2: GGAT CCTG CACT GGAT GAGT; Pair 3 - Fw3: GCCA TCCT CCCT ACCT CAGAA; Rv3: CCTG ACAT TGTT TTCC CCCT AA) and Gapdh as housekeeping gene (Fw: AAGG TCAT CCCA GAGC TGAA; Rv: CTGC TTCA CCAC CTTC TTGA)]. For details on ChIRP probe design, please see Extended Experimental Procedure on the previously published protocol (Chu et al., 2015).

### Data Protocol
Xist hits from CHIRP-MS were ranked according to Xist FL DOX/Xist FL noDOX fold-change in peptide counts. To calculate this and Xist ΔB+C/Xist FL noDOX ratios, when peptide counts for Xist FL noDOX samples was 0, it was considered 1 (Dataset EV1). For comparison with Chu et al. 2015 list (Chu et al., 2015), only annotated protein isoforms with an Annotation score in UniportKB ≥ 3 (out of 5) were considered with a minimum of 2.5 DOX/noDOX fold-change in one of the samples. Proteins present in the Chu’s list with DOX/no DOX ratio inferior in Xist ΔB+C than Xist FL were considered underrepresented in Xist ΔB+C protein interactome. Proteins with no peptide counts for Xist ΔB+C or with equal peptide counts to Xist FL noDOX, which had a DOX/noDOX ratio ≥ 4 for Xist FL were considered not to be part of the Xist ΔB+C protein interactome.

### Publication Abstract
Xist RNA has been established as the master regulator of X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) in female eutherian mammals, but its mechanism of action remains unclear. By creating novel Xist-inducible mutants at the endogenous locus in male mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells, we dissect the role of the conserved A-B-C-F repeats in the initiation of XCI. We find that transcriptional silencing can be largely uncoupled from Polycomb repressive complex 1 and complex 2 (PRC1/2) recruitment, which requires B and C repeats. Xist &#x394;B+C RNA specifically loses interaction with PCGF3/5 subunits of PRC1, while binding of other Xist partners is largely unaffected. However, a slight relaxation of transcriptional silencing in Xist &#x394;B+C indicates a role for PRC1/2 proteins in early stabilization of gene repression. Distinct modules within the Xist RNA are therefore involved in the convergence of independent chromatin modification and gene repression pathways. In this context, Polycomb recruitment seems to be of moderate relevance in the initiation of silencing.

### Keywords
Mouse, Xist, Chirp-ms

### Affiliations
VIRGINIA AND D. K. LUDWIG PROFESSOR OF CANCER GENOMICS AND OF GENETICS Dermatology Stanford University
Stanford Medical School

### Submitter
Yuning Wei

### Lab Head
Dr Howard Chang
VIRGINIA AND D. K. LUDWIG PROFESSOR OF CANCER GENOMICS AND OF GENETICS Dermatology Stanford University


