### Accession
PXD015984

### Title
Biochemical and proteomic studies on pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-binding protein (PLPBP)

### Description
Structural and proteomic investigations on conserved PLPBP.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were processed applying standard procedures including reduction, alkylation, and digestion.

### Data Protocol
Proteomic data were processed using MaxQuant and Perseus. Crosslinking data were analyzed with XlinkX.

### Publication Abstract
The pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-binding protein (PLPBP) is an evolutionarily conserved protein linked to pyridoxal 5'-phosphate-binding. Although mutations in PLPBP were shown to cause vitamin B6-dependent epilepsy, its cellular role and function remain elusive. We here report a detailed biochemical investigation of human PLPBP and its epilepsy-causing mutants by evaluating stability, cofactor binding, and oligomerization. In this context, chemical cross-linking combined with mass spectrometry unraveled an unexpected dimeric assembly of PLPBP. Furthermore, the interaction network of PLPBP was elucidated by chemical cross-linking paired with co-immunoprecipitation. A mass spectrometric analysis in a PLPBP knockout cell line resulted in distinct proteomic changes compared to wild type cells, including upregulation of several cytoskeleton- and cell division-associated proteins. Finally, transfection experiments with vitamin B6-dependent epilepsy-causing PLPBP variants indicate a potential role of PLPBP in cell division as well as proper muscle function. Taken together, our studies on the structure and cellular role of human PLPBP enable a better understanding of the physiological and pathological mechanism of this important protein.

### Keywords
Prosc, Pyridoxal, Plpbp

### Affiliations
Departmen of Chemistry Chair for Organic Chemistry II Technical University Munich Lichtenbergstraße 4 85748 Garching
Techincal University Munich

### Submitter
Anja Fux

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Dr. Stephan A. Sieber
Departmen of Chemistry Chair for Organic Chemistry II Technical University Munich Lichtenbergstraße 4 85748 Garching


