### Accession
PXD037763

### Title
Comprehensive evaluation of Ubiquinol-supplemented diet effects in the 3xTg AD mice using MALDI-MSI

### Description
Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder, accounting for up to 75 % of all dementia cases. Although the basis of AD etiology remains unknown, oxidative stress constitutes a major driver given its intimate association, specially at prodromic stages of the disease. In this line, Ubiquinol, the reduced form of coenzyme Q10, is a well-known neuroprotective antioxidant and has demonstrated significant effects in oxidative responses of β-Amyloid aggregation, internalization, and apoptosis-induced neurodegeneration. However, full extent of Ubiquinol effects in the context of AD is not yet known in detail. In this study, we designed a new methodology based on MALDI MSI for evaluating the peptide profile of the 3xTg-AD mice model fed a Ubiquinol-supplemented diet. By adopting functional analysis tools, we observed differential functional profile in hippocampus and cortex levels after 4- or 10-m o supplementation. Therefore, we also identified ACAD9, XPO1 and EIF3A as potential protein references for the diagnosis of AD at early/late stages.

### Sample Protocol
At the conclusion of the diet supplementation, animals were anesthetized with a mixture of ketamine hydrochloride (Ketolar, 1.5 ml/kg, 75 mg/kg; Parke-Oavis, Madrid, Spain) and xylazine (Xilagesic, 0.5 ml/kg, 10 mg/kg; Calier, Barcelona, Spain), and perfused with saline solution followed by 4% w/v paraformaldehyde in 0.1 M sodium phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The whole brains were post-fixed in 4% w/v paraformaldehyde for 24 h, dehydrated and then embedded in paraffin blocks. 5 μm sections were deparaffinized in xylene and rehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and deionized water. Paraffined tissues were cut at 5 µm of thickness and mounted onto an indium tin oxide slide (ITO, Sigma Aldrich, Steiheim, Germany) previously coated with poly-L-lysine (P1274-25mg, Sigma Aldrich, Steiheim, Germany) with a custom protocol (0,1mg/ml poly L-Lys, 37ºC, 1hour). Mounted samples were heated for 1 hr at 65ºC to increase tissue fixation on ITO slide. Then, sections were deparaffined in xylene and rehydrated in a graded series of ethanol and deionized water. Antigen retrieval steps were performed by heating the rehydrated samples in 10mM sodium citrate pH6 (AD7-950-270-0500, Enzo, Farmingdale, NY, USA) at 98ºC for 30 min. After cooling the samples at room temperature until 40ºC, we performed a two washing steps with NH4HCO3 10mM buffer and a drying step in vacuum for 30 min. prior tissue digestion.

### Data Protocol
Analysis of samples was performed using an AB 5800 TOF/TOF (ABSciex, Darmstadt, Germany). A positive reflector mode was used for all samples performing double internal calibration of the spectra using for first instance trypsin autolysis peak a 842.508 [M+H] + and secondly Glu-Fibrinopetide peak at 1570.677 [M+H] +. The m/z range for all samples was defined from 650 to 1800 because 80% of visualized peptides from these samples were in this range (data not shown). The following parameters were fixed as default for all samples: laser intensity at 3200, delay extraction set to 450 ns and the number of shots per pixel over the sample to 150. 20 first shots were discarded to avoid sample background noise. Deflectors parameters were adjusted for each sample to ensure a resolution (FWHW) >15000 at GluFib mass. Acquisition of MSI datasets was made using TOF/TOF Imaging Acquisition Software (ABSciex) in a fixed spatial resolution of 150 μm for all samples. Spectra data were loaded into the R statistical software (R Foundation for Statistical Computing). Cardinal MSI package was used for data processing. Reduction of data dimensionality was performed with a resampling method that consisted in a linear interpolation at m/z unit using the two closest m/z points at which intensities were measured. Basic tools from R programming language were used to obtain an average resampled spectrum of each ROI for subsequent classification and to perform, when indicated, a correlation analysis.  Signal intensities were extracted and uploaded to MetaboAnalyst 4.0 (Chong et al. 2018) for statistical analysis. Datasets were previously filtered by Interquartile range (IQR) and, to make the assumptions fit better, data logarithmic transformation and auto-scaling were performed. Univariate analyses such as fold-change analysis and t-test were performed to compute summary level-statistics for each feature and individual study. As a supervised learning method, Partial Least Squares for Discriminant Analysis (PLS-DA) was employed to represent the separation between both groups.

### Publication Abstract
Despite its robust proteopathic nature, the spatiotemporal signature of disrupted protein modules in sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) brains remains poorly understood. This considered oxidative stress contributes to AD progression and early intervention with coenzyme Q10 or its reduced form, ubiquinol, delays the progression of the disease. Using MALDI-MSI and functional bioinformatic analysis, we have developed a protocol to express how deregulated protein modules arise from hippocampus and cortex in the AD mice model 3xTG-AD in an age-dependent manner. This strategy allowed us to identify which modules can be efficiently restored to a non-pathological condition by early intervention with ubiquinol. Indeed, an early deregulation of proteostasis-related protein modules, oxidative stress and metabolism has been observed in the hippocampus of 6-month mice (early AD) and the mirrored in cortical regions of 12-month mice (middle/late AD). This observation has been validated by IHC using mouse and human brain sections, suggesting that these protein modules are also affected in humans. The emergence of disrupted protein modules with AD signature can be prevented by early dietary intervention with ubiquinol in the 3xTG-AD mice model.

### Keywords
Mass spectrometry; maldi-imaging; alzheimer disease; coenzyme q10; 3xtg-ad mice

### Affiliations
Cellular Biology Department, Oxidative Stress and Neurodegeneration group, Ciudad Real Medical School, Castilla-La Mancha University
Medical School, Castilla-La Mancha University 

### Submitter
Emilio  Llanos González

### Lab Head
Dr Mario Durán Prado
Cellular Biology Department, Oxidative Stress and Neurodegeneration group, Ciudad Real Medical School, Castilla-La Mancha University


