### Accession
PXD036336

### Title
Proteins of the translation initiation complex in Arabidopsis thaliana infected or not with potyvirus

### Description
Successful subversion of translation initiation factors 4E and 4G determines the infection success of potyviruses, the largest group of viruses affecting plants. Functional redundancy among these factors allows to engineer resistances through their genetic inactivation, however recent findings indicate that this strategy may be deleterious for the plant health and virus susceptibility. Here, we explored the cause of these adverse effects by studying the role of the Arabidopsis eIF4E1, which inactivation was previously reported not only to confer plant virus resistance, but also to induce increased susceptibility to the potyvirus turnip mosaic virus (TuMV). We report that eIF4E1 is required to maintain the global plant translational activity and to restrict TuMV accumulation during infection, as its absence is associated with a favoured virus multiplication over host translation.

### Sample Protocol
The Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia-0 (Col-0) was used as the wild-type accession and the mutant used was built in this genetic background. The homozygous eif4e1KO line was obtained by a T-DNA insertion in eIF4E1 (At1g18040; SALK_145583). The TuMV-GFP UK1 isolate was kindly provided by Jean-François Laliberté. Virus inoculation was performed on 4-week-old Arabidopsis plants. TuMV inoculation was done by rub-inoculating a single young leaf with TuMV-GFP UK1-systemically infected turnip (Brassica rapa) leaves freshly ground in phosphate buffer (0.03 M Na2HPO4, 0.2% diethyldithiocarbamate [DIECA], pH 7) containing active carbon and carborundum. Mock inoculation was done by rub-inoculating a single young leaf with the phosphate buffer alone. For m7GTP pull-down assay, whole plants were ground in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in a 1:3 weight to volume ratio in binding buffer (100 mM HEPES, pH 7.6, 5% glycerol, 50mM KCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton X-100, 5 mM DTT and 1 × protease inhibitor cocktail [Roche]). The homogenized lysates were incubated at 4 °C for 1 hour for western blot analysis of eIFiso4G1 or overnight for mass spectrometry analyses with 50 µl of prewashed immobilized γ-aminophenyl-m7GTP (C10-spacer)-agarose beads or agarose (Ctrl) beads (Jena Bioscience). The beads were washed three times for mass spectrometry analyses with the binding buffer at 4 °C and linked proteins were eluted by boiling in 50 µl Laemmli buffer. Three biological replicates of m7GTP pull-down assays using extracts from WT and eif4e1KO plants infected or not with TuMV were prepared. In parallel, two biological replicates of negative controls using the same extracts were processed.  The eluted proteins were stacked in the top of a 4-12% NuPAGE gel (Invitrogen). After staining with R-250 Coomassie Blue (Biorad), proteins were digested in-gel using trypsin (modified, sequencing purity, Promega). The resulting peptides were analyzed by nanoLC-MS/MS using an Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano coupled to a Q-Exactive HF (Thermo Fisher Scientific) using a 80-min gradient. For this purpose, the peptides were sampled on a precolumn (300 μm x 5 mm PepMap C18, Thermo Scientific) and separated in a 75 μm x 250 mm C18 column (Reprosil-Pur 120 C18-AQ, 1.9 μm, Dr. Maisch). The MS and MS/MS data were acquired by Xcalibur (Thermo Fisher Scientific).

### Data Protocol
Peptides and proteins were identified by Mascot (version 2.7.0.1, Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (Arabidopsis thaliana taxonomy, February 2020 download), the Genbank database (TuMV-K1 taxonomy November 2019 download), a homemade database containing the sequences of classical contaminant proteins found in proteomic analyses (human keratins, trypsin, etc.), and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 ppm and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were: Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used for the compilation, grouping, and filtering of the results (conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide length ≥ 6 amino acids, peptide-spectrum-match score ≥ 25, allowing to reach a false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 1% as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of one specific peptide per identified protein group).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Potyvirus turnip mosaic virus, Pull-down assay, Nanolc-ms/ms, Arabidopsis, Translation initiation complex

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Yohann Couté
EDyP


