### Accession
PXD007809

### Title
Influenza A virus induces autophagosomal targeting of ribosomal proteins

### Description
Seasonal epidemics of influenza A virus are a major cause of severe illness and are of high socio-economic relevance. For the design of effective anti-viral therapies, a detailed knowledge of cellular pathways perturbed by virus infection is critical. We performed comprehensive expression and organellar proteomics experiments to identify new protein targets and cellular pathways affected by influenza A virus. Type I as well as type II interferon pathways were upregulated upon infection, affecting amongst others poly ADP-ribose polymerase transcription factors and ubiquitin-like modifiers. In addition, influenza A virus had a major influence on the subcellular localization of proteins and complexes. The vesicular compartment appeared expanded upon infection and in particular the composition of autophagsomes was altered, virus infection leading to targeting of ribosomes to autophagosomes.

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in SDS-PAGE loading buffer, reduced with 1 mM DTT for 10 min at 95°C and alkylated using 5.5 mM iodacetamide for 30 min at 25°C in the dark. Proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE using 4-12% Bis-Tris gels (NuPAGE, Invitrogen, Darmstadt, Germany). Staining with Colloidal Blue was used to visualize the proteins. The gel lanes were cut into 10 slices of equal size, which were cut into small cubes. Remaining Colloidal Blue was washed out by incubation with ABC buffer (100 mM ammonium bicarbonate pH 7.5) for 10 min followed by incubation for 10 min in ethanol. This was repeated for three times. 12.5 ng/µl trypsin (MS grade, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) was added and incubated for digestion over night at 37°C. Trypsin activity was stopped by acidification with 0.5% TFA. Remaining peptides were washed out of the gel cubes by two times incubation in 100 µl ethanol and the supernatant of the respective slice was combined. The peptide solution was concentrated to less than 50 µl in a speedvac to remove ethanol. Samples were desalted on STAGE tips.

### Data Protocol
The MS raw data files were uploaded into the MaxQuant software (version 1.2.2.5, 1.3.0.5). Database searches were performed against a homemade full-length human database containing common contaminants such as keratins and enzymes used for in–gel digestion as well as IAV protein sequences. Carbamidomethylcysteine was set as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and protein amino–terminal acetylation was set as variable modifications. Dependent on the experiment, double or triple SILAC was used as quantitation mode. The enzyme specificity was trypsin/P+DP with three allowed miss cleavages. The MS/MS tolerance was set to 0.5 Da and the mass precision of identified peptides after recalibration was in general less than 1 ppm. For identification and quantitation, the following settings were used: peptide and protein FDR were set to 0.01, maximum peptide posterior error probability (PEP) was set to 0.1, minimum peptide length was set to 7, minimum number peptides for identification and quantitation of proteins was set to two of which one must be unique, minimum ratio count was set to two, and only unmodified peptides and the variable modification were used for protein quantification. The “match between run” option was used with a time window of 2 min.

### Publication Abstract
Seasonal epidemics of influenza A virus are a major cause of severe illness and are of high socio-economic relevance. For the design of effective antiviral therapies, a detailed knowledge of pathways perturbed by virus infection is critical. We performed comprehensive expression and organellar proteomics experiments to study the cellular consequences of influenza A virus infection using three human epithelial cell lines derived from human lung carcinomas: A549, Calu-1 and NCI-H1299. As a common response, the type I interferon pathway was up-regulated upon infection. Interestingly, influenza A virus infection led to numerous cell line-specific responses affecting both protein abundance as well as subcellular localization. In A549 cells, the vesicular compartment appeared expanded after virus infection. The composition of autophagsomes was altered by targeting of ribosomes, viral mRNA and proteins to these double membrane vesicles. Thus, autophagy may support viral protein translation by promoting the clustering of the respective molecular machinery in autophagosomes in a cell line-dependent manner.

### Keywords
Human, Ribosome, Influenza, Organelle, Lc-ms/ms, Autophagosome, Autophagy

### Affiliations
University of Fribourg
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741

### Submitter
Joern Dengjel

### Lab Head
Dr Joern Dengjel
Dr. Jörn Dengjel Department of Biology, University of Fribourg  Chemin du Musée 10, 1700 Fribourg, Switzerland  T  +41 26 300 8631                  E     joern.dengjel@unifr.ch F  +41 26 300 9741


