### Accession
PXD024447

### Title
From birth to adulthood: An analysis of Bothrops moojeni snake venom at different life stages

### Description
Bothrops moojeni has a wide distribution in Brazil and represents a serious medical concern at some localities. Previous works reported that the manifestations of snakebites caused by B. moojeni juveniles were mainly related to coagulation, while those caused by adults had more prominent local damage. In this work, we aimed to analyze the venoms of B. moojeni at different life stages to better understand how the venom shifts along the ontogeny. Snakes were grouped by age and sex, and venom pools were formed accordingly. Compositional analyses by one-dimensional electrophoresis (1-DE), chromatography and mass spectrometry revealed that ontogenetic changes may be mostly related to phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and metalloproteases. Regarding the functional aspect of the venoms, in vitro assays of proteolytic, L-amino acid oxidase, PLA2 and coagulant activities were assayed, but only the first and the last showed age-related changes, with the venom of younger snakes displaying lower proteolytic and higher coagulant activities up to 1 year-old; from 2 years-old onward, the venoms presented the opposite relation. The venoms of 3 years-old snakes were exceptions to the compositional and functional pattern of adults. Sex-related differences were observed at specific groups and not related to age. In vivo experiments (median lethal dose and hemorrhagic activity) were statistically similar between neonates and adults, but observation of the time each venom took to kill the mice revealed that the adult one seemed to act faster than the venoms of the neonates. All venoms were mostly recognized by the antibothropic serum and displayed similar profiles to 1-DE in western blotting. In conclusion, the venoms showed ontogenetic shift in composition and activities. Furthermore, this change occurred from 1 to 2 years-old, and interestingly the 3 years-old pools had particular characteristics, which highlight the importance of extending the studies to better understand venom variability.

### Sample Protocol
Venom protein samples of 100 µg were dissolved in 50 μL of 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate, followed by addition of 25 µL of 0.2% RapiGest (Waters), and incubation at 80 ºC for 15 min. Samples were reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol at 60 ºC for 30 min and then alkylated in the dark with 10 mM iodoacetamide at room temperature for 30 min. Proteins were digested using trypsin (Promega) at a 1:100 (wt:wt) enzyme:protein ratio at 37 ºC overnight. Digestion was stopped by addition of 10 µL of 5% trifluoroacetic acid and incubation at 37 ºC for 90 min. Samples were filtered through 0.22 μm Millex-GV filters (EMD Millipore) into glass vials. The final protein concentration was approximately 2 µg/µL. Mass spectrometry experiments of venom digests were performed on a Synapt G2 HDMS (Waters) mass spectrometer coupled to a nanoAcquity UPLC system (Waters). Approximately 10 μg of each peptide mixture was loaded online for 5 min at a flow rate of 8 μL/min of phase A (0.1% formic acid) using a Symmetry C18 trapping column (5 μm particles, 180 μm x 20 mm length; Waters). The mixture of trapped peptides was subsequently separated by elution with a gradient of 7-35% of phase B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) through a BEH 130 C18 column (1.7 μm particles, 75 x 150 mm; Waters) in 90 min at 325 nL/min. Data were acquired in the data-independent mode HDMSE with ion mobility separation in the m/z range of 50-2000 and resolution mode. Collision energies were alternated between 4 eV and a ramp of 19-48 eV for precursor ions and fragment ions, respectively, using scan times of 1.0 s. The ESI source was operated in positive mode with a capillary voltage of 3.1 kV, block temperature of 100 °C, and cone voltage of 40 V. For lock mass correction, a [Glu1]-Fibrinopeptide B solution (500 fmol/mL in 50% acetonitrile, 0.1% formic acid; Peptide 2.0) was infused through the reference sprayer at 500 nL/min and sampled every 60 s. Venom samples were analyzed in technical duplicates.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometry raw data were processed in ProteinLynx Global Server 3.0.3 (Waters) platform using a low energy threshold of 750 counts and an elevated energy threshold of 50 counts. Database searches were performed against Bothrops sequences from UniprotKB/Swissprot (www.uniprot.org; unreviewed; 3,555 sequences; downloaded on August 29th , 2019). The following search parameters were used: automatic tolerances for precursor and fragment ions, carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues as fixed modification, oxidation of methionine and N-terminal acetylation as variable modifications, and trypsin digestion with up to two missed cleavage sites allowed. Protein identifications were considered with a minimum of one fragment ion per peptide, five fragment ions per protein, two peptides per protein, and a false discovery identification rate set to 1%, estimated by simultaneous search against a reversed database. Label-free quantification was performed in Progenesis QI for proteomics (NonLinear Dynamics, Newcastle, UK) as previously reported. Briefly, the raw files were loaded in the software and a reference run for the replicates was automatically chosen. Precursor ion retention times were processed for alignment, peak picking and normalized to the reference run with default parameters. Relative quantification was carried out by the comparison of peptide ion abundances, which were calculated as the sum of the areas under the isotope boundaries.

### Publication Abstract
The Brazilian lancehead (Bothrops moojeni) has a wide distribution in Brazil and represents a serious public health hazard. Previous works reported that the symptoms of snakebites caused by B. moojeni juveniles' bites were mainly related to coagulation, while those caused by adults' bites had a more prominent local damage. In this work, we analyzed the venoms of B. moojeni at different life stages to better understand the ontogeny shift in this species. Snakes were grouped by age and sex, and venom pools were formed accordingly. Compositional analyses by one-dimensional electrophoresis (1-DE), chromatography, and mass spectrometry revealed that ontogenetic changes might be mostly related to phospholipase A2 (PLA2) and metalloproteases. Regarding the venoms functional aspect, proteolytic, L-amino acid oxidase, PLA2, and coagulant in vitro activities were assayed, but only the first and the last ones showed age-related changes, with the venom of snakes up to 1 year-old displaying lower proteolytic and higher coagulant activities, while those from 2 years-old onward presented the opposite relation. The venoms of 3 years-old snakes were exceptions to the compositional and functional pattern of adults as both venoms presented profiles similar to neonates. Sex-related differences were observed in specific groups and were not age-related. In vivo experiments (median lethal dose and hemorrhagic activity) were statistically similar between neonates and adults, however we verified that the adult venom killed mice faster comparing to the neonates. All venoms were mostly recognized by the antibothropic serum and displayed similar profiles to 1-DE in western blotting. In conclusion, the Brazilian lancehead venom showed ontogenetic shift in its composition and activities. Furthermore, this change occurred in snakes from 1 to 2 years-old, and interestingly the venom pools from 3 years-old snakes had particular characteristics, which highlights the importance of comprehensive studies to better understand venom variability.

### Keywords
Snake venom; bothrops moojeni; ontogeny; hdmse

### Affiliations
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, UniversidadeFederal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil
Universidade Federal de Sao Paulo

### Submitter
Alexandre Keiji Tashima

### Lab Head
Dr Alexandre Keiji Tashima
Departamento de Bioquimica, Escola Paulista de Medicina, UniversidadeFederal de Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil


