### Accession
PXD042514

### Title
CD32A Immunoprecipitation in K562 Cell Membrane and Cytoplasm Fractions

### Description
Here we interrogate CD32A protein interactions in the cytoplasm and membrane fractions isolated from the human AML cell lines K562 wild-type and knockout for CD32A. Cells were fractionated prior to incubation with CD32A antibody and subsequent samples isolated using protein agarose beads.

### Sample Protocol
The beads were resuspended in 40 uL of 2M Urea, 50mM Ammonium Bicarbonate pH 8.5 and treated with DL-dithiothreitol (1mM final concentration) for 30 minutes at 37°C with shaking (1100 rpm) on a Thermomixer (Thermo Fisher). Free cysteine residues were alkylated with 2-iodoacetamide (3.67mM final concentration) for 45 minutes at 25°C at 1100 rpm in the dark. LysC (750 ng) was added, followed by incubation for 1h at 37°C at 1150 rpm. Finally, trypsin (750 ng) was added, followed by incubation for 16 hours at 37°C at 1150 rpm.  After incubation, the digest was acidified to pH <3 with the addition of 50% of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA), and the peptides were desalted on 3-plug C18 (3M EmporeTM high performance extraction disks) stage tips. Briefly, the stage tips were conditioned by sequential addition of: i) 100 μL 100% Acetonitrile (ACN), ii) 100 μL 70% ACN/0.1% TFA, iii) 100 μL 0.1% Formic Acid (FA), iv) 100 μL 0.1% FA. Following conditioning, the acidified peptide digest was loaded onto the stage tip. The stationary phase was washed once with 100 μL of 0.1% FA. Finally, samples were eluted using 50μL of 70% ACN/0.1% FA twice. Eluted peptides were dried under vacuum followed by reconstitution in 12 μL of 0.1% FA, sonication and transfer to an autosampler vial. Peptide yield was quantified by NanoDrop (Thermo Fisher).

### Data Protocol
Raw data files were processed using Spectronaut version 17.4 (Biognosys) and searched with the PULSAR search engine with a Homo sapiens UniProt protein database downloaded on 2022/09/23 (226,953 entries). Cysteine carbamidomethylation was specified as fixed modifications, while methionine oxidation, acetylation of the protein N-terminus and deamidation (NQ) were set as variable modification. A maximum of two trypsin missed cleavages were permitted. Searches used a reversed sequence decoy strategy to control peptide false discovery rate (FDR) and 1% FDR was set as threshold for identification. Unpaired t-test was used to calculate p-value in differential analysis, volcano plot was generated based on log2 fold change and q-value (multiple testing corrected p-value). A q-value of ≤0.05 was considered the statistically significant cut-off.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Fcgr2a, K562, Cd32a

### Affiliations
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.
MSKCC

### Submitter
Zhuoning Li

### Lab Head
Dr Omar Abdel-Wahab
Molecular Pharmacology Program, Sloan Kettering Institute, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA.


