### Accession
PXD012171

### Title
Site-specific Identification of Glutathionylation

### Description
Cardiomyocytes proteins were investigated for their glutathionylation in response to hydrogen peroxide generated from glucose oxidase and using a clickable glutathione derivative. After exposure, or not, to hydrogen peroxide the glutathionylated proteins were enriched and LC-MS/MS analyses was performed.

### Sample Protocol
HL-1 Cells were transfected with a mutant glutathione synthetase protein and incubated with azido alanine to produce azido glutathione and were either treated with hydrogen peroxide or not. These cells were then lysed in the presence of NEM. Lysates were then reacted with a silane containing acid cleavable Biotin-alkyne derivative and then incubated with streptavidin beads. On-bead digestion followed by elution with formic acid resulted in peptides that were then used for LC-MS/MS analysis.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were separated by UHPLC reverse phase chromatography with an EASY-nLC 1000 liquid chromatography system (Thermo) and introduced into an Orbitrap FUSION mass spectrometer (Thermo). MS1 scans were between 350-1600 m/z and at 240,000 orbitrap resolution. Abundant peptides with +2 or +3 charges were fragmented by CID at 35% collision energy, and peptides with charges between +3 and +7 were fragmented by ETD using calibrated charge-dependent ETD parameters. All MS2 fragmentations were scanned at 30,000 orbitrap resolution. All MS/MS samples were analyzed using PEAKS Studio [Bioinformatics Solutions, version 8.5 (2018-05-07), Waterloo, Canada]. Charge state deconvolution and deisotoping were not performed. PEAKS Studio was set up to search the Uniprot_Mus_Compl_20170714 database, assuming the digestion enzyme as trypsin. PEAKS Studio was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0.60 Da and a parent ion tolerance of 10.0 PPM. Glu to pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, Gln to pyro-Glu of the n-terminus, deamidation of Asn and Gln, oxidation of Met, acetylation of the n-terminus, NEM modification of cysteine, spermidine modification of glutamine, and glutathionylation of cysteine (+444 Da) were specified in PEAKS Studio as variable modifications.

### Publication Abstract
Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are important signaling molecules, but their overproduction is associated with many cardiovascular diseases, including cardiomyopathy. ROS induce various oxidative modifications, among which glutathionylation is one of the significant protein oxidations that occur under oxidative stress. Despite previous efforts, direct and site-specific identification of glutathionylated proteins in cardiomyocytes has been limited. In this report, we used a clickable glutathione approach in a HL-1 mouse cardiomyocyte cell line under exposure to hydrogen peroxide, finding 1763 glutathionylated peptides with specific Cys modification sites, which include many muscle-specific proteins. Bioinformatic and cluster analyses found 125 glutathionylated proteins, whose mutations or dysfunctions are associated with cardiomyopathy, many of which include sarcomeric structural and contractile proteins, chaperone, and other signaling or regulatory proteins. We further provide functional implication of glutathionylation for several identified proteins, including CSRP3/MLP and complex I, II, and III, by analyzing glutathionylated sites in their structures. Our report establishes a chemoselective method for direct identification of glutathionylated proteins and provides potential target proteins whose glutathionylation may contribute to muscle diseases.

### Keywords
Ptm, Glutathionylation, Affinity purification

### Affiliations
Wayne state university
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America

### Submitter
garrett vanhecke

### Lab Head
Dr Young-Hoon Ahn
Wayne State University Chemistry Department, Ahn Lab, United States of America


