### Accession
PXD032952

### Title
Proximity labelling of FLAG-TurboID- or Myc-UltraID-tagged full-length RNPS1 or RNPS1 deletion mutants followed by proteomics analysis

### Description
RNPS1 is a component of the EJC-associated ASAP and PSAP complex. We used full-length RNPS1, RNPS1 with a C-terminal deletion and the RNPS1 RRM in a proximity labeling approach. We aimed to confirm interaction partners of RNPS1 previously identified by MS of RNPS1 IPs using the same RNPS1 deletion mutants (Project 2209 and 2236). By identifying RNPS1 interaction partners we want to uncover how RNPS1 is able to fulfill its splicing regulatory functions.

### Sample Protocol
For Label-free Mass spec, samples were immunoprecipitated as described above and after addition of 1 volume of 5% SDS in PBS reduced with DTT and alkylated with CAA (final concentrations 5 mM and 55 mM, respectively). For tryptic protein digestion, a modified version of the single pot solid phase-enhanced sample preparation (SP3) protocol was used as described below. Samples were reduced with 5 mM Dithiothreitol followed by alkylation using 40 mM Chloroacetamide. Afterwards, proteins were supplemented with paramagnetic Sera-Mag speed beads (Cytiva) and mixed in a 1:1-ratio with 100% acetonitrile (ACN). After 8 min incubation, protein-beads-complexes were captured using an in-house build magnetic rack, washed twice with 70% EtOH, and washed once with 100% ACN. After airdrying and reconstitution in 5 µl 50 mM triethylammonium bicarbonate, samples were supplemented with 0.5 µg trypsin and 0.5 µg LysC and incubated overnight at 37◦C. The beads were resuspended on the next day and mixed with 200 µl ACN, followed by 8 min incubation. Subsequently, the samples were placed on the magnetic rack to wash the tryptic peptides once with 100% ACN. Samples were airdried, dissolved in 4% DMSO, transferred into new PCR tubes, and acidified with 1 µl of 10% formic acid. Proteomics analysis was performed by the proteomics core facility at CECAD via data-dependent acquisition using an Easy nLC1200 ultra high-performance liquid chromatography (UHPLC) system connected via nano electrospray ionization to a Q Exactive Plus instrument (all Thermo Scientific) running in DDA Top10 mode. Based on their hydrophobicity the tryptic peptides were separated using a chromatographic gradient of 60 min with a binary system of buffer A (0.1% formic acid) and buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid) with a total flow of 250 nl/min. Separation was achieved on in-house made analytical columns (length: 50 cm, inner diameter: 75 μm) containing 2.7 μm C18 Poroshell EC120 beads (Agilent) heated to 50 °C in a column oven (Sonation). Over a time period of 41 min, Buffer B was linearly increased from 3% to 30% followed by an increase to 50% in 8 min. Finally, buffer B was increased to 95% within 1 min followed by 10 min washing step at 95% B. Full mass spectrometry (MS) spectra (300-1,750 m/z) were recorded with a resolution of 70,000, a maximum injection time of 20 ms and an AGC target of 3e6. In each full MS spectrum, the top 10 most abundant ions were selected for HCD fragmentation (NCE 27) with a quadrupole isolation width of 1.8 m/z and 10 s dynamic exclusion. The MS/MS spectra were then measured with a 35,000 resolution, an injection time of maximum 110 ms and an AGC target of 5e5.

### Data Protocol
The MS RAW files were then analyzed with MaxQuant suite (version 1.5.3.8) on standard settings. By matching against the human UniProt database the peptides were then identified using the Andromeda scoring algorithm. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine was defined as a fixed modification, while methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation were variable modifications. The digestion protein was Trypsin/P. A false discovery rate (FDR) < 0.01 was used to identify peptide-spectrum matches and to quantify the proteins. Data processing, statistical analysis, as well as clustering and enrichment analysis were performed in the Perseus software (version 1.6.15.0).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Alternative splicing, Exon junction complex, Rnps1

### Affiliations
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany
CECAD Research Center

### Submitter
Prerana Wagle

### Lab Head
Dr Niels H. Gehring
Institute for Genetics, University of Cologne, 50674 Cologne, Germany


