### Accession
PXD002598

### Title
eNOS interactors in human cells

### Description
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) catalyzes the conversion of L-arginine and molecular oxygen into L-citrulline and nitric oxide (NO), a gaseous second messenger that influences cardiovascular physiology and disease. Several mechanisms regulate eNOS activity and function, including phosphorylation at Ser and Thr residues and protein-protein interactions. Combining a tandem affinity purification approach and mass spectrometry, we identified stromal cell-derived factor 2 (SDF2) as a component of the eNOS macromolecular complex in endothelial cells. SDF2 knockdown impaired agonist stimulated NO synthesis and decreased phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser1177, a key event required for maximal activation of eNOS. Conversely, SDF2 overexpression dose-dependently increased NO synthesis through a mechanism involving Akt and calcium (induced with ionomycin), which increased the phosphorylation of Ser1177 in eNOS. NO synthesis by iNOS (inducible NOS) and nNOS (neuronal NOS) was also enhanced upon SDF2 overexpression. We found that SDF2 was a client protein of the chaperone protein Hsp90, interacting preferentially with the M domain of Hsp90, which is the same domain that binds to eNOS. In endothelial cells exposed to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), SDF2 was required for the binding of Hsp90 and calmodulin to eNOS, resulting in eNOS phosphorylation and activation. Thus, our data describe a function for SDF2 as a component of the Hsp90-eNOS complex that is critical for signal transduction in endothelial cells.

### Sample Protocol
Proteins were reduced with 1 mM DTT for 30 min, alkylated with 5.5mM iodoacetamide for 20 min in the dark and digested for 3 hours at room temperature with the endo-proteinase LysC. The samples were diluted four times with ABC buffer (50 mM ammonium bi-carbonate in H2O pH=8.0) and digested overnight at 37°C with trypsin. The resulting peptide mixture was acidified by addition of trifluoroacetic acid. Peptides were desalted following the protocol for StageTip purification (36). Samples were eluted with 60 µL buffer B (80% ACN, 0.1% formic acid in H2O) and reduced in a Vacufuge plus (Eppendorf) to a final volume of 3 µL. 2 µL of buffer A (0.1 % formic acid in H2O) were added and the resulting 5 µL were injected through HPLC. Analysis of the peptide mixture was performed as described previously (37). Briefly, peptides were separated on 15 cm columns (New Objectives) with a 75 µM inner diameter, packed in house with 1.9 µM C18 resin (Dr. Maisch GmbH, Germany). Peptides were eluted at a constant flow rate of 250 nl for 95 min with a linear acetonitrile gradient from 5-30%. Eluted peptides were directly sprayed into a Q-Exactive Mass spectrometer (Thermo). The mass spectrometer was operated in a data dependent mode to automatically switch between full scan MS and up to 10 data dependent MS/MS scans. Maximum injection time for MS scans was 20 ms with a target value of 3,000,000 at a resolution of 70,000 at m/z=200. The ten most intense multiple charged ions (z≥2) from the survey scan were selected for MS/MS scans.  Peptides were fragmented with higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) (38) with normalized collision energies of 25. Target values for MS/MS were set to 1,000,000 with a maximum injection time of 120 ms at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z=200. Dynamic exclusion of sequenced peptides was set to 25 sec.

### Data Protocol
Resulting MS and MS/MS spectra were analyzed using MaxQuant (version1.3.0.5), utilizing its integrated ANDROMEDA search algorithms (39, 40). Peak lists were searched against a local databases for human proteins concatenated with reversed copies of all sequences. Carbamidomethlyation of cysteine was set as fixed modification, and variable modifications were methionine oxidation and N-terminal acetylation. Maximum mass deviation was 6ppm for MS peaks and 20ppm for MS/MS peaks with a maximum of 2 missed cleavages allowed and a minimum peptide length of 6 amino acids. Label free quantitation was performed using the QUBIC software package as described previously (41). All calculations and plots were done with the R software package (http://www.r-project.org/).

### Publication Abstract
Endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) catalyzes the conversion of l-arginine and molecular oxygen into l-citrulline and nitric oxide (NO), a gaseous second messenger that influences cardiovascular physiology and disease. Several mechanisms regulate eNOS activity and function, including phosphorylation at Ser and Thr residues and protein-protein interactions. Combining a tandem affinity purification approach and mass spectrometry, we identified stromal cell-derived factor 2 (SDF2) as a component of the eNOS macromolecular complex in endothelial cells. SDF2 knockdown impaired agonist-stimulated NO synthesis and decreased the phosphorylation of eNOS at Ser(1177), a key event required for maximal activation of eNOS. Conversely, SDF2 overexpression dose-dependently increased NO synthesis through a mechanism involving Akt and calcium (induced with ionomycin), which increased the phosphorylation of Ser(1177) in eNOS. NO synthesis by iNOS (inducible NOS) and nNOS (neuronal NOS) was also enhanced upon SDF2 overexpression. We found that SDF2 was a client protein of the chaperone protein Hsp90, interacting preferentially with the M domain of Hsp90, which is the same domain that binds to eNOS. In endothelial cells exposed to vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), SDF2 was required for the binding of Hsp90 and calmodulin to eNOS, resulting in eNOS phosphorylation and activation. Thus, our data describe a function for SDF2 as a component of the Hsp90-eNOS complex that is critical for signal transduction in endothelial cells.

### Keywords
Stromal cell-derived factor 2, Enos

### Affiliations
Harvard School of Public Health; Research Associate
Professor of Genetics and Complex Diseases,  Harvard University T.H. Chan School of Public Health  Professor of Cell Biology,  Harvard Medical School Associate Member, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard

### Submitter
Florian Froehlich

### Lab Head
Dr Tobias Walther
Professor of Genetics and Complex Diseases,  Harvard University T.H. Chan School of Public Health  Professor of Cell Biology,  Harvard Medical School Associate Member, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard


