### Accession
PXD037058

### Title
HyPep: An Open-Source Software for Identification and Discovery of Neuropeptides using Sequence Homology Searching

### Description
Neuropeptides are a class of endogenous peptides that have key regulatory roles in biochemical, physiological, and behavioral processes. Mass spectrometry analyses of neuropeptides often rely on protein informatics tools for database searching and peptide identification. As neuropeptide databases are typically experimentally built and comprised of short sequences with high sequence similarity to each other, we developed a novel database searching tool, HyPep, which utilizes sequence homology searching for peptide identification. HyPep aligns database-free, de novo sequenced peptide sequences generated through PEAKS software with neuropeptide database sequences to identify neuropeptides based on an alignment score. HyPep performance was optimized using LC-MS/MS measurements of peptide extracts from various C. sapidus neuronal tissue types and compared with a commercial database searching software, PEAKS DB. HyPep identified more neuropeptides from each tissue type than PEAKS DB at 1% false discovery rate and the false match rate from both programs was 2%. In addition to identification, this report describes how HyPep can aid in the discovery of novel neuropeptides.

### Sample Protocol
Materials Methanol (MeOH), acetonitrile (ACN), glacial acetic acid (GAA), ammonium bicarbonate, formic acid (FA), and all crab saline components were purchased from Fisher Scientific (Pittsburgh, PA). All water (H2O) used in this study was either of HPLC grade or doubly distilled on a Millipore filtration system (Burlington, MA), and C18 Ziptips were purchased from Millipore (Burlington, MA). All LC solvents were of Fisher Optima Grade. Animals All female blue crabs, C. sapidus, were purchased from Midway Asian Foods (Madison, WI) and housed in artificial seawater at 35 parts per thousand (ppt) salinity, 13-16 °C, and 8–10 parts per million (ppm) (∼80–100%) O2. Crabs were anesthetized on ice for 20 minutes and sacrificed for the collection of brain, sinus glands (SG), pericardial organs (PO), and commissural ganglions (CoG) as previously described.44 All dissections were performed in chilled (∼10 °C) physiological saline (composition: 440 mM NaCl; 11 mM KCl; 13 mM CaCl2; 26 mM MgCl2; 10 mM Trizma acid; and pH 7.4,adjusted with NaOH).  NanoLC-ESI-Orbitrap Analysis of Tissue Samples For each tissue type, 3 tissue samples were pooled together before sample processing. Tissues were extracted for neuropeptides using 90/9/1 (v/v/v) MeOH/H2O/GAA and desalted using Millipore Ziptips. Peptide extract was reconstituted in 0.1% FA in water and loaded onto a 15 cm capillary (75 μm i.d.) packed using 1.7 μm diameter Ethylene Bridged Hybrid (BEH) C18 material with the integrated emitter tip in line with the instrument inlet. Untargeted neuropeptide profiling LC-MS/MS measurements were conducted on Thermo Q Exactive HF equipped with a Dionex Ultimate 3000 system. Mobile phase A was 0.1% FA in H2O and mobile phase B was 0.1% FA in can. Peptides were separated with a gradient elution of 10 to 20% B over 70 min and 20 to 95% B over 20 min at a flow rate of 300 nL/min. Full MS scans were acquired in profile mode ranging from m/z 200 to 2000 at a resolution of 60 K. Automatic gain control (AGC) target was 1 × 106, and maximum injection time was 250 ms. Tandem mass spectra were acquired in centroid mode. The top 10 most abundant precursor ions were selected for higher-energy collisional dissociation (HCD) fragmentation with a dynamic exclusion of 30 s. Data-dependent acquisition (DDA) parameters were set as resolution power of 15 K, isolation window of 2.0 Th, normalized collision energy (NCE) of 30, the maximum injection time of 120 ms, AGC target of 2 × 105, and fixed first mass of m/z 100. Each sample was injected in triplicate.

### Data Protocol
Peptide Identification and Discovery using HyPep The algorithm and GUI were written in Python. The program is compatible with  Python 3 and was validated with Python v.3.10. HyPep is open-source and freely available at https://github.com/lingjunli-research/HyPep-v1.0, with a user manual and tutorial included. A schematic of the HyPep workflow is shown in Figure 1. Thermo RAW files from LC-MS/MS measurements were de novo sequenced using PEAKS software (Bioinformatics Solutions Inc). PEAKS parameters were parent mass error tolerance = 20.0 ppm, fragment mass error tolerance 0.02 Da, enzyme = no digestion, variable modifications: amidation (-0.98 Da), oxidation (M) (+15.99 Da), pyro-glu from E (-18.01 Da), pyro-glu from Q (-17.03 Da), and max variable PTM per peptide = 3. De novo sequenced peptides were filtered for average local confidence (ALC) > 50 and exported as de novo peptides.csv. This .csv file was loaded along with the neuropeptide database files into HyPep for processing. The first neuropeptide database input is a .csv file containing each neuropeptide sequence annotated with known post-translational modifications (PTM) and monoisotopic [M+H]+ mass. The second neuropeptide database input includes a folder that contains a .txt file of the theoretical b- and y-series fragment ions for each neuropeptide database sequence. Theoretical masses were generated from ProteinProspector (https://prospector.ucsf.edu/prospector/mshome.htm). A sequence homology search (SHS) was performed by matching de novo sequenced peptides with neuropeptide database sequences using a local alignment strategy. Matches, or identifications, were scored using the SHS scoring function (Figure 2). Theoretical false positives below a user-defined FDR were removed from the identifications list by implementing a target-decoy method. As the SHS database searches of the target and decoy databases occur separately, the FDR is calculated as the number of hits to the decoy database (Ndecoy) divided by the total number of hits to the target (Ntarget) (Equation 1).45  Equation 1     FDR=  N_decoy/N_target  Identifications above the user-defined % FDR threshold from the SHS module were then verified through the included accurate mass matching (AMM) module. Both SHS and AMM modules are automatically performed in each HyPep run. AMM was performed at the peptide precursor and fragment level at the same error tolerances as those used for PEAKS de novo sequencing (20 ppm for precursor mass and 0.02 Da for fragment mass) to verify that HyPep identifications with a score less than 4 (i.e., an imperfect sequence alignment) were present in at least one MS/MS spectrum within the Thermo RAW file.  To determine the optimal (i.e., most sensitive) sliding window size (SWS), neuropeptide identifications from all SWS values (1-10) were compared. To determine the optimal target-decoy method, neuropeptide identifications using each target-decoy method (reversed, shuffled, randomized, and hybrid) method were compared.  Optimal HyPep parameters (SWS = 2 and target-decoy method = shuffled) were used for comparisons between HyPep and PEAKS DB. PEAKS DB parameters were the same as those used for PEAKS de novo sequencing parameters. The number of identifications at 1% FDR threshold from both programs were compared. To assess accuracy of both programs, an entrapment database was constructed consisting of all sequences from the original target crustacean neuropeptide database appended to a database of non-crustacean neuropeptides that were obtained from NeuroPep.19 There were no overlapping sequences between the target and trap databases and there were the same number of target and trap sequences in the final entrapment database. Hits to the non-crustacean neuropeptides (Ntrap) divided by the number of hits to the crustacean neuropeptides (Ntarget) were used to calculate the FMR (Equation 2).46 The number of identifications assigned to the correct crustacean or incorrect non-crustacean sequences at 1% false discovery rate (FDR) threshold from both programs were compared.  Equation 2     FMR=  N_trap/N_target  For discovery of novel neuropeptides, identifications from HyPep using optimal parameters (SWS = 2 and target-decoy method = shuffled) at 1% FDR threshold were scanned for de novo sequences originating from 1) multiple MS/MS scans, 2) MS/MS scans with ALC = 99 and 3) HyPep score < 4. Sequences and MS/MS scans were manually evaluated, and novel neuropeptides were reported.

### Publication Abstract
Neuropeptides are a class of endogenous peptides that have key regulatory roles in biochemical, physiological, and behavioral processes. Mass spectrometry analyses of neuropeptides often rely on protein informatics tools for database searching and peptide identification. As neuropeptide databases are typically experimentally built and comprised of short sequences with high sequence similarity to each other, we developed a novel database searching tool, HyPep, which utilizes sequence homology searching for peptide identification. HyPep aligns <i>de novo</i> sequenced peptides, generated through PEAKS software, with neuropeptide database sequences and identifies neuropeptides based on the alignment score. HyPep performance was optimized using LC-MS/MS measurements of peptide extracts from various <i>Callinectes sapidus</i> neuronal tissue types and compared with a commercial database searching software, PEAKS DB. HyPep identified more neuropeptides from each tissue type than PEAKS DB at 1% false discovery rate, and the false match rate from both programs was 2%. In addition to identification, this report describes how HyPep can aid in the discovery of novel neuropeptides.

### Keywords
De novo sequencing, Hypep, Fdr, Homology, Peptidomics, Mass spectrometry, Peptide, Neuropeptide

### Affiliations
Professor Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chemistry Charles Melbourne Johnson Distinguished Chair in Pharmaceutical Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison

### Submitter
Nhu Vu

### Lab Head
Dr Lingjun Li
Professor Vilas Distinguished Achievement Professor of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chemistry Charles Melbourne Johnson Distinguished Chair in Pharmaceutical Sciences


