### Accession
PXD039325

### Title
Scentmarking communication in the female rat_C4PR_LIV

### Description
Chemical communication in mammals is in part mediated through the deposition of scent marks in the environment. Volatile and non-volatile moleculesin the scent marksconvey important information about the donor animal, such as sex, social and reproductive status,and stimulatea response in the receptor animal. In rodents, most of the work about deciphering the molecular composition of scent markshas been focused on mice. In rats, by contrast, knowledge is limitedand the molecular complexity of scent marks is not as well described as in mice. In particular, the sources and roles of proteins in scent marks are largely undefined, with even less knowledge when we consider female rats. We therefore conducted a global proteomic analysis of scent marks from femalerats (Rattus norvegicus)to define the protein composition and then we investigated the role of scent marks in sexual communication. Our study revealed that protein pattern inscent marks greatly differsfrom that in naturally voided urine, indicatinga different tissue of41origin. In particular, female scent marks are dominated by lipocalins, notablymajor urinary proteins, whereas urinary output of these proteins is almost imperceptible.Further analysis revealed that the most plausible source of the components in scent marks are the clitoral glands,implying a critical role of theseaccessory glands in sexual communication in the rat.

### Sample Protocol
Scent marks, urine or clitoral gland extracts were diluted in 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate according to protein complexity and concentration. Protein concentration was measure using the Bradford method. Protein in the diluted samples were then digested as described in Gómez-Baena et al 2019.  Peptides were resolved by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (Ultimate 3000 LC nano system (Thermo Scientific)) coupled to a QExactive quadrupole orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific) or QExactive HF quadrupole orbitrap instrument (Thermo Scientific). Protein digests were loaded on a trap column (Acclaim PepMap 100 C18 precolumn, 300 m id, 5 mm long, 5 m particles, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at a flow rate of 4 µL/min in 2% (v/v) ACN /0.1% (v/v) TFA. After 7 min, peptides were separated through an analytical column (Easy-spray PepMap RSLC C18 column, 75 m id, 50 cm long, 2 m particles, 100 Å, Thermo Scientific) at 300 nL/min over a linear gradient from 3 to 40% (v/v) ACN in 0.1% v/v formic acid. The instruments were operated in data dependent acquisition mode. Full scan MS spectra (m/z 300-2000) were acquired at 70,000 resolution (AGC set to 1e6 ions with a maximum fill time of 250 ms) and the 10 most intense multiply charged ions (z ≥ 2) were sequentially isolated and fragmented by high energy collisional dissociation (HCD) at 30% standardized collision energy. Fragments ions were detected at 35,000 resolution (AGC set to 1e5 ions with a maximum fill time of 100 ms). Dynamic exclusion was set as 20 s.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer version 1.4 (Thermo Scientific) was used to generate peak lists from raw data using default parameters. Mascot version 2.8 was used as search engine to identify peptides and proteins. For identifications, we search our data against a database containing all entries for Rattus norvegicus in UniProt (www.uniprot.org, downloaded on 02.06.2021; 29,934 entries).  Trypsin was selected as specific enzyme allowing one missed cleavage. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was set as fixed modification with variable methionine oxidation, allowing a mass tolerance of 10 ppm for precursors and 0.01 Da for fragment ions. To accept an identification, we set FDR<1% at peptide level, required at least two unique peptides with a mascot score higher than 20. Label-free quantification was performed using Progenesis QI (Waters). Since protein concentration and sample complexity differed greatly among samples, we set “normalization off” in Progenesis QI and calculated proportional abundance of proteins. For the Mascot search, only the top 5 spectra were exported.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Norway rat, Scents, Mups

### Affiliations
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK
Universidad de Cordoba

### Submitter
Guadalupe Gomez-Baena

### Lab Head
Dr Robert J. Beynon
Centre for Proteome Research, Institute of Systems, Molecular and Integrative Biology, University of Liverpool, Liverpool, L69 7ZB, UK


