### Accession
PXD017932

### Title
Identification and quantification of small proteins and peptides in Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
Very small proteins with less than 100 amino acids (SP100) of Staphylococcus aureuse are underrepresented in proteomic analyses so far. However, in the last few years a variety of such small proteins with regulatory and virulence associated functions have been detected in several bacteria. The introduction of a new open source command line tool (Pepper) that provides a fully automated proteogenomic workflow enabled us to identify proteins encoded by non-annotated open reading frames based on identified peptides. Altogether, 185 soluble proteins with up to 100 amino acids have been detected of which 69 were not covered by the used gene annotation. Of these, 83 % were identified by at least two methods.

### Sample Protocol
Cytoplasmic proteins were prepared  from of S. aureus Newman cells harvested at exponential and stationary growth phase and disrupted mechanically using a FastPrep. Prefractionation of proteins and peptides was performed using a 1D gel-based and a gel-free approach (SCX). For protein digestion three different endopeptidases (trypsin, Lys-C, Asp-N) were used.  For the 1D gel-based approach, 40 µg of intracellular proteins were separated via one dimensional SDS polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis. Fixation of proteins was done for one hour in 40% ethanol and 10% acetic acid. Gels were stained with colloidal Coomassie for one hour. In gel digestion of proteins was carried out by dividing each lane into eight fractions with similar protein amounts, which were densitometrically determined using AIDA software (Raytest Isotopenmeßgeräte GmbH).  Peptides were extracted using acetonitrile, 1% formic acid and 10% formic acid. For peptide desalting, ZipTips (Merck Millipore) were used. For the gel free approach, 40 µg of intracellular proteins were denatured in 6 M urea / 1.5 M thiourea, reduced and alkylated using dithiotheritol and iodoacetamide and digested overnight. Peptide purification was done with Oasis cartridges (Waters, Milford, MA, USA). Prefractionation of peptides was performed by SCX chromatography resulting in eight fractions with similar peptide amounts. For LC-MS/MS analyses, each peptide fraction was solved in 16 µL of 0.1% formic acid 3% acetonitrile for one hour, ultrasonicated in a water bath for 5 min and ultracentrifuged. LC-MS/MS runs using the Orbitrap Velos Pro MS (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA USA) were done as described by Lerch et al 2019.  For LC-MS/MS runs using the Orbitrap Fusion (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, Waltham, MA USA) LC and MS systems and the applied columns are described by Bulitta et al. 2018. A 200 min gradient was applied, starting with 3.7% buffer B (80% acetonitrile, 5% DMSO and 0.1% formic acid) and 96.3% buffer A (0.1% formic acid, 5% DMSO): 0–5 min 3.7% B; 5–125 min 3.7–31.3% B; 125–165 min 31.3–62.5% B; 165–172 min 62.5–90.0% B; 172–177 min 90% B; 177–182 min 90–3.7% B, 182–200 min 3.7% B. Primary scans at the Orbitrap Fusion were performed in the profile modus scanning an m/z of 350-1800 with a resolution (full width at half maximum at m/z 400) of 120,000 and a lock mass of 445.1200. Using the Xcalibur software, the mass spectrometer was controlled and operated in the “top speed” mode, allowing the automatic selection of as many as possible twice to fourfold-charged peptides in a three second time window, and for the subsequent fragmentation of these peptides the non-targeted modus was applied. Primary ions (±10 ppm) were selected by the quadrupole (isolation window: 1.6 m/z), fragmented in the ion trap using a data dependent CID mode (top speed mode, 3 seconds) for the most abundant precursor ions with an exclusion time of 13 s and analyzed by the ion trap (non-targeted MS approach).

### Data Protocol
Analyses of the obtained MS and MS/MS data were performed using MaxQuant (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany, www.maxquant.org, version 1.5.2.8) and the following parameters were applied: peptide tolerance 5 ppm; a tolerance for fragment ions of 0.6 Da; variable modifications: methionine oxidation and acetylation at protein N-terminus, fixed modification: carbamidomethylation (Cys); a maximum of two missed cleavages and four modifications per peptide was allowed. For the identification of SP100, a minimum of one unique peptide per protein and a fixed false discovery rate (FDR) of 0.0001 was applied. The minimum score was set to 40 for unmodified and modified peptides, the minimum delta score was set to 6 for unmodified peptides and to 17 for modified peptides. All samples were searched against two different databases with a decoy mode of reverted sequences and common contaminants supplied by MaxQuant: a six-frame“stop-stop-translation” (designated “TRDB”) of the reference genome sequence (NC_009641.1) and the S. aureus Newman protein database (Access: NC_009641.1, BioProjekt:PRJNA58839, Publication date:2013-07-06) additionally containing newly predicted proteins using the sORF Finder algorithm (designated “PRDB”). A protein was considerably reliable identified when it was identified in at least two biological replicates. For identification of non-annotated open reading frames on the basis of identified peptides the new developed open source command line tool (Pepper) has been used.  Only high-quality peptide identifications were accepted (peptide posterior error probability < 0.1; Andromeda scores > 40; PSM FDR < 0.01%; sequence tags of five consecutive b or y ions or 2*4 b or 2*4 y ions; intensity coverage of b- and y-ions > 0.1) for the identification of SP100. A label free quantification mode was selected using MaxQuant LFQ-intensities (Cox et al. 2014). Statistical analysis was performed with the Perseus software (Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry, Martinsried, Germany Version 1.5.2.6, www.maxquant.org). LFQ intensities were transformed into log2 values and standardized using Z-score. To evaluate whether the amount of a given protein changed during growth, a permutation based students t-test (p-value ≤ 0.05) was applied.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Sp100, Proteogenomics, Small proteins, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
TU Braunschweig
Institut für Mikrobiologie
Spielmannstr. 7
Germany
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtz-Zentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany

### Submitter
Martin Kucklick

### Lab Head
Dr Susanne Engelmann
Mikrobielle Proteomik, Helmholtz-Zentrum für Infektionsforschung, Braunschweig, Germany


