### Accession
PXD017378

### Title
Comprehensive cross-linking mass spectrometry reveals molecular insights into the between peripheral and core NuRD complex subunits

### Description
Affinity purifications of CHD4 and CDK2AP2 to identify their interactors. The C-terminally tagged CHD4 has a C-terminal truncation to test whether this domain is required for the interaction with other NuRD subunits. GFP-purifications of both N- and C-terminally tagged CDK2AP2 were performed.

### Sample Protocol
Nuclear extracts were prepared from HeLa cells expressing the GFP-tagged bait. The affinity purifications are performed in triplicate, and so are the negative control purifications. For CHD4, the negative control purification consists of a GFP affinity purification on WT nuclear extract. For the CDK2AP2 purifications, blocked agarose beads were used as a negative control on the same nuclear extract. One mg of nuclear extract was incubated with 7.5 µl of GFP-nano-trap beads (Chromotek), in the presence of 50 µg/µL ethidium bromide. After 1,5 hour incubation at 4°C, beads were washed thoroughly (2x buffer C (1M NaCl, 20mM Hepes-KOH pH 7.9, 20% glycerol, 2mM MgCl2, 0.2mM EDTA, 0.25% NP40, 0.5 mM DTT, complete protease inhibitors (Roche)), 2x PBS with 0.25% NP40, and 2x PBS). Purified proteins were subjected to on-bead digestion using trypsin (0.25 µg protease in 2M urea, 100mM Tris-HCl pH 8.5, 10mM DTT) prior to STAGE-tipping.

### Data Protocol
RAW files were analysed using MaxQuant 1.5.0.1 with carbamidomethyl as fixed modification and oxidation of Methionines and acetylation of the N-terminus as variable modifications. The database used was a SWISSprot reviewed database. After identification of proteins, data was filtered for reverse hits, contaminants, unique peptides (>0), and valid values (3 in at least 1 group). Missing values were imputed and a two samples t-test was performed to identify specific outliers. Vulcano plots were generated using R.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cdk2ap2, Doc1r, Nurd, Chd

### Affiliations
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands
Radboud Universiteit Nijmegen

### Submitter
Cornelia Spruijt

### Lab Head
Dr Michiel Vermeulen
Department of Molecular Biology, Faculty of Science, Radboud Institute for Molecular Life Sciences, Oncode Institute, Radboud University Nijmegen, 6525 GA  Nijmegen, The Netherlands


