### Accession
PXD045239

### Title
Adaptive design of mRNA-loaded extracellular vesicles for targeted immunotherapy of cancer

### Description
Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have emerged as promising delivery vehicles for RNA-based therapeutics because of their advantages over other mRNA delivery systems, including their excellent biosafety and biocompatibility, stability against degradation, and the ability to cross physiological barriers such as the blood-brain barrier. In this study, we report a nanosecond electroporation (nsEP) system with a microfluidic configuration. Applying millisecond and nanosecond pulses separately shifted the main impact of electroporation from the cell membrane to the membrane structure of cellular organelles. After being treated by a nsEP system, mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) demonstrated the capability to generate large quantities of small extracellular vesicles (sEVs). To gain a better understanding of the biological mechanisms underlying this nsEP-triggered sEV release, we conducted a proteomics analysis.

### Sample Protocol
MEFs were treated with nsEP, harvested, digested overnight with trypsin at 37°C, and incubated with DTT and iodoacetamide to reduce and alkylate proteins. Subsequently, samples were subjected to a solid-phase extraction cleanup with an Oasis HLB plate (Waters). The resulting samples were then loaded onto an EasySpray column (75 μm particles, 750 mm length) for analysis with an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos mass spectrometer coupled to an Ultimate 3000 RSLC-Nano liquid chromatography system. The gradient elution consisted of an increase from 1% to 28% solvent B (80% acetonitrile, 10% trifluoroethanol, and 0.1% formic acid in water) over 90 min, while solvent A contained 2% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid in water.  The mass spectrometer operated in positive ion mode with a source voltage of 1.8 kV and an ion transfer tube temperature of 275°C. MS scans were acquired at 120,000X resolution in the Orbitrap, and up to 10 MS/MS spectra were obtained in the ion trap for each full spectrum acquired by higher-energy collisional dissociation for ions with charges. Dynamic exclusion was set for 25 s after an ion was selected for fragmentation.

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were analyzed using Proteome Discoverer v. 2.4.1.15 (Thermo). Peptide identification was performed using Sequest HT searching against the mouse protein database from UniProt. Fragment and precursor tolerances of 10 ppm and 0.6 Da were specified, and three missed cleavages were allowed. Carbamidomethylation of Cys was set as a fixed modification, with oxidation of Met set as a variable modification. The false-discovery rate (FDR) cutoff for all peptides was 1%. For enrichment analysis of proteins involved in sEV secretion and protein-protein interaction network analysis, the Gene Ontology, Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes, and STRING databases were applied, and the protein network data were visualized using Cytoscape software (v.3.7.2).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nanosecond pulse electroporation, Glioblastoma, Extracellular vesicle

### Affiliations
Associate Professor
Postdoctoral fellow

### Submitter
Shiyan Dong

### Lab Head
Dr Wen Jiang
Associate Professor


