### Accession
PXD040826

### Title
Proteomic profile of P. brasiliensis yeasts present in granulomatous lesions of C57BL/6 WT mice

### Description
C57BL/6 WT mice were infected with 1x10^6 P. brasiliensis yeasts. After 8 weeks and 12 weeks of infection the animals were euthanized and the granulomatous lesions were recovered. Then, the animals cells were lysed with distilled water and the yeast cell recovered. Once isolated, the yeasts proteins were extracted, digested with trypsin and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. The data show a low protein identification in the infection grouops, concomitant with a metabolism repression

### Sample Protocol
Proteins from the yeasts were extracted using the Yeast Buster Protein Extraction Reagent (MerckMillipore) according to the manufacturer's specifications. Benzonase Nuclease (MerckMillipore), protease inhibitors (Protease Inhibitor Cocktail, Sigma Aldrich) and phosphatase inhibitors (PhoSTOP, Sigma Aldrich) were also added to the buffer. In-solution trypsin digestion was performed, a solution of 6 M guanidine hydrochloride (GuHCl) was added to a sample of 100 μg of protein from each cell lysate to a final concentration of 3 M GuHCl, followed by the addition of 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) (final concentration). The mixture was incubated at 37 °C for 1 h. Iodoacetamide (IAA) was then added to a final concentration of 15 mM and the samples were incubated for 30 min at room temperature, in the dark. To quench the excess of IAA, DTT was added to a final concentration of 15 mM followed by the incubation of samples for 20 min at room temperature. Clean-up of samples was performed by the addition of ice-cold acetone (8 volumes) and methanol (1 volume), followed by the incubation of samples for 3 h at -80° C. After centrifugation at 14,000 x g for 10 min, protein pellets were washed twice with one volume of ice cold methanol and then resolubilized with NaOH solution (final concentration of 10 mM), followed by the addition of HEPES buffer (final concentration of 50 mM), pH 7.5, to a final volume of 100 μL. Trypsin (Proteomics grade; Sigma, USA) was added at 1:100 ratio (enzyme/substrate) and protein samples were incubated at 37 °C for 18 h. Tryptic peptides were desalted using C-18 cartridges SPE Extraction disks (3M EmporeTM), resuspended in 50 μL of 0.1% formic acid, quantified with Pierce™ Quantitative Colorimetric Peptide Assay (Thermo Scientific) and stored at -80º C. LC-MS/MS was made using the Thermo Fisher Q-Exactive mass spectrometer coupled to a Dionex RSLC nano. LC gradients ran from 4% to 35% B over 2 h, and data were collected using a Top15 method for MS/MS scans

### Data Protocol
Mass spectrometric (RAW) data were analyzed with MaxQuant software (version 2.0.3.0). A False Discovery Rate (FDR) of 1% was required for both protein and peptide-to-spectrum match identifications. Raw data were searched against a target database restricted to the taxonomy ‘Paracoccidioides brasiliensis’ (UniProt/Proteomes - UP000001628; 8,399 entries). This database was also combined with the sequences of 245 common contaminants and concatenated with the reversed versions of all sequences. Enzyme specificity was set to trypsin and up to two missed cleavages were allowed; cysteine carbamidomethylation was selected as fixed modification whereas methionine oxidation, glutamine/asparagine deamidation and protein N-terminal acetylation were selected as variable modifications. Peptide identification was based on a search with an initial mass deviation of the precursor ion of 4.5 ppm and the fragment mass tolerance was set to 20 ppm. Label-free quantitation was performed using the MaxLFQ algorithm, with the ‘re-quantify’ function of MaxQuant software enabled. As is observed from complex proteomes such as those of vertebrates, peptides can be shared between homologous proteins or splice variants, leading to “protein groups”. For each protein group in the MaxQuant’s ‘proteinGroups.txt’ file, the first protein entry was selected as representative. all the protein intensity values were log2-transformed and quantile-normalized using the ‘preprocessCore’ library in R scripting and statistical environment. Statistical analyses were performed using the ‘limma’ package in R/Bioconductor, using eBayes for granuloma data and treat for the recovered yeast. Differentially expressed genes (DEG) and proteins analyzed by eBayes were delimited by an adjusted p-value < 0,05 and a cutoff of |fold change| > 1, where the p-values were adjusted for multiple testing with the Benjamini-Hochberg method

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Paracoccidioidomycosis; granuloma; proteomic

### Affiliations
Federal university of São Paulo - Institute of Science and Technology - Applied immunology lab
UNIFESP

### Submitter
Bruno Borges

### Lab Head
Dr Flávio Vieira Loures
Federal university of São Paulo - Institute of Science and Technology - Applied immunology lab


