### Accession
PXD002596

### Title
Androgen Receptor Activity is Regulated Through the Mobilization of Cell Surface Receptor Networks

### Description
The aberrant expression of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcriptional programs is a defining pathology of the development and progression of prostate cancers. Transcriptional cofactors that bind AR are critical determinants of prostate tumorigenesis. To gain a deeper understanding of the proteins linked to AR-dependent gene transcription, we performed a DNAaffinity chromatography-based proteomic screen designed to identify proteins involved in ARmediated gene transcription in prostate tumor cells.

### Sample Protocol
LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on the Thermo LTQ mass spectrometer 3 times. Two LC-MS/MS gradients were used in this analysis. Gradient A: the samples were loaded onto a 10-cm Monitor C18 packed 100 inside diameter glass-capillary column for 70 minutes at 2800 nL/min, 180-minute gradient from 5%–35% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.8% acetic acid with a flow rate of 500 nL/min. The column was then washed with 75% buffer B for 45 minutes. Gradient B: the samples were loaded onto a 10-cm Monitor C18 packed 100 inside diameter glass-capillary column for 70 minutes at 2800 nL/min, 5%– 28% buffer B (100% ACN, 0.8% acetic acid) with a flow rate of 500 nL/min for 180 minutes and 28%–35% buffer B for 10 minutes. The column was then washed with 75% buffer B for 45 minutes. The samples were analyzed twice using the Pseudo gas-phase fractionation method, with the 2 gradients mentioned before. The data-dependent (DD) settings included mass to charge windows of 400–480, 475–560, 555–640, 635–720, 715–800, and 795–880 m/z (set to top 15 most intense MS/MS ions); mass to charge windows 875–960 and 955–1040 m/z (set to top 10 most intense MS/MS ions); and mass to charge windows 1035–1125 and 1120–1200 m/z (set to top 5 most intense MS/MS ions); minimum signal of 3000; normalized collision energy of 35%; isolation width of 2 atomic mass unit; activation Q of 0.25; and activation time of 30 seconds. The samples were analyzed a third time by the pseudo gas-phase fractionation method, using a higher mass charge window range and gradient B. TheMSDDsettings were top 15 most intense ions in the mass to charge windows 900–1000, 990–1100, 1090–1200, 1190– 1300, 1290–1400, 1390–1500, and 1490–1600 m/z.

### Data Protocol
Raw files were converted to mzXML format using the ReAdW conversion tool. The mzXML files were searched against a forward plus reverse human International Protein Index database, version 3.87) appended with common contaminants (182 934 sequences) using SEQUEST version UW2012.01.6. The next search parameters were applied: peptide mass tolerance 3.0; fragment ion tolerance 0.36; monoisotopic masses; full tryptic search with up to 3 missed cleavages allowed; 57.021464 static modification on C; 15.9949 variable modification on M; 14.01560 variable modification on K and R; 28.0313 variable modification on K and R; 42.046950 variable modification on K and R; 114.042927 variable modification on K; and 79.966331 variable modification on S, T and Y. The search results were subsequently processed with the PeptideProphet and ProphetProphet tools, using Trans-Proteomic Pipeline version 4.6.1., with a less than 1% false discovery rate (FDR). Finally, the data were collated using ProteinProphet files for both the AD and AS samples. The Abacus (33) tool was used to align the 2 ProteinProphet outputs to in a single excel file. The next parameters were used: maxIniProb at 0.80; iniProb at 0.3; E.P.I. at 0.1; combined file probability at 0.3; and minimum protein probability at 0.80. The Abacus output file was then curated and filtered by removing identifications (I.D.s) with multiple International Protein Indexes, less than 2 spectral counts, and no gene names. Multiple MS/MS datasets were analyzed, using Abacus to extract peptide spectra counts and compare protein expression data for subsequent statistical analysis.

### Publication Abstract
The aberrant expression of androgen receptor (AR)-dependent transcriptional programs is a defining pathology of the development and progression of prostate cancers. Transcriptional cofactors that bind AR are critical determinants of prostate tumorigenesis. To gain a deeper understanding of the proteins linked to AR-dependent gene transcription, we performed a DNA-affinity chromatography-based proteomic screen designed to identify proteins involved in AR-mediated gene transcription in prostate tumor cells. Functional experiments validated the coregulator roles of known AR-binding proteins in AR-mediated transcription in prostate tumor cells. More importantly, novel coregulatory functions were detected in components of well-established cell surface receptor-dependent signal transduction pathways. Further experimentation demonstrated that components of the TNF, TGF-&#x3b2;, IL receptor, and epidermal growth factor signaling pathways modulated AR-dependent gene transcription and androgen-dependent proliferation in prostate tumor cells. Collectively, our proteomic dataset demonstrates that the cell surface receptor- and AR-dependent pathways are highly integrated, and provides a molecular framework for understanding how disparate signal-transduction pathways can influence AR-dependent transcriptional programs linked to the development and progression of human prostate cancers.

### Keywords
Lncap, Androgen receptor, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
University of Iowa
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA , USA

### Submitter
Jordy Hsiao

### Lab Head
Dr Michael, Eugene, Wright
Molecular Physiology & Biophysics Department, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA , USA


