### Accession
PXD009333

### Title
Fam20C-LCMSMS -  Secretory kinase Fam20C tunes endoplasmic reticulum redox state via phosphorylation of Ero1α

### Description
Family with sequence similarity 20C (Fam20C), the physiological Golgi casein kinase, phosphorylates numerous secreted proteins that are involved in a wide variety of biological processes. However, the role of Fam20C in regulating proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen is largely unknown. Here we report that Fam20C interacts with various luminal proteins and that its depletion results in a more reduced ER lumen. We further show that ER oxidoreductin 1α (Ero1α), the pivotal sulfhydryl oxidase that catalyzes disulfide formation in the ER, is phosphorylated at Ser145 under reductive stress and under secretion-demanding conditions, such as mammalian lactation.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation. To identify the Fam20C interactome, HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA4.0 or pcDNA4.0-Fam20C-Flag for 48 h, then harvested and lysed. The cell extracts were incubated with anti-Flag M2 affinity gel (Sigma-Aldrich) overnight at 4°C with occasional vortexing. The immunoprecipitates were washed five times with ice-cold PBS. The proteins were then separated by SDS-PAGE and stained with Coomassie Brilliant Blue for MS analysis. For phosphorylation site identification, HeLa cells were transfected with pcDNA3.1-Ero1α-HA for 24 h. The cell extracts were incubated with anti-HA (HA-7; Sigma-Aldrich) overnight, followed by addition of Agarose A+G (Beyotime). The immunoprecipitates were washed for five times, the proteins were separated by SDS-PAGE gels, stained by Coomassie Brilliant Blue, and immunoblotted them with anti-HA in parallel.  In-gel digestion of proteins. All gel bands excluding Fam20C and immunoglobulin chains were excised and cut into small plugs. After destaining, the gel plugs were reduced (10 mM DTT in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at 56°C) and further alkylated (40 mM iodoacetamide in 25 mM NH4HCO3 for 45 min at room temperature in the dark). The plugs were washed twice with 50% acetonitrile in 25 mM NH4HCO3, dried using a SpeedVac, and digested with trypsin in 25 mM NH4HCO3 overnight at 37°C, followed by addition of formic acid to a 1% final concentration to terminate the reaction. Liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS analysis. The digestion peptides were separated on a 75 μm ID × 20 cm C18 column packed with reversed-phase silica (Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ, 3 μm; Dr. Maisch GmbH). A linear acetonitrile gradient was used to elute the bounded peptides, which were directly electrosprayed at a 2.0 kV voltage directly into a Q Exactive mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nano-liquid chromatography electrospray ionization source. In the data-dependent acquisition mode, the MS data were acquired at a high resolution of 70,000 (m/z 200) across a mass range of 300–1600 m/z, followed by 20 tandem mass (MS/MS) events on the top 20 precursor ions, which were isolated and fragmented in the HCD collision cell. Subsequently, MS/MS spectra were acquired at a resolution of 17,500 at m/z 200. The dynamic exclusion time was 40 seconds.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification. Database searches were performed on Proteome Discovery software, version 1.4 using SEQUEST HT search engine for protein identification and Percolator for false discovery rate (FDR, <1%) analysis against a UniProt human protein database. The search parameters were set as follows: 10 ppm mass tolerance for precursor ions; 0.02 Da mass tolerance for product ions; two missed cleavage sites allowed for trypsin digestion. For Fam20C interactome identification, proteins (unique peptides ≥ 2) were selected and protein interaction was defined as significant if the MS area ratio of Fam20C overexpressed group (B) to control group (A) is ≥ 3. A total of 1876 proteins were identified, of which 349 are localized in the ER and Golgi based on DAVID GO term analysis. For phosphorylation site identification, we selected phosphorylation for serine, threonine or tyrosine and methionine oxidation as variable modifications, and the cysteine carbamidomethylation as a fixed modification. The peptides confidence was set as high for peptides filter. The tandem mass spectra of the matched phosphorylated peptides were manually checked for their validity.

### Publication Abstract
Family with sequence similarity 20C (Fam20C), the physiological Golgi casein kinase, phosphorylates numerous secreted proteins that are involved in a wide variety of biological processes. However, the role of Fam20C in regulating proteins in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) lumen is largely unknown. Here, we report that Fam20C interacts with various luminal proteins and that its depletion results in a more reduced ER lumen. We further show that ER oxidoreductin 1&#x3b1; (Ero1&#x3b1;), the pivotal sulfhydryl oxidase that catalyzes disulfide formation in the ER, is phosphorylated by Fam20C in the Golgi apparatus and retrograde-transported to the ER mediated by ERp44. The phosphorylation of Ser145 greatly enhances Ero1&#x3b1; oxidase activity and is critical for maintaining ER redox homeostasis and promoting oxidative protein folding. Notably, phosphorylation of Ero1&#x3b1; is induced under hypoxia, reductive stress, and secretion-demanding conditions such as mammalian lactation. Collectively, our findings open a door to uncover how oxidative protein folding is regulated by phosphorylation in the secretory pathway.

### Keywords
Fam20c ero1 lcmsms

### Affiliations
Institue of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China

### Submitter
Jianchao Zhang

### Lab Head
Dr Lei Wang
National Laboratory of Biomacromolecules, Institute of Biophysics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China


