### Accession
PXD009676

### Title
Ample glycosylation in membrane and cell envelope protein explains phenotypic diversity, virulence and AMR in the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex

### Description
Glycoproteomics is likely to identify Mtb virulence factors because glycoproteins on the bacterial cell envelope are used by mycobacteria to enter the primary human host cell, the macrophage. It has been proposed that Mtb interacts with mannose receptors on host cells via mannosylated proteins to enter the macrophages. Despite the vital importance of these proteins in Mtb pathogenesis, our current knowledge of Mtb glycoproteins is still limited, and only a few secreted and cell wall-associated glycoproteins have to date been described. Previous studies have used laboratory strains as model systems to study glycosylation in Mtb. However, only a few sub-groups within the genetically conserved MTBC appear to cause extensive outbreaks with different clinical presentation and AMR. In this study, we employed qualitative and quantitative mass spectrometry and bioinformatics to explore the glycoproteomic patterns of clinical isolates from four lineages of the MTBC, lineages 3, 4, 5 and 7, to investigate the role of protein glycosylation in Mtb adaptation, survival and AMR.

### Sample Protocol
The late exponentially growing Mtb cultures were lysed and subjected to in-gel trypric digestion as described in Yimer et al., 2017 (PMID: 28536560)

### Data Protocol
Peptide characterization and quantitation were performed by nano LC-MS/MS using a Q Exactive™ Hybrid Quadrupole-Orbitrap™ Mass Spectrometer interfaced with an EASY1000-nano-electrospray ion source (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, Biberach, Germany). The LC gradient was from 2% to 90% solvent B (0.1% FA in 97% CAN) in 50µm x 15cm analytical columns (PepMap RSLC, C18, 2µm, 100Å, Thermo Scientific) for 75 min analysis at a flow rate of 0.3 μl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition mode with automatic switching between MS and MS/MS scans.  The full MS scans were acquired at 70K resolution with automatic gain control (AGC) target of 1 × 106 ions between m/z = 300 to 1800 and were surveyed for a maximum injection time of 200 milliseconds (ms). Higher energy collision dissociation (HCD) was used for peptide fragmentation at normalized collision energy set to 28. The MS/MS scans were performed using a data-dependent top10 method at a resolution of 17.5K with an AGC of 5 × 104 ions at maximum injection time of 100 ms and isolation window of 2.0 m/z units. An underfill ratio of 10% and dynamic exclusion duration of 30 s was applied. Three biological and three technical replicates and were run for each sample. Maxquant software (version 1.5.7.4) was used for protein and glycosylation site identification from the raw MS data 99. The raw mass spectral data were searched against the Uniprot Mtb protein database containing 3993 protein sequences concatenated to reverse decoy database and protein sequences for common contaminants. Trypsin [KR].[^P] was specified as a cleavage enzyme with up to two missed cleavages. The “re-quantify” and “match between runs” options were utilized with a retention time alignment window of 3 min. Carbamidomethylation of cysteine residues was specified as a fixed modification and acetylation on protein N-terminal, conversion of N-terminal glutamine and glutamic acid to pyroglutamic acid, and oxidation of methionine were set as the variable modifications.  For the PTM analysis, a number of glycosyl residues were configured in the MaxQuant search at three different amino acid residues, Asn, Ser and Thr (Supp. Table S3) and set as the variable modification. Both unique and razor peptides were used for the quantification of PTM abundance. Peptides with a minimum length of seven amino acids and detected in at least one or more of the replicates were considered for identification. For protein identification, a minimum of two peptides, of which at least one was unique, was required per protein group. All other parameters in MaxQuant were set to default values.  Statistical significance was determined with Multiple-sample test at a P < 0.05 level of significance using Perseus software (version 1.6.0.7). All modified peptide spectra were validated by applying stringent site localization probability of > 0.70 and PEP of <0.05 prior to further analysis. PTM sites with a minimum of one valid value from the total samples were considered for PTM site identification. Modified peptides with quantifiable values in at least 50% of the samples were considered for label-free relative quantification. Analysis of N- and O-glycosylation motifs.  Sequence logo generators, WebLogo and motifx, were used to identify the enriched amino acid motifs flanking the glycosylated sites. The biological processes, cellular component, molecular function and KEGG pathways for the identified glycoproteins were analyzed using DAVID Bioinformatics Resources 6.7. The proteins were classified by GO annotation based on three terms; molecular function (MF), biological process (BP) and cellular component (CC). The Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) was utilized to annotate the pathways.  Protein-protein interaction (PPI) networks were generated via STRING database version 10 with a high confidence threshold of 0.7, and imported into Cytoscape software (version 3.5.0) to produce the final interaction networks. Highly interconnected clusters were identified using MCODE and ClusterOne plug-in toolkits.

### Publication Abstract
Multiple regulatory mechanisms including post-translational modifications (PTMs) confer complexity to the simpler genomes and proteomes of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb). PTMs such as glycosylation play a significant role in Mtb adaptive processes. The glycoproteomic patterns of clinical isolates of the Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex (MTBC) representing the lineages 3, 4, 5 and 7 were characterized by mass spectrometry. A total of 2944 glycosylation events were discovered in 1325 proteins. This data set represents the highest number of glycosylated proteins identified in Mtb to date. O-glycosylation constituted 83% of the events identified, while 17% of the sites were N-glycosylated. This is the first report on N-linked protein glycosylation in Mtb and in Gram-positive bacteria. Collectively, the bulk of Mtb&#xa0;glycoproteins are involved in cell envelope biosynthesis, fatty acid and lipid metabolism, two-component systems, and pathogen-host interaction that are either surface exposed or located in the cell wall. Quantitative glycoproteomic analysis revealed that 101 sites on 67 proteins involved in Mtb fitness and survival were differentially glycosylated between the four lineages, among which 64% were cell envelope and membrane proteins. The differential glycosylation pattern may contribute to phenotypic variabilities across Mtb lineages. The study identified several clinically important membrane-associated glycolipoproteins that are relevant for diagnostics as well as for drug and vaccine discovery.

### Keywords
Glycoproteomics, Virulence, Glycosylation, Phenotypic variability, Ptms, M. tuberculosis

### Affiliations
PhD candidate, Faculty of Medicine, University of Oslo, Norway
University of Oslo Faculty of Medicine Department of Microbiology

### Submitter
Alemayehu Godana Birhanu

### Lab Head
Dr Alemayehu Godana Birhanu
University of Oslo Faculty of Medicine Department of Microbiology


