### Accession
PXD019591

### Title
Machine learning from large-scale proteomics accurately ranks anti-cancer drugs based on efficacy

### Description
We present an approach, named Drug Ranking Using ML (DRUML), which uses omics data to produce ordered lists of > 400 drugs based on their effectiveness in decreasing cancer cell proliferation. We trained and validated DRUML using in-house proteomics and phosphoproteomics data from a panel of 26 AML, 10 esophageal and 12 hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines in triplicate (three independent cultures per cell line) by LC-MS/MS

### Sample Protocol
Samples were lysed in 8 M urea buffer. This concentration was reduced to 2 M with 20 mM Hepes (pH 8.0) and proteins were digested with trypsin. Peptide solutions were desalted using Oasis-HLB cartridges or carbon tips. For phosphoproteomics experiments, a further step of phosphoenrichment was performed using TiO2.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using Mascot. Label-free quantification was performed using Pescal, an in-house developed software that uses extracted ion chromatograms (XICs) for all the peptides identified in at least one sample across all samples.

### Publication Abstract
Artificial intelligence and machine learning (ML) promise to transform cancer therapies by accurately predicting the most appropriate therapies to treat individual patients. Here, we present an approach, named Drug Ranking Using ML (DRUML), which uses omics data to produce ordered lists of &gt;400 drugs based on their anti-proliferative efficacy in cancer cells. To reduce noise and increase predictive robustness, instead of individual features, DRUML uses internally normalized distance metrics of drug response as features for ML model generation. DRUML is trained using in-house proteomics and phosphoproteomics data derived from 48 cell lines, and it is verified with data comprised of 53 cellular models from 12 independent laboratories. We show that DRUML predicts drug responses in independent verification datasets with low error (mean squared error &lt; 0.1 and mean Spearman's rank 0.7). In addition, we demonstrate that DRUML predictions of cytarabine sensitivity in clinical leukemia samples are prognostic of patient survival (Log rank p&#x2009;&lt;&#x2009;0.005). Our results indicate that DRUML accurately ranks anti-cancer drugs by their efficacy across a wide range of pathologies.

### Keywords
Phosphoproteomics, Drug efficacy prediction, Druml, Drug ranking, Proteomics, Machine learning, Cancer

### Affiliations
University of Salamanca
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London

### Submitter
Maruan Hijazi

### Lab Head
Dr Pedro Cutillas
Barts Cancer Institute. Queen Mary University of London


