### Accession
PXD030190

### Title
Succinylome and acetylome analyses of Staphylococcus aureusSuccinylome and acetylome analyses of Staphylococcus aureus

### Description
In this study, we detected the first lysine succinylome and acetylome in a vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus (VISA) strain, XN108.Furthermore,Comparative analysis of the protein succinylation and acetylation between XN108-ΔcobB and XN108-WT strain was conducted on the basis of quantitative detection of both protein expression and protein modification

### Sample Protocol
Proteomic extraction, trypsin digestion, and modification of enrichment VISA strain XN108 and XN108-ΔcobB were grown in TSB at 37 °C and were harvested at exponential phase (about 10 hours post-inoculation). All bacterial cells were colected via centrifugation at 5,000 g for 10 min at 4 °C. The precipitations were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and stored at -80 °C. The cells were resuspended with lysis buffer (1% Sodium dodecyl sulfate（SDS）, 1% protease inhibitor, 3 M Trichostatin A (TSA), 50 mM nicotinamide (NAM) and lysed by ultrasonication. Then, the lysate was centrifuged at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min to remove the remaining debris. Finally, the supernatants were collected and the protein concentration was determined by bicinchoninic acid（BCA）kit. Equal amount of protein samples of different groups were used for trypsin digestion. The proteins were washed with cold acetone for three times. The precipitations were dissolved in 200 mM Tetraethylammonium bromide（TEAB） for sonication and trypsin was added for digestion overnight (the ratio of trypsin to protein was 1:50). The protein solution was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol (DTT) for 30 min at 56 ℃ and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide (IAA) for 15 min in darkness at room temperature. The peptides were dissolved in IP buffer solution（100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0), and the supernatants were transferred to the pre-washed succinylated resin (PTM-402, PTM Bio ) or acetylated resin (PTM-104, PTM Bio) at 4 °C overnight with gentle shaking. The resins were washed four times with IP buffer and twice with ddH2O. The resin-bound peptides were eluted using 0.1% TFA. Finally, eluents were collected and were vacuum-dried to perform liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis (LC-MS/MS).  Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry analysis  The peptides were dissolved in liquid chromatography solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile) and a gradient of solvent B (0.1% formic acid, 100% acetonitrile) for separation with NanoElute ULTRA-high performance liquid phase system. The gradient consisted of Solvent B increased from 6% to 22% for 44 min, from 22% to 35% for 44-56 min,  35%~80% for 56-58 min, and at 80% for 58-60 min. All increments were performed at a constant flow rate of 450.00 nL/min on an EASY-nLC 1000 UPLC system. The peptides were separated by UPLC and ionized by injecting into the Capillary ion source. Then the peptide segments were analyzed by TIMS-TOF Pro mass spectrometry (Thermo). The electrospray voltage was 2.0 kV and the parent ion of the peptide segment and its secondary fragments were detected and analyzed using high resolution time-of-flight （TOF）. The MS scan range was 100 to 1700 for full scan and the parallel cumulative serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode was used for data acquisition. Secondary MS scan with the charge of the parent ions in the range of 0 to 5 were collected in PASEF mode, followed by 10 MS/MS scans with 30 seconds dynamic exclusion.

### Data Protocol
The resulting MS/MS data were processed using Maxquant 1.6.6.0. Tandem mass spectra were searched against the S. aureus XN108 (2992 sequences) database concatenated with an inverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages, 7 modifications per peptide, and 5 charges. Mass errors tolerance of precursors set to 10 ppm and 5 ppm and 0.02 Da for fragment ions. Carbamidomethylation on cysteine was set as fixed modification and acetylation modification, oxidation on methionine and succinylation on lysine were specified as variable modifications. LFQ was used for quantitative method with  false discovery rate (FDR) thresholds specified at 1%.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Acetylome, Succinylome, Sacobb, Staphylococcus aureus

### Affiliations
Army Medical University,
Army medical university, Chongqing, China

### Submitter
Li Tan

### Lab Head
Dr Li Tan
Army medical university, Chongqing, China


