### Accession
PXD019243

### Title
Optimization of protocols for detection of de novo protein synthesis in whole blood samples via azide-alkyne cycloaddition

### Description
Aberrant protein synthesis and protein expression are a hallmark of many disorders ranging from cancer Aberrant protein synthesis and protein expression are a hallmark of many disorders ranging from cancer to neuropsychiatry. Blood-based biomarkers indicative of changes in proteomes have long been held to be potentially useful with respect to disease prognosis and treatment. However, most effort has been focused on unlabelled plasma proteomics which includes non-myeloid origin proteins and no method of dynamically tagging acute changes in proteomes. Herein we report a method for evaluating de novo protein synthesis in whole blood liquid biopsies. Using a  modification of the “bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging” (BONCAT) protocol, rodent whole blood samples were incubated with L-azidohomoalanine (AHA) to allow incorporation of this selectively reactive non-natural amino acid within nascent polypeptides. Overall, we present a rapid and convenient de novo protein synthesis assay usable with whole blood biopsies that can quantify translational change as well as identity of proteins differentially expressed that may be useful for clinical applications

### Sample Protocol
Detection of de novo synthesized proteins in whole blood. Trunk blood was collected from mice,rat or from hDetection of de novo synthesized proteins in whole blood. Trunk blood was collected from mice,rat or from human subjects by venal puncture into heparinized or EDTA containing tubes, incubated with methionine-free media for 15 minutes, labelled with azidohomoalanine (AHA) for 60 minutes, and snap-frozen. The blood was thawed and lysed utilizing buffer either with or without EDTA and then dialyzed. The lysates were labelled for 100 mins overnight using Cu(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloadditions (CuAAC) and analyzed by western blot or proteomics. Human subjects by venal puncture into heparinized or EDTA containing tubes, incubated with methionine-free media for 15 minutes, labelled with azidohomoalanine (AHA) for 60 minutes, and snap-frozen. The blood was thawed and lysed utilizing buffer either with or without EDTA and then dialyzed. The lysates were labelled for 100 mins overnight using Cu(I)-catalyzed azide-alkyne cycloadditions (CuAAC) and analyzed by western blot or LC-MS/MS.

### Data Protocol
The raw data from the 3 replicates and the blank of LC-MS/MS were processed in the Mascot Daemon version 2.6.0 coupled with Mascot Distiller version 2.4.2 and queried against the uniprot Rattus norvegicus (downloaded on May 2019) and Mus musculus database (downloaded on May 2019) using the Mascot search engine (V2.6.2, Matrix Science, London, UK). The following parameters were used considering the experimental conditions: peptide mass tolerance was 10 ppm and fragment mass tolerance was set at 0.6 Da with 2 maximum missed cleavages. Cysteine Carbamidomethyl (57.02146) was set as a fixed modification. N terminal acetylation (42.01057) and oxidation of methionine (15.99492) were set as variable modifications. To identify the newly synthesized proteins variable modifications like Methionine replaced with AHA (Meth>Aha (-4.99 Da)  and ThermoBiotin 10185 (523.27 Da) were selected as variable modifications along with error tolerant search. For The significance threshold was set at 0.05 and score cut off was selected as 23. For further stringent comparison, we included peptides identified in two more biological replicates

### Publication Abstract
Aberrant protein synthesis and protein expression are a hallmark of many conditions ranging from cancer to Alzheimer's. Blood-based biomarkers indicative of changes in proteomes have long been held to be potentially useful with respect to disease prognosis and treatment. However, most biomarker efforts have focused on unlabeled plasma proteomics that include nonmyeloid origin proteins with no attempt to dynamically tag acute changes in proteomes. Herein we report a method for evaluating de novo protein synthesis in whole blood liquid biopsies. Using a modification of the "bioorthogonal noncanonical amino acid tagging" (BONCAT) protocol, rodent whole blood samples were incubated with l-azidohomoalanine (AHA) to allow incorporation of this selectively reactive non-natural amino acid within nascent polypeptides. Notably, failure to incubate the blood samples with EDTA prior to implementation of azide-alkyne "click" reactions resulted in the inability to detect probe incorporation. This live-labeling assay was sensitive to inhibition with anisomycin and nascent, tagged polypeptides were localized to a variety of blood cells using FUNCAT. Using labeled rodent blood, these tagged peptides could be consistently identified through standard LC/MS-MS detection of known blood proteins across a variety of experimental conditions. Furthermore, this assay could be expanded to measure de novo protein synthesis in human blood samples. Overall, we present a rapid and convenient de novo protein synthesis assay that can be used with whole blood biopsies that can quantify translational change as well as identify differentially expressed proteins that may be useful for clinical applications.

### Keywords
Whole blood, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid, De novo protein synthesis, Blood-based biomarkers, Copper(i)-catalyzed click-chemistry

### Affiliations
Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), Bangalore, India.
InStem

### Submitter
Janani Priya Venkatasubramani

### Lab Head
Dr Dr. Aditi Bhattacharya
Institute for Stem Cell Science and Regenerative Medicine (inStem), Bangalore, India.


