### Accession
PXD045352

### Title
ETFDH comigrates with CIII in BN-PAGE

### Description
Proteomic analysis of 13 bands from BN-PAGE immunostaining of mouse skeletal muscle mitochondrial proteins: Coenzyme Q (Q) is a key lipid electron transporter, but several aspects of its biosynthesis and redox homeostasis remain undefined. Various flavoproteins reduce the Q; however, in eukaryotes, only the OXPHOS-complex III (CIII) oxidizes the QH2. The mechanism of action of CIII is still debated. We demonstrate that the Q-reductase ETFDH is essential for CIII activity in skeletal muscle. We identify a complex involving ETFDH, CIII, and the Q-biosynthesis regulator COQ2 that directs electrons from lipid substrates to the respiratory chain, reducing electron leak and ROS production. This metabolon maintains Q levels, minimizes QH2-reductive stress, and improves OXPHOS efficiency. Muscle-specific ETFDH-/- mice develop myopathy due to CIII dysfunction, indicating that ETFDH is a required OXPHOS component and a potential therapeutic target for mitochondrial redox medicine

### Sample Protocol
Gel bands: Sample preparation and LC-MS analysis: Samples were run on a denaturing X % SDS-PAGE. Up to 12 band slices were collected and individually loaded in a 96-well plate. Tryptic digestion was performed using an Opentrons OT-2 robot following a protocol described by Shevchenko et al. [A. Shevchenko, M. Wilm, O. Vorm, M. Mann, Anal Chem 68 (1996) 850] with minor variations. Following digestion, peptides were extracted, pooled at the sample level, dried by speed-vac centrifugation and stored at -20ºC until needed. LC-MS analysis followed the protocol described above although the gradient length was shorter (40 min).

### Data Protocol
Proteomics data analysis and sequence search: Raw files were converted to mgf files and MS/MS spectra searched using Proteome Discoverer 2.5 (ThermoFisher Scientific) and Mascot v2.7 as search engine against a composite target database built from the Mus musculus reference proteome downloaded from UniprotKB plus a collection of common laboratory contaminants. Search engine was configured to match potential peptide candidates with mass error tolerance of 10 ppm and fragment ion tolerance of 0.025 Da, allowing for up to two missed tryptic cleavage sites, considering fixed carbamidomethyl modification of cysteine and variable oxidation of methionine and acetylation at Protein N-term. False Discovery Rate (FDR) was set at 1% and only proteins identified with at least a unique peptide were allowed. Peptide signal abundances were extracted and normalized to obtain the signal abundances at the protein level.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Coenzyme q; oxphos-complex iii; skeletal muscle; mitochondria

### Affiliations
CNB-CSIC
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa Spanish Research Council Nicolas Cabrera, 1 28049 Madrid (Spain)

### Submitter
Alberto Paradela

### Lab Head
Dr Laura Formentini
Centro de Biología Molecular Severo Ochoa Spanish Research Council Nicolas Cabrera, 1 28049 Madrid (Spain)


