### Accession
PXD020201

### Title
Spironucleus salmonicida endocytic interactors

### Description
We probed interactors of S. salmonicida CHC interactors by the means of native co-IP.

### Sample Protocol
Co-immunoprecipitation assays on control wild type S. salmonicida and transgenic S. salmonicida bearing the HA-tagged CHC were processed as previously established (Zumthor et al., 2016) with the notable exception of cross-linking agent.

### Data Protocol
The co-IP datasets derived from transgenic cells expressing epitope-tagged “baits” as affinity handles were filtered using dedicated control co-IP datasets generated from non-transgenic wild-type parasites to identify candidate interaction partners unique to bait-specific datasets. This was done using Scaffold4 (http://www.proteomesoftware.com/products/scaffold/). Unless otherwise indicated, bait-derived co-IP data was filtered using high stringency parameters (Exclusive Spectrum Counts at 95-2-95, 0% FDR) and manually curated to rank putative interaction partners in a semi-quantitative fashion using ESCs as a proxy for relative abundance. Only proteins with more than 10 hits were considered. Proteins in both datasets were only considered if present 3-fold in the transgenic line versus the control. In silico analysis of hypothetical proteins was mainly carried out using BLASTp for protein homology detection (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Blast.cgi?PAGE=Proteins) and HHPred (http://toolkit.tuebingen.mpg.de/hhpred) for protein homology detection based on Hidden Markov Model (HMM-HMM) comparisons and a cut-off at e-value < 0.05 was implemented to assign in silico annotation to otherwise non-annotated proteins of unknown function (Zimmermann et al., 2017).

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Endocytosis, Spironucleus salmonicida, Chc

### Affiliations
Institute of Anatomy, UZH
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich

### Submitter
Rui Santos

### Lab Head
Dr Prof. Adrian Hehl
Institute of Parasitology, University of Zurich


