### Accession
PXD033525

### Title
The salivary proteome in relation to oral mucositis in autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation recipients: a labelled and label-free proteomics approach -DIAdata

### Description
Decreased salivary flow rates and/or changes in protein composition reported after autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (ASCT) reduces the protective function of saliva. This might be associated with the development of oral mucositis (OM), an inflammation of the oral mucosa as a result of chemotherapy before ASCT which affects patients, quality of life and risk factor for systemic infections. In this study, a TMT-labelled proteomics experiment, a label-free quantification (LFQ) proteomics experiment and a DIA-MS proteomics experiment were used to identify differences in the salivary proteome between patients with ulcerative OM (uOM; WHO score 2) and those without (nOM).

### Sample Protocol
Half of the individual patient samples collected at different timepoints from 19 patients suffering from OM or not, used for DDA analysis, were re-dissolved in 20 µl of which 5 µl was used for LC/MS/MS Data Independent Acquisition (DIA) analysis. The LC conditions were kept equal to the DDA analysis. DIA settings were set at an isolation window of 10 m/z with overlapping windows in a m/z range of 400-900 m/z. The resolution for MS2 was set to 15000 with a collection of 3,000,000 ions with a maximum fill time of 45 ms and a normalized collision energy for fragmentation of 30. After every set of 30 MS2 windows, an MS1 was recorded with the same settings as in the DDA analysis, except for the maximum fill time now allowing for only 50 ms and a scan range of 200-2000 m/z.

### Data Protocol
The dataset was analyzed with the Spectronaut software (v13.8) using the spectral library from the DDA analysis. Default parameters were used, except for the proteotypicity of the peptides, only unique was selected. The signals were normalized across all runs and pairwise t-tests were performed to compare OM versus nOM across all timepoints and per timepoint. To reveal proteins with a significantly different expression level between the different conditions and the timepoints, two-way ANOVA was performed to compare the intensities of the proteins in the disease state (OM vs nOM) with the timepoint group. Differently regulated proteins were analyzed using GO analysis with g:Profiler, with similar settings as the DDA results, except that the lists were run as single query. The PCA plot and volcano plot were generated in Rstudio (version 1.1.463; ggplot2 library). Log2 fold changes were calculated to compare the hospitalization period (week 1, 2 and 3) and outside this period (baseline, 3 months and 12 months). P-values of the volcano plot were calculated using multilevel linear regression analysis per protein (a minimal of 3 intensities had to be known per protein per period (within or outside the hospitalization period) to calculate the p-value. P-values were corrected using the ‘FDR’ function of the p.adjust package.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Lc-ms, Tmt-ms, Autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, Multiple myeloma, Oral mucositis, Dia-ms, Saliva, Label-free quantification, Tmt-labelled proteomics

### Affiliations
Medical Protein Chemistry
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands

### Submitter
An Staes

### Lab Head
Dr Nicole M.A. Blijlevens
Radboud university medical center, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Department of Hematology The Netherlands


