### Accession
PXD037151

### Title
HDX-MS of NicA2 and a NicA2 variant with increased activity

### Description
Here we have used HDX-MS to investigate the change in structure/dynamics in NicA2 and a variant with increased activity (v321) that was generated using directed evolution

### Sample Protocol
An automated HDX liquid handling system (LEAP Technologies) coupled with an Acquity M-Class LC/HDX manager (Waters) was used for all experiments. Samples comprised protein (protein concentration of 8 µM, either with or without NMM at concentration of 5 mM) in 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 7.6. HDX was initated by adding 95 μl of deuterated buffer (10 mM potassium phosphate, pD 7.6) to 5 μl of protein-containing solution. The resultant mixture was incubated at 4 °C for 0.5, 2 or 5 min. Three replicate measurements were performed for each time point and condition. Quenching of the HDX reaction was achieved by mixing 50 μl of the labelling reaction with 100 μl of 10 mM potassium phosphate, 0.05% DDM, pH 2.2. Proteolysis was performed by taking 50 μl of the quenched sample and flowing it through an immobilised pepsin columns (Waters) (20 °C). Peptides were then trapped [Acquity UPLC BEH C18 VanGuard Pre-column (1.7 μm, 2.1 mm × 5 mm, Waters)] for 3 min. The peptides were separated by gradient elution of 0–40% (v/v) acetonitrile (0.1% v/v formic acid) in H2O (0.3% v/v formic acid) over 7 min at 40 μl min−1 using a C18 column (75 μm × 150 mm, Waters, UK). The eluate was infused into a Synapt G2Si mass spectrometer (Waters) operating in HDMSE mode, with dynamic range extension enabled. Peptides were separated by IM prior to CID fragmentation in the transfer cell.

### Data Protocol
Peptides were identified using PLGS (v3.0.2) and isotopic envelopes of the peptides were interrogated using DynamX (v3.0.0) software (Waters). PLGS search parameters were: peptide and fragment tolerances = automatic, min fragment ion matches = 1, digest reagent = non-specific, false discovery rate = 4. DynamX parameters were: minimum intensity = 1000, minimum products per amino acid = 0.3, max sequence length = 25, max ppm error = 5, file threshold = 3. Deuteros 2.0 was used to identify peptides with statistically significant increases/decreases in deuterium uptake and to prepare Wood’s plots.

### Publication Abstract
The flavoenzyme nicotine oxidoreductase (NicA2) is a promising injectable treatment to aid in the cessation of smoking, a behavior responsible for one in ten deaths worldwide. NicA2 acts by degrading nicotine in the bloodstream before it reaches the brain. Clinical use of NicA2 is limited by its poor catalytic activity in the absence of its natural electron acceptor CycN. Without CycN, NicA2 is instead oxidized slowly by dioxygen (O<sub>2</sub>), necessitating unfeasibly large doses in a therapeutic setting. Here, we report a genetic selection strategy that directly links CycN-independent activity of NicA2 to growth of Pseudomonas putida S16. This selection enabled us to evolve NicA2 variants with substantial improvement in their rate of oxidation by O<sub>2</sub>. The encoded mutations cluster around a putative O<sub>2</sub> tunnel, increasing flexibility and accessibility to O<sub>2</sub> in this region. These mutations further confer desirable clinical properties. A variant form of NicA2 is tenfold more effective than the wild type at degrading nicotine in the bloodstream of rats.

### Keywords
Directed evolution, Nica2, Nicotine oxidoreductase

### Affiliations
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, LS2 9JT
School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds

### Submitter
Antonio Calabrese

### Lab Head
Dr Antonio Calabrese
Astbury Centre for Structural Molecular Biology, Faculty of Biological Sciences, School of Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of Leeds, Leeds, United Kingdom, LS2 9JT


