### Accession
PXD006462

### Title
Identification of molecular response to blood meal in the fatbody of Anopheles stephensi using quantitative proteomics

### Description
Fat body is an important tissue in the context of vitellogenesis, vector immunity, vector physiology and vector-parasite interaction. However, the proteome of fatbody and impact of blood meal on the gene expression of this vital organ has not been investigated so far. Therefore, in this study, we made an attempt to identify proteins expressed in fatbody of An. stephensi and their altered expression in response to blood meal. In all, we identified 4,504 proteins in the fatbody using multiple fractionation strategies, which is by far the largest resource of fatbody proteome in any mosquito species. Further, comparative proteomic analysis of fatbody 24 and 48 hours post blood meal led to identification of over 300 differentially expressed proteins. Bioinformatics analysis of these proteins suggested their role in vitellogenesis, lipid transport, mosquito immunity and oxidation-reduction processes. Interestingly, we identified four novel genes,which were found to be differentially expressed upon blood meal. These proteins are potential target for vector control strategies and development of transmission blocking vaccines.

### Sample Protocol
Fat bodies were dissected from sugar and blood fed mosquitoes under stereomicroscope. Dissected fat bodies were then homogenized and sonicated for 10 cycles followed by centrifugation. Protein was estimated using BCA assay and equal amount of proteins from each case was digested using trypsin. Peptides obtained from sugar fed and blood fed mosquitoes were labeled with iTRAQ reagent and the pooled sample was fractionationed using strong cation exchange chromatography. Each fraction was analyzed in MS3 mode as duplicate runs on Thermo Orbitrap Fusion tribrid mass spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
The raw files were searched against An. stephensi indian strain protein database. The database was downloaded from VectorBase resource and common contaminants including hemoglobin protein were added. The data was searched using Sequest and Mascot search engines (version 2.4.1) using Proteome Discoverer (Version 2.1.0) software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Bremen, Germany). Trypsin was included as proteolytic enzyme and missed cleavage was set to two. Search parameters included trypsin as the proteolytic enzyme, precursor ion mass and fragment ion mass tolerance tolerance was set to 10 ppm and 0.05 Da, respectively. Static modifications included carbamidomethylation of cysteine and iRAQ labeling at peptide N-terminus and lysine. Oxidation of methionine was considered as dynamic modification. The unassigned MS/MS spectra that did not map to known protein sequences were searched against the three frame translated RNA-seq data of fat body. Percolator node was used for both the searches and a PSM level FDR of 1% was applied. MS/MS spectrum, which were assigned to different peptide sequnces by Mascot and Sequest were discarded. Reportor ions quantifier node was used to estimate the relative abundance of the reporter ions from MS3 scans.

### Publication Abstract
Malaria remains a grand challenge for disruptive innovation in global health therapeutics and diagnostics. Anopheles stephensi is one of the major vectors of malaria in Asia. Vector and transmission control are key focus areas in the fight against malaria, a field of postgenomics research where proteomics can play a substantive role. Moreover, to identify novel strategies to control the vector population, it is necessary to understand the vector life processes at a global and molecular scale. In this context, fat body is a vital organ required for vitellogenesis, vector immunity, vector physiology, and vector-parasite interaction. Given its central role in energy metabolism, vitellogenesis, and immune function, the proteome profile of the fat body and the impact of blood meal (BM) ingestion on the protein abundances of this vital organ have not been investigated so far. Therefore, using a proteomics approach, we identified the proteins expressed in the fat body of An. stephensi and their differential expression in response to BM ingestion. In all, we identified 3,218 proteins in the fat body using high-resolution mass spectrometry, of which 483 were found to be differentially expressed in response to the BM ingestion. Bioinformatics analysis of these proteins underscored their role in amino acid metabolism, vitellogenesis, lipid transport, signal peptide processing, mosquito immunity, and oxidation-reduction processes. Interestingly, we identified five novel genes, which were found to be differentially expressed upon BM ingestion. Proteins that exhibited altered expression in the present study are potential targets for vector control strategies and development of transmission blocking vaccines in the fight against malaria.

### Keywords
Juvenile hormone and orbitrap fusion mass spectrometer, Egg development, Hemolymph, Vitellogenin

### Affiliations
Institute of Bioinformatics, Bangalore, Karnataka, India.
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, Karnataka 560066, India

### Submitter
Keshava Prasad T. S.

### Lab Head
Dr T. S. Keshava Prasad
Institute of Bioinformatics, International Technology Park, Bangalore, Karnataka 560066, India


