### Accession
PXD024500

### Title
Diabetic mitochondria are resistant to palmitoyl CoA inhibition of respiration, which is detrimental during ischaemia

### Description
The bioactive lipid intermediate palmitoyl CoA (PCoA) can inhibit mitochondrial ADP/ATP transport, though the physiological relevance of this regulation remains unclear.  We questioned whether myocardial ischaemia was a pathological setting in which PCoA regulation of ADP/ATP transport would be beneficial.  Secondly, whether the chronically elevated lipid content within the diabetic heart would make the mitochondria less sensitive to the inhibitory effects of PCoA, with detrimental consequences during ischaemia. Palmitoyl CoA acutely decreased ADP-stimulated state 3 respiration, increasing the Km for ADP 2-fold.  The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) of PCoA in control mitochondria was 22 µM.  This inhibitory effect of PCoA on respiration was blunted in the diabetic mitochondria, with no significant difference in the Km in the presence of PCoA, and the IC50 increased to 32 µM PCoA.  The competitive inhibition by PCoA was localised to the phosphorylation apparatus, particularly the ADP/ATP carrier (AAC).  During ischaemia, the AAC imports ATP into the mitochondria, where it is hydrolysed by reversal of the ATP synthase, to regenerate the membrane potential.  Addition of PCoA dose-dependently prevented this wasteful ATP hydrolysis for membrane repolarisation during ischaemia.  However, this beneficial effect was blunted in the diabetic mitochondria.  Finally, using 31P-magnetic resonance spectroscopy we demonstrated that diabetic hearts lose ATP more rapidly during ischaemia, with a 3-fold higher ATP decay rate compared with control hearts.     In conclusion, PCoA plays a role in protecting mitochondrial energetics during ischaemia, by preventing wasteful ATP hydrolysis.  However, this beneficial effect is blunted in diabetes, contributing to the impaired energy metabolism during myocardial ischaemia.

### Sample Protocol
Citrate synthase activity was measured according to the protocol of Srere (16).  ATP synthase activity was measured using a kit from Abcam (ab109714-96).  Palmitoylation was assessed using a Badrilla CAPTUREome S-Palmitoylated Protein Kit to isolate the palmitoylated proteins from SSM and IFM populations, followed by western blotting for AAC1 and AAC2.  Caveolin 3 was used as a positive control for palmitoylation, due to its high degree of palmitoylation.  Acetylation of AAC in SSM and IFM was assessed using mass spectrometry, following immunoprecipitation using an anti-acetyl lysine antibody (Cell Signalling Technology, 9441S and 9681S) to isolate acetylated proteins,.  The immobilised proteins were digested by adding SMART trypsin (ThermoFischer, 60113-101) and digested according to the manufacturer’s instruction the eluted peptides were desalted using SepPak reverse phase columns (SoLa) and evaporated to dryness using a speedivac system. Mass spectrometry data was acquired by an Orbitrap Fusion Lumos after chromatographic separation with a Dionex Ultimate3000 (both Thermo Fisher Scientific) using standard parameters . Peptides separated on as Easyspray column (ES803) with a gradient of 5-35% Acetonitrile in 0.1% Formic Acid/5%DMSO over 60 minutes.

### Data Protocol
For Label-Free Quantitation, data was analysed with Progenesis QI (Waters) and searched against  Rattus norvegicus database (UP00002494)  with PEAKS 8.5. Quantitative data was then further analysed using Perseus.

### Publication Abstract
The bioactive lipid intermediate palmitoyl CoA (PCoA) can inhibit mitochondrial ADP/ATP transport, though the physiological relevance of this regulation remains unclear. We questioned whether myocardial ischemia provides a pathological setting in which PCoA regulation of ADP/ATP transport would be beneficial, and secondly, whether the chronically elevated lipid content within the diabetic heart could make mitochondria less sensitive to the effects of PCoA. PCoA acutely decreased ADP-stimulated state 3 respiration and increased the apparent K<sub>m</sub> for ADP twofold. The half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC<sub>50</sub> ) of PCoA in control mitochondria was 22&#xa0;&#xb5;M. This inhibitory effect of PCoA on respiration was blunted in diabetic mitochondria, with no significant difference in the K<sub>m</sub> for ADP in the presence of PCoA, and an increase in the IC<sub>50</sub> to 32&#xa0;&#xb5;M PCoA. The competitive inhibition by PCoA was localised to the phosphorylation apparatus, particularly the ADP/ATP carrier (AAC). During ischemia, the AAC imports ATP into the mitochondria, where it is hydrolysed by reversal of the ATP synthase, regenerating the membrane potential. Addition of PCoA dose-dependently prevented this wasteful ATP hydrolysis for membrane repolarisation during ischemia, however, this beneficial effect was blunted in diabetic mitochondria. Finally, using <sup>31</sup> P-magnetic resonance spectroscopy we demonstrated that diabetic hearts lose ATP more rapidly during ischemia, with a threefold higher ATP decay rate compared with control hearts. In conclusion, PCoA plays a role in protecting mitochondrial energetics during ischemia, by preventing wasteful ATP hydrolysis. However, this beneficial effect is blunted in diabetes, contributing to the impaired energy metabolism seen during myocardial ischemia in the diabetic heart.

### Keywords
Pcoa, Ischemia

### Affiliations
University of Oxford
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford

### Submitter
Roman Fischer

### Lab Head
Dr Roman Fischer
Discovery Proteomics Facility University of Oxford


