### Accession
PXD008625

### Title
Cracking the code of an elusive key protein modification at structural and genome scales

### Description
Characterization of Myristoylated proteins in human brain and liver samples.

### Sample Protocol
Human brain samples were obtained from brains collected as part of a Brain Donation Program of the Brain Bank “NeuroCEB” run by a consortium of patient associations. Consents were signed by the patients or their next of kin in their name in accordance with French bioethics laws. The Brain Bank NeuroCEB has been declared at the Ministry of Higher Education and Research and has received approval to distribute samples (agreement AC-2013-1887). Human liver were purchased from KaLy-Cell (Strasbourg, France). Frozen samples from brain and liver were processed as described to obtain membrane-enriched fractions. In brief, the sample were partially thawed in 150 mM sodium chloride, cubed with scissors, washed in 150 mM sodium chloride, crushed (1 g/5 mL) in 250 mM sucrose, 100 mM tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane/HCl, 1 mM EDTA, pH 7. The homogenate was centrifuged at 800 g for 10 min, and at 13,500 g for 20 min to isolate mitochondria. The supernatants were further ultracentrifuged at 105,000g for 60 min to isolate the microsomal fraction. Both mitochondria and microsomal pellets were washed with 100 mM sodium pyrophosphate pH 7.4. The final fractions were suspended in 100 mM sodium phosphate, without protease inhibitor, and stored at -80°C.

### Data Protocol
Mascot 2.4 software was used for protein identification and co-translational modification characterization using the Human reference sub-proteome provided by UniProtKB (uploaded the 23/06/2017,  UniProtKB (release-2017_05). Trypsin/P rules were used with parent and fragment mass tolerance defined as 10 ppm and 0.8 respectively. Carbamidomethylcysteine was considered as fix modifications whereas Met-oxidation, N-terminal acetylation and Myristoylation were considered as variable modifications. To extract specifically N-terminal peptides, Mascot searches were exported in XML format and submitted to an in-house script written in python.

### Publication Abstract
An organism's entire protein modification repertoire has yet to be comprehensively mapped. N-myristoylation (MYR) is a crucial eukaryotic N-terminal protein modification. Here we mapped complete Homo sapiens and Arabidopsis thaliana myristoylomes. The crystal structures of human modifier NMT1 complexed with reactive and nonreactive target-mimicking peptide ligands revealed unexpected binding clefts and a modifier recognition pattern. This information allowed integrated mapping of myristoylomes using peptide macroarrays, dedicated prediction algorithms, and in vivo mass spectrometry. Global MYR profiling at the genomic scale identified over a thousand novel, heterogeneous targets in both organisms. Surprisingly, MYR involved a non-negligible set of overlapping targets with N-acetylation, and the sequence signature marks for a third proximal acylation-S-palmitoylation-were genomically imprinted, allowing recognition of sequences exhibiting both acylations. Together, the data extend the N-end rule concept for Gly-starting proteins to subcellular compartmentalization and reveal the main neighbors influencing protein modification profiles and consequent cell fate.

### Keywords
S-palmitoylation, N-terminus, N-acetylation, Methionine excision, Myristoylation, N-myristoyltransferase

### Affiliations
CNRS

### Submitter
Willy Bienvenut

### Lab Head
Dr Dr Willy Bienvenut
CNRS


