### Accession
PXD005423

### Title
Proteome of the Apogamous Fern Dryopteris affinis ssp. affinis

### Description
Performing proteomic studies on non-model organisms with little or no genomic information is still difficult. However, many specific processes and biochemical pathways occur only in species that are poorly characterized at the genomic level. For example, many plants can reproduce both sexually and asexually, the first one allowing the generation of new genotypes and the latter their fixation. Thus, both modes of reproduction are of great agronomic value. However, the molecular basis of asexual reproduction is not understood in any plant. In ferns, it combines the production of unreduced spores (diplospory) and the formation of sporophytes from somatic cells (apogamy). To set the basis to study these processes, we performed transcriptomics by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and shotgun proteomics by tandem mass spectrometry in the apogamous fern D. affinis ssp. affinis. For protein identification we used the public viridiplantae database (VPDB) to identify orthologous proteins from other plant species and new transcriptomics data to generate a “species-specific transcriptome database” (SSTDB). In total 1397 protein clusters with 5865 unique peptide sequences were identified (13 decoy proteins out of 1410, protFDR 0.93% on protein cluster level). We show that using a “species-specific transcriptome database” for protein identification increases the number of identified peptides almost four times compared to using only the publically available viridiplantae database. We identified homologs of proteins involved in reproduction of higher plants, including proteins with a potential role in apogamy.

### Sample Protocol
MATERIAL AND METHODS In vitro culture of spores and gametophytes   Spores of D. affinis ssp. affinis obtained from sporophytes growing in the forest of Turón (Asturias, Spain) were soaked in water for 2 h and then washed for 10 min with a solution of NaClO (0.5%) containing Tween 20 (0.1%). Then, they were rinsed three times with sterile distilled water. Spores were centrifuged at 1300g for 3 min between rinses, and then cultured in 500-ml Erlenmeyer flasks containing 100 mL of Murashige and Skoog (MS) medium (1962) supplemented with 2% sucrose (w/v), pH 5.7.   Gametophytes at three developmental stages ̶̶̶ filamentous, spatula, and heart (in the last stage with visible signs of an evolving apogamic center) ̶̶̶ were collected to carry out the molecular analyses. Cultures of filamentous gametophytes were obtained by maintaining the spores in liquid cultures placed on a gyratory shaker (75 rpm) for 50 days. Cultures of spatula and heart stage gametophytes were cultured in Petri dishes with 25 mL of MS medium containing 2% sucrose (w/v) and 0.7% agar, pH 5.7, for 65 days. All cultures were maintained at 25 ºC under cool-white fluorescent light (40 μmolm-2s-1) with a 16-h photoperiod. For RNA extraction, 100 mg of fresh plant material was weighed, immediately frozen in liquid nitrogen, and kept at -80 °C until use. For proteomic analyses, gametophytes were lyophilized and kept at -20 °C until use.  Protein extraction  An amount of 20 mg dry weight of plant gametophytes were homogenized using a Silamat S5 shaker. Homogenized samples were solubilized in 800 μL of buffer A [0.5M Tris-HCL pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 0.1 M Hepes-KOH, 4 mM DTT, 15 mM EGTA, 1 mM PMSF, 0.5% PVP and 1x protease inhibitor cocktail] using a Potter homogenizer. Proteins were extracted in two steps: first, the homogenate was subjected to centrifugation at 16,200g for 10 min at 4 °C on a tabletop centrifuge and, second, the supernatant was subjected to ultracentrifugation at 117-124 kPa for 45 min at 4 °C. Post-ultracentrifugation the supernatant contained the soluble protein fraction. The pellet from the first ultracentrifugation was re-dissolved in 200 μL of buffer B (40 mM Tris base, 40 mM DTT, 4% SDS, 1x protease inhibitor cocktail  to extract membrane proteins using the ultracentrifuge as described before. The contained the membrane protein fraction.   1D Gel electrophoresis  Approximately 1 mg protein per soluble and membrane fraction was loaded separately onto a 0.75 mm tick, 12% SDS-PAGE mini-gel proteins were loaded separately. 1D gel electrophoresis was performed at 150 V and 250 mA for 1h in 1X Running Buffer.  Protein separation and in-gel digestion  After 1D SDS-PAGE. Each gel lane was cut into six 0.4 cm wide sections using a custom-made gel cutter, resulting 48 slices. These slices were further fragmented into smaller pieces and subjected to 10 mM DTT (in 25 mM AmBic pH8) for 45 min at 56 °C and 50 mM Iodoacetamide for 1h at RT in the dark prior to trypsin digestion at 37 °C overnight (Baerenfaller et al., 2008). Samples were dissolved in 15 µl 0.1% formic acid/3% acetonitrile and transferred to auto-sampler vials for liquid chromatography (LC)-MS/MS where 5 µl injected.   Mass spectrometry and peptide identification (Orbitrap XL)   The samples were analyzed on a LTQ Orbitrap mass spectrometer coupled to an Eksigent Nano HPLC system. Solvent composition of buffer A was 0.2% formic acid/1% acetonitrile, and of buffer B 0.2% formic acid/99.8% acetonitrile. Samples were dissolved in 3% acetonitrile/0.1% formic acid. Peptides were loaded onto a self-made tip column packed with reverse phase C18 material and eluted at a flow rate of 200 nL per min. The following LC gradient was applied: 0 min: 5% buffer B, 56 min: 40% B, 60 min: 47% B, 64 min: 97% B, 71 min: 97% B. MS/MS spectra were acquired in a data-dependent manner from the five most intense signals in the ion trap, using 28% normalized collision energy and an activation time of 30 ms. The precursor ion isolation width was set to m/z 3.0. Charge state screening was enabled, and singly charged precursor ions and ions with undefined charge states were excluded. Precursor masses already selected for MS/MS acquisition were excluded from further selection for 120 s. MS/MS spectra were converted to the Mascot generic format using MascotDistiller 2.3.2 and the parameters recommended for Orbitrap instruments. These .mgf files were submitted to Mascot  for searching. Trypsin was selected as the proteolytic enzyme, Mascot was set up to search against the in-house generated SSTDB combined with the publicly available VPDB and a set of 260 known mass spectrometry contaminants in a target-decoy strategy (using reversed protein sequences). Data was searched with a fragment ion mass tolerance of ± 0.6 Da and a precursor mass tolerance of ±10 ppm. A maximum of 2 missed cleavages were allowed.

### Data Protocol
Protein identification, verification, and bioinformatic downstream analysis   Scaffold software (version Scaffold 4.2.1, Proteome Software Inc., Portland, OR) was used to validate MS/MS-based peptide and protein identifications. Mascot results were analyzed together using the MudPIT option. Peptide identifications were accepted if they scored better than 95.0% probability as specified by the PeptideProphet algorithm with delta mass correction, and protein identifications were accepted if the ProteinProphet probability was above 95%. Proteins that contained same peptides and could not be differentiated based on MS/MS alone were grouped to satisfy the principles of parsimony using scaffolds cluster analysis option. Only proteins that met the above criteria were considered positively identified for further analysis. The amount of random matches was evaluated by performing the Mascot searches against a database containing decoy entries and checking how many decoy entries (proteins or peptides) passed the applied quality filters. The peptide FDR and protein FDR was estimated at 0.21% and 0.93% respectively, indicating the stringency of the analysis. A total of 2525 unique proteins were assembled into 1397 protein clusters using Scaffold. The Spectrum Report from Scaffold satisfying the criteria mentioned above was exported and for each identified peptide-spectrum-match (PSM) and each peptide the origin of the DB (being either from the VPDB, the SSTDB, or identified in both DBs) was evaluated. PSMs for which more than one hit was generated with exactly the same score but a different peptide sequence were considered as conflicts and omitted from subsequent analyses. These are cases where the AA composition of the two assignments are the same but the first two or three residues are permutated or represent Leu/Ile switches as these are isobaric AAs.

### Publication Abstract
Performing proteomic studies on non-model organisms with little or no genomic information is still difficult. However, many specific processes and biochemical pathways occur only in species that are poorly characterized at the genomic level. For example, many plants can reproduce both sexually and asexually, the first one allowing the generation of new genotypes and the latter their fixation. Thus, both modes of reproduction are of great agronomic value. However, the molecular basis of asexual reproduction is not well understood in any plant. In ferns, it combines the production of unreduced spores (diplospory) and the formation of sporophytes from somatic cells (apogamy). To set the basis to study these processes, we performed transcriptomics by next-generation sequencing (NGS) and shotgun proteomics by tandem mass spectrometry in the apogamous fern <i>D. affinis</i> ssp. <i>affinis</i>. For protein identification we used the public viridiplantae database (VPDB) to identify orthologous proteins from other plant species and new transcriptomics data to generate a "species-specific transcriptome database" (SSTDB). In total 1,397 protein clusters with 5,865 unique peptide sequences were identified (13 decoy proteins out of 1,410, protFDR 0.93% on protein cluster level). We show that using the SSTDB for protein identification increases the number of identified peptides almost four times compared to using only the publically available VPDB. We identified homologs of proteins involved in reproduction of higher plants, including proteins with a potential role in apogamy. With the increasing availability of genomic data from non-model species, similar proteogenomics approaches will improve the sensitivity in protein identification for species only distantly related to models.

### Keywords
Species-specific transcriptome database, Dryopteris affinis ssp. affinis, Orbitrap lc-msms, Plant proteomics, Fern, Rna-seq database

### Affiliations
Functional Genomics Center Zurich (UZH/ETHZ)
Universidad de Oviedo Area of Plant Physiology, Dept. BOS Catedrático R Uria s/n 33071 Oviedo Spain.

### Submitter
Jonas Grossmann

### Lab Head
Dr ELENA MARIA FERNANDEZ GONZALEZ
Universidad de Oviedo Area of Plant Physiology, Dept. BOS Catedrático R Uria s/n 33071 Oviedo Spain.


