### Accession
PXD012971

### Title
RET Kinase Inhibition in Neuroendocrine Prostate Cancer, part 2

### Description
Increased treatment of metastatic castration resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) with second-generation anti-androgen therapies (ADT) has coincided with a greater incidence of lethal, aggressive variant prostate cancer (AVPC) tumors that have lost androgen receptor (AR) signaling. AVPC tumors may also express neuroendocrine markers, termed neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Recent evidence suggests kinase signaling may be an important driver of NEPC. To identify targetable kinases in NEPC, we performed global phosphoproteomics comparing AR-negative to AR-positive prostate cancer cell lines and identified multiple altered signaling pathways, including enrichment of RET kinase activity in the AR-negative cell lines. Clinical NEPC and NEPC patient derived xenografts displayed upregulated RET transcript and RET pathway activity. Pharmacologically inhibiting RET kinase in NEPC models dramatically reduced tumor growth and cell viability in mouse and human NEPC models. Our results suggest that targeting RET in NEPC tumors with high RET expression may be a novel treatment option.

### Sample Protocol
Protein digestion and phosphopeptide enrichment were performed as previously described(Humphrey, Azimifar, and Mann 2015; Drake et al. 2012; Zimman et al. 2010) with minor modifications. Briefly, prostate cancer cell lines were lysed in 6M guanidium hydrochloride buffer (6M Guanidinium chloride, 100mM Tris pH8.5, 10mM Tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine, 40mM 2-chloroacetamide, 2mM Vanadate, 2.5mM NaPyrophosphate, 1mM Beta-glycerophosphate, 10mg/ml N-octyl-glycoside). The lysate was sonicated, cleared, and protein was measured. 5 mg of protein was digested with trypsin and the resulting phosphopeptides were subjected to phosphotyrosine antibody-based enrichment via immunoprecipitation. The immunoprecipitate was washed and pY peptides were eluted. The supernatant from the pY immunoprecipitations was kept for pST peptide enrichment. 2.5 mg of pST peptides were de-salted using C18 columns and then separated using strong cation exchange chromatography. In separate reactions the pY and pST peptides were then further enriched using titanium dioxide columns to remove existing non-phosphorylated peptides. The pY and pST peptides were then de-salted using C18 tips prior to submission on the mass spectrometer. Samples were analyzed by LC-MS/MS using a dual pump nanoRSLC system (Dionex, Sunnyvale CA) interfaced with a Q Exactive HF (ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA)(Kelstrup et al. 2012; Scheltema et al. 2014). Samples were run in technical duplicates, and data were searched using MaxQuant Andromeda version 1.5.3.30(Cox and Mann 2008) against the Uniprot human reference proteome database with canonical and isoform sequences (downloaded September 2016 from http://uniprot.org). MaxQuant Andromeda parameters were set as previously described(Drake et al. 2016).

### Data Protocol
MS Data Analysis MS data analysis was performed as previously described(Drake et al. 2016). For clustering, pY data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.2, pS/pT data were filtered using an FDR-corrected ANOVA p-value of 0.05. Hierarchical clustering was performed using the Cluster version 3.0 with the Pearson correlation and pairwise complete linkage analysis(Eisen et al. 1998). Java TreeView version 1.1.6r4 was used to visualize clustering results(Saldanha 2004). Kinase Substrate Enrichment Analysis (KSEA) KSEA was performed as previously described(Drake et al. 2012). Briefly, the phosphopeptides were rank-ordered by average fold change between Adenocarcinoma (AR positive) vs aggressive variant prostate cancer (AR negative). The enrichment score was calculated using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic. Statistical significance was calculated via permutation analysis. The normalized enrichment score (NES) was calculated by taking the enrichment score and dividing by the mean of the absolute values of all enrichment scores from the permutation analysis. We used the Benjamini-Hochberg procedure to calculate false discovery rate for each kinase.

### Publication Abstract
The increased treatment of metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) with second-generation antiandrogen therapies (ADT) has coincided with a greater incidence of lethal, aggressive variant prostate cancer (AVPC) tumors that have lost dependence on androgen receptor (AR) signaling. These AR-independent tumors may also transdifferentiate to express neuroendocrine lineage markers and are termed neuroendocrine prostate cancer (NEPC). Recent evidence suggests kinase signaling may be an important driver of NEPC. To identify targetable kinases in NEPC, we performed global phosphoproteomics comparing several AR-independent to AR-dependent prostate cancer cell lines and identified multiple altered signaling pathways, including enrichment of RET kinase activity in the AR-independent cell lines. Clinical NEPC patient samples and NEPC patient-derived xenografts displayed upregulated RET transcript and RET pathway activity. Genetic knockdown or pharmacologic inhibition of RET kinase in multiple mouse and human models of NEPC dramatically reduced tumor growth and decreased cell viability. Our results suggest that targeting RET in NEPC tumors with high RET expression could be an effective treatment option. Currently, there are limited treatment options for patients with aggressive neuroendocrine prostate cancer and none are curative. IMPLICATIONS: Identification of aberrantly expressed RET kinase as a driver of tumor growth in multiple models of NEPC provides a significant rationale for testing the clinical application of RET inhibitors in patients with AVPC.

### Keywords
Human, Ret, Phosphoproteomics, Kinase, Prostate cancer

### Affiliations
University of Minnesota, Twin-Cities, Pharmacology Department
University of Minnesota at Minneapolis

### Submitter
Zoi Sychev

### Lab Head
Dr Zoi Sychev
University of Minnesota, Twin-Cities, Pharmacology Department


