### Accession
PXD004565

### Title
Mini-Bacillus -  Large-scale reduction of the Bacillus subtilis genome: Consequences for the transcriptional network, resource allocation, and metabolism

### Description
In this study, we have applied the top-down approach to reduce the genome of B. subtilis in order to obtain minimal strains with robust growth on complex medium at 37°C. For this purpose, we have evaluated the function of each gene of the B. subtilis genome and identified essential, important and dispensable genomic regions. Using an efficient markerless and scarless deletion method and a system allowing induction of genetic competence in the complete cell population, we have constructed two genome-reduced strains lacking about 36% of dispensable genetic information. Multi-omics analyses with the genome-reduced strains revealed substantial changes in the transcriptome, the proteome and in the metabolome. The massive reorganization of metabolism in the two genome-reduced strains can be explained by the underlying genotypes that were determined by genome re-sequencing. Moreover, the transcriptome and proteome analyses uncovered novel dispensable genomic regions that can be removed to further streamline the B. subtilis genome. In conclusion, both minimal strains show interesting metabolic features and they serve as excellent starting points to generate an ultimate reduced-genome B. subtilis cell containing only genes required for robust growth on complex medium.

### Sample Protocol
Sample preparation for Mass spectrometry analysis For the spectral library generation, protein samples (for details, see Appendix Table S3) were pre-fractionated using SDS-PAGE. Briefly, 20 μg of protein from each sample was denatured with loading buffer for 5 min at 95°C and separation was carried by NuPAGE® Bis-Tris Gels 4-12% (Life Technologies Corporation- Carlsbad, California). Separation, staining and destaining were carried out according to the manufacturer’s guidelines. Each lane was sliced into 5 equal pieces which were processed independently. Briefly, gel pieces were washed twice with 200 μl of 20 mM ammonium biscarbonate in 50% (v/v) acetonitrile (ACN) for 30 min at 37°C. Next, the gel pieces were dehydrated by two times washing with 200 μl of ACN for 15 min. Trypsin solution (20 ng/μl trypsin in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate) was added until the gel pieces stopped swelling. Digestion was allowed to proceed for 16–18 h at 37°C. Peptides were extracted from the gel pieces with 40 μl of 0.1% (v/v) acetic acid by incubation in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min, followed by a second extraction with 40 μl of 50% ACN in 0.05% acetic acid. The peptide containing supernatants of each band were collected and excess liquid was removed by lyophilization. The resulting lyophilized peptide mixtures were resuspended in 100 µl of buffer A (0.1% acetic acid, 2% ACN) and desalted using 2 µg C18-ZipTip columns (Millipore, Bedford). 1 µg of the purified peptide mixture was used for subsequent MS analysis.  Protein samples without prefractionation (details in the supplemental table) were subjected to in-solution trypsin digestion. Briefly, 2 µg of protein from each sample were initially reduced by addition of 25 mM DTT prepared in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 60°C for 1 h. Following reduction, the protein samples were carbamidomethylated with 100 mM iodoacetamide in 20 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37°C in dark. After 30 min, protein samples were subjected to overnight (16 h) proteolysis using trypsin (Promega) in a ratio of 1:25 (trypsin:protein). 1% acetic acid was added to stop the proteolysis. Digested peptides were then desalted using 2 µg C18-ZipTip columns (Millipore, Bedford). 1 µg of the purified peptide mixture was used for subsequent MS analysis. For data-dependent acquisition experiments, iRT peptides (Biognosys, Schlieren, Switzerland) were spiked into the sample, and for the data-independent acquisition experiments, HRM calibration peptides (Biognosys) were added to the samples prior to analysis according to manufacturers’ instructions.

### Data Protocol
The data analysis was performed using SpectronautTM (Spectronaut v8.0.9600.8.23526 academic). Raw files from DIA acquisition were converted to HTRMSTM format by “Raw to HTRMS converter” supplied with the SpectronautTM. HTRMS format files were analyzed using SpectronautTM with the settings of iRT correction factor set to 1; interference correction set to TRUE. The number of fragment ions was defined in the spectral library (at least 6 and up to 10), and all were required for identification and quantification. All results were filtered by a Q value of 0.001. All other settings were set to default. Protein intensity was calculated by summing the peptide peak areas (sum of fragment ion peak areas as calculated by Spectronaut) of each protein from the Spectronaut default output file. Shared peptide sequences were excluded from the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Understanding cellular life requires a comprehensive knowledge of the essential cellular functions, the components involved, and their interactions. Minimized genomes are an important tool to gain this knowledge. We have constructed strains of the model bacterium, Bacillus subtilis, whose genomes have been reduced by &#x223c;36%. These strains are fully viable, and their growth rates in complex medium are comparable to those of wild type strains. An in-depth multi-omics analysis of the genome reduced strains revealed how the deletions affect the transcription regulatory network of the cell, translation resource allocation, and metabolism. A comparison of gene counts and resource allocation demonstrates drastic differences in the two parameters, with 50% of the genes using as little as 10% of translation capacity, whereas the 6% essential genes require 57% of the translation resources. Taken together, the results are a valuable resource on gene dispensability in B. subtilis, and they suggest the roads to further genome reduction to approach the final aim of a minimal cell in which all functions are understood.

### Keywords
Bacillus subtilis, Lc-ms/ms, Dia

### Affiliations
Professor Dr. Uwe Völker, Head of the department of Functional Genomics, Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.
Universitätsmedizin Greifswald

### Submitter
Praveen Sappa

### Lab Head
Dr Uwe Völker
Professor Dr. Uwe Völker, Head of the department of Functional Genomics, Interfakultäres Institut für Genetik und Funktionelle Genomforschung, Universitätsmedizin Greifswald, Greifswald, Germany.


