### Accession
PXD012591

### Title
Assessment of protein extraction and digestion efficiency of well-established shotgun protocols for heart proteomics

### Description
In this study, we evaluated three well-established sample preparation methods for shotgun proteomics, named: i) UREA; ii) sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS); and iii) filter-aided sample preparation (FASP) protocols. We focused our analysis on protein extraction and digestion from heart left ventricle (LV) tissue.The three methods were compared by relative quantification using dimethyl labeling.

### Sample Protocol
Male Wistar rats  were euthanized, left ventricles  were dissected on ice and washed with ice-cold 0.9% (w/v) NaCl solution containing protease inhibitors. In the UREA protocol, tissue lysis and protein extraction were performed using the chaotropic agents urea (6 mol.L-1) and thiourea (2 mol.L-1). Trypsin digestion was conducted after 10-times dilution of the lysis solution. In the SDS protocol, tissue lysis and protein extraction were performed using SDS-containing solution (SDS 4% (w/v)). Afterwards, proteins were precipitated using ice-cold acetone, resuspended in urea-containing solution (6 mol.L-1 urea and 2 mol.L-1 thiourea) and digested with trypsin after dilution like in the UREA protocol. In the FASP protocol, protein extraction was performed using SDS-containing solution (SDS 4% (w/v)) and then exchanged for triethylammonium bicarbonate (TEAB) buffer for trypsin digestion.

### Data Protocol
Mass spectra data (.raw files) were searched against UniProtKB Rattus norvergicus fasta file (downloaded at April 2018; 29,969 entries) using MaxQuant software (version 1.6.1.0) and Andromeda search engine. Database search parameters included common contaminants, first search peptide tolerance set at 20 ppm, and main search peptide tolerance set at 4.5 ppm. Trypsin was set and allowing up to 2 missed cleavages. Carbamidomethyl (Cys) was set as fixed modification. Oxidation (Met) and acetyl (protein N-terminal) were set as variable modifications. To assess potential amine carbamylation due to urea, we also searched raw files setting carbamylation at peptide N-terminus, Lys and Arg. “Match between runs” was enabled with matching time window of 0.7 minutes and an alignment time window of 20 min. For identification, a minimum of 1 minimum razor + unique peptide was used. Peptide FDR was set as <1 % and revert decoy mode was used.

### Publication Abstract
Ischemic heart disease is the leading cause of deaths worldwide. Thus, understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying disease progression is needed. Due to heart importance and lack of studies evaluating different sample preparation methods for heart proteomics, we compared three well-established protocols in shotgun proteomics using dimethyl label quantitation to allow relative quantitation. The tested methods for the analysis of left ventricle (LV) tissue were: i) in-solution digestion (ISD); ii) on-pellet digestion (OPD); and iii) on-filter digestion (OFD). Protein extraction was done using SDS-containing buffer for OPD and OFD while this step was under urea-containing buffer for ISD. We used an optimized one-step reaction for reduction of disulfide bonds and alkylation of thiol groups in ISD and OPD. Using the same amount of tissue, we observed that OFD and ISD extracted significantly higher amount of protein than OPD. ISD outperformed OFD and OPD in the number of proteins identified. We did not observe significant bias related to physicochemical features of the identified proteins when comparing the three protocols. ISD was more efficient to identify low abundant proteins and yielded more proteins per protocol duration. Thus, we concluded that the optimized ISD suited better for heart proteomics than OFD and OPD.

### Keywords
Heart, Lc-msms, Rat, Fasp, Dimethyl labeling

### Affiliations
Federal University of Minas Gerais
Departament of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais

### Submitter
Thiago Verano-Braga

### Lab Head
Dr Thiago Verano-Braga
Departament of Physiology and Biophysics, Federal University of Minas Gerais


