### Accession
PXD015687

### Title
Multi-layered proteomic analyses decode compositional and functional effects of cancer mutations on kinase complexes

### Description
With the rapidly increasing availability of genomic data and ensuing identification of disease associated mutations, the determination of molecular mechanisms by which such mutations affect biochemical processes and phenotypes remains a major challenge. In this study we developed and applied a multilayered proteomic workflow to explore how genetic lesions modulate the modular proteome to alter functional phenotypes.  Using this workflow we determined how expression of a panel of disease-associated mutations in the Dyrk2 protein kinase altered the composition, topology and activity of the multifunctional protein complex assembled around Dyrk2 and the phosphoproteomic state of the respective cells. We found that the selected cancer-related Dyrk2 mutations caused, to a differing extent, disassembly of the catalytic kinase core complex and caused disruption of interactions within the Dyrk2 core or with other cellular modules. This is exemplified by the nuclear pore associated Y-complex which we identified as new interactor of Dyrk2. We further found that the altered protein-protein interactions caused by the mutations are associated with topological changes and with changes in posttranslational modifications in the mutated kinase modules. Finally, we observed that the expression of each tested cancer-related mutation created a specific phosphoproteomic footprint including altered phosphorylation of known cancer-associated proteins, thus linking Dyrk2 mutations with cancer-related biochemical processes.  Overall we developed an integrated, multilayered proteomic workflow to study how specific genomic mutations affect the modular proteome. Applying it to mutations in the Dyrk2 kinase we discover multiple mutation-specific, significant, pleiotropic and functionally relevant changes, highlighting the large plasticity of molecular responses to genomic lesions. The established workflow is generically applicable and will contribute to a better understanding of the molecular mechanisms that translate genomic alterations into (disease) phenotypes.

### Sample Protocol
AP-MS: Cell pellet was lysed in 4 ml lysis buffer. Cleared cell lysate was incubated with Strep-Tactin beads. Protein complexes were eluted from the Strep-Tactin beads with 2 mM biotin. Proteins of the eluate were precipitated with trichloroacetic acid and then dissolved in 8M urea. The proteins were digested with 0.8 µg trypsin (V5112, Promega) over night followed by peptide clean-up with C18 UltraMicroSpin columns. BioID-MS: Lysis of the cell pellet was performed in 1 ml RIPA buffer followed by Benzonase treatment (250 U) for 30 min. The cleared lysate was then incubated with disuccinimidyl suberate crosslinked Strep-Tactin beads for 1h. Proteins bound to the beads were denaturated with 8M urea. Proteins were digested on the beads with 0.5 µg LysC for 3h followed by dilution to 1 M urea and digestion by 0.8 µg trypsin. Peptides were purified by C18 UltraMicroSpin columns. Total cell lysate preparation: The cell pellet was lysed in 8 M urea and 100 µg protein were subsequently reduced with 5 mM TCEP and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide. The sample was diluted to 1.5 M urea with 100 mM NH4CO3 and digested with Trypsin over night. Peptides were purified by C18 columns.  Phosphopeptide enrichment: Peptides were dissolved in loading buffer for the enrichment of phosphopeptides (50% acetonitrile, 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid, 300 mg/ml lactic acid) and incubated with 5 mg TiO2 beads under strong shaking. The following steps were performed as previously described (Leitner, A., et al., Anal Chem, 2010). Cross-linking of purified Dyrk2: Purified Dyrk2 was crosslinked at a concentration of 0.5 mg/ml with 1 mM isotope labeled di-succinimidylsuberate as previously described (Leitner, A., et al., Nat Protoc, 2014). Cross-linked peptides were enriched by peptide size exclusion chromatography with Superdex Peptide PC 3.2/30 column. SEC fractions were then dissolved in 5% acetonitrile and 0.1% formic acid. Mass spectrometry-based data acquisition Interactomics (AP-MS/BioID-MS) LC-MS/MS analysis was performed on an Orbitrap Elite and Orbitrap XL mass spectrometer coupled to an Easy-nLC 1000 system. For samples derived from affinity purification peptides were separated on a Thermo PepMap RSLC column with a 60 min gradient from 5% to 35% acetonitrile at a flow rate of 300 nl/min whereas for BioID samples a gradient of 90 min was used. The mass spectrometer was operated in data-dependent acquisition (DDA) mode with the following parameters: one full FTMS scan (350-1600 m/z) at 120,000 resolution followed by MS/MS scans on the fifteen (Orbitrap Elite) or ten (Orbitrap XL) most abundant precursors with a charge state of +2 or higher.  Total proteome analysis: Samples for total proteome analysis were measured on a Sciex TripleTOF 6600 instrument. Peptides were separated using a self packed C18 column with a 60 min gradient from 2% to 35% Buffer B at a flow rate of 300 nl/min. The mass spectrometer was operated in SWATH-mode using 64 variable windows between 400 and 1200 m/z (1 m/z overlap). Phosphoproteomics: To generate a phosphopeptide specific assay library, phosphopeptide enriched samples were acquired in high-resolution data dependent acquisition mode on TripleTOF 6600. Phosphopeptides were separated by liquid chromatography  at 0.3 mL/min flow rate. As column material, a PicoTipTM Emitter  was in-house packed with C18 beads  and cut to a length of 21 cm. Phosphopeptides were separated on a 120 min long linear gradient from 5% solvent A  to 35% solvent B. The twenty most intense precursor ions with a charge state between +2 to +5 were selected for CID fragmentation. MS1 scan time was 300 ms over a mass to charge range of 360 to 1460, followed by 20 MS2 spectra measurements with 150 ms per spectra from 50 to 2000 m/z. The same phosphopeptide enriched samples were submitted to measurements in SWATH-mode on the TripleTOF 6600 instrument. Data were acquired in positive ion and high-sensitivity SWATH-mode, using 100 variable windows from 400 to 1250 m/z with 1 m/z overlap at the upper window boarder.  Cross-linking MS: LC-MS/MS (DDA mode) was performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer. Peptides were separated using reverse phase column  across 60 minute linear gradient from 7% to 35%. The data acquisition mode (data dependent acquisition) was set to perform a cycle of 3 sec with high resolution MS scan in the Orbitrap (120000 at 400 m/z) and n MS/MS spectra in the ion trap. LC-MS/MS (target mode) was performed on Orbitrap Fusion Lumos Tribrid mass spectrometer using the same configuration as described for DDA mode. The data acquisition mode (PRM) was set to perform a MS1 scan followed by time scheduled targeted PRM scans acquired at variable resolution (60000 and 120000) fragmented as in the DDA acquisition. The quadrupole isolation window for the PRM events was set to 1.4 m/z units and the duration of the time scheduled windows were set to 2min.

### Data Protocol
Interactomics: Acquired MS/MS scans were searched against the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database (10.05.2018) with the EulerPortal (ETH in-house software) workflow using the search engines X!TANDEM Jackhammer TPP (2013.06.15.1 - LabKey, Insilicos, ISB), Comet (2016.01 rev. 3) and MyriMatch v2.1.138 considering a precursor mass tolerance of 15 ppm and a fragment mass error of 0.4 Da. Carbamidomethyl on cysteine residues as static modification was added. High confident interactors of AP-MS and BioID-MS experiments were determined by SAINTexpress with default parameters using spectral counts obtained from EulerPortal. For the quantification of interactome changes in the AP-MS and BioID-MS network LFQ MS1 intensities were determined by MaxQuant analysis v1.5.2.8 using default parameters and the UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot protein database. Total proteome analysis: DIA-SWATH data were analysed with the OpenSWATH workflow  implemented on the in-house EulerPortal platform. Spectra were extracted using the combined human assay library with a fragment ion m/z extraction window of 0.05 Th and a retention time extraction window of 480s. Detected features were aligned using TRIC with a target FDR of 0.01. The OpenSWATH data output was further processed by the R package SWATH2stats. The data were filtered with a global m-score cut-off of 3.9811E-5. The resulting data matrix was further filtered for proteotypic peptides. The following quantitative and statistical analysis was carried out by mapDIA v1.2.1. The filtered data matrix was normalized using total intensity normalization and an independent study design with a minimum correlation of 0.1 was chosen. For the calculation of fold changes and p-values at least one peptide per protein and between 3-6 fragments per peptide were selected. Phosphoproteomics: Generation of a phosphopeptide SWATH-assay library - For peptide identification the data were searched using EulerPortal with the search engines X!TANDEM Jackhammer TPP, omssacl  and Comet against the human proteome (UniProt KB 10.05.2018). Tryptic peptides with a maximum number of two missed cleavages were considered for the peptide identification search. The maximum precursor mass error was 50 ppm and the fragment mass error was set to 0.1 Da. Identified peptide sequences were analyzed with the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP v4.7 POLAR VORTEX rev 0) applying PeptideProphet, iProphet, and Proteinprophet scoring. The search result was filtered at 0.01 FDR corresponding to an iprophet-peptide probability of 0.8829. To assess the localization of the phosphorylation site for each annotated spectra LuciPHor2 was used. All phosphopeptides with a lower false localization rate of 0.01 were annotated as localized. The spectral assay library was built using the Trans Proteomic Pipeline.  Phospho-SWATH data quantification - The extraction of quantitative phosphopeptide data was conducted with the OpenSWATH workflow and the Dyrk2 mutant specific phospho-SWATH library generated for this project. All recorded phospho-SWATH maps were extracted with OpenSWATH applying an m/z fragment ion extraction window of 0.05 Th around the expected mass of the fragment ions and a retention time window of +/- 300 s after iRT-alignment. Scoring of the peaks was conducted with PyProphet applying 10 different scores. Detected features were mapped between runs, and re-aligned using a regression with a local minimum spanning tree model, with a 0.01 target FDR. Next, the obtained intensities for all fragment features from OpenSWATH were processed with SWATH2stats Low quality features were removed with an m-score threshold of 0.01 and additionally a fragment feature had to be detected in at least 30% of all phospho-SWATH measurements. Data was normalized using TIS (total ion spectra) normalization within the mapDIA framework. Cross-linking MS: MS data were searched with xQuest/xProphet against a database containing the fasta sequence of DYRK2 and its decoy sequence. Cross-linked peptides were identified with a minimal length of 5 amino acids and xQuest ld score higher than 25. Data analysis of acquired targeted cross-linked peptides were performed in Skyline v.4.1. The common transition were imported as described. Peptides were analysed manually, and correct identification was assigned on the basis of the following criteria: (1) retention time matching to the identification by the XQuest analysis (±2min), (2) co-elution of heavy and light cross-linked peptides, (3) matching of the peak shape and intensity for six common transitions of heavy and light cross-linked peptides. Transitions with a signal to noise ratio less than 5 were filtered out for the quantification. Cross-linked peptides were normalized for the intensity of two non-cross-linked Dyrk2 peptides (acquired in PRM mode) and missing value were imputed with the minimum value identified in the analysis.

### Publication Abstract
Rapidly increasing availability of genomic data and ensuing identification of disease associated mutations allows for an unbiased insight into genetic drivers of disease development. However, determination of molecular mechanisms by which individual genomic changes affect biochemical processes remains a major challenge. Here, we develop a multilayered proteomic workflow to explore how genetic lesions modulate the proteome and are translated into molecular phenotypes. Using this workflow we determine how expression of a panel of disease-associated mutations in the Dyrk2 protein kinase alter the composition, topology and activity of this kinase complex as well as the phosphoproteomic state of the cell. The data show that altered protein-protein interactions caused by the mutations are associated with topological changes and affected phosphorylation of known cancer driver proteins, thus linking Dyrk2 mutations with cancer-related biochemical processes. Overall, we discover multiple mutation-specific functionally relevant changes, thus highlighting the extensive plasticity of molecular responses to genetic lesions.

### Keywords
Human, Dda, Dyrk2, Cancer mutations, Prm, Swath-ms

### Affiliations
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland and Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Switzerland
ETH Zurich

### Submitter
Martin Mehnert

### Lab Head
Dr Ruedi Aebersold
Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, Department of Biology, ETH Zurich, Switzerland and Faculty of Science, University of Zurich, Switzerland


