### Accession
PXD007162

### Title
The proteome of germlings from urediniospores of Puccinia triticina

### Description
Wheat leaf rust is a serious fungal disease of wheat that causes annual losses and necessitates using fungicides for effective disease management.  It is caused by Puccinia triticina which spreads by means of airborne urediniospores.  When these germinate on the leaf surface, they form germ-tubes which enter the leaf through open stomates.  Spores and germ-tubes represent the first fungal structures that the host can perceive during a rust infection.  They therefore contain proteins that could potentially trigger early host defense responses.  Using 2-DE to separate this proteome, we produced gels containing 173 spots in the pI range of 4-7 and identified 123 proteins.  These were predominantly proteins involved in metabolic and cellular processes, but with a large number (77%) of novel proteins that could not be identified through homology matching  Twenty four of these showed no homology to wheat sequences, making them good candidate PAMPs.

### Sample Protocol
P. triticina race-1 uredinospores were maintained on hexaploid bread wheat (Triticum aestivum L.) cv ‘Morocco’ in a growth chamber under 16h/8h day/night cycle at 20℃/15℃ respectively.  Urediniospores were collected from pustules and germinated on 0.5% (w/v) agarose in water for 24 h at 20℃ in the dark.  Germlings were observed under a microscope (Leica DM500, Leica Microsystems, Germany).  Plates containing dense germling mats (90-95% germinated) were included in the study.  A total of 900 mg uredinospore were used in three biological replicates.  Protein was extracted from germlings using a combination of acetone-TCA and phenol-SDS extraction [8] (See Supporting information 1).  Protein content was measured using a Bradford assay with BSA standards. Extracted germling proteins were resolved by two-dimensional gel electrophoresis (2-DE) using an IPGphor3 unit for the  1st dimension and an Ettan DALTSix large vertical electrophoresis system  (GE Healthcare)  for the 2nd dimension (Supporting information 1).  2-DE was performed in 3 technical replicates for three individual biological replicates.  Gels were stained with colloidal CBB and digitalized by Syngene Proteomescan Pro 2D Gel Imaging Systems at 800 dpi, and Dymension (Syngene, Cambridge UK) was used for image analysis.  Spots observed in at least two biological replicates were selected and cut from gels and reduced to cubes of approximately 1mm3.  In-gel trypsin digestion and peptide extraction was achieved using standard protocols.   Mass Spectra of the resulting peptides were acquired in a hybrid quadrupole-orbitrap mass spectrometer (Q-Exactive: ThermoFisher, Bremen, Germany).  Tryptic peptides were separated through a C18 column (12 cm, 75µm ID, Vydac C18, 3 µm beads, 300 Å pores) with nano-electrospray ionization.  An acetonitrile gradient (2% (v/v) to 40% (v/v) in 0.1% (v/v) FA) was delivered at 300 nl/min over 24 minutes (Easy nLC1000: ThermoFisher, San Jose, CA).  A survey scan acquired over the range m/z 300-2000 was followed by 12 MS2 scans of the most intense ions, with dynamic exclusion set to 6 s.  Protein identification of the MS2 spectra was performed using Mascot Server v2.4 (MatrixScience, London UK).  The following parameters were set: a monoisotopic mass accuracy of ±5 ppm; up to one missed cleavage; peptide charge up to +5; fixed modification of carbamidomethyl (C), and variable modifications of oxidation (M) and deamidation (NQ).

### Data Protocol
Raw MS data files were converted to MGF using Mascot Distiller (v2.5.1: MatrixScience) and used to query a database of the genomic sequences of Puccinia triticina, P. striiformis and P. graminis containing 52,198 sequences downloaded from the Broad Institute (Cambridge MA, https://www.broadinstitute.org/) in September 2015.  Proteins were considered correctly identified if returns contained two or more peptides with a significant ion score.  Gene ontology annotations were generated using the BLAST2GO tool (www.blast2go.org) by querying with BLASTp against the nonredundant database at NCBI (February 2016) and annotating at an E value of ≤1.0x10-3.  Annotation was based on the NCBI description lines from the BLASTp return with the smallest E-value. Further analyses were performed for potential signal-peptide signatures using SignalP (v4.1) ( http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/SignalP/) with the default settings for eukaryotes.  Where known secretory signals were identified, proteins were filtered further to eliminate those with mitochondrial and chloroplast localization signals, using TargetP (v1.1) (http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/services/TargetP/) using the default settings for plant organisms.  Biological process annotations were carried out using the BlastKOALA option of the KEGG fungal database.  Protein-protein interaction analysis was carried out by String (v10) against Puccinia database.  Finally proteins with unknown domains were analyzed using Psipred software for structure and function prediction (http://bioinf.cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/)and subcellular localization were predicted using psort (http://www.genscript.com/wolf-psort.html)

### Publication Abstract
Wheat leaf rust caused by the pathogenic fungus, <i>Puccinia triticina</i>, is a serious threat to bread wheat and durum production in many areas of the world. This plant-pathogen interaction has been studied extensively at the molecular genetics level however, proteomics data are still relatively scarce. The present study investigated temporal changes in the abundance of the apoplastic fluid proteome of resistant and susceptible wheat leaves infected with <i>P. triticina</i> race-1, using a label-free LC-MS-based approach. In general, there was very little difference between inoculated and control apoplastic proteomes in either host, until haustoria had become well established in the susceptible host, although the resistant host responds to pathogen challenge sooner. In the earlier samplings (up to 72 h after inoculation) there were just 46 host proteins with significantly changing abundance, and pathogen proteins were detected only rarely and not reproducibly. This is consistent with the biotrophic lifestyle of <i>P. triticina</i>, where the invading pathogen initially causes little tissue damage or host cell death, which occur only later during the infection cycle. The majority of the host proteins with altered abundance up to 72 h post-inoculation were pathogen-response-related, including peroxidases, chitinases, &#x3b2;-1-3-endo-glucanases, and other PR proteins. Five days after inoculation with the susceptible apoplasm it was possible to detect 150 <i>P. triticina</i> proteins and 117 host proteins which had significantly increased in abundance as well as 33 host proteins which had significantly decreased in abundance. The latter represents potential targets of pathogen effectors and included enzymes which could damage the invader. The pathogen-expressed proteins-seen most abundantly in the incompatible interaction-were mostly uncharacterized proteins however, many of their functions could be inferred through homology-matching with pBLAST. Pathogen proteins also included several candidate effector proteins, some novel, and some which have been reported previously. All MS data have been deposited in the PRIDE archive (www.ebi.ac.uk/pride/archive/) under Project PXD012586.

### Keywords
Brown rust, Wheat leaf rust

### Affiliations
Molecular Genetics
Agriculture and Agrifood Canada Morden Research and Development Centre

### Submitter
Christof Rampitsch

### Lab Head
Dr Christof Rampitsch
Agriculture and Agrifood Canada Morden Research and Development Centre


