### Accession
PXD024231

### Title
A proteomic study of bacterial growth arrest in a synthetic biology application

### Description
Scaling up the functioning of synthetic circuits from microplates to bioreactors is far from trivial to achieve. We here test the scalability performance of a previously developed growth switch for increasing product yields in bacteria, based on external control of RNA polymerase expression. We show that, in liter-scale bioreactors operating in fed-batch mode, growth-arrested Escherichia coli cells are able to convert glucose to glycerol at an increased yield. A multi-omics quantification of the physiology of the cells shows that apart from acetate production, few metabolic side-effects occur, while a number of specific responses to growth slow-down and growth arrest are launched on the transcriptional level. These responses include the downregulation of genes involved in growth-associated processes, such as amino acid and nucleotide metabolism and translation, and the upregulation of heat shock genes. Interestingly, these transcriptional responses are buffered on the proteomic level, probably due to the strong decrease of the total mRNA concentration after the diminution of transcriptional activity and the absence of growth dilution of proteins. This transforms the growth-arrested cells in “bags of proteins“ with a functioning metabolism. More generally, the analysis shows that physiological characterization of bacterial cells hosting a synthetic circuit may reveal complex patterns of adaptation on different time-scales, dynamically interacting with the bioreactor environment.

### Sample Protocol
The R (growth-Regulated) and W (Wild-type) strains have been transformed by glycerol production plasmids. We cloned the yeast genes GPD1 and GPP2, non-optimized for E. coli, into the pCL1920 vector carrying an ampicillin resistance. The transcription of the genes are under the control of the xylose isomerase (xylA) promoter of Actinoplanes missouriensis. The resulting strains are called W-gly and R-gly. The actual experiments consisted of two phases, a growth phase and a production phase. In the growth phase, the bacteria were grown in 500 mL fermenters containing 200 mL of minimal medium with 30 g L-1 of glucose and an IPTG concentration of 50 µM. We used 8 to 10 mL of the seed obtained in flasks to inoculate the bioreactors at an initial optical density of 0.2 OD600. During the culture, pulses of feeding solution (glucose and salts) were added automatically. The temperature of the culture was maintained at 37 °C and the pH at a value of 6.8, by addition of NH4OH (10%). After 25 to 27 hours, cells were harvested to inoculate the production reactor. Before inoculation, in order to eliminate IPTG, cells were washed with M9 minimal medium in two centrifugation steps. The production phase was carried out in 2 L bioreactors containing M9 minimal medium with 30 g L-1 of glucose. The optical density after inoculation was 1 OD600. Like in the growth phase, the bioreactors operated in fed-batch mode by adding pulses of feeding solution when glucose was close to exhaustion. Moreover, the culture was maintained at 37 °C and pH 6.8 by adding NH4OH (28%). Samples to be analysed were taken at two time-points for the W-gly strain (W1 and W2) and four time-points for the R-gly strain (R1 to R4).  Three independent repetitions of the experiments were carried out. Total proteins were solubilized in Laemmli buffer, stacked in a single band in the top of a SDS-PAGE gel (4-12% NuPAGE, Life Technologies) and stained with Coomassie blue R-250 (Bio-Rad) before in-gel digestion using modified trypsin (Promega, sequencing grade). The resulting peptides were analyzed by online nanoliquid chromatography coupled to tandem MS (Ultimate 3000 RSLCnano and Q-Exactive Plus, Thermo Scientific). Peptides were sampled on a 300 μm × 5 mm PepMap C18 precolumn (Thermo Scientific) and separated on a 75 μm × 250 mm C18 column (PepMap C18, 2 μm, Thermo Scientific) using a 200-min gradient.

### Data Protocol
MS and MS/MS data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (Thermo Scientific). Peptides and proteins were identified using Mascot (Matrix Science) through concomitant searches against the Uniprot database (E. coli K12 taxonomy), the sequences of proteins expressed from the plasmids, a homemade classical contaminant database and the corresponding reversed databases. Trypsin/P was chosen as the enzyme and two missed cleavages were allowed. Precursor and fragment mass error tolerances were set at respectively at 10 and 25 mmu. Peptide modifications allowed during the search were Carbamidomethyl (C, fixed), Acetyl (Protein N-term, variable) and Oxidation (M, variable). The Proline software was used to filter the results: conservation of rank 1 peptides, peptide score ≥ 25, peptide length ≥ 7 amino acids, false discovery rate (FDR) of peptide-spectrum-match identifications < 0.01 as calculated on peptide-spectrum-match scores by employing the reverse database strategy, and minimum of 1 specific peptide per identified protein group. Proline was then used to perform compilation, grouping and MS1 quantification (MRF procedure) of the protein groups.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Growth switch, Nanolc-ms/ms, Escherichia coli, Metabolic engineering

### Affiliations
EDyP

### Submitter
Yohann Couté

### Lab Head
Dr Virginie Brun
EDyP


