### Accession
PXD035482

### Title
The Legionella pneumophila effector DenR hijacks host NRas signaling during infection

### Description
Label-free global and phopshoproteomic acnalysis of Lp02-ΔDenR vs. Lp02-ΔDenR-pDenR infected Raw 264.7 macrophages 10 hours post-infection.

### Sample Protocol
Differential protein expression between the Lp02-ΔDenR vs. Lp02-ΔDenR-pDenR infected Raw 264.7 macrophages was assesed using label-free global proteomics. Phosphopeptides were enriched from the same samples using sequential metal oxide affinity chromatography (SMOAC) and phosphorylation changes were asessed using label-free phosphoproteomics. Samples were separated and analyzed by LC-MS/MS. Data was collected on a Thermo Orbitrap Eclipse Tribrid Mass Spectrometer.

### Data Protocol
Proteome Discoverer (PD, version 2.5) was used for global proteomic and phosphoproteomic data analysis. MS data files were searched against Mus musculus, Legionella pneumophila Philadelphia, and contaminant databases using Sequest HT. Precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 5 ppm and 0.02 Da, respectively. Acetyl, Met-loss, and Met-loss+Acetyl were included as dynamic N-terminal modifications. Carbamidomethyl was set as a static modification. Label-free quantification (LFQ) was carried out in PD using the Precursor Ion Quantifier node. For global proteomics, total peptide amount was used for normalization and all peptides were included. For phosphproteomics, data was normalized using specific reliably quantified (high abundance) proteins that were unchanged between the two groups. ΔDenR/pDenR group abundance ratios were generated in PD and later inversed for data visualization. T-test was performed in PD and Adjusted P-values were used to determine significance. Protein expression and phosphorylation changes were considered significant if p < 0.05. Proteins and peptides with 1.4-fold change were considered.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Nras, Legionella

### Affiliations
NIH/NIAID/LISB/FCNS
NIAID

### Submitter
Trisha Tucholski

### Lab Head
Dr Aleksandra Nita-Lazar
NIH/NIAID/LISB/FCNS


