### Accession
PXD007157

### Title
Proteomics analysis of 2n+x aneuploid yeast

### Description
We generated forty 2n+x aneuploid yeast strains and qualify the proteomes in nine of them using SILAC.

### Sample Protocol
Aneulploid cells were cultured in a synthetic complete medium in the presence of light amino acid isotopes (Lys0 and Arg0). The reference strain was cultured similarly but in the presence of heavy amino acid isotopes (Lys8 and Arg10).  Cells were harvested at the mid-log phase and were resuspended in lysis buffer.  Subsequently, we mixed the cell lysate of each light amino acid labeled 2n+x or 2n strain with the cell lysate of the heavy amino acid labeled reference strain under the 1:1 ratio.  The mixed lysate was then sonicated and was centrifuged.  The supernatant was analyzed with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) analysis.

### Data Protocol
MS/MS spectra were matched to the database containing the translated sequences of all predicted open reading frames in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (http://downloads.yeastgenome.org) and protein abundances were estimated with MaxQuant (v1.4.1.2).  Search parameters allowed less than 2 missed cleavages and up to 3 of labeled amino acids to be detected in a peptide amino acid sequence.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
2n+x, Silac, Aneuploid

### Affiliations
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,Chinese Academy of Sciences

### Submitter
Ying Chen

### Lab Head
Dr Wenfeng Qian
Institute of Genetics and Developmental Biology,Chinese Academy of Sciences


