### Accession
PXD007649

### Title
Identification of new therapies for the treatment ofBRAF/NRAS wild type melanomas

### Description
Despite recent therapeutic advances in the management of BRAFV600-mutant melanoma, there is still a compelling need for more effective treatments for patients who developed BRAF/NRAS wild type disease. Since the activity of single targeted agents is limited by innate and acquired resistance, we performed a high-throughput drug screen using 180 drug combinations to generate over 17,000 viability curves, with the aim of identifying agents that synergise to kill BRAF/NRAS wild type melanoma cells. From this screen we identified a promising drug combination that efficiency kills 30% of melanoma cell lines. We validated in  vivo the synergy of the drug combination and found a potential marker to identify sensitive tumors. We applied a genome-wide CRISPR screening which revealed that resistance mechanisms to the drug combination. In order to investigate the mechanism of drug synergy, we treated sensitive and resistance melanoma cell lines with the single drugs and the drug combination and performed proteome analyses to investigate the changes in total proteins and protein phosphorylation. These analysis highlighted specific pathway deregulations associated to the drug synergy that allowed to get a better understanding of the drug interaction and their efficacy in killing melanoma cell lines.

### Sample Protocol
Cell pellets were dissolved by tip sonication and boiling and the protein extracts were digested with trypsin. The peptides were labelled with the TMT10plex reagents, combined at equal amounts and fractionated at high-pH with C18 HPLC. Phosphopeptides were enriched with IMAC using the PHOS-Select(tm) Iron Affinity Gel. LC-MS analysis was performed on the Dionex Ultimate 3000 UHLPC system coupled with the Orbitrap Fusion Mass Spectrometer. MS3 level quantification with Synchronous Precursor Selection (SPS10) was applied for the total proteome whereas phosphopeptides were quantified with a top15 HCD method at the MS2 level.

### Data Protocol
Raw mass spectrometry files were analysed with Proteome Discoverer 2.1 using the SequestHT node followed by Percolator validation. SequestHT settings: TMT6plex at N-termimus, K and Carbamidomethyl at C were defined as static modifications. Dynamic modifications included oxidation of M and Deamidation of N,Q. Search for phospho-S,T,Y was included only for the IMAC data. Peptide confidence was estimated with the Percolator node. Peptide FDR was set at 0.01 and validation was based on q-value and decoy database search.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Imac, Tmt, Cancer

### Affiliations
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute
Functional Proteomics, Institute Cancer Research
&
Proteomic Mass Spectrometry, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute

### Submitter
James Wright

### Lab Head
Dr Jyoti Choudhary
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute


