### Accession
PXD036888

### Title
N-acetyltransferase NAT10 Controls Cell Fates

### Description
Here, we show that NAT10 is an essential regulator of cellular plasticity, and its catalyzed mRNA cytidine acetylation represents a new layer of epitranscriptomic modulation.

### Sample Protocol
All protein samples were precipitated by six volumes of acetone at −20 °C for 30 min. Precipitated proteins were dried in air and resuspended in 8 M urea, 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5. After reduction with 5 mM TCEP (Sigma) for 20 min and alkylation with 10 mM iodoacetamide (Sigma) for 15 min in the dark, samples were diluted to 2 M urea with 100 mM Tris, pH 8.5, and digested with trypsin (from Promega, at 50:1 protein: enzyme ratio) at 37°C for 16 h.  Digestion was stopped by adding formic acid to 5% final concentration, and digested peptides were desalted with Stage-tip.

### Data Protocol
MS experiments were performed on a Q Exactive HF-X instrument (ThermoFisher). Thermo Raw MS files were analyzed by MaxQuant. Uniprot was used to annotate human proteome. IFQ intensity values were generated to quantify protein expression. Pair-wise Student’s t test was used for significance test. Differential proteins were defined if p-values are less than 0.05 and protein expressions have at least 1.2-fold change.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Cell-fate transition, Nat10, Epitranscriptome

### Affiliations
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University

### Submitter
Zhensheng Hu

### Lab Head
Dr Saiyong Zhu
Life Sciences Institute, Zhejiang University


