### Accession
PXD028737

### Title
Global Proteomic Analysis of Lysine lactylation in HMC3 cells under Normoxia or Hypoxia

### Description
This project carried out a quantitative study of lactylation in HMC3 Cell Line. In order to ensure a high degree of credibility of the results, we used the standard of localization probability>0.75 to filter the authentication data. In this study, a total of 3093 lactylation sites located on 1270 proteins were identified, of which 1601 sites of 751 proteins contain quantitative information. Subsequently, we carried out a systematic bioinformatics analysis of proteins containing quantitative information sites, including protein annotation, functional classification, functional enrichment and cluster analysis based on functional enrichment.

### Sample Protocol
Cell lines and cell cultures The HMC3s were purchased from the American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA) and cultured in Eagle's minimal essential medium (EMEM; ATCC), containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Gibco),100 U/ml penicillin and 100 lg/ml streptomycin under 1% O2 or normoxia for 24 hrs. Protein Extraction Sample was sonicated three times on ice using a high intensity ultrasonic processor (Scientz) in lysis buffer (8 M urea, 1% protease inhibitor cocktail，3 μM TSA and 50 mM NAM). The remaining debris was removed by centrifugation at 12,000 g at 4 °C for 10 min. Finally, the supernatant was collected and the protein concentration was determined with BCA kit according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Trypsin Digestion The sample was slowly added to the final concentration of 20% v/v TCA to precipitate protein, then vortexed to mix and incubated for 2 h at 4 °C. The precipitate was collected by centrifugation at 4500 g for 5 min at 4 °C. The precipitated protein was washed with pre-cooled acetone for 3 times and dried for 2 h. The protein sample was then redissolved in 100 mM TEAB and ultrasonically dispersed. Trypsin was added at 1:50 trypsin-to-protein mass ratio for the first digestion overnight. The sample was reduced with 5 mM dithiothreitol for 60 min at 37 °C and alkylated with 11 mM iodoacetamide for 45 min at room temperature in darkness. Finally, the peptides were desalted by C18 SPE column. Pan antibody-based PTM enrichment To enrich Kla modified peptides, tryptic peptides dissolved in NETN buffer (100 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 50 mM Tris-HCl, 0.5% NP-40, pH 8.0) were incubated with pre-washed antibody beads (PTM Bio) at 4°C overnight with gentle shaking. Then the beads were washed for four times with NETN buffer and twice with H2O. The bound peptides were eluted from the beads with 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid. Finally, the eluted fractions were combined and vacuum-dried. For LC-MS/MS analysis, the resulting peptides were desalted with C18 ZipTips (Millipore) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. LC-MS/MS Analysis The tryptic peptides were dissolved in solvent A (0.1% formic acid, 2% acetonitrile/ in water), directly loaded onto a home-made reversed-phase analytical column (25-cm length, 100 μm i.d.). Peptides were separated with a gradient from 6% to 22% solvent B (0.1% formic acid in acetonitrile) over 43 min, 22% to 30% in 13 min and climbing to 80% in 2 min then holding at 80% for the last 2 min, all at a constant flow rate of 450 nL/min on a nanoElute UHPLC system (Bruker Daltonics). The peptides were subjected to Capillary source followed by the timsTOF Pro (Bruker Daltonics) mass spectrometry. The electrospray voltage applied was 1.70 kV. Precursors and fragments were analyzed at the TOF detector, with a MS/MS scan range from 100 to 1700 m/z. The timsTOF Pro was operated in parallel accumulation serial fragmentation (PASEF) mode. Precursors with charge states 0 to 5 were selected for fragmentation, and 10 PASEF-MS/MS scans were acquired per cycle. The dynamic exclusion was set to 24 s.

### Data Protocol
Database Search and analysis The resulting MS/MS data were processed using MaxQuant search engine (v.1.6.6.0). Tandem mass spectra were searched against the human SwissProt database (20366 entries) concatenated with reverse decoy database. Trypsin/P was specified as cleavage enzyme allowing up to 4 missing cleavages. The mass tolerance for precursor ions was set as 20 ppm in First search and 20 ppm in Main search, and the mass tolerance for fragment ions was set as 20 ppm. Carbamidomethyl on Cys was specified as fixed modification, and acetylation on protein N-terminal, oxidation on Met, and lactylation on Lys were specified as variable modifications. FDR was adjusted to < 1%. The search result contains the signal intensity value of each modified peptide in different samples. The relative quantitative values of modified peptides in different samples are obtained by centralizing the signal intensity values in different samples. After filtering lysine lactylation sites (localization probability >0.75), the relative quantitative values of each sample were obtained by two experiments. Then all the ratios of quantified lysine lactylation peptides were normalized by the ratios of their corresponding protein expression levels.  Bioinformatics Analysis  Using the UniProt-GOA database ( http://www.ebi.ac.uk/GOA/), the InterProScan soft to annotated protein’s GO functional based on protein sequence alignment method. Then proteins were classified by Gene Ontology annotation based on three categories: biological process, cellular component and molecular function. Using the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) database was used to annotate protein pathway. Then mapping the annotation result on the KEGG pathway database using KEGG online service tools KEGG mapper. For each term, a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test was employed to test the enrichment of the differentially expressed protein against all identified proteins. The pathway with a two-tailed Fisher’s exact test p-value < 0.05 was considered significant. All differentially expressed modified protein sequence were searched against the STRING database version 11.0 for protein-protein interactions. Only interactions between the proteins belonging to the searched data set were selected, thereby excluding external candidates. STRING defines a metric called “confidence score” to define interaction confidence; we fetched all interactions that had a confidence score ≥ 0.7 (high confidence). Interaction network form STRING was visualized in R package “networkD3”.

### Publication Abstract
None

### Keywords
Human, 4d label-free platform, Hmc3 (cell line), Lactylation

### Affiliations
The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China
The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University

### Submitter
Shengping Hou

### Lab Head
Dr Shengping Hou
The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing, China


